Mark Carney: What are banks really for? 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the University of Alberta 
School of Business, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Across  the  world's  major  economies,  addressing  the  failures  of  banking  ranks  among  the 
highest policy priorities. In the harsh glare of the current financial turmoil, it is clear that many 
banks outside of Canada were either not doing their jobs or were doing them in ways that 
created enormous risks. It is vital that we learn from these mistakes to build a more robust 
financial order. 
The financial system should be the servant of the real economy. As one of my international 
colleagues recently remarked, "it is time the banks stopped swanning around like the Queen 
of England and resumed their traditional role as handmaidens to industry." It is apparent that 
an  era  of  self-absorbed  finance  that  viewed  itself  as  the  apex  of  economic  activity  led  to 
widespread  misallocation  of  capital.  Now,  in  some  major  economies,  the  challenge  is  that 
banks are not allocating capital at all. Around the world, banks are accused of not lending 
enough, charging too aggressively when they do lend and, most fundamentally, of deepening 
the recession rather than dampening it. These concerns are much less valid in Canada than 
abroad, but we too should reflect upon them and respond accordingly. 
My  remarks  today  will  address  the  role  of  banks  and  markets  in  our  economy.  In  recent 
years,  these  core  elements  of  our  financial  system  became  increasingly  intertwined,  with 
each  expanding  into  the  traditional  role  of  the  other,  and  each  reliant  on  the  health  of  the 
other.  This  blurring  between  banks  and  markets  led  to  the  emergence  of  the  so-called 
"shadow banking" sector, whose presence helped trigger the crisis and whose absence will 
complicate  the  recovery.  We  now  face  important  policy  questions  about  which  activities 
banks should perform, which should be located in sustainable, continuously-open markets, 
and which should be prohibited. 
The final answers to these questions require reflection and implementation will take time, but 
broad direction is needed now. Markets are overshooting. On the current trajectory, virtually 
all  financial  activities  will  be  put  back  onto  bank  balance  sheets  at  potentially  tremendous 
cost in terms of lost output and employment. 
Restoring stability to financial markets requires broad direction on the type of global financial 
system that should emerge from the current financial mess. Important steps will be taken at 
this week's meeting of the leaders of the G-20 in London. Canada has much to offer these 
discussions, and is participating actively and constructively. 
Let  me  stress  at  the  outset  that  many  of  my  comments  today  apply  more  acutely 
internationally than domestically. While some commentators have been too quick to ascribe 
global failings to our local institutions, we should not engage in a bout of perverse envy. Our 
system  is  better.  Regulation  has  been  more  consistent.  Our  banks  have  been  more 
conservative.  Credit  conditions  in  Canada  remain  superior  to  those  in  virtually  every  other 
industrialized  country.  That  is  not  to  suggest  that  access  to  credit  is  not  a  challenge,  that 
risks do not lie ahead, or that our system cannot be improved. However, many of the current 
constraints in our system reflect the impact on Canada of failures in the international financial 
system and of international institutions. The core of our system has many – although not all – 
of the elements of a more sustainable global financial system. 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 1
The traditional roles of banks 
Commercial banks perform several key functions in our economy. To begin with, banks are a 
critical part of the payments system – the pipes through which financial transactions occur. 
By facilitating decentralized exchange, the payments system is critical to the functioning of a 
market economy. Like oxygen, the payments system passes unnoticed unless disrupted. It is 
one of the Bank of Canada's jobs to oversee systemic elements of the payments system, as 
well as its reliability. Reflecting years of investment and planning, our payments system has 
functioned smoothly and reliably, despite the enormous shocks to our financial system over 
the past two years. 
The  second  important  role  of  banks  is  to  transform  the  maturities  of  assets  and  liabilities. 
Banks  take  short-term  liabilities,  usually  in  the  form  of  deposits,  and  transform  them  into 
long-term  assets,  such  as  mortgages  or  corporate  loans.  Households  and  businesses  can 
therefore  do  the  reverse,  holding  short-term  assets  and  longer-term  liabilities.  This  helps 
them  to  plan  for  the  future  and  to  manage  risks  arising  from  uncertainties  over  their  cash 
flows. Banks also provide liquidity to their customers by allowing rapid access to those same 
short-term  assets.  Indeed,  by  transacting  at  a  wide  range  of  maturities,  banks  provide 
arbitrage which increases the efficiency of financial markets. This allows borrowers to obtain 
the lowest rate of interest appropriate to their risk characteristics. 
The social value of maturity transformation is without question. However, by definition, it also 
leads  to  a  maturity  mismatch  that  creates  a  fundamental  risk  for  banks.  Banks  hold  liquid 
reserves that are only a fraction of their outstanding obligations. What if a depositor wants his 
money back, but that money is committed to long-term investment projects? Generally, this is 
not a problem, because banks maintain sufficient liquidity to meet typical demands and can 
borrow from other banks if the shock is larger than anticipated. But what if many depositors 
want their money back at the same time? There is a tipping point when the liquidity problem 
becomes self-fulfilling. 
To  manage  this  risk,  banks  rely  on  two  crucial  supports.  First,  deposit  insurance  gives 
depositors the comfort that their funds will be there when they need them.1 Second, the Bank 
of Canada acts as a lender of last resort to solvent but illiquid institutions.2
These  support  mechanisms  are  carefully  crafted  to  discourage  banks  from  taking 
inappropriate risks while still providing the necessary support. They are also accompanied by 
a  robust  regulatory  framework.  Bankers  implicitly  accept  a  social  contract  that  gives  them 
access to liquidity support in times of a stress in return for regulation of their behaviour at all 
times. 
Banks perform a third essential role of credit intermediation, channelling funds from savers to 
investors. This allows savers to diversify their risk and all of us to smooth our consumption 
over  time.  Young  families  can  borrow  to  buy  a  house,  students  can  pay  for  university. 
Canadians  can  invest  in  low-risk,  interest-bearing  accounts  for  their  retirements,  and 
businesses can finance working capital and investment. 
                                                 
1   The Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation insures eligible deposits up to a maximum of $100,000 (principal 
and interest combined) per depositor against the failure of a bank or other financial institution if it is a CDIC 
member. Canadian chartered banks are CDIC members, as are federally regulated trust and loan companies 
that take deposits and deposit-taking associations governed by the Cooperative Credit Associations Act. 
2   A more detailed description of the Bank's role as lender of last resort can be found in the Winter 2004-05 issue 
of the Bank of Canada Review, available at http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/winter04-05/daniel.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2009
Banks, markets, and the crisis 
Banks are not the only game in town. In recent years, markets have grown to the point that 
they are now an important alternative for corporate and household finance. From a financial 
system perspective, the deepening of markets is generally very welcome because it makes 
the system more robust and increases competition, which disciplines banking activity. 
While  markets  expand  the  choices  and  lower  the  prices  available  to  financial  consumers, 
they  function  differently  from  banks.  Unlike  banks,  markets  rely  more  completely  on 
confidence  for  liquidity.  We  have  seen  during  this  crisis  that  confidence  is  not  always 
present.  Liquidity  waxes  and  wanes,  and  with  it,  so  do  the  prices  of  securities.  In  recent 
months, as we have seen a fundamental repricing of virtually every financial asset across the 
world, liquidity in many securities has fallen dramatically. 
Banks have relationships with their customers. They follow borrowers over time and monitor 
their  payment  history  and  reliability.  When  performing  their  role  properly,  banks  tailor  their 
products  to  the  borrower,  imposing  higher  or  lower  standards  as  appropriate.  In  contrast, 
markets are transaction oriented. They act as an intermediary between savers and borrowers 
but  maintain  relationships  with  neither.  Consequently,  market  instruments  are  more  robust 
when the underlying product is more standardized. Determining whether an activity is best 
financed  through  a  bank  or  a  market  depends  on  the  relative  benefits  to  that  activity  of 
specialization versus standardization. 
In  response  to  increased  competitive  pressure  from  markets,  banks  have  become  direct 
participants  in  markets.  This  move  helped  to  sow  the  seeds  of  the  crisis  through  three 
channels in particular: wholesale funding, securitization, and proprietary trading. 
First,  banks  have  become  increasingly  heavy  users  of  markets  to  fund  their  activities.  In 
recent  years,  many  international  banks  borrowed  in  short-term  markets  to  finance  asset 
growth  and,  in  the  process,  to  substantially  increase  their  leverage.  This  made  them 
increasingly  dependent  on  continuous  access  to  liquidity  in  money  and  capital  markets.  In 
the process, banks conflated a reliance on market liquidity with their access to central bank 
liquidity. This exacerbated the potential liquidity problems of banks to a magnitude that we 
now better appreciate. 
Second,  banks  increasingly  used  securitization  to  straddle  relationship  banking  and 
transactional market-based finance. Under the originate-to-distribute business model, banks 
originated  a  set  of  loans,  repackaged  them  as  securities,  and  sold  them  to  investors.  In 
essence,  banks  took  specialized  loans  and  sold  them  in  standardized  packages.  While 
securitization  promised  to  diversify  risks  for  banks,  the  transfer  of  risk  was  frequently 
incomplete. Banks often sold securities to "arms-length" conduits that they were later forced 
to reintermediate or held onto AAA tranches of structures that proved far from risk-free. At 
the extreme, the business models of some institutions were wholly reliant on the continuous 
availability of markets for securitized assets (e.g., Northern Rock). 
The global financial crisis exposed the fundamental incentive problems that can occur with 
securitization. In the originate-to-distribute model, the incentives of the originating institution 
were no longer aligned with those of the risk-holders. Once that relationship was severed, 
the standards for new loans and their ongoing monitoring were adversely affected. However, 
pricing and risk management did not reflect these changes until they were abruptly adjusted, 
helping to trigger the onset of the crisis. 
Third,  many  retail  and  commercial  banks  expanded  into  investment  banking.  This  allowed 
banks  to  package  traditional  lending  with  higher  value-added  agency  business,  market-
making activities and, increasingly proprietary trading. Banks' push into markets helped spur 
the  proliferation  of  over-the-counter  derivative  products,  which  created  counterparty  and 
investment risks that were difficult to identify and control. 
Incentive  problems  also  plagued  this  transition.  In  many  banks,  a  culture  that  rewarded 
innovation  and  opacity  over  risk  management  and  transparency  eventually  undermined  its 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 3
creators.  Senior  managers  and  shareholders  of  banks  discovered  that  actual  risks  were 
much greater than originally thought. By that time, the more junior traders who had assumed 
the risks had already been paid, largely in cash. Many large, complex institutions learned too 
late  that  there  can  be  principal-agent  problems  within  firms,  as  well  as  between  firms  and 
their shareholders. 
Just  as  banks  began  doing  what  markets  traditionally  did  best,  there  was  an  explosion  in 
highly  specialized  products  that  required  monitoring  and  continuous  access  to  funding 
liquidity.  More  and  more  of  the  traditional  functions  of  banks  –  including  maturity 
transformation  and  credit  intermediation  –  were  conducted  through  a  broader  range  of 
intermediaries  and  investment  vehicles,  which  have  been  collectively  referred  to  as  the 
"shadow  banking"  system.  Shadow  banks  included  investment  banks  (in  other  countries), 
mortgage brokers, finance companies, structured investment vehicles (SIVs), hedge funds, 
and other private asset pools. 
The scale of these developments was remarkable. During this decade, banking assets grew 
enormously, to anywhere from one and a half times to six times national GDP in Canada, the 
United States, the United Kingdom, and Europe. In all countries besides Canada, much of 
this  growth  was  financed  by  increased  leverage.3  In  the  final  years  of  the  boom,  when 
complacency about access to liquidity reached its zenith, the scale of the shadow banking 
system  exploded.  The  value  of  SIVs,  for  example,  tripled  in  the  three  years  to  2007.  The 
growth  in  financial  activity  and  the  increasingly  complex  array  of  financial  players  have 
prompted a dramatic increase in claims within the financial system, as opposed to between 
the financial system and the real economy, which created risks that were difficult to identify 
and evaluate. 
Financial  institutions,  including  many  banks,  came  to  rely  on  high  levels  of  liquidity  in 
markets. In the United States, the total value of commercial paper rose by more than 60 per 
cent and the ABCP market by more than 80 per cent in the three years before the crisis. In 
essence, the shadow banking system practiced maturity transformation without a safety net – 
that is, it was wholly reliant on the continuous availability of funding markets. The collapse in 
market liquidity that began in August 2007 crystallized these risks. 
The regulatory system neither appreciated the scale of this activity nor adequately adapted to 
the new risks created by it. The shadow banking system was not supported, regulated, or 
monitored in the same fashion as the banking system. With hindsight, the shift towards the 
shadow banking system that emerged in other countries was allowed to go too far for too 
long. 
Financial deleveraging 
The  financial  crisis  is  now  reversing  the  decades-long  transition  from  bank-based, 
relationship-oriented finance towards market-based, transaction-oriented finance. Banks are 
playing  a  larger  role  in  the  ongoing  extension  of  credit.  However,  this  transition  carries 
enormous  risks.  Banks  alone  cannot  support  the  same  level  of  economic  activity  as  the 
entire  system  did  before,  particularly  since  many  need  to  delever.  Moreover,  the  financial 
system as  a whole is more robust when both  banks and markets are strong, healthy, and 
liquid. 
Financial  deleveraging  is  now  one  of  the  dominant  forces  in  the  global  economy.  After  a 
decade  during  which  household  debt,  leverage  in  the  financial  sector,  and  cross-border 
                                                 
3   Average asset-to-capital ratios for U.S. investment banks rose to 25 prior to the onset of the crisis, to 30 in the 
euro  area,  and  to  over  40  for  some  major  global  banks.  These  are  all  much  higher  than  the  Canadian 
equivalent of about 20. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2009
capital flows all rose rapidly, all have slowed or are now falling. The duration and orderliness 
of these shifts will help to determine the severity of the global recession. 
Financial institutions around the world must bring their leverage down to more sustainable 
levels by shrinking assets and raising more capital. Considerable, albeit disruptive, progress 
has been made in the shadow banking system, where SIVs and other conduits have been 
largely  wound  up.  Hedge  fund  assets  under  management  have  been  cut  in  half  to  about 
US$1 trillion, and the leverage applied to these assets has been substantially reduced. As 
liquidity in many funding markets has dried up, so has embedded leverage in many pension 
funds. However, there has been less progress in the regulated banking sector. This is a large 
task.  We  estimate  that  to  bring  leverage  ratios  down  to  Canadian  levels  by  raising  capital 
alone, global banks would need more than US$1 trillion in new capital, before any additional 
writedowns on assets. 
The  deleveraging  process  has  contributed  to  a  dramatic  reversal  in  cross-border  capital 
flows.  Many  of  the  largest  global  banks  have  dramatically  curtailed  their  international 
activities.  Hedge  funds  have  similarly  retreated  to  their  home  countries  in  anticipation  of 
redemptions  and  over  concerns  for  cross-border  liquidity.  The  Institute  of  International 
Finance  (IIF)  estimates  that  net  flows  from  private  creditors  to  emerging  markets,  which 
topped US$630 billion in 2007, will be negative this year. Once the crisis passes, the scale of 
cross-border financial transactions is unlikely to return to pre-crisis levels. This reflects both 
the re-emergence of home bias amongst investors and the impact of measures to support 
domestic institutions. This financial protectionism, if not checked, could permanently impair 
cross-border capital flows and could be a serious setback for the global economy. 
Reform of the global financial system 
It is clear that the global financial system needs to be restructured, but doing so requires a 
clear view of the objectives. The fundamental objective is a system that efficiently supports 
economic  growth  while  providing  financial  consumers  with  choices.  The  system  must  be 
robust  to  shocks,  dampening  rather  than  amplifying  their  effect  on  the  real  economy.  It 
should  also  support  sensible  innovation.  The  system  needs  both  stable  banks  and  robust 
markets,  since  both  play  a  central  role  in  financing  and,  if  properly  structured,  each  can 
support the other. 
Achieving these objectives will require a range of measures starting with short-term initiatives 
to  keep  the  system  functioning  and  then  bridging  to  more  fundamental  long-term  reforms, 
which help define the roles of banks and markets. 
Keeping the system functioning 
Extraordinary measures have been taken to underpin the financial system. All G-20 countries 
have  explicitly  and  repeatedly  confirmed  that  no  systemically  important  institution  will  be 
allowed  to  fail.  In  some  countries,  there  has  been  direct  support  for  banks  through  capital 
injections  using  public  money.  Support  has  also  taken  less  direct  forms,  such  as  liquidity 
support  to  help  keep  open  the  markets  on  which  banks  and  market  participants  depend. 
Some of these measures are expediencies taken in the midst of a crisis and elements may 
need to be adjusted later to support a more permanent solution.4
For example banks have been provided with considerable liquidity support to reflect the scale 
of the funding pressures. The broader intent has been to grease the wheels of the financial 
system. In providing liquidity to banks at the core of the system, central banks expected that 
                                                 
4   The  Bank  of  Canada  has  outlined  some  principles  for  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  the  following  article 
http://www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/fsr/2008/pol0608.pdf. 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 5
key  markets  would  resume  functioning  as  liquidity  cascaded  down  to  other  market 
participants and, ultimately, through private credit creation to the real economy. However, the 
weaker  the  starting  point  of  regulated  institutions  and  the  greater  the  importance  of  the 
shadow banking sector, the longer the healing process has taken. 
While the provision of extraordinary liquidity is limiting the damage from the crisis, it has long 
been apparent that official liquidity, irrespective of size, cannot re-open markets on its own. 
Reopening markets will ultimately require a series of measures to improve the infrastructure 
of core funding markets, securitization, and credit default swaps (CDS). 
Building systemic markets 
A robust and efficient financial system needs core markets for interbank lending, commercial 
paper, and repos of high-quality securities that are continuously open, even under periods of 
stress.  To  that  end,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  currently  engaged  in  wide-ranging  discussions 
with  market  participants,  regulators,  and  other  central  banks  on  the  steps  that  may  be 
needed  to  create  continuously  open  markets.  Potential  measures  include  improving  the 
transparency  of  securities  (as  with  ABCP),  standardizing  terms  such  as  through-the-cycle 
haircuts  for  repos,  and  exploring  the  potential  use  of  clearing  houses  to  limit  counterparty 
risks.  Regulations  and  standards  could  reinforce  these  initiatives.  Central  bank  operations 
could also be adapted to create a market-maker of last resort. 
Authorities are also taking important steps to improve the functioning of key markets such as 
securitization  and  CDS  by  creating  more  robust  infrastructure  and  standardizing  the 
products. For example, to reduce opacity, the models and data underlying securities could be 
published  to  move  securitization  from  black  box  to  open  source.  An  extreme  would  be  to 
standardize securities by introducing a government "wrap" or guarantee, as is the case with 
Canada Mortgage Bonds.5  6 Similarly, a host of measures are being pursued to make the 
CDS  market  more  sustainable.  The  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  has  improved  clearing  and 
settlement arrangements, and has encouraged the move of CDS onto clearing houses. This 
will  encourage  the  standardization  of  these  products,  while  making  CDS  counterparties  – 
often banks – less systemically important at the margin. 
The limits between banks and markets 
These initiatives will change the margin between banks and markets and will make markets 
much more robust. This will reduce risks to those institutions that rely on these markets and 
reduce the extent to which certain banks are "too interconnected to fail." Nonetheless, even 
with these changes, banks can be expected to continue to be active market participants. 
For some, such progress is insufficient. A simple lesson that they draw from the crisis is that 
banks  should  be  divorced  from  markets.  To  those  who  think  this  way,  banks  are  most 
naturally heavily regulated utilities that collect deposits and make loans. Once banks become 
involved  in  the  market  "casino,"  they  are  overwhelmed  by  the  resulting  risk-management 
challenges  and  all  too  often  have  to  draw  on  their  public  safety  nets.  Indeed,  the  very 
existence  of  those  safety  nets  may  encourage  excess  risk  taking  and  promote  financial 
crises.  That  is  why  some  advocate  restricting  banks'  activities  to  their  "core"  functions  of 
deposit  taking  and  lending.  The  range  of  activities  related  to  the  markets  would  be  kept 
                                                 
5   For  example,  the  former  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  United  Kingdom  Financial  Services  Authority,  Sir  James 
Crosby,  proposed  the  introduction  of  government  guarantees  of  newly-issued  mortgage-backed  bonds.  In 
March, the Bank of England introduced an Asset Purchase Program to support corporate credit markets. 
In addition, to align incentives, originators could brand their products to retain part of the security or to absorb 
first loss. 
6  
6 
 BIS Review 39/2009
outside the heavily regulated banking sector. To this way of thinking, banks could not then 
get themselves into trouble or, if they did, their demise could be safely managed. 
In the midst of the crisis, this is a seductive viewpoint, but its practical value may be limited 
for three reasons. 
First, banks perform a broad range of market-related activities that are vital to the existence 
of markets. Canadian banks are the major agents, market makers, underwriters, and traders 
of most government debt and corporate debt. Even with substantial improvements to market 
infrastructure,  it  is  difficult  to  see  markets  functioning  effectively  in  the  absence  of  bank 
participation.  These  activities  can  be  distinguished  from  principal  positions  or  proprietary 
investments  and  are  essential  to  well-functioning  markets.  Efforts  to  improve  market 
infrastructure described above will make markets less risky and the system as a whole more 
robust. 
Second, banks are the major providers of cross-border financing products ranging from trade 
finance, to foreign exchange hedging, to foreign financing. In a world of global supply chains 
and  corporations,  it  would  be  very  costly  to  prohibit  bank  provision  of  these  services  that 
have become integral to global commerce. Moreover, with global cross-border flows already 
under such pressure, further impediments would be extremely risky. 
Third,  the  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  there  are  many  firms  that  have  been  deemed 
systemic and worthy of  rescue even though they were not  deposit-taking banks. Efforts to 
build  more  robust  markets  and  to  define  clearer  and  more  comprehensive  resolution 
schemes may limit these cases in the future, but they are unlikely to eliminate them entirely. 
In  my  opinion,  a  better  approach  is  the  plan  by  the  G-20  to  expand  the  perimeter  of 
regulation.  As  a  general  principle,  all  financial  activities  that  can  pose  a  systemic  risk  to 
financial  stability  should  be  supervised  and  regulated.  This  will  include  pools  of  capital  of 
material size, leverage, and maturity mismatches. In addition, to avoid regulatory arbitrage, 
markets should be regulated according to economic substance, placing similar activities into 
the  same  regulatory  bucket,  even  if  undertaken  in  different  institutions.  Regulating  by 
economic  substance  should  limit  the  destabilizing  impact  of  shadow  banks  on  the  banks 
themselves. 
In many respects, the relative success of Canadian banks and their consolidated supervision 
by  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  demonstrates  that,  with  the 
proper  regulatory  regime  and  professional  management,  banks  can  be  much  more  than 
utilities.  In  this  spirit,  Canada  is  contributing  to  the  international  debate  on  financial  sector 
reform. We are stressing the need for a macroprudential (i.e., comprehensive and system-
wide)  approach  that  takes  into  account  the  importance  of  banks,  markets,  and  the 
interactions between them. 
Conclusion 
Our  principal  preoccupation  is  weathering  the  financial  and  economic  storm,  but  as  we 
respond to the current tempest, policy-makers must also focus on where we want to end up 
when  calmer  conditions  arrive.  Our  destination  should  be  one  where  banks  and  financial 
markets  play  critical,  and  complementary,  roles  in  a  financial  system  to  support  long-term 
economic prosperity. The system as a whole will be more stable if market infrastructure is 
substantially improved, market products are more standardized and transparent, and banks 
can fulfill their market-making roles with appropriate liquidity backstops. 
As  the  G-20  pursues  its  critical  agenda  of  financial  reform,  Canada  will  contribute  an 
important perspective on these issues, drawing on the fine example we continue to set. 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 7
