Martín Redrado: Where is global finance heading? Status of the 
international monetary system and the stake of emerging economies 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the Session II – 
Emerging Economies in the international financial system – the way forward, Cusco, 13-14 
July 2009. 
 The experience of having to deal with recurrent crisis over the last decades finally is paying-
off for us, emerging economies. For the first time in recent decades, the emerging world is 
not at the epicenter of a financial crisis. We, developing economies, were “learners of first 
resort”  that  financial  stability  is  a  prominent  goal  for  central  banks.  And,  what  is  most 
important on the way forward, we are meant to be both the engine of the world economy but 
also to share the driver’s seat, which is a bigger role that comes with bigger responsibilities.  
While the global economy seems to be bottoming out, it is still gripped in what, in my view, 
will be a lengthy recession. In the developed world further adjustment is in the pipeline in a 
context of credit squeeze, growing unemployment and a deteriorating credit quality. We have 
not yet seen clear steps to what is needed in terms of long-term funding; households and 
banks balance sheets repair; and long-run fiscal and monetary sustainability, which could be 
a drag today but clearly is an issue for the medium term.  
In the emerging world, the correction is also taking place. And, in some cases, it is showing 
up the hard way. We witness Asian economies suffering from a collapse on trade but mostly 
region-driven. Figures reveal that U.S. imports did not fall as much as intra-Asia trade. On 
the positive side, inventories data in East Asia suggest that the retrenchment on industrial 
activity  might  be  over.  Here,  again,  the  “green  shoots”  could  be  the  effect  of  anti-crisis 
packages rather than a more lasting effect with domestic consumption on the “driver’s seat”.  
Collapsing global demand caused a sharp drop in the international prices of raw materials 
since their reached their peak in mid-2008. During the first half of the year, however, prices 
showed some signs of stability and certain improvement. The outlook imposes a limit on a 
recovery, but it is expected that structural factors that are underpinning prices, will continue 
to prevail. We have been seeing lately a remarkable performance of quotations on both hard 
and soft commodities. There can be two main explanations for this development: a surge on 
speculative trading or a surge in physical trade.  
In  the  former  case,  although  there  have  been  some  improvements  in  financial  markets, 
activity  on  non-commercial  commodity  trade  is  still  bellow  last  year  levels,  and  the  causal 
relationship  between  speculative  trading  and  prices  is  under  hard  scrutiny.  In  this  regard, 
there  is  a  clear  concern  of  US  authorities  that  are  set  to  strengthen  the  regulation  on 
commodities markets, and at the same time are going to disclose more detailed information 
on non commercial operations. On the fundamentals of these markets, there is much more 
information  to  justify  an  upswing  on  prices:  on  the  supply  side  there  is  a  lower  harvest  of 
some  grains  and  oilseeds.  The  stagnation  of  productive  investment  (because  of  reduced 
spending  in  fertilizers,  seeds  and  equipment)  due  to  the  crisis,  in  a  context  of  low  grain 
stocks,  makes  the  markets  vulnerable  to  any  weather  shocks  in  the  2009/10  season, 
something that starts to be reflected in prices. For example, my country consumed 30% less 
fertilizer  during  2008,  while  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009  imports  showed  a  decline  of  90% 
annually.  This  lower  investment  is  particularly  relevant  for  countries  in  the  southern  cone 
because it would affect the productivity of the soils, which were damaged by the drought of 
the last season (even with favorable weather, it is likely that productivity will be lower than 
that of recent years). On the demand side, there were new increases on biofuels targets and 
a broad re-stocking process, taking advantage of lower prices. Much of this is reflected on a 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 1
surge  on  vessels  use  with  a  clear  impact  on  freight  rates,  which  jumped  nearly  50%  last 
June.  
In  addition,  with  a  focus  on  ensuring  the  future  supply  of  food  and  commodities  and  on 
investment, countries like China and Saudi Arabia, among others are making progress in the 
purchase of arable land in developing regions like Africa and in our region. This factor shows 
a renewed investor’s interest in the development of agriculture. The first reason that explains 
the  proliferating  acquisition  of  land  is  linked  to  food  security  concerns.  Several  countries 
invest in the long run to feed their people at affordable prices. The second reason is more 
related to financial gains. Faced with the collapse and prospects for future increases in prices 
of food and land, institutional investors are returning to invest in the agricultural sector.  
It is crystal clear right now that the way out of this crisis for emerging markets will be critical 
for the future growth path of the world economy. In analyzing medium-term economic growth 
perspectives,  a  key  issue  is  whether  the  dynamics  of  previous  years  will  be  maintained, 
especially  when  considering  the  disruptive  effects  of  the  crisis.  In  this  regard,  emerging 
economies  are  expected  to  play  a  key  role.  Our  projections  indicate  that  the  BRICs,  for 
instance,  would  share  approximately  30%  of  global  output  in  2020,  while  the  U.S.  share 
would  drop  to  17%.  Two  areas  where  these  structural  changes  associated  with  emerging 
economies have most clearly come true are the world production of industrial goods and in 
the  development  of  global  imbalances.  As  to  imbalances,  the  increased  importance  of 
emerging countries became apparent in international reserves and the creation of sovereign 
wealth funds.  
At  the  same  time,  the  growing  importance  of  emerging  economies  in  the  global  economy 
reveals  the  need  for  their  increased  participation  in  the  global  policy  decision-making 
process. In turn, the appearance of new important players in the emerging world makes this 
process more multi-polar and complex. 
One example is the participation of emerging economies in the recently launched Financial 
Stability Board and the expansion of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which in 
my view, have been the most significant reform in the international financial architecture so 
far. For instance, in the case of the regulatory treatment of currency mismatches, we, I mean 
those countries that suffered macroeconomic crisis, have something to say. The increased 
credit  risk  faced  by  subsidiaries,  when  these  subsidiaries  are  significant  for  the  banking 
group as a whole, imposes negative effects for the parent bank and home market. Central 
Banks  could  strengthen  its  regulation  on  credit  risk  management  by  requiring  banks  that 
before  granting  a  loan,  they  should  assure  that  no  currency  mismatches  exist  in  debtors’ 
balance sheets. This regulation can be imposed by host authorities to subsidiaries in their 
jurisdictions, and also, by home regulators to the banking group as a whole regarding each of 
its subsidiaries. This means for example that home regulators ask that the parent bank and 
each subsidiary inside the group must comply with that requirement. If not, penalties should 
be imposed, such as increases in capital requirements. The effect of that kind of currency 
mismatches could be explicitly considered in the Pillar II in Basel II. If the effects of currency 
mismatches  are  not  properly  attended  by  banks,  supervisors  at  the  banking  group  level, 
should require additional capital. Also, the potential effects of currency mismatches should 
be explicitly addressed in supervisory colleges. 
In this context, Latin America is also playing a growing role in the world economy by being a 
factor of stability as opposed to what happened in other times in history. Definitely, the region 
has been better prepared to face this crisis both when comparing with history and with the 
way  other  emerging  markets  are  being  affected.  Following  the  crises  of  the  1990s  and 
2000s, our countries have taken important steps to strengthen macroeconomic management, 
prudential  regulation  and  oversight.  Improved  current  account  and  fiscal  positions,  large 
amounts  of  external  liquidity,  better  liability  management  and  robust  monetary  frameworks 
are several features that place my region not even in the first row of the fire line at this time. I 
would like to stress, in particular, the strengthening of balance sheets, including the built up 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2009
of liquidity buffers to face external shocks and the reduced currency mismatches – one of the 
key sins of the past. The development of a domestic currency capital market was a corner-
stone that allow the monetary and banking system to act as a shock smoother rather than a 
shock amplifier, proving for financial stability. 
Speaking  about  financial  stability,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the  key  structural  changes  in 
economic policy is that financial stability is now ranking higher on every central bank goals 
worldwide. Both developed and emerging countries have had to adjust monetary schemes 
focused  on  the  interest  rate  as  the  single  instrument  to  maintain  stability.  In  fact,  financial 
stability objectives were implicitly and explicitly added, and instruments were adjusted to new 
priorities.  Within  this  framework,  many  central  banks  have  had  to  revisit  their  usual 
regulation, operation and intervention mechanisms. We still confront the challenging task of 
defining and measuring financial stability. There is no unique or generally accepted definition. 
As  well,  when  it  comes  to  making  financial  stability  an  operational  factor,  disagreement 
among relevant actors arise, something that is somehow different with price stability goals. 
On  top  of  that,  there  is  also  a  lack  of  available  instruments  to  achieve  financial  stability, 
whether it is a developed or emerging market economy. Those missing tools may have its 
part  on  explaining  the  under  pricing  of  risk  during  recent  times,  leading  to  a  short-sighted 
vision on potential longer-term consequences of a reversion on the business cycle.  
In this regard, the economic literature is lagging behind. If the relationship between economic 
theory  and  policy  recommendations  is  reasonably  well  defined  during  “normal”  times,  in 
times of turmoil, this relationship becomes much weaker. We have reached a point in which 
economic theory is having a hard time keeping up with praxis. Literature has shown results 
that  are  ambiguous  or  contrary  to  those  produced  by  the  usual  “technology”,  especially  in 
relation to the approach that relies on the interest rate as the single instrument. Same applies 
to  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regimes.  Recent  empirical  papers  that  refined  the 
analysis  started  by  several  academics  argue  against  sharp  fluctuations  in  the  domestic 
currency.  Instead,  mitigating  excessive  volatility,  especially  in  developing  countries  with 
rather  shallow  capital  markets  and  limited  access  to  hedging,  seems  to  be  an  appropriate 
policy. 
This kind of monetary and financial framework that ensures systemic stability has been my 
main task during the last years. This means giving priority to avoiding "the next crisis" and 
building  buffers  to  minimize  the  effects  of  disruptions.  In  my  country,  the  decades  of 
macroeconomic instability and recurrent crises were not harmless in terms of welfare.  
These factors, which undermined the power of some traditional monetary policy instruments, 
have  played  a  key  role  in  the  design  of  our  current  monetary  and  financial  system.  In 
particular,  our  risk  management  strategy  based  on  four  pillars  (calibrated  convergence 
between  supply  and  demand  in  the  monetary  market,  managed  floating  exchange  rate 
regime,  development  of  external  liquidity  buffers,  appropriate  financial  regulation  and 
supervision) is compatible with these aims as well as with the tools available. This scheme, 
which was carefully developed along recent years, now allows us to overcome each episode 
of stress, minimizing the impact on the real economy and avoiding inconsistencies that might 
make  it  unsustainable  over  time.  Recently,  we  have  experienced  periods  to  significant 
financial  stress  in  the  domestic  market  and  our  monetary  and  financial  framework  has 
delivered. The fact that we have successfully navigated four episodes of financial stress in 
the  last  two  years  (July-October  2007,  April-June  2008,  September-November  2008  and 
March 2009) is an ample proof of the robust nature of the approach adopted by the Central 
Bank.  
In each of the events, we first reacted firmly to normalize the money demand and stabilize 
the foreign exchange market. Then, with simple instruments, we ensured liquidity provision to 
guarantee systemic stability. Finally, we implemented an array of measures including reforms 
on  the  markets  for  Central  Bank  securities,  the  development  of  additional  mechanisms  for 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 3
liquidity  provision,  changes  to  enhance  futures  market  depth  and  transparency,  and 
instruments to facilitate supply of foreign currency.  
In particular, we acted to neutralize the effect on money supply of the increased demand for 
foreign  currency  by  injecting  liquidity,  mainly  through  the  redemption  of  Central  Bank  Bills 
and  Notes  (LEBAC  and  NOBAC)  on  the  secondary  market  and  partial  renewals.  This 
avoided  placing  excessive  pressure  on  interest  rates,  at  the  same  time  as  ensuring 
compliance  with  the  monetary  targets.  We  also  offered  swaps  between  fixed  and  variable 
interest rate instruments to set a reference for the term structure of nominal interest rates for 
longer  periods  than  are  currently  traded  on  the  market.  In  addition,  to prevent  excessively 
cautious  behavior  by  banks  and  to  encourage  the  use  of  their  surplus  foreign  currency 
resources to trade financing we made available a new option to access to foreign currency 
repos. In this context, the managed floating exchange rate regime has proved its worth for 
the  period  the  economy  is  going  through.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  ignore  structural 
changes that could affect the real equilibrium exchange rate (commodity prices, the value of 
the currencies of leading trading partners, development of global supply and demand, among 
other  factors).  We  will  continue  to  prevent  excessive  fluctuation  in  the  exchange  rate  that 
could potentially impact on expectations and could represent unbearable threats to systemic 
financial and monetary stability. Our system worked as a dam to the rest of the economy, 
providing for the first time in decades monetary and financial stability.  
While  challenges  for  us,  policy  makers  around  the  globe  are  significant,  now  we  seem  to 
understand that policy recipes vary from one country to the other. Developing and making 
operational  flexible  but  robust  policy  frameworks  is  therefore  highly  desirable.  I  mean 
approaches  with  goals  that  are  consistent  with  the  history,  the  idiosyncrasies  and  the 
instruments available in each economy. The ongoing crisis is making somewhat obvious that 
financial stability is relevant for central banks for instance. My message is that a goal that 
has been mostly ignored (or left as a “by-product”) in a country, could be as important as any 
other  one  in  certain  circumstances.  Furthermore,  in  my  view,  the  way  we  handle  the 
changing  links  and  trade-offs  between  the  different  goals  and  instruments  is  what  would 
make us succeed as policy makers. This progress is, obviously, welcomed. Especially for us, 
emerging markets’ policy makers, as we have to catch up with the standards of living of our 
population and, most importantly, build institutions and credibility at the same time. In fact, it 
is  more  a  synchronic  than  a  sequential  two-fold  challenge:  advancing  towards  the 
development of our economies and building institutions simultaneously. Today, this approach 
seems to be the rule rather than the exception not only in the emerging world but also all 
across developed countries. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2009
