Kevin M Warsh: Longer days, fewer weekends 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  12th  Annual  International  Banking  Conference,  Chicago,  Illinois, 
25 September 2009. 
 Recent media stories and more substantial works chronicle in great detail the events of the 
past couple of years.1 A pair of conclusions might be fairly drawn from these early drafts of 
history.  One,  the  financial  market  turmoil  of  the  past  year  proved  to  be  of  significant 
consequence  to  the  economy.  And  two,  the  Federal  Reserve  distinguished  itself  from 
historical  analogues  by  taking  extraordinary  actions  to  address  risks  to  the  economy.  The 
commentary,  however,  tends  to  part  ways  as  to  whether  the  extraordinary  actions 
undertaken were to the good or the detriment of the U.S. economy in the long-run.  
As my fellow members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and I stated earlier 
this  week,  economic  activity  has  picked  up,  conditions  in  financial  markets  have  improved 
further, and longer-term inflation expectations are stable. 
Nonetheless, the second anniversary of the onset of the financial crisis – and about a year 
from  the  darkest  days  of  the  Panic  of  2008  –  is  no  time  to  declare  victory,  scarcely  the 
moment to hand out medals.2 I cannot help but think of the strong but weary athlete who, 
after a morning swim, embarks upon a grueling cycling contest to a rising din of cheers and a 
smattering of boos…only to be reminded that he is participating in a triathlon, and that he has 
a long run still before him.  
In my view, it is unwise to prejudge the Fed's policy strategy – or to declare the victor or the 
vanquished – by the split time, however notable it might be. We are at a critical transition 
period,  of  still  unknown  duration,  and  we  must  prepare  diligently  for  an  uneven  road  race 
ahead. If policy is not implemented with skill and force and some sense of proportionality, the 
success of the overall endeavor could suffer.  
Judgments made by policymakers in the current period are likely to be as consequential as 
any  made  in  the  depths  of  the  panic.  That  means  policymakers  should  continue  to 
communicate  as  clearly  as  possible  the  guideposts,  conditions  and  means  by  which 
extraordinary  monetary  accommodation  will  be  unwound,  including  the  removal  of  excess 
bank reserves.3  
It  also  means  that  policymakers  should  acknowledge  the  heightened  costs  of  policy  error. 
The stakes are high, in part, because the policy accommodation that requires timely removal 
as  the  economy  rebounds  is  substantial.  And  our  policy  judgments  will  ultimately  prove 
worthy of the accolades, and tender the ultimate rejoinder to their critics, if we rise to meet 
this heightened responsibility. I am confident we will. 
                                                 
1   The views  expressed herein  are my  own  and do not  necessarily reflect the views  of other members of the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful 
for  the  valuable  assistance  of  Daniel  Covitz,  Eric  Engstrom,  Nellie  Liang,  and  David  Reifschneider  of  the 
Board staff who contributed to these remarks. 
2   See Kevin Warsh (2009), "The Panic of 2008," speech delivered at the Council of Institutional Investors 2009 
Spring Meeting, Washington, April 6, 2009. 
3   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the 
Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  July  21,  2009;  and  Ben  S.  Bernanke 
(2009), "The Fed's Exit Strategy," Wall Street Journal, July 21, 2009. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 1
The final recounting of economic history, I submit, will judge that winning the battle against 
the Panic of 2008 was a necessary but insufficient condition to win the peace and ensure a 
strong foundation for economic prosperity. That outcome will require that policymakers have 
equal  parts  capability,  clairvoyance  and  courage,  perhaps  the  most  important  of  which  is 
courage.  
For  those  of  us  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  task  ahead  involves  longer  days,  but  in  all 
likelihood, fewer weekends. While the undertaking is as challenging as any we faced in the 
preceding  period,  it  is  exceptionally  well  suited  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  comparative 
advantages of deliberation, dispassion, and a determination to make judgments based on the 
long-term interests of the U.S. economy.  
transmission  mechanism  and 
The task ahead 
Economic histories in the United States and elsewhere are packed with examples in which 
the  monetary  authorities,  with  the  overwhelming  benefit  of  hindsight,  may  have  misjudged 
the communication, timing or force of their exit strategies. In some cases, policymakers may 
have waited too long to remove easy-money policies. In other cases, policymakers may have 
acted  too  abruptly,  normalizing  policy  before  the  economy  was  capable  of  self-sustaining 
growth.  
Errors of each sort are neither uncommon nor unexpected in the normal conduct of monetary 
policy.  During  normal  turns  in  the  business  cycle,  the  consequences  of  policy  error  to  the 
broad  economy  tend  to  be  meaningful.  Forgone  output.  Higher  unemployment.  Threats  to 
price stability. None of which are – or should be – acceptable to the Federal Reserve, or to 
the  broader  body  politic.  And  the  current  environment  is  anything  but  normal.  There  are 
uncertainties regarding the trajectory of the economy recovering from a major financial crisis 
and  a  deep  recession.  Equally,  there  are  uncertainties  about  the  performance  of  the 
monetary 
the  Federal  Reserve's 
unconventional policy tools. A nimble, even-handed approach toward our risk-management 
challenges will prove necessary.  
Monetary  policy  rules  have  for  some  time  served  as  an  alluring  guide  for  policymakers, 
particularly at transition points when guidance is especially useful. In particular, the Taylor 
rule has proven to be informative in describing, if not prescribing, how a central bank might 
adjust  its  interest  rate  policy  instrument  in  response  to  developments  in  inflation  and 
macroeconomic  activity.4  But,  to  make  the  outputs  operational,  we  need  reasonable 
conviction in the reliability of our estimates of current resource utilization and inflation or, for 
some alternative rules that have been proposed, forecasts of these model inputs.5 And it is 
these  kinds  of  estimates  that  appear  especially  uncertain  during  this  period  of  economic 
history,  emblematic  of  the  challenging  task  ahead.  Policy  rules  and  models  alike  tend  to 
presume average historical responses, incorporating typical transmission effects and normal 
market functioning, which may not fairly capture the current state of play.  
Nonetheless,  policymakers  strive  to  answer  the  following  questions:  How  is  the  economy 
currently performing relative to its long-run potential, and is this likely to change in the next 
few months? Where is inflation now relative to its desired level, and what are the prospects 
for  an  acceleration  or  deceleration  in  prices  in  the  near-term?  Will  changes  in  the  federal 
funds  rate  interact  with  financial  conditions  and  affect  future  real  activity  and  inflation 
the  operation  of 
                                                 
4   John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on 
Public Policy 39, December, 195-214. 
5   Athanasios  Orphanides  (2007),  "Taylor  Rules,"  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-18 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2009
consistent with past practice? Or have these interactions changed, with implications for both 
the outlook and the conduct of policy?  
It  may  be,  for  example,  that  potential  output  has  fallen  by  virtue  of  the  panic  and  its 
aftermath.  If  the  resulting  economy  proves  less  adaptive,  for  example,  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment may well threaten to move upward, implying tighter labor markets at higher 
unemployment rates, and lower potential output. These estimates are especially difficult to 
ascertain given the uncertain contour of the financial architecture and the greater-than-usual 
reallocation (and risk of misallocation) of labor and capital across sectors.  
Of course, countervailing risks could cause a mark-up in economic potential that cannot be 
dismissed: Productivity gains may turn out to be larger and more enduring than we expect, 
and  the  remarkable  resiliency  of  the  U.S.  economy  could  defy  skeptics  as  it  has  done 
repeatedly in the post-World War II era.  
Data  in  the  past  couple  of  months  show  continued  improvement  in  real  economic 
performance.  In  combination  with  the  repair  in  financial  markets,  the  outlook  for  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP)  in  the  next  few  quarters  appears  better,  improving  the  odds  of  a 
more enduring positive feedback loop arising from market developments and real activity.  
Nonetheless,  the  medium-term  risks  to  the  outlook  are  still  disquieting.  Policies,  broadly 
defined,  that  purport  to  bring  stability  to  the  macroeconomy  could  risk  lowering  output 
potential over the horizon.6 The uncertainty of the capital and labor reallocation process, a 
global  trade  environment  in  transition,  and  a  shifting  regulatory  environment  represent 
downside  risks.  The  possibility  that  we  fail  to  accurately  gauge  the  resulting  changes  in 
economic and inflation prospects – by virtue of the remarkable, iterative changes in private 
sector practices and public policy prescriptions – is a foremost risk for policymakers. In this 
environment, we should maintain considerable humility about optimal policy.  
Preliminary, provisional, subject to revision, condition-dependent forecast 
I just sought to describe the challenges in conducting monetary policy in this environment. 
That should caution us to steer clear of ironclad policy prescriptions. Nonetheless, I would 
hazard the view that prudent risk management suggests that policy will likely need to begin 
normalization  before  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  necessary,  possibly  with  greater  force  than  is 
customary,  and  taking  proper  account  of  the  policies  being  instituted  by  other  authorities. 
Allow me to elaborate on each of these three items.  
First, when will the Fed's extraordinary policy accommodation demand removal? 
The  central  banker's  standard  reply,  to  which  I  would  associate  myself  here,  fits  the  bill: 
When conditions warrant. The FOMC stated on Wednesday that "economic conditions are 
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period." 
Although it just might be a central banker's rationalized excuse for not knowing, I genuinely 
believe that more precise timing is unknowable.  
In  my  view,  if  policymakers  insist  on  waiting  until  the  level  of  real  activity  has  plainly  and 
substantially  returned  to  normal  –  and  the  economy  has  returned  to  self-sustaining  trend 
growth – they will almost certainly have waited too long. A complication is the large volume of 
banking system reserves created by the nontraditional policy responses. There is a risk, of 
much  debated  magnitude,  that  the  unusually  high  level  of  reserves,  along  with  substantial 
liquid assets of the banking system, could fuel an unanticipated, excessive surge in lending. 
                                                 
6   See  Kevin  Warsh  (2009),  "Defining  Deviancy,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers 
Annual Meeting, New York, June 16. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 3
Predicting the conversion of excess reserves into credit is more difficult to judge due to the 
changes in the credit channel.7
Financial  market  developments  bear  especially  careful  watching.  They  may  impart  a  more 
forward-looking sign of growth and inflation prospects than arithmetic readings of stimulus-
induced GDP or lagged composite readings of inflation. 
The rapid, global revaluation of asset prices – in both directions – has served as a hallmark 
of  the  past  two  years.  Monitoring  this  trend,  and  gauging  its  durability,  will  demand  keen 
judgment.  If  asset  prices  find  a  new  and  enduring  equilibrium,  market  participants  and 
policymakers  alike  may  well  gain  additional  comfort  that  the  real  economy  is  poised  for 
sustainable recovery. However, if asset prices retrace their recent gains, the real economy 
would be adversely affected.  
Understanding risk premiums embedded in asset prices will be critical to this task. In general, 
risk  premiums  across  asset  classes  fell  significantly  in  the  past  six  months,  but  remain 
elevated,  roughly  consistent  with  prior  recession  periods.  Some  portion  of  the  decline  in 
premiums and the concomitant run-up in equity prices, for example, can be fairly ascribed to 
the abatement of tail risk that became apparent during the panic. Option prices across broad 
equity market indexes show a substantial markdown in the likelihood of a substantial market 
correction.  
But,  the  broad  and  continued  ascent  in  equities  appears  increasingly  to  reflect  a  new 
judgment about the modal outcome for economic growth and corporate earnings. If it turns 
out  that  equity  risk  premiums  continue  their  recent  trajectory,  real  economic  performance 
would be bolstered further by sturdier household, business and financial firm balance sheets.  
It is not just the trend or level of asset prices that should inform policymakers. Correlations of 
asset  prices  across  markets  also  provide  important  insights.  In  times  of  panic,  historic 
correlations  break  down  and  commonality  predominates.  Those  firms  and  individuals  with 
purportedly "well-diversified portfolios" going into the panic bore painful witness to this truth. 
During  extreme  conditions,  sharp  swings  in  investor  sentiment  often  dominate  changes  in 
relative  valuations  and,  for  a  time,  limit  the  degree  to  which  financial  markets  effectively 
allocate credit.  
This  breakdown  in  historic  correlations  is  not  unique  to  the  onset  of  panics.  It  may 
predominate when panic conditions are in retreat. For instance, in the past couple of months, 
U.S. stock market indexes and corporate bond prices both moved meaningfully higher, while 
Treasury  yields  and  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  fell.  These  movements  are 
difficult to reconcile with historical experience or by ascribing them to changes in the modal 
growth  path  for  the  economy.  Rather,  this  odd  constellation  of  movements  in  asset  prices 
may indicate changes in investor preferences and in the distributions of outlooks for inflation 
and  growth.  It  would  be  more  reassuring  to  growth  and  inflation  prospects  in  the  coming 
months if asset prices were to signal a clearer, more reliable message.  
Second, how might the policy response evolve?  
Many  of  the  programs  created  during  the  panic  were  designed  to  atrophy  –  due  to  their 
changing relative attractiveness in price and other terms – as market conditions improved. 
This  natural  unwinding  has  proven  largely  successful.  As  a  result,  the  Federal  Reserve's 
balance  sheet  composition  has  changed  in  recent  months,  even  while  the  overall  balance 
sheet size has remained relatively constant. 
                                                 
7   See Kevin Warsh (2008), "The Promise and Peril of the New Financial Architecture," speech delivered at the 
Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, November 6, 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2009
Several of the Fed's non-traditional programs to provide monetary stimulus were established 
under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, the Fed's governing statute. The Congress 
authorized the Federal Reserve to lend to non-depository institutions, as the programs do, 
only under "unusual and exigent circumstances." The judgment that the 13(3) standard is no 
longer  satisfied  would  cause  an  unwinding  of  nontraditional  policy  tools  by  the  Fed,  and 
presage a normalization of policy.8  
Ultimately, when the decision is made to remove policy accommodation further, prudent risk 
management may prescribe that it be accomplished with greater swiftness than is modern 
central  bank  custom.  The  Federal  Reserve  acted  preemptively  in  providing  monetary 
stimulus,  especially  in  early  2008  when  the  economy  appeared  on  an  uneven,  uncertain 
trajectory.  If  the  economy  were  to  turn  up  smartly  and  durably,  policy  might  need  to  be 
unwound with the resolve equal to that in the accommodation phase. That is, the speed and 
force of the action ahead may bear some corresponding symmetry to the path that preceded 
it. Of course, if the economy remains mired in weak economic conditions, and inflation and 
inflation  expectation  measures  are  firmly  anchored,  then  policy  could  remain  highly 
accommodative.  
"Whatever it takes" is said by some to be the maxim that marked the battle of the last year. 
But, it cannot be an asymmetric mantra, trotted out only during times of deep economic and 
financial distress, and discarded when the cycle turns. If "whatever it takes" was appropriate 
to arrest the panic, the refrain might turn out to be equally necessary at a stage during the 
recovery  to  ensure  the  Fed's  institutional  credibility.  The  asymmetric  application  of  policy 
ultimately  could  cause  the  innovative  policy  approaches  introduced  in  the  past  couple  of 
years to lose their standing as valuable additions in the arsenal of central bankers. 
Third, how might U.S. monetary policy be affected by other macroeconomic policies? 
Monetary  policy  is  not  conducted  in  a  vacuum.  The  Federal  Reserve,  and  other  monetary 
policymakers, will be keen observers to the judgments made by the fiscal authorities around 
the world. Central bankers will necessarily take account of these judgments. 
Financial  markets'  affection  for  decoupling  –  that  is  the  disassociation  of  U.S.  economic 
prospects from the rest of the world – tends to wax and wane. My own views on the subject 
are  less  ephemeral.  Our  prospects  for  economic  growth  are  highly  correlated  with  the 
prospects of our large trading partners. And if fiscal, regulatory and trade policies diverge or 
deteriorate,  economic  prospects  globally  could  suffer.  But  if  the  better  path  prevails  –  that 
born  of  the  past  couple  of  generations  of  economic  dynamism,  positive-sum  trade  flows, 
fiscal  sustainability  and  regulatory  best  practices  –  we  will  emerge  from  this  crisis  with  a 
stronger, more integrated global economy and more resilient financial markets.  
Monetary  policy  convergence  has  proven  remarkable,  and  remarkably  constructive, 
throughout the crisis. When the removal of accommodation begins in earnest, we should be 
alert to see if this trend continues. 
                                                 
8   This standard represents a prudent framework from which responsibility is delegated to the central bank. The 
grant  of  authority  from  the  Congress  is  standards-based  with  clear  limits  and  bounds.  It  might  serve  as  a 
useful model worthy of broader application in the ongoing debate about regulatory reform. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 5
