Rakesh Mohan: Emerging contours of financial regulation – challenges 
and dynamics 
Paper by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, for the Financial 
Stability Review of Bank of France, 10 June 2009. 
The  assistance  of  Anand  Sinha,  Prashant  Saran,  P  R  Ravi  Mohan,  T  Gopinath,  and  Muneesh  Kapur  in 
preparation of the paper is gratefully acknowledged. The paper has also benefited from the Report of the Working 
Group I of the G-20 on “Enhancing Sound Regulation and Strengthening Transparency”. 
 The world is currently in the midst of the most severe financial and economic crisis since the 
Great  Depression.  Although  the  crisis  originated  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  market  in  the 
United States, it then spread to Europe and later to the rest of the world. The speed of the 
contagion  that  spread  across  the  world  is  perhaps  unprecedented.  What  started  off  as  a 
relatively  limited  crisis  in  the  US  housing  mortgage  sector  turned  successively  into  a 
widespread banking crisis in the United States and Europe, the breakdown of both domestic 
and  international  financial  markets,  and  then  later  into  a  full  blown  global  economic  crisis. 
Almost all governments and central banks of the world have been busy over the last 9-18 
months in an effort to contain the effects of the crisis through both fiscal and monetary policy 
measures,  respectively.  Just  as  the  global  nature  of  the  crisis  is  unprecedented,  so  is  the 
global nature of the response, as exemplified by the coordinated action being committed to 
by the G-20. 
Along  with  the  coordinated  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  actions,  a  comprehensive  re-
examination of the financial regulatory and supervisory framework is also underway around 
the world.  
Against this backdrop, this paper attempts to analyse the emerging contours of regulation of 
financial institutions with an emphasis on the emerging challenges and dynamics. The paper 
is  organised  as  follows:  Section  I  provides  a  broad  overview  of  the  global  developments 
which  contributed  to  the  current  global  financial  crisis.  Section  II  presents  the  ongoing 
discussion and debate at the international level in the light of the shortcomings of the extant 
regulatory framework. Section III analyses proposals for reforming the regulatory framework, 
while Section IV discusses the difficulties in implementing the regulatory proposals. 
Evolution of crisis: what went wrong? 
I.  
What are some of the identifiable sources of market failures that led to the current financial 
turbulence?  
The  current  ongoing  financial  crisis  is  attributed  to  a  variety  of  factors  such  as  the 
developments in the sub-prime mortgage sector, excessive leverage, lax financial regulation 
and supervision, and global macroeconomic imbalances. At a fundamental level, however, 
the crisis also reflects the effects of long periods of excessively loose monetary policy in the 
major advanced economies during the early part of this decade. 
After the dotcom bubble burst in the US around the turn of the decade, monetary policy in the 
US and then in other advanced economies was eased relatively aggressively. Policy rates in 
the US reached one per cent in 2002, and were held around these levels for an extended 
period, longer than was probably necessary (Taylor, 2009; Yellen, 2009). Excessively loose 
monetary policy led to excess liquidity and consequent low interest rates worldwide; and the 
burst of financial innovation during this period amplified and accelerated the consequences 
of excess liquidity and rapid credit expansion (de Larosière Report, 2009). 
What  is  interesting  about  this  episode  is  that,  despite  the  persistent  accommodative 
monetary policy, the accompanying strong worldwide macroeconomic growth did not result in 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 1
measured inflationary pressures in goods and most services. Consequently, central banks in 
advanced economies, particularly in the US, did not withdraw monetary accommodation for 
an extended period. The excess liquidity worldwide did show up in rising asset prices, and 
later in commodity prices, particularly oil. It was only then that measured inflation did start 
rising and central banks began to tighten monetary policy, though belatedly. 
With  significant  increases  in  both  investment  and  consumption,  along  with  declining 
savings,1 aggregate demand exceeded domestic output in the US for an extended period, 
leading  to  persistent  and  increasing  current  account  deficits,  as  the  domestic  savings 
investment imbalance grew. This large excess demand of the US was supplied by the rest of 
the world, especially China, which provided goods and services at relatively low cost, leading 
to  corresponding  current  account  surpluses  in  China  and  elsewhere.  The  surpluses 
generated by the oil exporting countries added to the emerging global imbalances.  
Large current account surpluses in China and other EMEs and equivalent deficits in the US 
and elsewhere are often attributed to the exchange rate policies in China, other EMEs and oil 
exporters. Given the fact that the US demand exceeded output, it is apparent that the US 
current  deficit  would  have  continued  at  its  elevated  levels.  In  the  event  of  a  more  flexible 
exchange  rate  policy  in  China,  the  sources  of  imports  for  the  US  would  have  been  some 
countries other than China. Although the lack of exchange rate flexibility in the Asian EMEs 
and  oil  exporters  did  contribute  to  the  emergence  of  global  imbalances,  it  can  not  fully 
explain the large and growing current account deficits in the US, particularly since Europe as 
a whole did not exhibit current account deficits at the same time. 
Accommodative monetary policy and the corresponding existence of low interest rates for an 
extended  period  encouraged  the  active  search  for  higher  yields  by  a  host  of  market 
participants. Thus capital flows to Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) surged in search of 
higher yields, but could not be absorbed by these economies in the presence of either large 
current account surpluses or only small deficits, largely ending up as official reserves. These 
reserves  were  recycled  into  US  government  securities  and  those  of  the  government 
sponsored  mortgage  entities  such  as  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  Thus,  while 
accommodative  monetary  policy  kept  short  term  interest  rates  low,  the  recycled  reserves 
contributed to the lowering of long term interest rates in the advanced economies, particularly 
the United States. Such low long term interest rates contributed to the growth of mortgage 
finance and consequent rising housing prices. 
Furthermore,  the  stable  macroeconomic  environment  –  relatively  stable  growth  and  low 
inflation – in the major advanced economies in the run up to the crisis led to sustained under-
pricing of risks and hence excessive risk taking and financial innovation. It may be ironic that 
the perceived success of central banks and increased credibility of monetary policy, giving 
rise to enhanced expectations with regard to stability in both inflation and interest rates, could 
have led to the mispricing of risk and hence enhanced risk taking. Easy monetary policy itself 
may have generated a search for yields that resulted in a dilution of standards in assessing 
credit  risk  leading  to  erosion  of  sound  practices  (Mohan,  2007).  Lower  yields  encouraged 
excessive leverage as banks and financial institutions attempted to maintain their profitability. 
Lacunae  in  financial  regulation  and  supervision  allowed  this  excessive  leverage  in  the 
financial  system.  Assets  were  either  taken  off  banks’  balance  sheets  to  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles  that  were  effectively  unregulated;  or  financial  innovation  synthetically  reduced  the 
perceived risks on balance sheets. 
The  sustained  rise  in  asset  prices,  particularly  house  prices,  on  the  back  of  excessively 
accommodative  monetary  policy,  and 
financial 
innovations, resulted in the high growth in mortgage credit to households, particularly to low 
credit  quality  households.  Due  to  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model,  most  of  these 
lending  standards  coupled  with 
lax 
                                                 
1   The US personal saving rate hovered only slightly above zero from mid-2005 to mid-2007 (Yellen, 2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2009
mortgages were securitized. In combination with strong growth in complex credit derivatives 
and with the use of credit ratings, the mortgages, inherently sub-prime, were bundled into a 
variety of tranches, including AAA tranches, and sold to a range of financial investors looking 
for higher yields.  
As  inflation  started  creeping  up  beginning  in  2004,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  did  start  to 
withdraw monetary accommodation. Consequently, mortgage payments started rising, while 
housing  prices  started  to  ease.  Low/negligible  margin  financing  incentivised  default  by  the 
sub-prime  borrowers.  Although  the  loans  were  supposedly  securitized  and  sold  to  the  off 
balance sheet special institutional vehicles (SIVs), the losses were ultimately borne by the 
banks and financial institutions wiping off a significant fraction of their capital. The uncertainty 
about the extent of the likely bank losses led to a breakdown of trust among banks. Given the 
growing  financial  globalization,  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  other  major  advanced 
economies,  especially  Europe,  have  also  been  adversely  affected  by  losses  and  capital 
write-offs. Inter-bank money markets nearly froze and this was reflected in very high spreads 
in  money  markets  and  debt  markets.  There  was  aggressive  search  for  safety,  which  has 
been  mirrored  in  very  low  yields  on  Treasury  bills  and  bonds.  These  developments  were 
significantly  accentuated  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  and 
there was a complete loss of confidence. 
The deep and lingering crisis in global financial markets, the extreme level of risk aversion, 
the mounting losses of banks and financial institutions, the elevated level of commodity and 
oil prices (until the third quarter of 2008), and the sharp correction in a range of asset prices, 
all combined, have suddenly led to the sharp slowdown in growth momentum in the major 
advanced  economies,  especially  since  the  Lehman  failure.  Global  growth  for  2009,  which 
was seen at a healthy 3.8 per cent in April 2008, is now expected by the IMF to contract by 
1.3 per cent.  
Thus, the causes for the current crisis reflect the interaction of monetary policy, the choice of 
exchange rate regime in a number of countries and important changes within the financial 
system itself (de Larosière Report, 2009; BIS, 2008), along with lax regulation arising from 
the belief in efficient markets and light touch regulation. To recap, low interest rates, together 
with increasing and excessive optimism about the future pushed up asset prices, from stock 
prices to housing prices. Low interest rates and limited volatility prompted the search for yield 
down the credit quality curve, and underestimation of risks led to creation and purchase of 
riskier assets. Central banks, focused on measured consumer price inflation and aggregate 
activity, while neglecting asset price movements, did not perceive the full implications of the 
growing risks until it was too late (IMF, 2009). 
Shortcomings in financial regulation and supervision 
II.  
There  have  been  calls  for  fundamental  rethinking  on  macro-economic,  monetary  and 
financial sector policies to meet the new challenges and realities, which perhaps represent a 
structural  shift  in  the  international  financial  architecture  demanding  potentially  enhanced 
degree of coordination among monetary authorities and regulators. A review of the policies 
relating to financial regulation, in a way, needs to address both the acute policy dilemmas in 
the short run and a fundamental re-think on broader frameworks of financial and economic 
policies over the medium-term (Reddy, 2008). 
A  great  deal  of  very  active  discussion  is  now  going  on  internationally  on  the  existing 
regulatory practices and the future of financial regulation and supervision. It is also perhaps 
correct to say that there is an emerging consensus on the directions that need to be taken on 
financial regulation and supervision. Among the most influential reports on this issue are: 
• 
Report  of  the  High  Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  European  Union 
(Chairman: Jacques de Larosière).  
BIS Review 72/2009 
 3
   The  structure  of  Financial  Supervision:  Approaches  and  Challenges  in  a  Global 
Market Place (Group of Thirty; Chairman: Paul Volcker).  
The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation (The Geneva Report).  
The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking Crisis (Financial 
Services Authority of the UK); and finally,  
The  Report  of  Working  Group  I  of  the  G-20  on  “Enhancing,  Sound  Regulation  and 
Strengthening Transparency (G-20).  
What  is  common  among  all  these  reports  is  the  acknowledgement  that  regulation  and 
supervision  in  the  advanced  economies  was  clearly  too  lax  in  recent  times  and  that  there 
needs  to  be  considerable  rethinking  leading  to  much  strengthened,  and  perhaps,  intrusive 
regulation  and  supervision  in  the  financial  sector.  There  is  clear  recognition  of  serious 
regulatory and supervisory failures. 
The root of such re-thinking is really the questioning of the existing intellectual assumptions 
with  respect  to  the  functioning  of  markets,  and  the  nature  of  financial  risk.  To  quote  the 
Turner Review:  
“At the core of these assumptions has been the theory of efficient and rational markets. Five 
propositions with implications for regulatory approach have followed: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Market prices are good indicators of rationally evaluated economic value. 
The development of securitized credit, since based on the creation of new and more 
liquid markets, has improved both allocative efficiency and financial stability. 
The  risk  characteristics  of  financial  markets  can  be  inferred  from  mathematical 
analysis, delivering robust quantitative measures of trading risk. 
Market discipline can be used as an effective tool in constraining harmful risk taking. 
Financial  innovation  can  be  assumed  to  be  beneficial  since  market  competition 
would winnow out any innovations which did not deliver value added. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Each  of  these  assumptions  is  now  subject  to  extensive  challenge  on  both  theoretical  and 
empirical grounds, with potential implications for the appropriate design of regulation and for 
the role of regulatory authorities”. (Turner Review, 2009, p.30) 
What were the specific developments in the financial system that arose from these broadly 
accepted intellectual assumptions that led to the ongoing global financial crisis? 
Financial  and  banking  crises  have  a  long  history,  which  is  as  old  as  the  existence  of  the 
financial sector itself. What is common among almost all crises is the build up of excessive 
leverage in the system and the inevitable bursting of the financial bubble that results from 
such  leverage.  What  is  interesting  about  the  current  crisis  is  that  this  excess  leverage 
occurred over a period when greater consensus had developed through the Basel process 
on the need for and level of adequate capital required in banking institutions across all major 
jurisdictions.  Furthermore,  sophisticated  financial  risk  management  capabilities  were  also 
believed  to  have  been  developed  within  large  financial  institutions  during  this  period  of 
unusually high rapid growth in both the magnitude and sophistication of the financial system. 
With financial deregulation in key jurisdiction like the United States and the U.K., along with 
most other countries, financial institutions also grew in complexity. Financial conglomerates 
began  to  include  all  financial  functions  under  one  roof:  banking,  insurance,  asset 
management,  proprietary 
like.  The 
consequence has been inadequate appreciation and assessment of the emerging risks, both 
within  institutions  and  system  wide.  What  were  the  factors  that  led  to  this  emergence  of 
excessive system wide and institutional risk? 
Among the notable developments of the last decade has been the unprecedented explosive 
growth  of  securitized  credit  intermediation  and  associated  derivatives  (Yellen,  2009).  The 
investment  banking,  broking,  and 
trading, 
the 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2009
assumption underlying this development was that this constituted a mechanism that took risk 
off  the  balance  sheets  of  banks,  placing  it  with  a  diversified  set  of  investors,  and  thereby 
serving  to  reduce  banking  system  risks.  As  late  as  April  2006,  the  IMF’s  Global  Financial 
Stability  Report  noted  that  this  dispersion  would  help  “mitigate  and  absorb  shocks  to  the 
financial system” with the result that “improved resilience may be seen in fewer bank failures 
and more consistent credit provision” (as quoted in the Turner Report, p.42). 
This assumption has already proved to be erroneous, although simple forms of securitisation 
have existed for a long time. Among the key functions of banks is maturity transformation: 
they intermediate shorter term liabilities to fund longer term assets in the non-financial sector. 
Banks  are  typically  highly  leveraged  and  hence  trust  and  confidence  is  crucial  to  their 
functioning and stability. Traditionally, therefore, banks exercised sharp vigilance on the risk 
elements of their assets, which were typically illiquid, in order to ensure constant rollover of 
their  shorter  term  funding  liabilities.  What  securitization  does  is  to  turn  illiquid  assets  into 
liquid  ones,  which  in  theory  then  disperse  risks  from  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  also 
reduce  their  requirements  of  banking  capital.  With  assets  themselves  seen  as  liquid  short 
term  instruments,  they  began  to  be  funded  by  ultra-short  term  liabilities,  including  even 
overnight repos whose volume increased manifold in recent years. Systemic risk increased 
because  traded  instruments  are  inherently  more  susceptible  to  price swings  depending  on 
changes  in  market  sentiment.  Furthermore,  liquidity  risks  in  such  markets  were  also  not 
understood  adequately.  It  was  assumed  that  these  liquid markets  would  always  exist,  and 
hence  securitized  assets  were  assumed  to  be  inherently  less  risky  than  illiquid  long  term 
credit assets. 
Financial innovation arising from the search for yields compounded this problem as second 
order derivatives proliferated and their valuation became increasingly dependent on model 
valuation  and  credit  ratings,  rather  than  observable  and  transparent  market  valuation,  and 
hence  inherently  more  opaque.  Thus,  when  problems  arose  in  these  markets  and  prices 
were not visible, valuation of the assets of banks and the shadow banking system became 
unobservable. Consequently, trust and confidence evaporated and markets froze. 
Compounding these problems was the emergence of the shadow banking system that took 
off assets from the banks’ balance sheets, thereby reducing the latter’s capital requirements. 
The complexity and magnitude of intra-financial sector transactions exploded over this past 
decade,  particularly  over  the  past  five  years.  Thus  the  financial  sector  increasingly  served 
itself,  exhibiting  high  profits  and  growth,  while  doing  relatively  little  for  the  non  financial 
sectors of the economy, which the financial sector exists to serve in principle. The debt of 
financial companies increased to levels exceeding the GDP of leading economies. Thus, in 
the process of taking risks off balance sheets through securitization, these risks returned to 
the  extended  banking  system  itself  and  the  original  rationale  for  securitization  got  belied. 
Rather  than  reducing  systemic  risk  the  system  of  complex  securitisaiton  and  associated 
derivatives only served to increase systemic risk. Moreover, it became increasingly difficult to 
trace where the risk ultimately lay. 
The regulatory system was clearly behind the curve in taking account of these developments. 
The  procedures  for  calculating  risk-based  capital  requirements  under-estimated  the  risks 
inherent  in  traded  securitized  instruments,  thereby  adding  to  the  incentive  for  banks  to 
securitise  assets  into  traded  instruments,  which  bore  lower  risks  weights.  The  trading  of 
these  instruments  has  largely  been  in  OTC  markets  that  exhibit  little  transparency.  As  a 
result of this overall process, banks became effectively under capitalized, and the leverage 
ratios  of 
investment  banks  reached 
unsustainable levels. 
With  the  existence  of  low  interest  rates,  mispriced  low  risk  perceptions,  and  inherent 
incentives 
instruments,  household 
indebtedness  increased  to  unprecedented  levels,  particularly  for  housing.  Demand  for 
housing  assets  rose  and  hence  housing  prices.  Thus  micro  behavior  led  to  increased 
the  unregulated  shadow  banking  system  and 
lending  and  distribute  securitized 
to  originate 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 5
systemic risk that was not adequately appreciated or understood, and hence not monitored 
by the authorities. 
Thus there are immense emerging challenges that confront financial sector regulators as a 
consequence of the ongoing global financial crisis. 
We  can  look  forward  to  extensive  debate  at  both  the  academic  level  and  among 
practitioners.  How  will  we  change  our  view  on  the  efficiency  and  rationality  of  markets, 
particularly  financial  markets?  What  will  be  the  effect  of  such  re-examination  on  financial 
innovation  in  the  future?  What  will  regulatory  authorities  do  in  the  meantime  while  these 
debates are settled at the intellectual level? Will they overreact and restrict financial growth in 
the months and years to come? Will this affect global GDP growth as well? 
I now turn to the key proposals that are now being made for overhaul of the strong financial 
regulatory architecture. 
Reforming the regulatory framework: the future perspective 
III.  
A great deal of discussion is going on at both the national and international levels on reform 
of  the  financial  regulatory  system  to  address  the  various  weaknesses  that  have  emerged. 
There  is  no  question  that  financial  regulation  has  to  be  strengthened  all  round.  Hitherto 
unregulated  institutions,  markets  and  instruments  will  now  have  to  be  brought  under  the 
regulatory  framework,  and  the  framework  itself  will  need  to  be  redesigned  to  address  the 
emerging  needs  at  both  national  and  international  levels.  As  this  new  enthusiasm  for 
financial  regulation  unfolds,  it  is  important  that  we  keep  in  mind  the  basic  functions  of  the 
financial system, and how they can be strengthened so that the needs of the real economy 
are better served. 
We need to ensure that the financial system continues to play a vital role in intermediating 
savings  for  providing  adequate  levels  of  funding  to  the  real  sector,  thereby  supporting 
economic  growth.  It  needs  to  be  recognized  that  financial  markets  will  remain  global  and 
interconnected, while financial innovation would continue to be important to foster economic 
efficiency.  Hence,  while  strengthening  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  an  endeavour 
has  to  be  made  in  this  process  to  be  careful  not  to  stifle  entrepreneurship  and  financial 
innovation.  But  the  following  question  needs  to  be  constantly  asked:  “Financial  innovation 
towards what objective?” As long as financial innovation is seen to promote price discovery, 
greater  intermediation  efficiency,  and  hence,  overall  efficiency  and  growth,  it  must  be 
encouraged,  but  with  appropriate  safeguards  to  maintain  financial  stability.  Unproductive 
financial innovation, however, will need to be discouraged. Moreover, the debate on financial 
innovation  and  regulation  has  to  be  considered  in  terms  of  potential  and  systematic 
relevance of such innovations besides the capabilities for bringing them effectively under the 
regulatory umbrella (Mohan, 2007). Therefore, there is a need for reform of the regulatory 
framework to shield the financial system from potential crises, while identifying measures to 
mitigate the consequences of any future episodes of financial stress. 
The regulatory framework will need to keep pace with the associated risks in a more rapid 
and effective manner. Large complex financial institutions will continue to operate in multiple 
jurisdictions in order to meet the needs of their large global clients, and supervision will need 
to be better coordinated internationally with a robust global resolution framework. In order to 
avoid regulatory arbitrage, there is a need for greater consistency in the regulation of similar 
instruments and of institutions performing similar activities, both within and across borders. 
In addition, capital markets will require greater emphasis on reducing counterparty risk and 
on ensuring that their infrastructure allows them to remain a source of funding during periods 
of  stress.  The  post-crisis  period  is  likely  to  be  characterized  by  a  financial  system  which 
functions  with  lower  levels  of  leverage,  reduced  funding  mismatches  (both  in  terms  of 
maturity  and  currency),  less  exposure  to  counterparty  risk,  and  greater  transparency 
regarding  financial  instruments.  After  credit  markets  recover  from  the  crisis,  it  will  be 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2009
important to mitigate the inevitable pressure to expand profits through increased risk-taking. 
A more developed macro-prudential approach will be important in this context. 
The type, size, and cross-border exposures of institutions and markets that will emerge from 
this  crisis  are  likely  to  be  considerably  different  from  before.  As  banks  and  financial 
institutions  consolidate,  policy  makers  will  have  to  adapt  prudential  regulation  to  varying 
degrees of size and concentration. Similarly, competition policy will be important in ensuring 
healthy competition. Financial institutions, markets and instruments will therefore continue to 
evolve in ways that pose challenges for regulation, notwithstanding the retrenchment that is 
currently  underway.  Financial  institutions,  policymakers,  supervisors  and  regulators  will  all 
need  to  become  better  equipped  to  manage  the  interconnectedness  of  markets,  both 
domestically  and  globally,  the  effects  of  innovation,  and  the  potential  for  incentives  to 
become misaligned. 
It  will  be  necessary  to  consider  the  appropriate  timing  for  changes  in  the  regulatory 
framework  going  forward.  Recommendations  should  promote  proportionate  regulatory 
reaction when needed, acknowledging the possible limits of the self-regulation approach in 
some  contexts.  For  example,  while  ultimately  capital  buffers  for  the  system  should  be 
enhanced  during  the  economic  expansion  in  order  to  be  drawn  down  as  needed  in 
downturns,  changes  in  the  current  environment  may  have  negative  consequences  on  the 
real economy. A considered and comprehensive review of the consequences of reforms and 
harmonization,  coordinated  across  jurisdictions,  is  necessary  to  increase  the  effective 
transition to a more stable financial system (G-20, 2009). 
In short, the overarching mandate of reforms is to make regulatory regimes more effective 
over  the  cycle.  This  is  related  to  many  other  issues  including  certain  aspects  of 
compensation  schemes  at 
risk 
management  practices  focused  on  Value-at-Risk  calculations  based  on  short  historical 
samples,  of  the  capital  adequacy  framework,  and  of  valuation  and  loan-loss  provisioning 
practices. In addition, there is a need to redefine the scope of the regulatory framework in 
order  to  establish  appropriate  oversight  for  the  institutions  and  markets  that  may  be  the 
source  of  systemic  risk.  Risk  management  also  needs  to  be  enhanced  to  better  evaluate 
vulnerabilities  arising  from  low-frequency,  system-wide  risks,  and  to  better  mitigate  these 
risks. 
Against this broad background, this section endeavours to focus on defining the priorities for 
action in so far as financial regulation and supervision are concerned. 
institutions,  of  margin 
requirements  and 
financial 
Macro prudential orientation 
As observed, the build up of micro institutional risks has resulted in the unfolding of massive 
macro risk, partly through the rise in unsustainable asset prices. As a supplement to sound 
micro-prudential  and  market  integrity  regulation,  national  financial  regulatory  frameworks 
therefore  should  be  reinforced  with  a  macro-prudential  oversight  that  promotes  a  system-
wide  approach  to  financial  regulation  and  supervision  and  mitigates  the  build-up  of 
observable excess risks across the system. Prudential regimes should encourage behaviour 
that supports systemic stability; discourages regulatory arbitrage; and adopts the concept of 
“systemic” risk, factoring in the effects of leverage and funding. In most jurisdictions, this will 
require improved coordination mechanisms between various financial authorities, mandates 
for all financial authorities to take account of financial system stability, and effective tools to 
address systemic risks. It will also require an effective global table, which is now proposed to 
be  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  to  bring  together  national  financial  authorities  to  jointly 
assess systemic risks across the global financial system and coordinate policy responses. 
A  number  of  policy  institutions,  particularly  central  banks,  have  enhanced  their  analysis  of 
systemic risks in recent years – many of the systemic vulnerabilities that caused or enhanced 
the current turmoil had in fact been identified – but policy mechanisms to effectively translate 
these analyses into policy action have been lacking. The basic idea here is to multiply the 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 7
capital adequacy ratios with a systemic risk factor. Better measures of macro-prudential risk 
are to be found. It is argued that leverage ratios, maturity mismatch and estimates of bank 
credit expansion should be taken into account. Highly leveraged and fast growing “systemic” 
institutions  would  be  subject  to  higher  capital  requirements  than  the  rest.  The  idea  is  that 
when  there  is  increasing  systemic  risk,  with  increasing  leverage,  maturity  mismatch,  credit 
expansion  and  asset  price  increases  during  boom  times,  banking  capital  required  should 
increase,  and  reduce  during  a  downturn  when  deleveraging  takes  place  (Geneva  Report, 
2009).  
Potential macroprudential tools that could be explored further could include: 
• 
Complementing  risk-based  capital  measures  with  simpler  indicators  aimed  to 
measure  the  build-up  of  leverage,  with  enhanced  sensitivity  to  off-balance  sheet 
exposures;  
Capital requirements that adjust over the financial cycle;  
Loan-loss provisioning standards that incorporate all available credit information;  
The use of longer historical samples to assess risk and margin requirements; and  
Greater focus on loan-to-value ratios for mortgages.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Further,  the  challenge  is  to  continually  endeavour  to  strike  a  balance  between  macro  and 
micro prudential regulation. 
Regulatory regime 
With the emergence of the shadow banking system and other leveraged financial institutions, 
the  scope  of  regulation  and  oversight  needs  to  be  expanded  to  include  all  systemically 
important  institutions,  markets  and  instruments.  Accordingly,  the  perimeter  of  the  financial 
sector  surveillance  would  have  to  be  extended  possibly  with  differentiated  layers  to  allow 
institutions  to  graduate  from  simple  disclosures  to  higher  levels  of  prudential  oversight  as 
their  contribution  to  systemic  risks  increases.  Financial  authorities  will  need  enhanced 
information on all material financial institutions and markets, including private pools of capital. 
Large complex financial institutions require particularly robust oversight given their size and 
global reach. Consideration would also need to be given to put in regulatory disincentives for 
such institutions to not become too big to fail. The regulatory and oversight framework should 
strive  to  treat  similar  institutions  and  activities  consistently,  with  greater  emphasis  on 
functions and activities and less emphasis on legal status. 
The main bone of contention here, inter alia, is whether and how to regulate private pools of 
capital, including hedge funds. There have been differences with regard to the role of these 
funds  in  the  current  global  financial  crisis.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  broad  agreement  that 
private  pools  of  capital,  including  hedge  funds,  can  be  a  source  of  risk  owing  to  their 
combined  size  in  the  market,  their  use  of  leverage  and  maturity  mismatches,  and  their 
connectedness with other parts of the financial system. 
The widespread reliance of market participants on credit ratings of market instruments led to 
inadequate risk analysis by themselves. Thus, credit rating agencies (CRAs) will have to be 
subject to a regulatory oversight regime. Further, there is a need for modifications to a rating 
agency’s  practices  and  procedures  for  managing  conflicts  of  interest  and  for  assuring  the 
transparency and quality of the rating process, particularly on the process underlying ratings 
of complex  securitised instruments and derivatives. Given the global scope of some credit 
rating  agencies,  the  oversight  framework  should  be  consistent  across  jurisdictions  with 
appropriate sharing of information between national authorities responsible for the oversight 
of credit rating agencies. 
8 
 BIS Review 72/2009
Procyclicality 
Once  conditions  in  the  financial  system  have  recovered,  international  standards  for  capital 
and  liquidity  buffers  will  have  to  be  enhanced,  and  the  build-up  of  capital  buffers  and 
provisions  in  good  times  should  be  encouraged  so  that  capital  can  absorb  losses  and  be 
drawn  down  in  difficult  times  such as  the  current  period.  It  will  be  necessary  to  develop  a 
methodology  to  link  the  stage  in  the  business  cycle  to  capital  requirements  in  a  non-
discretionary way and to accounting and prudential standards. 
Many  questions  have  also  arisen  on  accounting  conventions  and  procedures  that  are 
perceived to have added to procyclicality in the financial system. It should be recognised that 
the clock should not be turned back on Fair Value Accounting just to address the issue of 
temporary market illiquidity. What is needed is to make clear the nature of price uncertainty, 
and to do so in a manner that speaks symmetrically to the potential for mispricing in illiquid 
markets as much as in booming markets. Enhancements could include better guidance and 
principles  for  mark-to-market  valuation,  information  on  the  variance  around  the  fair  value 
calculations and data on history price. 
Prudential oversight 
There are three broad areas with regard to prudential oversight that require strengthening: 
capital  adequacy 
for  OTC 
derivatives. 
liquidity  risk  management  and 
infrastructure 
framework, 
Capital adequacy framework 
There is a clear need for higher quantity and quality capital resulting in minimum regulatory 
requirements  significantly  above  existing  Basel  rules.  The  emphasis  should  be  on  Tier  I 
capital.  The  transition  to  future  rules  should  be  carefully  phased  given  the  importance  of 
maintaining  bank  lending  in  the  current  macroeconomic  climate.  Capital  required  against 
trading  book  activities  should  be  increased  significantly.  Published  accounts  could  also 
include buffers which anticipate potential future losses, through, for instance, the creation of 
an  “Economic  Cycle  Reserve”.  A  maximum  gross  leverage  ratio  could  be  introduced  as  a 
backstop discipline against excessive growth in absolute balance sheet size. Further, in the 
context  of  rapid  financial  innovation  and  risk-based  regulatory  capital  requirements,  a  well 
constructed  non-risk-based  capital  measure  can  at  least  partially  address  the  problem  of 
modelling deficiencies for the advanced approaches and ensure a minimum level of capital is 
retained in the banking system. 
Liquidity risk management 
A new element in the future regulatory approach is explicit recognition that liquidity regulation 
and supervision must be recognised as of equal importance to capital regulation. Individual 
institutions have demonstrated that their own internal incentive structure is such that liquidity 
risk may be procyclical due to its links with market and credit risk, and to accelerator factors, 
such  as  the  mark-to-market  effects  of  asset  values  and  net  worth.  Structural  reliance  on 
short-term  wholesale  market  funding,  including  via  securitization,  has  increased  the 
sensitivity  of  banks  balance  sheets  and  cost  of  funds  to  procyclical  elements.  Therefore, 
regulatory policies need to reflect appropriately the true price of funding liquidity on financial 
institutions’  balance  sheets  –  ensuring  that  the  market  does  not  rely  excessively  on  the 
central bank emergency liquidity support facility. Areas that could be considered include 
• 
Improved  funding  risk  management  by  strengthening  risk  management  and 
governance and control 
Introduction of minimum quantitative funding liquidity buffers of high-quality liquidity 
assets 
 BIS Review 72/2009 
 9
 Introduction of regulatory charge for institutions that present a higher-than-average 
liquidity  risk  and  pricing  of  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  in  order  to  encourage 
institutions holding better-quality collateral. 
An effective global liquidity framework for managing liquidity in large, cross-border financial 
institutions  should  include  internationally  agreed  levels  of  liquidity  buffers,  and  should 
encourage  an  increase  in  the  quality  of  their  composition.  Such  a  framework  needs  to  be 
comprehensive and take into account liquidity needs for the overall institution. 
Infrastructure for OTC derivatives 
The  explosion  of  credit  derivatives  and  their  offshoots  (CDOs  etc)  has  demonstrated  the 
clear  need  for  oversight  and  transparency  in  this  market.  As  noted  earlier,  the  market  for 
credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  operates  on  a  bilateral,  over-the-counter  (OTC)  basis  and  has 
grown to many times the size of the market for the underlying credit instruments. In light of 
problems involving some large players in this market, attention has focused on the systemic 
risks  posed  by  CDS.  There  is  a  global  consensus  on  the  need  for  a  central  counter  party 
(CCP) for all the OTC derivative products and accordingly efforts are on, both in the US, EU 
and elsewhere to implement CCP for CDS. 
The development of a CCP facilitates greater market transparency, including the reporting of 
prices  for  CDS,  trading  volumes,  and  aggregate  open  interest.  The  availability  of  pricing 
information  can  improve  the  fairness,  efficiency,  and  competitiveness  of  markets  —  all  of 
which  enhance 
formation.  The  degree  of 
transparency, of course, depends on the extent of participation in the CCP. If needed, some 
incentives may be provided by national authorities, for example, by taking a higher capital 
charge  for  transactions  not  cleared  through  central  counterparties.  In  order  to  foster 
transparency and to promote the use of CCP and of exchange trading for credit derivatives, 
public authorities should also encourage the financial industry to standardize contracts and to 
use  a  data  repository  for  the  remaining  non-standardized  contracts  and  promote  fair  and 
open access to central counterparty services. In order to mitigate systemic risk resulting from 
counterparty  credit  risk,  in  the  short  run,  it  would  also  be  beneficial  for  there  to  be  a 
competitive environment for central counterparties without imposing regulatory requirements 
that unduly fragment the market. 
investor  protection  and 
facilitate  capital 
Compensation and risk management 
Compensation 
Among the issues that have gained prominence as contributory factors to the emergence of 
the global financial crisis is the explosion of remuneration in the financial sector, particularly 
in  comparison  with  trends  in  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Much  more  attention  is  now  being 
given to the development of sound practice principles by the international standard setters. It 
is important that reforms in this regard be done on an industry-wide basis, so that improved 
risk management and compensation practices by some systemically important firms are not 
undermined by the unsound practices of others. Along with the enunciation of such principles 
and practices, we need to look more carefully at the inherent market incentive structure that 
has led to the observed compensation practices in the financial sector. Acting on this flawed 
incentive structure is more likely to be effective than regulatory prescriptions.  
Risk management 
The  fundamental  weaknesses  in  risk  management  practices  revealed  in  the  current  crisis 
were  the  inability  of  financial  institutions  to  adequately  monitor  risk  concentrations  across 
products and geographical areas, shortcomings in stress testing and inappropriate practices 
for  managing  risks  arising  from  structured  products.  First  and  foremost,  it  remains  the 
responsibility  of  the  private  sector  to  take  the  lead  in  strengthening  firm-wide  risk 
10 
 BIS Review 72/2009
management frameworks. Both management and the Board of Directors are responsible for 
putting  in  place  adequate  risk  management  and  control  systems.  Generally,  banks  are 
expected  to  have  in  place  effective  internal  policies,  systems  and  controls  to  identify, 
measure, monitor, manage, control and mitigate their risk concentrations in a timely manner, 
and  under  various  conditions,  including  stressed  market  situations.  The  supervisory 
authorities would have to oversee compliance of such best practices for capturing firm-wide 
risk concentrations arising from both on- and off-balance sheet exposures and securitization 
activities. 
Transparency 
In  recognition  of  the  serious  problems  that  have  arisen,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  greater 
emphasis on greater market transparency about the techniques, data characteristics, and the 
caveats  involved  in  the  valuation  of  complex  financial  instruments,  improved  information 
regarding OTC derivatives markets and clearing arrangements and reporting of exposures in 
a format that permits regulators to aggregate and assess risks to the system as a whole. This 
would  help  investors  to  perform  some  of  the  due  diligence  currently  outsourced  to  CRAs, 
while also helping the latter to do a better job measuring the tail risks. 
The fundamental issue here is two fold: standard setters should work with supervisors and 
regulators  to  reduce  complexity  in  accounting  standards  to  facilitate  better  assessment  of 
uncertainty surrounding valuation and achieve consistency of valuation methods and a single 
set of accounting standards. 
Enforcement 
Through the expanded Financial Stability Forum, now renamed as Financial Stability Board, 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  international  standard  setters,  international 
standards,  including  those  for  macro-prudential  regulation,  the  scope  of  regulation,  capital 
adequacy  and  liquidity  buffers,  should  be  coordinated  to  ensure  a  common  and  coherent 
international  framework,  which  national  financial  authorities  should  apply  in  their  countries 
consistent  with  national  circumstances.  The  financial  regulatory  and  oversight  frameworks 
and  their  implementation  in  all  G-20  countries  should  be  reviewed  periodically,  validated 
internationally and made public. 
The challenges ahead 
IV.  
The  agenda  that  is  being  developed  for  strengthening  of  financial  sector  regulation  and 
supervision  is  ambitious.  Contentious  issues  will  arise  both  at  domestic/national  regulatory 
levels and at the international levels on regulatory cooperation. Whereas the principles that 
have been outlined for this regulatory overhaul are being increasingly well accepted, many 
challenges will arise on their modes of implementation, and their practicality. 
The  first  issue  is  that  the  various  proposals  that  will  lead  to  increased  levels  of  regulatory 
capital  over  the  economic  cycle,  and  extension  of  such  capital  requirements  on  bank  like 
institutions  that  are  currently  unregulated  or  lightly  regulated,  will  inevitably  lead  to  lower 
profitability  for  equity  investors.  The  bargaining  power  of  banking  institutions  has  become 
weak  in  the  current  circumstances  and  hence  there  is  little  observable  protest  regarding 
these proposals at present. As the financial crisis is resolved, and normalcy returns, we can 
expect the financial industry will do its utmost to resist the requirements for higher capital at 
that  time.  It  will  be  a  challenge  for  regulators  and  governments  to  resist  demands  for 
relaxation  of  the  new  capital  requirements,  both  the  enhanced  minimum  levels  and  the 
capital buffers proposed in good times. The lobbying power of the financial industry will be 
restored  by  that  time  and  hence  authorities  will  need  to  be  prepared  for  such  challenges. 
Lower  systemic  profitability 
limiting 
compensation levels in the financial sector. 
levels  will  also  be  effective  endogenously 
in 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 11
the  proposal 
institutions,  markets  and 
for  provision  of  contra-cyclical  capital  will 
face  significant 
Second, 
implementation  issues.  Regulators  will  need  to  do  significant  technical  work  in  the 
understanding of business cycles so that turning points can be recognised. What would be 
the  triggers  for  changes  in  these  capital  buffers  in  either  direction?  Would  these  changes 
kick-in  in  anticipation  of  business  cycle  turns  or  post  facto?  How  formation  or  rule-based 
would these changes be so that regulated institutions know in advance themselves what they 
need to do? An additional issue in this sphere arises from the possibility of economic cycles 
occurring  at  different  times  in  different  jurisdictions.  This  would  necessitate  greater  cross 
border  cooperation  between  home  and  host  regulators  in  terms  of  applicable  capital 
requirements  for  different  segments  of  the  same  international  financial  conglomerate.  An 
additional  problem  for  EMEs  would  be  the  lack  of  adequate  data  for  business  cycle 
identification. 
Third, there is general agreement  on macro prudential regulations and the identification of 
systemic risks like the build up of asset bubbles. However, considerable technical work will 
need to be done at both national and international levels on identifying what such risks are, 
what is systemic and what is not, and what kind of regulatory actions would be effective. In 
the  recent  experience,  for  example,  there  was  ample  awareness  of  the  build  up  of  both 
global financial imbalances, and of the asset price bubble, but there was little agreement on 
what needed to be done. Even if adequate work is done on the identification of systemic risk, 
and  on  the  regulatory  measures  necessary,  what  will  be  the  enforcement  methodology 
internationally.  Within  national  regulatory  systems,  issues  relating  to  inter-regulatory 
cooperation will also arise, who will be in-charge of issuing early warning systems and who 
will listen to them? 
Fourth,  there  is  general  agreement  on  the  extension  of  regulation  on  all  systemically 
important 
issue  of 
implementation. How do we decide what is systemically important? Considerable debate has 
ranged  around  the  regulation  of  hedge  funds,  which  come  in  all  sizes,  shapes  and  forms. 
Some are large, but not leveraged, others can be both large and leveraged, and yet others 
can be small and leveraged or otherwise. Whereas it may be that individual hedge funds or 
other equity pools are not systemically important, they may be so collectively. Furthermore, 
they could be collectively not important systemically in good times, but become so in times of 
extensive  leveraging.  Similar  is  the  story  for  markets  and  instruments.  Thus  the  work  of 
national  and  international  regulatory  system  is  cut  out  in  this  regard.  Excessive  regulation 
could indeed snuff out entrepreneurship if not done carefully. 
Fifth,  a  great  deal  of  debate  has  emerged  around  the  issue  of  securitised  credit  and  its 
offshoots.  Very  clearly,  financial  innovations  in  this  area  have  been  unproductive  and 
dysfunctional and will need to be discouraged. Once again, however, securitisation is a time 
honoured  methodology  that  has  done  much  to  lubricate  the  financial  system  and  helped 
funding real economy needs at competitive costs. How these instruments are regulated and 
how “good” financial innovations will be winnowed from the “bad” will be a challenge. 
Sixth, as the current global crisis has shown, whereas many of the large complex financial 
institutions are global in nature, their regulation is national. Considerable discussion is now 
ongoing  on  how  international  regulatory  cooperation  can  be  enhanced.  Apart  from  the 
regulatory  problems  associated  with  ongoing  institutions,  even  more  difficult  are  the 
problems  associated  with  cross  border  resolution  of  failing  institutions.  The  discussion  on 
these issues has just began. 
Seventh, from the point of view of Emerging Market Economies (EMEs), at the macro level, 
the  volatility  in  capital  flows  has  led  to  severe  problems  in  both  macro  management  and 
financial regulation (CGFS, 2009). These capital flows have been influenced significantly by 
the  extant  monetary  policy  regimes  in  developed  countries  and  hence  their  volatility  is  not 
necessarily related to economic conditions in the receiving economies. Excess flows, sudden 
instruments.  Here  again 
is  an 
there 
12 
 BIS Review 72/2009
stops  and  reversals  have  significant  effects  on  EME  financial  sectors,  the  working  of  their 
capital markets, and asset prices, and hence their economies as a whole. 
Management of this volatility involves action in monetary policy, fiscal management, capital 
account  management,  and  also  financial  market  regulation.  This  will  remain  a  challenge 
since there is little international discussion on this issue. 
Finally, in response to the crisis, monetary policy has been loosened substantially in major 
advanced economies since the second half of 2007. Policy rates have been cut to near zero 
levels, even lower than that in 2003-04, and the financial systems have been flooded with 
large liquidity. Abundant liquidity, if not withdrawn quickly, runs the risk of inducing the same 
excesses  and  imbalances  that  were  witnessed  during  2003-07.  Excess  liquidity  could  also 
take  the  form  of  large  capital  flows  to  the  EMEs  and  their  likely  recycling  back  to  the 
advanced  economies.  As  the  global  economy  starts  recovery,  a  calibrated  exit  from  this 
unprecedented  accommodative  monetary  policy  will  have  to  be  ensured  to  avoid  the 
recurrence of the financial crisis being experienced now. 
To summarise, the emergence of the global financial crisis has led to a new wave of thinking 
on all issues related to both monetary policy and financial regulation. Whereas considerable 
progress  has  been  achieved  on  the  principles  governing  this  regulatory  overhaul,  very 
significant challenges remain on the implementation issues that will arise as we move into a 
new regime globally. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2008), 78th Annual Report, 2007-08. 
Committee  on  Global  Financial  System  (2009),  “Capital  Flows  and  Emerging  Market 
Economies”  (Chairman:  Rakesh  Mohan),  CGFS  Papers  No  33,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. 
de Larosière Report (2009), “Report of the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the 
EU” (Chairman: Jacques de Larosière), Brussels. 
Geneva  Report  (2009),  “The  Fundamental  Principles  of  Financial  Regulation”,  Geneva 
Reports  on  the  World  Economy  11  (by  Markus  Brunnermeier,  Andrew  Crocket,  Charles 
Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud and Hyun Shin).  
G-20  (2009),  “Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening 
Transparency (Co-Chairs: Tiff Macklem and Rakesh Mohan). 
Group of Thirty (2009), “Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability” (Chairman: 
Paul A. Volcker), Washington D.C. 
International Monetary Fund (2009), “Initial Lessons of the Crisis”, February. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2007),  “Recent  Financial  Market  Developments  and  Implications  for 
Monetary Policy”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, October.  
Reddy,  Y.V,  (2008),  “Global  Financial  Turbulence  and  Financial  Sector  in  India:  A 
Practitioner’s Perspective”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, August. 
Taylor, John (2009), “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis 
of  What  Went  Wrong”,  Working  Paper  14631,  January,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research. 
Turner Review (2009), “The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking 
Crisis” by Lord Turner, Chairman, Financial Services Authority, UK.  
Yellen,  Janet  L.  (2009),  “A  Minsky  Meltdown:  Lessons  for  Central  Bankers”  available  at 
http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2009/0416.html. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 13
