Sada Reddy: An anatomy of microfinance in Fiji 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Pacific 
Microfinance Week 2009, Nadi, 13-17 July 2009. 
 Distinguished Guests, resource persons and honoured participants. Let me extend to you all 
a very warm welcome and bula vinaka to the Fiji Islands. 
I  am  very  grateful  and  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  address  this  distinguished 
gathering of the Pacific Community on the important subject of microfinance. Firstly, I would 
like  to  commend  the  Microfinance  Pasifika  Network,  the  Foundation  for  Development 
Cooperation and the sponsors for putting together such a comprehensive programme for us 
this  week.  A  wide  range  of  issues  on  microfinance  and  its  role  in  the  development  of  the 
Pacific  communities  will  be  discussed.  I  note  from  the  programme  that  we  have  very 
distinguished speakers and resource persons to speak to us and provide guidance on the 
way forward. 
I guess one of the greatest benefits of this kind of gathering is the networking and the sharing 
of each other’s experiences.  
I will therefore shortly be sharing with you some of Fiji’s experiences in the promotion and 
development of microfinance in Fiji. 
Before  that,  however,  let  me  make  some  general  remarks  on  microfinance.  As  we  are  all 
aware, the role and contribution of microfinance in economic development and empowering 
our underprivileged is very important indeed. The impact studies of the various microfinance 
projects  around  the  world  have  shown  the  significant  improvement  in  the  lives  of  people 
through  the  outreach  of  microfinance.  It  has  contributed  significantly  in  tackling  poverty, 
improvements  in  housing,  health  &  sanitation,  better  access  to  education,  and  more 
particularly the empowerment & participation of women in social and economic activities.  
Most  of  you  know  the  seminal  work  done  in  Bangladesh  in  the  area  of  developing  and 
promoting  microfinance  schemes.  A  number  of  countries  have  adopted  the  Bangladesh 
model.  
Bangladesh saw an astronomical growth in microcredit over the last three decades. It has 
grown from a loan of US$27 to 42 people in 1976 to more than US$4 billion to 2.8 million 
borrowers in 2003. I am told the recovery rate in Bangladesh is 99 percent. These statistics 
show  the  phenomenal  success  of  microcredit  in  Bangladesh.  Therefore,  I  do  not  see  why 
similar successes cannot be achieved in our part of the world. But this requires great drive 
and motivation of our people and policy makers. 
The basic and simple principles and beliefs of the Grameen Bank’s success story that have 
defied the conventional commercial thinking over the years are: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Institutions create poverty and not the poor;  
Poverty cannot be eradicated by charity;  
No difference in the ability of the poor person and any other person;  
Understanding  the  needs  of  the  poor  and  designing  of  the  credit  delivery  system 
accordingly;  
Trust and firm belief that poor people will pay-back; and finally  
Lending  to  women  brings  greater  benefit  and  maximises  the  uses  of  limited 
resources.  
(5) 
(6) 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 1
More simply put, Grameen philosophy centered on the theme of promoting credit as a human 
right.  
This philosophy, combined into action on the ground, delivered Grameen Bank where it is 
today. As the famous saying goes, fine words and intentions are not enough until and unless 
they are transformed into action.  
But  of  course,  we  know  now,  that  microfinance  is  more  than  just  provision  of  micro-
credit. Microfinance is intertwined with access and provision of credit, basic banking services 
and also provision of insurance services and financial literacy.  
The development of microfinance: experience of Fiji 
Let  me  now  share  with  you  our  experiences  in  Fiji.  I  intend  to  first  provide  an  analysis  of 
microfinance in Fiji and outline the major challenges facing us. Finally, I will elaborate a little 
on the role of the Reserve Bank of Fiji in promoting microfinance in Fiji.  
The  first  microfinance  initiative  was  established  by  the  Ministry  of  Women,  Social  Welfare 
and Poverty Alleviation in 1993. I believe this was done with the assistance of NZ Aid.  
This initiative was based on the Grameen Bank model. Soon after, we saw the establishment 
of two new private initiatives – SEEDS and Anandpur. SEEDS (abbreviated for Social and 
Economic Equity for the Disadvantaged) and Anandpur were community based microfinance 
institutes that received technical assistance and funding from the National Microfinance Unit, 
the UDNP, Ministry of Women and Ba Rotary Club.  
In the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank of Fiji started taking an interest in examining how best 
to develop and promote microfinance nationwide. First, we provided awareness to our staff 
by  sending  them  to  international  conferences  and  also  to  visit  countries  with  successful 
microfinance  schemes.  I  also  personally  benefited  through  such  awareness  trips  to  some 
Asian countries and saw firsthand the role the governments, private sector and NGOs played 
in the promotion and development of microfinance. 
Recognising that we needed to have a national strategy, the Reserve Bank of Fiji conducted 
a national survey on the existing microfinance schemes and the demand for microfinance in 
1996 with technical assistance from the UN ESCAP. Based on the findings of the survey the 
Reserve  Bank  proposed  to  the  Government  the  need  for  setting  up  an  agency  within  the 
Government to drive the microfinance initiative. 
Around  the  same  time  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  collaboration  with  the  UNDP,  organized  a 
national  conference  on  microfinance.  The  outcomes  of  this  conference  led  to  the 
Government setting up a Microfinance Unit in 1999. 
The initial role of the Microfinance Unit was to conduct pilot-projects on the best methods and 
means for promoting micro-credit lending. By 2000 the National Microfinance Unit was fully 
operational.  
Initially, the National Microfinance Unit acted as a wholesaler of micro loanable funds to Fiji 
Council of Social Services’ Microfinance Unit and the Aglow’s Microfinance Unit. However, in 
2001, the National Microfinance Unit ventured into its own retail microfinance operations. It 
started  lending  to  individuals  rather  than  to  groups.  This  eventually  resulted  in  significant 
problems for the National Microfinance Unit and led Government to review the effectiveness 
of the National Microfinance Unit.  
In a study conducted by the World Bank in 2003 it noted that “the National Microfinance Unit 
neglected  systemic  issues  in  favour  of  a  pre-occupation  with  short-term  operational 
objectives”.  This  was  a  result  of  almost  exclusive  emphasis  on  microcredit  and  ignoring 
issues such as, savings, capacity building and the creation of an enabling environment.  
2 
 BIS Review 88/2009
Savings  
o 
o 
Lending 
o 
Consequently,  the  individual  lending  programme  of  the  National  Microfinance  Unit  was 
discontinued.  
In 2004, the Government merged the National Microfinance Unit with the National Centre for 
Small and Medium Enterprises (NCSMED).  
Let me share with you some statistics of the NCSMED on microfinance. 
• 
The  number  of  savings  clients  rose  from  around  12,500  in  2004  to  around 
24,000 by the first quarter of 2009, an increase of around 93 percent.  
Total savings is around F$1 million.  
    Total lending by the Centre was around F$7 m at the end of March this year. 
In addition the Centre provided capital grants of $7.1 m.  
Loan repayments  
o 
Repayment  of  loans  has  improved  from  around  62  percent  in  2000  to  95 
percent in 2008. 
200 new micro businesses by 2008 compared to 46 in 2004. 
Number of micro businesses  
o 
Training and capacity building  
o 
The Centre plays a very critical role in terms of training and capacity building.  
It  has  developed  a  package  of  training,  technical  and  financial  assistance  for  the 
benefit of affiliated microfinance institutions, NGOs and social groups.  
The NCSMED basically follows the Grameen Bank model. However, I understand, there are 
a  number  of  other  models  of  microfinance  in  Fiji.  These  new  models,  I  believe,  have 
developed  because  of  the  unique  constraints  we  face  in  Fiji,  like  other  Pacific  Island 
countries, in terms of the significant geographical and demographic dispersion from the key 
economic centers, which tend to increase transaction costs.  
Before  I  go  on  further,  let  me  share  with  you  two  success  stories  from  the  work  done  by 
NCSMED.  
Mrs. Siliva Nasaga 
Mrs. Siliva Nasaga is from Viria in Naitasiri. She has come a long way from the days when 
her family had to survive on $10 a week. Mrs. Nasaga always had an interest in flowers and 
the interest grew while she was working in various hotels around Fiji. This encouraged her to 
leave  paid  employment  to  focus  on  the  farm  with  her  husband.  In  2004,  Mrs.  Nasaga 
secured a stall at the Garden City in Raiwaqa to sell pot plants and cut flowers. She also 
hired out pot plants. The business started off with no capital but the passion in farming and 
flowers became a driving force and Mrs. Nasaga and her husband joined the microfinance 
program in 2005. 
They secured three loans from FCOSS Microfinance Unit and fully repaid it with continued 
savings. The money earned from the business has supplemented what is earned from the 
farm assuring them a comfortable life. Their dedication and passion was rewarded with the 
Fiji  Sun  sponsored  2nd  Category  of  the  Fiji  Development  Bank  Small  Business  Awards  in 
2008. 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 3
Mr. Sanjay Chand 
Another  success  story  is  of  Mr.  Sanjay  Chand.  Mr  Chand  is  a  very  successful  vegetable 
farmer and a poultry producer in Saru, Lautoka.  
In order to maximise returns from the farm Mr. Chand joined microfinance initiative in July 
2008 and immediately signed himself up for the Business Skills Training offered in Lautoka 
by NCSMED. With this training Mr Chand was able to prepare detailed financial projections 
and business plan. This enabled him to obtain a loan from the Fiji Development Bank under 
the  FDB’s  Small  Business  Loan  Scheme  in  2008  to  buy  his  stock  of  seeds,  and  other 
essential supplies plus a horse.  
Mr. Chand’s farm has now expanded to include many different vegetables. He is now looking 
into  expanding  into  commercial  peanut  farming.  I  am  told  Mr  Chand  is  always  looking  to 
expand the farm by testing different crops. 
Mr Chand’s venture was assisted greatly by the Lautoka staff of the Microfinance Unit and 
the Ministry of Agriculture. 
Through the Microfinance Unit West Sanjay was identified as a candidate for the FDB Small 
Business of the Year Awards for 2008 and he was successful in receiving the Farming Small 
Business Award sponsored by the Reserve Bank of Fiji. 
There are several other very good success stories but these two cases, I just illustrated, go 
to show how we can assist small and micro businesses to grow with the necessary support 
and guidance from the various agencies of Government, financial institutions and NGOs. 
Let  me  at  this  stage  briefly  talk  about  the  ANZ  Rural  Banking  Scheme  in  Fiji.  Access  to 
banking services in the rural areas is very critical in enhancing the growth of microfinance. 
In view of this, the Reserve Bank of Fiji has been discussing with the commercial banks in 
Fiji for a number of years on how best they can provide access to banking services to our 
rural people. The Reserve Bank was very pleased that the ANZ Bank took great initiative in 
this regard by launching the ANZ Rural Banking Services in 2004. Both the Reserve Bank 
and the Government played an important facilitating role in this initiative. I am pleased to say 
that the ANZ Rural Banking Scheme is now an internationally recognized model for delivery 
of banking services to the rural sector. 
Here, I would like to convey my special thanks to the UNDP for its role in making the ANZ 
Rural Banking a success. The UNDP’s financial literacy programme assisted in the success 
of this scheme immensely particularly in the education of villagers in the rural areas on the 
importance of managing their finance.  
To date, ANZ has face-to-face relationship with over 300 communities and 200 schools each 
month. In just under 4 years, ANZ rural banking initiative has grown substantially to over $9m 
deposits with over 70,000 rural customers. In addition, total lending has reached over $2m 
and  its  rural  banking  team  continues  to  serve  with  vigour  in  areas  across  Fiji  –  in  Suva, 
Nausori, Sigatoka, Ba, Labasa, Savusavu and including Taveuni & Kadavu.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  is  very  grateful  to  the  ANZ  rural  banking  scheme  for  the 
commitment shown in areas that are not normally serviced by commercial banks.  
Challenges 
Let me now discuss some of the challenges in developing and promoting microfinance in Fiji. 
I am sure some of these challenges will also equally apply to many other countries of the 
Pacific participating here today. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2009
Deficiency of data on microfinance  
• 
Adequate data on microfinance is very critical in policy design and promotion. Unfortunately, 
availability of such data is a key challenge for most of us.  
Some of the data that we need, for example, are types of microfinance operators and their 
location, the number of employees, annual turnover, assets and capital investment, etc.  
What  we  need  is  to  pool  the  data  held  by  different  institutions  in  order  to  produce  a 
comprehensive set of usable data for analysis and appropriate policy response. This will also 
allow evaluations to be made to identify areas of improvement.  
• 
As I mentioned before the geographical and demographic dispersion has been a key factor 
contributing to the high transactional costs for the delivery of microfinance services in Fiji. 
• 
Financial  literacy  is  another  area  of  importance  and  needs  to  improve  its 
outreach  
Delivery of low-cost and efficient microfinance services 
The UNDP Report on Fiji (2005) highlighted that around 340,000 people in the rural areas 
remained unbanked. Although, some good progress has been made in this regard through 
the ANZ Rural Banking Scheme, I feel it still remains a major challenge for most of us. Of 
particular  interest  are  the  maritime  areas  and  how  to  deliver  banking  and  microfinance 
services to these remote areas even though a number of our people live on these islands 
and they expect similar type of service delivery with least costs. The use of mobile phone 
technology for providing basic banking services can be considered for these remote areas.  
• 
In recent meetings with various microfinance stakeholders, the RBF was informed that lack 
of  innovative  and/or  viable  proposals  for  micro,  small  and  medium  ventures  are  a  key 
inhibiting factor. It seems everyone wants to replicate a successful business in an area. For 
instance, if one person operates a successful canteen on an outer island, others will set-up 
similar  business  using  micro-credit.  It  is  obvious  that  such  actions  will  make  the  canteen 
business unsustainable given the small market size within which these businesses operate. 
In such situations, education, guidance, mentoring and awareness becomes critical.  
Lack of good proposals for microfinance projects 
Role of the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Let me say a few words on the role of the Reserve Bank of Fiji as the country’s central bank 
in promoting microfinance and rural banking. 
I  have  already  mentioned  the  role  the  RBF  played  in  working  with  commercial  banks  to 
introduce rural banking services.  
The RBF has also played a very significant role in the development of microfinance in Fiji. As 
I alluded to before, the RBF initiated policy dialogue with the Government in the early 1990s 
which  led  to  the  formation  of  the  national  schemes  for  the  promotion  and  development  of 
microfinance Fiji-wide.  
However, much more needs to be done to fully realize the benefits of microfinance so that 
more of our rural and unbanked people are enabled to fully participate in the growth of our 
economy and in turn improve their living standards. Microfinance can be an effective channel 
through which we can reduce the growing poverty in our respective countries. 
In  this  regard,  I  refer  to  the  findings  of  the  Joint  IMF-World  Bank  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Program  (FSAP)  conducted  in  2007.  This  Report  highlighted  that  providing 
financial services to the poor and to rural communities and expanding access to finance for 
small enterprises are key development goals for Fiji.  
BIS Review 88/2009 
 5
in 
the 
financial 
instrumental 
implementation  of 
This  Report  further  noted  that  “initiatives  in  this  regard  have  not  been  coordinated  and 
sustained. A lead agency is needed to formulate an overall development strategy for micro, 
small and medium enterprises and to harmonise the various initiatives to improve access to 
finance  for  these  enterprises  and  to  rural  areas.  The  RBF  should  work  closely  with  this 
agency and other stakeholders to facilitate the enhancement of the enabling environment”.  
The NCSMED and UNDP Pacific Centre are two very key organisations in this area that the 
RBF  will  work  closely  with.  In  addition,  the  RBF  will  engage  more  actively  with  financial 
institutions,  in  particular  the  commercial  banks,  FDB,  NGO  microfinance  institutions  and 
other microfinance stakeholders. The target areas would be development of micro, small and 
medium enterprises, rural banking and promoting financial literacy.  
The RBF, with these institutions and other development partners, will work on reviewing and 
tailoring  the  regulatory  framework  to  provide  further  impetus  for  growth  of  microfinance 
services. Efforts will be made to obtain a more comprehensive set of statistics on a regular 
basis on the various facets of microfinance and small and medium enterprises. 
Let me at this stage recognize the very important role, the UNDP and other donor agencies 
have  played  in  the  development  of  microfinance  in  Fiji  and  the  Pacific.  In  particular,  the 
UNDP  Pacific  Centre,  through  its  Financial  Inclusion  Programme,  and  in  conjunction  with 
donor  agencies,  has  been 
literacy 
programmes,  provision  of  micro-capital  grants,  research  &  specialised  technical  expertise 
specific  to  financial  service  development,  advocacy  and  facilitation  of  partnerships  and 
capacity development.  
I also commend the UNDP’s new initiatives that are being considered such as the provision 
of mobile phone banking services. I assure you the RBF will be supportive of such initiatives 
that will reduce transaction costs and improve extension of banking services, particularly to 
the  remote  areas.  This  will  allow  those  in  our  remote  islands  to  access  banking  services. 
With  the  wide  coverage  of  our  current  mobile  phone  providers,  this  initiative  will  have  a 
significant impact on our development.  
More  recently  the  RBF  has  taken  on  an  active  role  in  formulating  financial  strategies  and 
policies to increase access to finance by our rural and unbanked people. 
A  new  department  called  the  Financial  System  Development  and  Compliance  Group  was 
specifically set up in April this year to drive these initiatives. I am hoping that the RBF will 
now  be  able  to  interface  more  closely  with  other  development  agencies  and  the  financial 
institutions in promoting microfinance schemes around the country. 
To  begin  with  the  RBF  has  asked  all  the  commercial  banks  operating  in  Fiji  to  set  up 
microfinance centers in each of their branches with effect from January 2010. We believe the 
commercial banks need to play a more active role in the development of the country in which 
they operate through designing their banking services to suit the needs of the development 
goals of the country. As we are aware most of the countries in Asia and South America have 
successfully  outreached  the  rural  sector  through  national  policies  in  which  the  banking 
industry plays a pivotal role.  
Some of the other areas of policy development the RBF is focusing on are: 
• 
• 
• 
Most of these policies are directly related to the microfinance initiative. The goals of each of 
these projects are mutually reinforcing – that is, achieving one will lead to another.  
Local value added content requirement for the tourism industry; 
Financial literacy; and 
Local advisory board for branches of foreign banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 88/2009
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  discussed  at  length  our  experiences  in  Fiji  with  respect  to 
development and promotion of microfinance. I have also touched on a number of challenges 
we all face in our respective countries in getting more and more of our rural and unbanked 
people  into  the  economic  mainstream.  They  can  be  a  formidable  force  and  with  proper 
systems and structures in place, can contribute substantially to economic development. 
I have acknowledged the significant contribution the various government agencies, financial 
institutions and development agencies are playing in the area of microfinance, rural banking, 
financial literacy and financial inclusion. 
At this juncture I wish to acknowledge the significant and pioneering role a number of NGOs 
and individuals have played in initiating and promoting microfinance in various parts of Fiji. 
There are numerous organizations and individuals and for this reason I am unable to mention 
each one by name. But let me assure all of you that we tremendously value the great work 
you all are doing in uplifting the lives of our underprivileged people. 
We recognize that our governments and central banks need to place greater emphasis on 
microfinance and put in place policies and procedures whereby the microfinance schemes 
and rural banking are driven at national level by competent lead agencies. 
In  my  view  we  have  come  a  long  way  in  our  understanding  of  what  makes  a  successful 
microfinance  scheme  but  we  have  to  constantly  build  on  our  experiences  and  share  our 
experiences. In this regard, this one week of programme on microfinance will go a long way 
in further strengthening and enhancing microfinance in our respective countries. Let me once 
again thank the organizers and the sponsors for this initiative and foresight. 
Finally, I would like to end with the seminal quote of Prof Yunus – “Each of you has the 
power to change the world – realise it and act on it!”  
With  these  few  words  I  have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  the  Pacific  Microfinance  Week 
officially open. 
Thank you, Vinaka Vakalevu and Dhaniyavaad. 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 7
