Philipp Hildebrand: Lessons from the crisis for global financial market 
infrastructure 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Zermatt  Symposium,  Avenir  suisse,  Zermatt,  25  August 
2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  financial  market  infrastructure,  in  other  words,  the  systems  for  trading,  clearing  and 
settling  payments  and  financial  instruments,  is  essential  for  the  operation  of  the  financial 
system.  Thus  far  in  the  financial  crisis,  financial  market  infrastructure  has  stood  up  well 
overall and helped to prevent the existing uncertainty in the financial system from becoming 
even greater. This holds true both for payment and settlement systems in Switzerland and for 
the global financial market infrastructure.  
However, time and again, it becomes apparent that the infrastructure for clearing and settling 
transactions  is  not  keeping  up  with  rapidly  growing  financial  markets.  In  recent  years,  this 
has been most obvious in the OTC derivatives market. Pressured by supervisory authorities 
and central banks, market participants are now developing safer and more efficient clearing 
and settlement arrangements for OTC derivatives. These efforts include the establishment of 
central counterparties, which facilitate market participants’ risk management, promote market 
transparency  and  reduce  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system.  To  the  extent  that  the 
market infrastructure reduces the interconnections between individual financial institutions, it 
contributes to the long-term strategy aimed at finding ways of liquidating large and complex 
financial institutions in an orderly way. 
From  a  regulatory  perspective,  it  is  important  to  note  that  responsibility  for  ensuring  that 
payment and settlement systems work smoothly and meet the requirements of the financial 
industry  lies  with  the  system  operators  and  market  participants.  The  role  of  regulatory 
authorities is to establish certain guidelines, especially for infrastructures that are of critical 
importance for the stability of the financial system, and to intervene rapidly in cases where 
market forces do not provide an adequate infrastructure. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
