Zhou Xiaochuan: Changing pro-cyclicality for financial and economic 
stability 
Essay by Mr Zhou Xiaouchuan, Governor of the People's Bank of China, on "Changing Pro-
cyclicality for Financial and Economic Stability", Beijing, 26 March 2009. 
The major points were presented at the G20 Meeting of Financial Ministers and Central Bank Governors in São 
Paulo, Brazil, on 15 November 2008. 
 Much has been discussed on the root causes for the current financial crisis, including but not 
limited  to  lessons  on  monetary  policy,  financial  sector  regulations,  accounting  rules.  This 
note  aims  to  stimulate  debate  and  discussions  on  some  of  the  pro-cyclical  features  in  the 
system, possible remedial measures, and how monetary and fiscal authorities can play their 
professional roles at times of severe market distress. It also touches upon China's financial 
sector  reform  and  macroeconomic  policy  to  counter  slowdown  in  economic  growth.  The 
major points here were presented at the G20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank 
Governors in São Paulo, Brazil on November 15, 2008. 
The built-in pro-cyclical features in financial architecture 
1.  
When  we  discuss  system  stability,  we  can  borrow  some  concepts  from  electronic 
engineering  or  control  theory.  In  a  complicated  system,  there  are  usually  many  feedback 
loops, some of them are positive, some of them are negative. A positive (plus) feedback loop 
enlarges  amplification  (like  multiplier),  tends  to  create  oscillation  (like  boom  and  bust  pro-
cyclicality)  and  zero-point  shifting  (like  a  reference  of  bubble).  While  a  negative  (minus) 
feedback loop can reduce amplification, help for system stability and self-correction of zero-
point.  In  economic  and  financial  systems  of  recent  years,  we  have  too  many  positive 
feedback loops on macro and micro levels, and a small number of negative feedback loops. 
Thus the system shows a strong pro-cyclicality. What we need to do is not to totally rebuild 
the system, but to add a few negative feedback loops, which are able to sufficiently change 
the characteristics of our system. 
Financial  crises  normally  originate  in  the  accumulation  of  bubbles  and  their  subsequent 
bursts.  Usually,  economists  pay  a  lot  of  attentions  to  pro-cyclicality  on  the  macro  level. 
However,  on  the  micro  level,  there  are  quite  a  number  of  notable  pro-cyclical  features 
embedded  in  the  market  structure  today,  which  should  be  addressed  as  we  deal  with  the 
current crisis and reform the financial system. In the current market structure, more counter-
cyclical  mechanisms  or  negative  feedback  loops  on  micro-level  should  be  put  in  place  to 
sustain a more stable financial system. 
Rating problems and herding phenomenon arising from outsourcing 
1) 
The  global  financial  system  relies  heavily  on  the  external  credit  ratings  for  investment 
decisions  and  risk  management,  giving  rise  to  a  prominent  feature  of  pro-cyclicality.  The 
rating  industry  is  dominated  by  a  few  large  players,  which  provide  practically  all  important 
rating services. Specific ratings from the big three tend to be highly correlated and they are 
combined  to  form  a  strong  cyclical  force.  Economic  upswings  produce  euphoria  and 
downturns  generate  pessimism.  Many  market  players  adopting  ratings  from  the  three 
agencies  and  using  them  as  the  yardstick  for  operations  and  internal  performance 
assessments clearly result in a massive "herd behavior" at the institutional level. Moreover, 
the  rating  process  is  filled  with  conflicts  of  interest  by  virtue  of  the  issuer-paying  business 
model  (issuers  also  pay  for  the  rating  agencies'  advisory  services  on  structuring  their 
products, which leads to more problems). Moreover, the rating models for mortgage-related 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 1
structured  products  are  fundamentally  flawed.  During  the  current  crisis  stemming  from  the 
subprime  mess,  the  high  ratings  assigned  to  many  subprime  products  and  the  massive 
downgrades of them within short period were unprecedented, which drove the massive write-
downs by financial institutions, and exacerbated downward spirals.  
Herding phenomenon can also be explained as too many positive feedback loops to cause 
an oscillation. In investment area, we always preach on the virtue of diversification. Portfolio 
diversification  means  when  you  bet  for  upside  in  some  products,  you  should  also  place 
protection elsewhere for downside. Investor diversity and heterogeneity is predicated on the 
notion  that  market  needs  both  optimists  and  pessimists.  Thus  the  system  should  not 
encourage all investors and their portfolios to behave in the same way. However, too many 
financial  institutions  outsourced  the  development  of  their  internal  control  systems  and  the 
technical models used by their bankers and traders in internal assessment and risk control, 
including  the  program  trading  models  that  had  been  widely  adopted  at  an  earlier  time. 
Outsourcing of system technologies at such a prevalent scale contributed to high degree of 
homogeneity  in  the  financial  system,  which  strongly  added  to  pro-cyclicality.  For  complex 
financial products, most institutions use models built by a handful of quantitative analysts that 
get widely adopted throughout the industry. Such models tend to produce similar directional 
results at the same time when certain conditions prevail. In other words, outcomes from such 
models are highly correlated. When they are used by the whole financial industry world-wide, 
asset price boom is made much stronger and bust much more damaging. And due to high 
synchronizations  of  market  participants'  behaviors  as  a  result  of  using  the  similar  models, 
systemic risk arises. Regulators should require systemically important financial institutions to 
complement  external  pricing  models  with  internally  developed  capabilities  to  exercise 
judgment. In addition, to give issuers of structured products more incentives to better assess 
their risks, regulators should ask them to retain a meaningful share of the underlying assets 
on  their  balance  sheets  in  order  to  alleviate  the  myriad  of  problems  associated  with  the 
"originate-to-distribute"  business  model,  including  moral  hazards  and  fraudulent  loan 
underwritings. 
On  the  users'  side  of  ratings,  there is  the  long-standing  moral  hazard issue.  Various  rules 
have  required  investment  management  decisions  and  risk  management  practices  to  be 
benchmarked on financial instruments attaining certain ratings from the so-called Nationally 
Recognized  Statistical  Rating  Organizations  (NRSRO).  This  practice  has  enabled  industry 
practitioners to piggyback on the external ratings and not to worry about the inherent risks 
once the instruments have achieved the threshold ratings. Over time, the financial industry 
has become accustomed to the practice and become complacent of the ratings they rely on 
so heavily. Some market players seem to have forgotten that the ratings are no more than 
indicators  of  default  probabilities  based  on  past  experiences  but  were  never  meant  to  be 
guarantees for the future. Along with complacency, there is inertia and sloppiness on the part 
of investment managers to ask tough questions about the inherent risks of instruments sitting 
in  their  portfolios.  Once  problems  take  place,  as  we  have  seen  during  the  current  crisis, 
fingers are pointed to the rating agencies. The institutional users (e.g., the money managers 
and financial institutions) of credit ratings should be ultimately accountable to their customers 
and  shareholders  and  should  exercise  their  own  judgment  of  risk,  not  just  outsource  risk 
assessment duties to the rating agencies. To the extent they have to use external expertise, 
internal and independent judgment has to be deployed as a complement. As a matter of fact, 
the problem has become so serious that regulators need to encourage financial institutions to 
enhance internal rating capability to rely less on external ratings, and that central banks and 
regulators should impose requirement whereby use of external ratings should not exceed 50 
percent of business activities, at least for systemically important financial institutions. Internal 
capabilities should be developed to exercise independent judgment on credit risks at such 
organizations. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2009
Fair value accounting, mark-to-market and mark-to-model 
2) 
Both  IFRS  and  GAAP  require  mixed  value  measurements  of  different  type  of  assets  and 
liabilities  according  to  their  features  and  the management's  intentions  of  holding  them,  i.e. 
assets  on  the  trading  book  and  available-for-sale  assets  should  be  measured  on  the  fair 
value basis, while hold-to-maturity assets, loans and liabilities without an objective fair value 
should be recorded at historical costs. 
GAAP and IFRS define fair value in a similar way, which is a price at which an asset and 
liability  can  be  traded  with  a  willing  counterparty  in  an  orderly  manner.  Both  accounting 
frameworks provide measurement approaches at differentiated levels. Level 1: prices can be 
observed on active market, which are used to measure the value of assets and liabilities, a 
practice called mark-to-market. Level 2: when there is no active market, prices are assessed 
by  using  models  with  observable  parameters  as  inputs,  a  process  called  mark-to-model. 
Measurement  approach  used  on  level  3  is  similar  to  the  mark-to-model  approach,  but  it 
involves unobservable parameters and model assumptions as inputs. Both IFRS and GAAP 
require disclosure of the adoption of fair value approaches and specific assumptions as well 
as risk exposures and sensitivities.  
The  problems  of  fair  value  accounting  have  been  exposed  by  the  current  crisis.  First, 
compared  with  the  historical  cost  approach,  fair  value  accounting  intensifies  market 
fluctuations. While the fair value approach is more dynamic and can better reflect the real 
time  value  of  assets  and  liabilities,  it  also  magnifies  the  changes  in  their  values  and 
increases the volatility of returns through the profit and loss account as a consequence. As a 
result  of  the  massive  collateralized  securities  they  held,  financial  institutions  registered 
mounting  unrealized  losses  which actually  involved  no  cash  flow  under  the  fair  value  rule. 
Though  these  losses  were  only  meaningful  in  accounting,  such  astronomical  book  losses 
distorted investors' expectations and formed a vicious cycle of prices tumbling – asset write-
down “panic selling” further prices slumps. Second, the poorly guided adoption of fair value in 
non-active  markets  exacerbated  market  volatility.  As  defined,  the  using  of  fair  value 
approaches must be based on the prerequisite of orderly trading. At times of crisis, as a large 
number  of  institutions  were  forced  to  liquidate  their  assets,  prices  developed  under  this 
situation did not meet the prerequisite for fair value measurement. However, due to the lack 
of specific guidelines on dealing with such circumstances, reporting entities had to conduct 
fair value measurement on the basis of unreasonable market prices, which magnified book 
losses and exacerbated the vicious cycle.  
We could say, in a normal situation or in a low frequency band, mark-to-market is a negative 
feedback  loop.  However,  in  an  extreme  situation  or  high  frequency  band,  mark-to-market 
mechanism can not catch the changing phase. When phase lag is larger than 90º, a negative 
feedback loop can become a positive feedback loop in characteristics. In this situation, what 
we  need  to  do  is  to  cut  off  this  loop,  thus  we  need  a  circuit  breaker.  We  can  resume  the 
system when it returns to normal condition. In economic system, we need to put into place a 
sort of circuit-breaker mechanism to stem the pro-cyclicality caused by mark-to-market and 
fair value accounting in specific situations. 
Internal rating based (IRB) approach under Basel II 
3)  
The  New  Basel  Capital  Accord  (Basel  II)  released  in  2004  improved  the  capital  adequacy 
ratio  framework,  shifting  from  singular  requirement  on  capital  adequacy  to  highlighting  the 
importance of risk-based banking supervision, and including minimum capital as one of the 
three  pillars  of  banking  supervision  (regulatory  capital  requirement,  regulatory  responses, 
disclosure  and  market  discipline).  Under  Basel  II,  the  minimum  capital  requirement  of  8 
percent  was  unchanged,  but  the  notion  of  risk weighted  asset  was improved  to  reflect  not 
only  credit  risks,  but  also  market  risks  and  operational  risks.  Following  the  release  of  the 
Basel II, major economies have outlined steps and the timetable for its implementations, and 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 3
major European countries have basically implemented the new Accord. China is also making 
preparations for implementing it. 
The Basel II framework allows financial institutions to apply internal rating-based approach in 
pricing and assessing risk of complex products. Risk weights for purpose of capital adequacy 
calculation are derived from internal modeling. Such weights are generally low and lead to 
high capital adequacy ratio (CAR) during economic upswing, and are high and lead to low 
CAR during cyclical downturn, everything else equal. As a result, financial institutions tend to 
have high leverage ratios during good times and have to deleverage during bad times. This 
amplifies  bubble  buildup  during  upswings  and  leads  to  credit  squeeze  and  asset  dumping 
during downturns, thus increase cyclical volatilities. This reflects a strong pro-cyclicality. We 
took notice that FSF has formed working groups to cooperate with BCBS in studying ways to 
strengthen  Basel  II  framework,  and  to  address  its  weaknesses  revealed  during  the  crisis 
including its pro-cyclicality.  
2.  
Give full play to the professional role of authorities of overall financial stability 
and establish a counter-cyclical mechanism for capital requirement 
Among  the  supervisory  requirements  on  financial  institutions,  banking  institutions  in 
particular, capital adequacy ratio is one of the most important prudential requirements. The 
current financial crisis suggests that a sound capital buffer is critical for banks' resilience to 
risks  and  financial  stability  in  a  broader  sense.  Effectively  addressing  the  pro-cyclicality 
elements in the existing capital requirement framework is essential for avoiding a repetition of 
serious  financial  crisis.  The  ongoing  crisis  has  exposed  much  vulnerability  in  capital 
adequacy  framework  of  banks  in  the  following  areas:  inadequate  capture  of  risks  by  the 
Basel  II  framework  for  complex  credit  products;  the  minimum  capital  requirement  and  the 
quality of capital did not provide adequate buffer during the crisis; the pro-cyclicality of capital 
adequacy  amplified  economic  oscillations;  the  differences  in  capital  requirements  among 
different types of financial institutions. Efforts are being made in some countries to widen the 
coverage of capital requirements, including setting requirements on asset-backed securities, 
off-balance sheet risk exposures and trading account activities, improving the quality of tier 1 
capital, and enhancing the global consistency of minimum capital requirements. In addition, 
as a complement to capital adequacy ratio requirement, a notion is under discussion that a 
properly constructed leverage ratio indicator will play a role in the macro prudential regulation 
framework  as  the  new  indicator  can  both  measure  potential  excessive  risk-taking  and 
dampen the amplification of cyclical fluctuations. 
In addressing the vulnerability of the existing capital adequacy ratio framework, particularly 
the  pro-cyclicality  of  capital  buffer,  national  authorities  responsible  for  overall  financial 
stability  can  actively  play  their  professional  role.  If  economic  cycle  comes  into  an  unusual 
phase,  or  economic  system  needs  an  unusual  counter-cyclical  adjustment  or  special 
stabilization measure, it can be considered to let authorities of overall financial stability issue 
quarterly indicators of prosperity and stability, which can then be used by financial institutions 
and  regulatory  supervisors  by  multiplying  into  risk  weights  for  capital  adequacy  ratio 
calculation. Thus  the  risk  weighted capital  adequacy  requirement  and  other  control  criteria 
(like internal rating-based approach), can reflect counter-cyclicality preference of the stability 
authorities. 
Traditionally, finance ministries have counter-cyclical fiscal policies and monetary authorities 
have  counter-cyclical  monetary  policy  tools  at  their  disposal,  but  these  tools  are  macro  in 
nature.  As  a  remedy  to  pro-cyclicality  at  micro  level,  counter-cyclical  multipliers  can  be 
developed and used to dampen the pro-cyclical factors such as the risk weights that come 
out of the internal rating-based exercises. To begin with, as mentioned above, it may become 
necessary for financial stability authorities to develop a set of prosperity indices from which 
counter-cyclical multipliers can be derived. There already exist a multitude of private sector 
indices linked to business cycles, investor and consumer sentiments. Prosperity indices can 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2009
be built on the basis of these indices. During market boom, everything points to the up-tick, 
market exuberance prevails, and prosperity indices are high. As a contrast, during economic 
downturn,  the  opposite  holds.  Once  prosperity  indices  are  available,  the  derived  counter-
cyclical multipliers can be applied to the pro-cyclical factors such as risk-weights mentioned 
above,  default  probabilities 
for  credit  rating  purposes  and  discount  (i.e.,  haircuts) 
percentages for various collaterals used in financial transactions. In suitable forms, they can 
be applied to other pro-cyclical factors too. One example of using them is to apply a multiplier 
greater  than  1  (say,  1.5.  Please  note  this  is  only  an  example  and  the  actual  multiplier  is 
determined by specific calculations. The same applies below) during economic upswing and 
another  multiplier  less  than  1  (e.g.,  0.7)  during  downturn  to  the  IRB-based  risk  weights  to 
alleviate the pro-cyclical problems. The magnitude of the multiplier can be refined by taking 
into consideration other factors such as product type, industry and country of risk exposures. 
Through the applications of the counter-cyclical multipliers, we can not only mitigate the pro-
cyclicality elements in capital requirements but also improve quality of capital by improving 
management of collaterals and by using multipliers-adjusted default probabilities and better 
managing the risk in complex credit products. 
To stabilize markets under severe stress, finance ministries and central banks need to act 
fast and apply extraordinary measures. Untimely or delayed response falls behind the curve 
and would make the outcome less than desired even if the response is correct and strong. In 
modern Western societies, a prolonged political process for mandates to finance ministries or 
central banks often miss the best timing for action. We have observed such cases during the 
current crisis. Going forward, national governments and legislatures may consider giving pre-
authorized mandates to ministries of finance and central banks to use extraordinary means 
to  contain  systemic  risk  under  well-defined  stress  scenarios,  in  order  to  allow  them  to  act 
boldly  and  expeditiously  without  having  to  go  through  a  lengthy  or  even  painful  approval 
process.  Such  systematic  pre-authorized  mandates  would  put  the  specialized  expertise  of 
finance ministries and central banks to the best use when markets need it the most. 
3.  
China's financial sector reform and ongoing macroeconomic stimulus 
measures 
In 2003, fully aware of the systemic vulnerabilities of China's banking industry, the Chinese 
government made a courageous and strategic decision to restructure the four state-owned 
commercial banks. It was commonly recognized at that time that Chinese banks, especially 
the big four, could hardly withstand a big economic downturn if not seriously reformed. The 
banking  system  was  then  vulnerable  to  shocks,  especially  external  shocks,  which  would 
trigger  confidence  crisis  or  even  systemic  meltdown.  The  Chinese  government  decided  to 
first inject capitals into Bank of China and China Construction Bank by tapping into the official 
foreign  reserve.  The  banking  reform  got  a  quick  start  and  captured  a  good  time  window. 
Before  the  reform,  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China  (ICBC),  CCB  and  BOC  were 
plagued by high NPL ratios, low or negative capital base and a culture not accountable to 
shareholder  value.  Through  capital  injections  and  subsequent  public  listings,  these  major 
banks  now  enjoy  strong  capital  base  even  after  fast  growth  during  the  last  five  years. 
Through NPL carve-out and strengthening of risk management practices, all of these banks 
have maintained NPL ratios of low single digits. In terms of corporate governance, boards 
are comprised of independent non-executive directors and full-time and dedicated directors 
who  can  provide  strategic  guidance  for  future  development  and  effective  checks  and 
balances. Strategic investors from overseas were brought in to help them improve in areas of 
weakness  such  as  risk  management,  business  processes,  product  innovations,  cash 
management,  and  credit  cards  and  so  on.  More  importantly,  through  the  restructuring 
processes  and  public  listings  and  the  transparency  that  followed,  accountability  culture 
started to sink in and shareholder value became respected, not ignored as before. 
In  the  securities  industry,  the  shaky  firms  were  closed  down  and  some  important  ones 
received government capital injection and were restructured. Their customers' cash accounts 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 5
were put into independent custodian arrangements with the major banks, thus removing the 
possibility  of  customer  asset  commingling  and  misappropriations.  The  banking  reform  and 
the securities industry cleanup have proved to be successful and have laid a solid foundation 
for  the  financial  sector  to  withstand  economic  downturn,  in  particular  the  ongoing  global 
financial crisis. For example, despite the steep drop of the stock market since late 2007, no 
securities  firms  have  gotten  into  big  trouble  so  far.  And  the  major  banks  are  in  a  strong 
position to weather economic slowdown. ICBC, CCB and BOC top the global list of banks' 
market  capitalizations.  A  more  robust  financial  industry  after  the  reform  places  China  in  a 
better  position  to  withstand  the  financial  crisis.  Meanwhile,  it  should  be  noted  that  China's 
financial  system  has  been  helped  by  the  progressive  opening-up  strategy  and  its  limited 
exposure  to  overseas  markets.  We  should  bear  in  mind  that  despite  the  notable 
achievements  in  banking  reform,  the  major  banks  have  not  gone  through  a  full  business 
cycle and still have much to improve. An economic slowdown will be the ultimate stress test 
for the robustness of the banks' strengths. 
Irrespective  of  China's  sound  financial  sector, the  Chinese  economy,  especially  the  export 
sector, has felt the impact brought by the slowdown of the global economy. Since the fourth 
quarter of 2008, as international economic crisis worsened and exerted greater impacts on 
China's economy, the Chinese government made rapid responses by decisively adopting a 
proactive fiscal policy and an adaptively easing monetary policy, and launching a bundle of 
timely, targeted and temporary policies and measures. 
First, ten measures were launched to stimulate domestic demand and promote stable and 
relatively rapid economic growth. The central government planned to invest an extra 4 trillion 
RMB over two years, which would mainly go to the agricultural sector, welfare and affordable 
housing,  transportation  infrastructure,  and  energy  conservation  and  emission  reduction. 
Second, ten measures to revitalize the industrial sectors were initiated, aiming to strengthen 
policy  support  for  enterprises.  At  present,  the  revitalization  plans  cover  10  industries 
including  the  light  industry,  automobiles,  steel,  textile,  equipment  manufacturing,  shipping, 
petrochemicals,  non-ferrous  metals,  IT  and  logistics,  with  the  aim  to  curb  and  reverse  the 
trend  of  declining  growth  in  these  industries.  Third,  bolster  financial  support  for  economic 
developments. Since September 2008, People's Bank of China has lowered the benchmark 
interest rates five times and reduced the reserve requirement ratios on four occasions, for 
the  purpose  of  maintaining  adequate  liquidity  for  the  banking  sector  and  promoting  stable 
growth of monetary and credit supply. In addition, 9 measures to strengthen financial support 
for  economic  growth  were  launched.  Fourth,  earnest  efforts  have  been  made  to  promote 
employment,  improve  people's  livelihood,  better  support  and  benefits  for  farmers,  and 
stimulate household consumption demand. Fifth, policy measures were adopted to advance 
the  reform  of  important  areas  including  VAT  tax  transformation,  reform  of  taxes  and  fees 
imposed  on  oil  products,  and  medical  and  healthcare  system  reforms.  Having  taken  the 
above-mentioned measures, China expect to maintain stable economic growth by boosting 
domestic  demand  and  reducing  dependence  on  external  demand,  thus  serving  as  a 
stabilizing force in global economy. 
In overall, the macroeconomic measures have produced preliminary result and some leading 
indicators are pointing to recovery of economic growth, indicating that rapid decline in growth 
has  been  curbed.  Facts  speak  volume  and  demonstrate  that  compared  with  other  major 
economies,  the  Chinese  government  has  taken  prompt,  decisive  and  effective  policy 
measures, demonstrating its superior system advantage when it comes to making vital policy 
decisions. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2009
