Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Corporate governance reform in the Philippines 
– progress and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Asian  Roundtable  on  Corporate  Governance,  Manila, 
9 September 2009. 
 This  roundtable  conference  on  corporate  governance  is  indeed  timely  as  the  world  now 
moves to redefine the global corporate, financial and regulatory architecture with the view to 
prevent the recurrence of a similar crisis in the near or distant future.  
Many have concluded that this crisis was to an important extent the result of poor adherence 
to  the  core  tenets  of  good  governance.  Decisions  overstepped  the  principles  of  good 
governance  either  due  to  excessive  risk-taking,  conflicts  of  interest  and  or  opacity  of 
transactions.  
In  the  BSP,  we  take  governance  of  banks  seriously  because  we  know  banks  are  key  in 
keeping the economy well functioning and growing. One of the main reasons our economy 
has weathered the crisis relatively better than most in our region is that our financial system 
has continued to function normally even at the height of the crisis in the last quarter of 2008.  
In  this  regard,  please  allow  me  to  walk  you  through  BSP’s  initiatives  to  strengthen  good 
governance  in  the  financial  industry  and  our  continuing  efforts  to  ensure  that  good 
governance  principles  are  woven  into  the  organizational  culture  and  operations  of  our 
supervised institutions.  
BSP initiatives on corporate governance 
Setting the tone from the top 
At the BSP, we believe that the corporate governance principles of Fairness, Accountability 
and Transparency should complement our banking reform advocacies. When we were trying 
to flesh out the implementation of these tenets to banks, we asked ourselves where better to 
set the tone of good governance than at the corporate top? Indeed we wanted to ensure that 
only  those  deemed  “fit  and  proper”  for  the  jobs  are  confirmed  to  assume  their  posts.  To 
accomplish  this,  we  issued  regulations  that  set  out  standards  on  the  qualifications  of 
directors and key officers of financial institutions, putting as much weight on competence as 
on  integrity.  The  BSP  likewise  required  the  members  of  the  board  to  attend  a  seminar  on 
corporate  governance  to  formally  structure  the  learning  on  the  ethos  of  good  governance. 
For  this  undertaking,  the  BSP  accredited  seven  (7)  training  providers,  which  include  the 
Institute of Corporate Directors.  
We have also made explicit our expectations from the board of directors of our supervised 
financial  institutions.  We  have  issued  regulations  clearly  identifying  the  duties  and 
responsibilities  that  the  board  itself  and  the  members  of  the  board,  in  their  individual 
capacity, should carry-out. Responsibilities of the board that have been established include 
the selection of officers and personnel to the adoption and implementation of adequate risk 
management policies. Also, consistent with the General Banking Law, the BSP has required 
that  banks  have  at  least  two  independent  directors  on  their  boards.  In  addition,  we  have 
prescribed that risk management, corporate governance and audit committees be created in 
the board.  
All these may be considered as parts of an internal line of defense against excessive risk 
taking or attempts to cut corners that may result in unsafe and unsound practices.  
BIS Review 105/2009 
 1
Enhancing transparency, disclosure and financial reporting 
Our campaign for good corporate governance didn’t only cover determining “fit and proper” 
officials,  but  also  included  equipping  the  officials  with  the  necessary  tools  for  making 
informed  decisions  and  for  relaying  the  same  to  stakeholders.  In  this  respect,  the  BSP 
adopted the International Accounting Standards. This aligns our financial reporting principles 
with the global standards and substantially improves the amount and quality of information 
disclosed by financial institutions to the public, beyond published audited financial statements 
and annual reports.  
Along  the  line  of  promoting  transparency  and  disclosure  in  financial  reporting,  we  have 
established an accreditation process for external auditors. This raises the bar for adherence 
to  control  standards  and  ensures  that  financial  institutions  will  be  audited  only  by  external 
auditors who adhere to such quality control standards. I am pleased to report that to further 
cement  this  move,  the  BSP  signed  (just  last  month)  together  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Commission  (SEC), 
the  Board  of 
Accountancy  a  Memorandum  of  Agreement  (MOA)  to  provide  a  working  framework  to 
harmonize the different accreditation processes of the regulatory agencies and allow mutual 
recognition  of  external  auditors  that  they  have  individually  accredited  for  certain  types  of 
institutions.  
Insurance  Commission  (IC)  and 
the 
Enhancing supervisory tools 
Many of us may have heard that this crisis was brought about by individual actions that have 
necessitated correction by collective action. Market participants have been seen to manage 
their risks effectively up to the point where the cost of doing so makes sense from their own 
point of view only. This presents a challenge to regulators. To avoid stifling appropriate credit 
activities and risk taking, the regulator must find the suitable balance when crafting banking 
regulation  and  enforcing  supervision.  The  regulator  must  ensure  that  risks  are  well 
understood and appreciated by all concerned economic agents. In addition, the appropriate 
incentive  structures  must  be  present  so  that  market  discipline  operates  effectively  in  the 
future.  The  BSP,  as  an  overseer  of  good  governance  in  the  financial  system,  therefore 
recognizes the need to constantly enhance its supervisory tools if it is to effectively perform 
this balancing act.  
A step towards this goal is the issuance of the guidelines on Pillar 2 of the Basel 2 capital 
adequacy framework or the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) and the 
Supervisory Review Process (SRP). This would give the BSP a better handle on how well 
the  board  of  directors  and  senior  officers  understand  their  own  risk  management  systems 
and capital allocation policies, as the ICAAP is bank-determined and should provide rules for 
implementing the bank’s risk appetite.  
In sum, the BSP has created an environment of good governance among banks by 1) setting 
the tone of governance from the top by choosing only fit and proper directors; 2) equipping 
the  board  of  directors  to  make  smart  risk  decisions  through  appropriate  information  and 
disclosure tools; and 3) allowing bank management to implement those risk decisions in a 
framework that protects the stakeholders. 
By  creating  this  environment,  we  hope  that  banks  would  move  from  “mere  compliance,  to 
performance”.  
Corporate governance scorecard for banks 
Before I conclude my remarks this morning, allow me to share with you the issuance by the 
BSP  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Scorecard  (CGS)  for  Banks.  I  am  quite  pleased  to 
mention this, as I have been told this is the first of its kind in the world. The CGS for banks 
initially  covers  universal  and  commercial  banks  and  their  subsidiary  and  affiliate  banks.  It 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2009
was  made  possible  through  our  partnership  with  the  ICD  and  representatives  from  the 
banking industry.  
The CGS for banks was broadly patterned after the scorecard for publicly listed companies, 
which was customized and refined to make it suitable for banks. In addition to the five (5) 
corporate governance categories that we have adopted from the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), the CGS for banks includes a category on Control 
Environment and Processes in recognition of the importance of risk management in banks. 
The 20 U/KBs involved in this project were asked to rate themselves using the questionnaire 
issued  by  the  BSP.  The  “person-on-the-street”  approach  was  adopted  in  evaluating  the 
corporate governance practices of the concerned banks. This takes on the perspective of a 
depositor or investor that has no other access to information aside from those available to 
the public, including those posted in banks’ website.  
Based on the evaluation of the submitted CGS of U/KBs, the industry charted a high average 
score of 84%. Although this did not come as a surprise, we are nevertheless pleased as we 
take this as an indication that the banking industry is indeed embracing the principles of good 
governance. I would also like to share with you, that among the six (6) corporate governance 
categories, the U/KBs registered the highest score in Control Environment and Processes at 
89%. The top three (3) U/KBs had an average score of 94% while the bottom three had an 
average score of 66%, or a margin of 28%. However, if we look at the average scores of the 
top three (3) and bottom three (3) on a per group basis the margin narrowed down to 15% as 
the top three (3) of the thirteen (13) universal banks received an average score of 94%. The 
same  margin  was  maintained  for  the  seven  (7)  commercial  banks,  as  their  top  three  (3) 
posted an average score of 85%.  
The BSP intends to continue the CGS for banks on a yearly basis and eventually expand its 
coverage  so  as  to  include  all  types  of  banks  under  our  supervision.  We  believe  that  this 
endeavor will take us a step closer to strengthened investor confidence and capital market 
development.  
Roadmap for the future 
Moving  forward,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  maintain  its  stance  of  being  a  step  ahead  in 
initiating  reforms  for  good  governance  in  the  financial  industry.  For  example,  we  recently 
conducted a study on whether we should impose a limit on the number of institutions wherein 
an individual may serve as an independent director. Based on our assessment, there is no 
immediate need to change existing regulations, we will, however, monitor any development 
in  the  industry  that  may  indicate  an  abuse  of  the  existing  regulatory  leeway.  Also,  we  are 
proposing an amendment to the BSP Charter that would require our prior approval for the 
transfer  of  substantial  equity  holdings  in  banks.  We  believe  that  this  additional  measure 
would  help  in  ensuring  that  only  those  with  indubitable  integrity,  capacity  and  competence 
would have a stake in the banking industry.  
The BSP has also started planting the seeds for increased financial literacy in the country as 
we believe that the financial sector and ultimately the Philippine economy will benefit from 
increased public awareness. This will strengthen the confidence of the market in the financial 
system and at the same time, foster a more transparent way of doing  business. The BSP 
created  a  group  dedicated  solely  to  advancing  financial  literacy  and  we  have  also  tied-up 
with the Department of Education to include in the curriculum of grade school students basic 
topics on savings and money management.  
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, governance is a reflection of the values of individuals within an institution. The 
initiatives  we  have  started  to  promote  good  governance  are  only  as  good  as  the  people 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 3
observing them. This is similar to the art of making ceramics. Different potters shaping the 
clay  will  come  out  with  different  interpretations  of  the  same  pattern,  although  each  one  of 
them followed the same process and used the same tools. The challenge for us, in this case, 
is to ensure that the potters have the skills, the right values and perspective in shaping the 
delicate piece of art. 
Thank you and good day. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2009
