Joseph Yam: International financial system – challenging issues  
Welcome address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
at the SIBOS 2009, Hong Kong, 14 September 2009. 
 SIBOS was last held here in Hong Kong in 1991. So it has taken you 18 years to come back 
to  Hong  Kong.  I  wonder  what  took  you  so  long.  A  lot  has  happened  here  in  this  free  and 
open  international  financial  centre  in  the  past  18  years  that  ought  to  have  interested  you 
enough to bring you back here earlier. I can think of, for example, the establishment of the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority in 1993! Seriously, financial globalisation and innovation have 
made life here, where there is a high degree of market freedom and ample liquidity, rather 
challenging, perhaps a little too challenging for the financial authorities. And on a couple of 
occasions we had to take controversial, remedial action to safeguard monetary and financial 
stability. On top of this, there were of course the market excitement, or interestingly the lack 
of it, surrounding the reversion of sovereignty; the inevitable bursting of the housing bubble 
that did not, I repeat not, lead to a collapse of the financial system; the construction of our 
multi-currency and multi-dimensional financial infrastructure that made RTGS DVP and PVP 
possible for anybody wanting to manage risks more properly here in this time zone; and the 
emergence,  more  recently,  of  the  RMB  offshore  market  here  that  is  also  serving  as  a 
laboratory  for  testing  financial  liberalisation  on  the  Mainland,  a  development  that  is  of 
increasing importance to global finance. But it is still a great pleasure, after all these years, to 
welcome SIBOS back to Hong Kong. 
I  understand  that  the  objectives  of  SIBOS  this  year  are  “learning  lessons  from  the  past, 
exploring  the  post-crisis  landscape  and  paving  the  way  for  future  innovation”.  These  are 
indeed important objectives, having regard to the current state of global finance. Indeed, for 
the  past  couple  of  years  they  have  been  occupying  much  of  the  time  of  the  financial 
authorities  and  the  industry.  The  G20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  its  Standing 
Committees, and the Standard Setting Bodies are all working hard and there is no lack of 
specific  subjects  to  address  –  the  Basel  capital  framework,  the  accounting  standards  for 
valuation  and  for  off-balance  sheet  activities,  capital  requirements  for  trading  activities, 
compensation practices, central counterparties, principles for the oversight of hedge funds, 
supervisory colleges, cross-border cooperation on crisis management, oversight regimes for 
the  rating  agencies,  etc,  etc.  Some  of  you  may  already  be  suffering  from  meeting  fatigue 
and, like me, somewhat sick of these subjects already; so I do not want to add to your agony. 
I  am  fortunate  to  have  had  the  privilege  of  setting  up  and  heading  a  central  banking 
institution  over  a  relatively  long  and  exciting  period  in  a  significant  international  financial 
centre that is free and open. And as the time for retirement draws near, after sixteen and a 
half  years,  I  do  have  a  few  reflections,  from  a  rather  different  perspective  than  those  of 
present pre-occupations, which I would like to share with others. They are nothing profound 
or technical; just a few issues that I have found particularly challenging over the years. 
The first concerns a conflict. This is the conflict between the private, particularly short term, 
interest of financial intermediaries in maximising profits, and the public interest of effective 
financial  intermediation  that  provides  crucial  support  to  the  economy.  This  conflict  has  not 
been talked about much, if at all, even in central banking forums; but it is, I am quite sure, 
one  important  contributing  factor  to  the  making  of  financial  crises.  Financial  intermediaries 
are  often,  and  rightly  so,  rewarded  handsomely  for  their  innovative  efforts,  which,  it  is 
claimed, bring a higher rate of return for those with surplus money and a lower cost for those 
in  need  of  money;  in  other  words,  a  narrowing  of  the  intermediation  spread,  or  greater 
financial efficiency. But there is an internal contradiction in this phenomenon. Greater profits 
for financial institutions and larger bonuses for those employed in them mean, to me at least, 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 1
a  widening,  rather  than  a  narrowing,  of  the  intermediation  spread;  in  other  words,  lower 
financial efficiency. 
Yet  we  do  observe  greater  profits  and  larger  bonuses  in  the  financial  system  along  side 
(probably apparent) improvements in financial efficiency. For example, the innovative effort 
variously described as "securitisation", "originate-and-distribute", and "credit risk transfer" did 
raise the rate of investment return and lower the cost of credit. The explanation for this, if I 
may venture a guess, is in the time dimension. The observed narrowing of the intermediation 
spread comes at the expense of, or presages, a future, possibly sharp widening that often 
occurs in the context of a financial crisis. Indeed, we have just had a case of co-occurrence 
of highly remunerated financial innovation and a temporary narrowing of the intermediation 
spread that was built upon, among other things, a serious erosion of credit standards. We all 
know how this ended; rather miserably with investors losing a lot of money and borrowers 
finding credit expensive and hard to come by, and consequently considerable damage to the 
economy. 
How do we deal with this conflict? I am afraid I have no answer, other than always to be alert 
to  it  and  be  ready,  as  protectors  of  the  public  interest  (in  terms  of  maintaining  stability, 
upholding  integrity,  promoting  diversity  and  efficiency  in  financial  intermediation)  to  act 
whenever the private interest of the financial intermediaries threatens to override the public 
interest.  But  this  is  easier  said  than  done,  particularly  when  financial  innovation  is  often 
packaged and presented skilfully by financial intermediaries as an effort to enhance financial 
efficiency. Furthermore, in capitalist, free-market economies, the authorities generally do not 
have a lot of influence over innovation. The financial intermediaries often constitute a strong 
political lobby against regulation, arguing quite forcefully that regulation stifles innovation and 
progress.  And  so,  regrettably,  we  have  an  environment  that  is  often  not  conducive  to  the 
financial authorities taking preventive measures to protect the public interest. You have I am 
sure  heard  of  the  rather  unkind  and  unfair  street  talk  that  the  US  Treasury  was  being  run 
largely by Wall Street. I am sure it is not true but it conveys a misconceived perception that 
perhaps we should not ignore. 
I am not suggesting that the socialist-market economy model, practiced for example on the 
Mainland of China, with considerably greater influence over and ownership of the financial 
system  by  the  authorities,  and  therefore  greater  attention  by  operators  within  the  financial 
system  to  the  public  interest,  has  become  the  superior  model,  although  I  noticed  at  least 
some  involuntary  movement  lately  of  the  so-called  Anglo-Saxon  model  towards  that 
direction.  “Thou  shalt  lend”,  says  the  government  to  banks  that  have  received  capital 
injections from the public purse. It is I think a matter of degree, not so much in the ownership 
of the financial system, but more in the legal and institutional framework whereby those with 
the  responsibility  to  protect  the  public  interest  can  exert  the  appropriate  influence  at  the 
appropriate  time,  whether  it  is  through  prudential  supervision,  conduct  regulation,  the 
provision of safety nets or the design of crisis resolution mechanisms. 
My second issue is a dilemma. This is a dilemma mostly for emerging markets – a dilemma 
between  pursuing  financial  openness  and  maintaining  financial  stability.  I  support  financial 
openness  as  a  means  of  greatly  extending  the  universe  within  which  the  risk  appetite  of 
domestic  savings  and  the  risk  profile  of  domestic  borrowers  can  be  satisfied.  Indeed,  for 
borrowers  and  investors  of  a  particular  jurisdiction,  taking  financial  intermediation  into  the 
international dimension should lower borrowing costs and increase investment returns. And 
so measures are taken by emerging markets in financial sector development to enhance and 
eventually  liberalise  the  international  mobility  of  investors  and  borrowers,  and  their  funds, 
and  the  international  mobility  of  financial  instruments  and  financial  institutions;  in  other 
words, they embrace financial globalisation. 
As  we  all  know,  there  are  risks  to  monetary  and  financial  stability  associated  with  such 
mobility,  and  events  in  the  past  two  decades  have  indicated  clearly  that  these  risks  are 
considerable. Many have pointed out that financial openness has to be supported by prudent 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2009
macroeconomic policies and so financial openness serves also to impose needed discipline 
on  policy  making  in  emerging  markets.  I  fear,  however,  that  this  is  true  only  to  a  certain 
degree, in that the discipline imposed by capital mobility on emerging markets seems to be a 
lot  tougher  than  that  imposed  on  developed  markets.  The  small  size  of  emerging  markets 
relative  to  the  pool  of  international  capital  may  be  one  reason  behind  this.  The  greater 
volatility  of  international  capital  relative  to  domestic  capital  is  perhaps  another.  Also  of 
concern  is  the  willingness  of  some  emerging  market  jurisdictions,  in  a  perhaps  doubtful 
attempt to attract the household names in international finance to set up shop as part of their 
strategies to develop their financial systems, to promulgate rules that may be unsuitable for 
their domestic circumstances. This often results in structural defects in the financial systems 
that are not conducive to the maintenance of monetary and financial stability; for example, 
regulatory  gaps,  low  transparency  and  market  concentration.  These  defects  also  breed 
unethical  behaviour.  Indeed,  free  and  open  emerging  markets  are  considered  by  some  as 
markets that can be rather freely manipulated. They also call them ATMs. 
But I still believe that financial openness outweighs the risks of financial instability, and that 
the risks I mentioned just need to be, and can be, managed, simply by being sensible in the 
development of the financial system, reminding ourselves always that the primary purpose of 
the  financial  system  is  financial  intermediation  that  supports  the  economy.  Although  it 
provides  employment  for  quite  a  number  of  people,  including  us,  and  profits  for  a  lot  of 
capital, the financial system does not and should not have a life of its own. Gradualism is 
perhaps a prudent attitude, even if this means taking a little more time or appearing for a time 
to be not as welcoming as the top players in international finance would like. "Because others 
have  it"  is  definitely  a  risky  attitude  to  take  in  financial  development.  And  as  developed 
markets are going back to basics, a no-frills approach to financial development may not be a 
bad idea. Financial openness does not mean getting all the top brand names to set up shop 
in your backyard and importing innovative financial instruments and practices. Indeed, some 
of those innovative financial instruments may be toxic. 
My third issue is a reality. The reality here is that in finance, and perhaps in other areas, it is 
difficult  if  not  impossible  to  find  a  textbook  perfect  market,  where,  for  example,  market 
participants are all price takers and not in a position – and therefore not having the incentive 
–  to  try  and  move  markets  in  their  favour.  Fear  or  greed,  fed  by  information  or 
misinformation, stoked by manipulative or predatory behaviour by a few, often takes hold, to 
such  an  extent  as  to  produce  volatility  well  beyond  prudent  risk  management  parameters, 
threatening  a  complete  meltdown  of  the  financial  system  or  other  forms  of  systemic 
breakdown. 
As supervisors of financial institutions and regulators of financial markets, our duty is to do 
our best to prevent these situations from occurring, but we have to accept that we too are not 
perfect,  particularly  when  supervision  and  regulation  at  the  national  level  have  their 
shortcomings  in  dealing  with  financial  institutions  and  markets  that  are  already  global  in 
nature.  Whatever  combination  of  market  freedom  and  regulatory  oversight  one  cares  to 
design and try out, markets do fail, sometimes inflicting huge damage to the public interest, 
defined in terms of ensuring that the financial system operates effectively in support of the 
economy.  The  damage  to  the  public  interest  could  well  be  much  greater  than  that  arising 
from not allowing the free market to find its equilibrium on its own. 
We certainly hope that these situations do not occur too often. But when they do, very simply 
there is a need for intervention to put things right so that the financial system can continue to 
function to support the economy. But market intervention is always controversial. We learned 
that in 1998 and many of our critics then learned the same more recently. The purists wave 
the free-market banner and condemn any market intervention, pointing out the moral hazard 
involved,  the  cost  and  the  unfairness  of  intervention.  Many  become  instant  experts  in 
managing financial crises and alternative courses of action proliferate. Politicians, whether or 
not  they  have  the  authority  over  the  decision  to  intervene,  want  to  satisfy  themselves  that 
intervention is justified and what is proposed is the right way forward. Often the process of 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 3
arriving  at  a  consensus  takes  time  and  meanwhile  the  problem  worsens  and  the 
effectiveness of the actions to be taken is eroded. 
I  believe  therefore  that  those  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability should have the necessary emergency powers to do what is required independently 
and  promptly.  There  is  of  course  the  need  for  transparency  and  accountability  when 
exercising these powers to ensure appropriate checks and balances. At a time when many 
jurisdictions  and  international  forums  are  reviewing  the  financial  regulatory  structure,  the 
ability  or  inability  of  the  financial  authorities  to  take  unusual  action,  independently  and 
promptly, to protect the public interest should be addressed. 
My fourth and last issue is an involvement. This concerns the extent to which the authorities 
should be involved in the development of the financial infrastructure. I am sure you are aware 
of  the  huge  amount  of  public  money  spent  in  all  jurisdictions  in  the  development  of  the 
physical  infrastructure,  building  highways,  bridges  and  airports  to  take  people  and  goods 
from  one  place  to  another  safely  and  efficiently,  thus  facilitating  the  conduct  of  economic 
activities for the benefit of all. Authorities, however, seem to devote only disproportionately 
small amounts of resources to the development of the financial infrastructure to move money 
and financial instruments from one entity to another safely and efficiently for the purpose of 
enhancing  financial  efficiency  that  promotes  economic  prosperity.  To  some  extent,  the 
development  of  the  financial  infrastructure  can  be  left  to  the  market,  with  SWIFT  being  a 
sterling example of private sector initiative in this area. But many of the important elements of 
the financial infrastructure are public goods, the provision of which, in a form that serves the 
public  interest  best,  may  not  be  financially  viable  for  the  private  sector.  Furthermore,  the 
conflict I mentioned earlier often comes in, affecting the willingness or the enthusiasm of the 
financial intermediaries to develop and use a financial infrastructure that promotes financial 
efficiency. I believe this is one of the main reasons why X in T+X in the settlement of some 
financial  transitions  is  still  a  number  other  than  zero,  or  why  T+X  is  still  not  replaced  by 
RTGS DVP even though the technology to do so has been available for some time. 
Very simply therefore there is a case for the authorities to get involved, as a developer or a 
service provider, when a private sector solution that is in the public interest is not available. 
And the public interest is not just in the enhancement of financial efficiency but also in the 
limitation  of  contagion  and  the  more  effective  achievement  of  financial  stability.  The  Hong 
Kong  Monetary  Authority  has  devoted  much  effort  to  the  building  of  the  financial 
infrastructure  of  Hong Kong.  I  can  assure  all of  you  that  it  is  well  worth  the  effort  and  the 
amount of public money involved is really quite modest, although it may take a little time, and 
some appropriate prudential guidance concerning, for example, the management of payment 
and  settlement  risks,  to  convince  potential  users  before  traffic  in  these  financial  highways 
builds up. 
Allow  me  to  end  this  address  with  an  advertisement.  In  Hong  Kong  we  now  have  RTGS 
systems for the Hong Kong dollar, the US dollar, the euro and the RMB. They are all linked 
together  to  achieve  cross-currency  PVP  in  our  time  zone  and  they  are  linked  up  with  our 
debt-clearing system to achieve DVP. We welcome external users accessing these systems 
for  their  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  needs,  through  directly  becoming  members  of 
these  systems,  indirectly  using  the  services  through  corresponding  relationships  with  the 
existing members, or having them linked up with their own payment, clearing and settlement 
systems. Some of you may, for example, be wondering how you could use the RMB for trade 
settlement, something that is being promoted by the Mainland authorities. You can, of course 
make  use  of  correspondent  banks  on  the  Mainland,  and  therefore  pay  or  receive  RMB 
arising from imports and exports there, where the money stays. But should you wish to pay 
or receive RMB offshore where there is greater freedom in the mobilisation of the relevant 
funds,  albeit  for  the  time  being  there  is  still  a  dearth  of  RMB  denominated  financial 
instruments, you can do so in Hong Kong. 
Thank you and I wish this year's SIBOS great success. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2009
