Ewald Nowotny: Crisis management – general reflections and the 
Austrian experience 
Speech by Mr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Conference 
“The cost of the financial crisis“, organized by the Bank of Greece, Athens, 27 May 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking the organizers for giving me the chance to present some thoughts 
on  the  current  financial  and  economic  crisis  from  an  Austrian  perspective.  It  is  a  great 
pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Athens,  that  vibrant  metropolis  with  its  history  of  more  than 
4,500  years.  During  that  time,  the  inhabitants  of  Athens  certainly  had  to  cope  with  many 
crises, which often jeopardized their livelihood. I am far from sugar-coating the current crisis, 
but  I  think  it  is  important  to  stress  that  today  the  conditions  for  coping with  a  crisis  of  this 
dimension are much better than in most episodes of the past. 
Since my previous speakers have already emphasized many important issues, I will focus 
my presentation on some selected issues on the management of the crisis from an Austrian 
point of view. 
 
I  have  structured  my  speech  into  four  parts.  First,  I  want  to  highlight  some  aspects  of  the 
crisis that are relevant for designing the proper policy response. Then, I will talk about the 
reaction of economic policy in Austria. Having done that, I will turn to the effects of the crisis 
on Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE), which is of particular interest from 
an Austrian perspective due to the strong ties of Austria with that region. Finally, I will talk 
about the crisis in this region from the perspective of Austrian banks. 
The crisis in a nutshell  
1.  
Let me start my talk with a short overview of how the crisis developed. Although I assume 
you are familiar with the basic causes and consequences of the crisis, a brief look on the 
history  of  the  crisis  –  with  a  special  focus  on  the  policy  measures  needed  to  manage  the 
crisis – might be worthwhile. 
As you all know, the crisis originated in the market for subprime loans in the United States. 
But how can a crisis on such a small market spill over to the world financial system and to 
the real economy? 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 1
 
To  understand  this,  let  us  take  a  brief  look  at  the  time  before  the  crisis,  when  the  initial 
conditions for the crisis were set. After the 2001 recession, huge worldwide savings and low 
interest  rates  led  to  a  "search  for  yield"  of  investors.  The  U.S.A.  was  regarded  as  an 
attractive  place  for  investments.  The  emergence  of  securitized  assets  rendered  the 
distribution of yield (and risks) across borders possible. Loopholes in the regulation made 
it  possible  that  such  assets  were  issued  by  special  purpose  vehicles  that  were  mainly 
founded on a short-term basis. The risks of these complex and hard-to-value assets were 
underestimated.  As  a  consequence, 
financial  system  became  strongly 
interconnected.  At  the  same  time,  the  leverage  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
increased sharply, making the system more vulnerable. The spark that ignited this mixture 
was the U.S. subprime market. 
 
the  global 
 
One  major  amplification  mechanism  was  a  steep  decline  in  confidence,  which  caused 
massive  financing  problems  of  monetary  and  financial  institutions  in  short-term  money 
markets. This led to "fire sales" of assets, causing asset prices to fall. This applied especially 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2009
to complex and hard-to-value assets such as mortgage-backed securities. This reduction in 
prices  further  reduced  capital.  Another  amplification  mechanism  was  the  need  of  MFIs  to 
improve  their  capital  ratio  and  the  resulting  deleveraging  process.  As  a  consequence,  the 
supply of loans was negatively affected. Feedback loops between the financial and the real 
sectors of the economy further amplified the negative impact. Deleveraging also took place 
on a global scale, leading to capital outflows from emerging economies. 
 
   
The crisis calls for policy action in different areas. The most urgent topic on the agenda is to 
remedy  the  malfunction  of  the  financial  system.  The  decline  in  the  value  of  equity  of 
many financial institutions makes it necessary to recapitalize them in order to restore capital 
ratios.  The  decline  in  confidence  contained  the  risk  of  bank  runs.  Although  substantial 
guarantees for household deposits were in place in most countries before the crisis, these 
guarantees were extended to strengthen public confidence. The collapse of the interbank 
market  called  for  action  to  restore  liquidity.  These  points  are  covered  by  banking  support 
packages  and  they  already  prove  to  be  effective.  One  crucial  point  which  remains  to  be 
solved is the problem of toxic assets. Policymakers need to agree on a framework on how to 
value  and  dispose  of  such  toxic  assets  and  thus  contribute  to  sound  balance  sheets  of 
financial  institutions.  The  contagion  of  the  real  economy  calls  for  coordinated  fiscal  and 
monetary policy action to dampen the economic downturn. 
The crisis hits emerging economies from different sides. In addition to the steep decline in 
demand for their products due to the slump in world trade, capital outflows exert pressure on 
emerging economies’ capital accounts, triggering the need for massive financial support. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 3
2. 
The reaction of Austrian economic policy  
 
The  Austrian  bank  stabilization  package  was  passed  by  the  Austrian  parliament  in 
October 2008 and primarily encompasses two new laws, the Interbank Market Support Act 
(InterbankmarktstärkungsG), and the Financial Market Stability Act (FinanzmarktstabilitätsG). 
The Austrian measures were designed in accordance with the common principles highlighted 
at the ECOFIN meeting on October 7, 2008, and the Declaration on a concerted European 
action  plan by  the  heads  of  state  of  the  euro  area  on  October  12,  2008.  This  declaration, 
which defines specific cornerstones regarding national measures for supporting the financial 
markets, shows that the European Union is in a position to act quickly and in a coordinated 
manner in the case of a financial crisis. 
With  the  Interbank  Market  Support  Act,  an  "Austrian  clearing  bank"  (Oesterreichische 
Clearingbank AG)  was  established as a special purpose entity to strengthen the interbank 
market and to guarantee bank bonds. The Austrian clearing bank serves as an intermediary 
on the interbank market by borrowing funds from credit institutions and lending them on to 
other  credit  institutions  and  insurance  undertakings.  Measures  under  this  law  may  not 
exceed EUR 75 billion. The Interbank Market Support Act expires on December 31, 2009. Up 
to now, bank bonds to the amount of EUR 11.1 billon have been guaranteed by the Austrian 
government, while guarantees given in the interbank market amount to EUR 5.3 billion. 
Under  the  Financial  Market  Stability  Act,  the  Minister  of  Finance  may  take  measures  to 
recapitalize credit institutions and insurance undertakings by way of assuming liabilities, 
guaranteeing  loans  and  providing  equity  capital,  acquiring  company  shares  or  convertible 
bonds, taking over company assets and – as a measure of last resort – taking over property 
rights  (i.e.  nationalization).  Fees  and  interest  for  these  instruments  must  be  set  at  market 
rates. Measures under this law may not exceed EUR 15 billion. The law also provides for 
(re)privatization after stabilization has been achieved. Up to now, agreed capital measures 
amount to EUR 6.35 billion, leaving a buffer of EUR 8.65 billion for further recapitalization 
measures in the future. 
Another  measure  taken  by  the  Austrian  authorities  concerns  the  safeguarding  of  bank 
deposits  and  the  prevention  of  bank  runs.  For  bank  deposits  of  retail  customers,  a  100% 
state guarantee was put in place retroactively from October 1, 2008; this guarantee will be 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2009
valid until the end of 2009. As of January 1, 2010, protection for retail customers’ deposits 
will be limited to EUR  100.000 (previously EUR 20.000 per account holder/per bank). The 
deposit protection for small and medium-size enterprises was raised to EUR 50.000. Overall, 
a maximum of EUR 10 billion has been allotted to this measure. 
All these measures, adopted in a swift and comprehensive way, contributed successfully to 
reestablishing confidence in the Austrian financial market and to securing financial stability. 
 
 
When comparing the Austrian bank stabilization package with those of other countries, 
the Austrian package was initially criticized as being oversized. But in fact, the dimension of 
the package was already taking the new risk development in the CESEE countries (where 
Austrian banks have a high exposure) into account and proved to be the result of prudent 
foresight.  Moreover,  compared  with  the  banking  systems  in  other  countries  (U.S.A., 
Germany,  U.K.  etc.),  where  public  rescue  packages  play  a  key  role  in  guaranteeing  the 
survival  of  the  banking  system,  it  is  particularly  worth  noting  that  the  Austrian  banking 
system is still generating profits. The Austrian banking support package can be described 
as a vaccination against potential future problems. 
 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 5
 
The  financial  crisis  has  become  a  global  economic  crisis.  Given  the  scope  of  the  current 
crises,  several  arguments  in  favor  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  have  been  put  forward. 
First,  since  the  output  gap  is  expected  to  remain  negative  for  a  longer  period  of  time,  the 
well-known  implementation  lag  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  is  currently  less 
problematic. Second, in "normal" times, fiscal policy supports monetary policy in smoothing 
the  business  cycle  via  automatic  stabilizers.  This  has  worked  quite  well  over  the  last  25 
years. Yet, these are not "normal" times. Although automatic stabilizers still work, they are 
not  large  enough  to  prevent  a  severe  economic  downturn.  Moreover,  they  have  been 
weakened through structural reforms like reductions in the progressivity of tax systems and a 
decrease in the public expenditure-to-GDP ratio. Third, due to the financial crisis and very 
low expectations on returns of potential investments for the near future, right now the ability 
of  traditional  monetary  policy  measures  to  boost  investment  and  consumption  is  limited. 
Finally, we face the threat of hysteresis effects (increase in NAIRU) via a long-run reduction 
in human capital. So there is a need for adequate fiscal policy measures, and fiscal policy 
may  well  be  more  effective  under  the  current  circumstances  than  in  "normal"  times.  Low 
capacity  utilization  and  a  larger  number  of  liquidity-constrained  households  and  firms  may 
currently shift fiscal multipliers to above-average levels. 
So,  coordinated  discretionary  measures  as  proposed  in  the  European  Economic 
Recovery Plan are necessary. Coordination among EU Member States is important due to 
their  high  degree  of  openness  and  the  therefore  relatively  low  multiplier  effects.  Most  EU 
countries (including Austria) are already implementing such programs. The measures should 
be  lasting  because  the  downturn  might  be  lasting,  and  contingent  because  the  situation 
might get worse. So there has to be commitment to stick to the measures until the recession 
is over, and to do more if the recession gets worse indeed. As for fiscal policy, the necessity 
of  a  large  and  timely  stimulus  package  is  most  obvious.  Olivier  Blanchard  and  other  IMF 
experts1 explained concisely by the end of last year what such a stimulus package should 
look like. 
But of course the long-term sustainability of public finances in Europe and around the world 
must not be undermined. Fiscal measures should not conflict with long-term goals of growth 
policy like in the Lisbon Strategy; this point is heavily emphasized in the European Economic 
                                                 
1   Olivier  Blanchard,  Antonio  Spilimbergo,  Steve  Symansky  and  Carlo  Cottarelli  (2008).  “Fiscal  Policy  for  the 
Crisis,” IMF Staff Position Note, December 29, 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2009
Recovery Plan. Furthermore, in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact, there has to 
be a commitment that consolidation will be carried out when times get better. 
 
 
In  line  with  these  principles  the  Austrian  package  encompasses  consumption-stimulating 
measures, investment incentives and export facilitation, investments in infrastructure and job 
support  measures.  All  measures  together  sum  up  to  EUR  6.6  billion  or  2.4%  of  GDP. 
Simulation results of the quantitative effects of these measures show that on balance, GDP 
growth  will  be  pushed  up  by  more  than  ¾%  of  GDP  in  2009.  By  2010,  GDP  should  have 
increased by about 1.4% compared to a baseline scenario assuming no such measures. At 
the  same  time,  the  measures  are  expected  to  translate  into  a  sizeable  positive  effect  on 
employment,  creating  close  to  25,000  jobs  (+0.7%)  in  more  than  two  years  (calculated 
cumulatively,  not  reflecting  job  support  initiatives  and  not  adjusted  for  short-term  work 
schemes). 
The crisis in CESEE  
3.  
During  the  early  stages  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  the  CESEE  countries  performed 
relatively  well  compared  to  other  world  regions,  and  increases  in  risk  premiums  and 
downward revisions of growth prospects were rather contained. However, with the tightening 
of  the  crisis  in  the  fall  of  2008,  the  collapse  in  world  trade  and  the  global  increase  in  risk 
aversion,  emerging  market  economies  in  general  came  under  considerable  constraint. 
Moreover, country- as well as region-specific vulnerabilities moved into the focus of market 
participants  and  investors.  Credit  default  swaps  increased,  but  the  increase  was  not  at  all 
homogeneous across CESEE countries. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 7
 
With  the  change  in  global  investors’  sentiment,  growth  prospects  for  CESEE  countries 
had to be revised downwards substantially in the recent past. Since the CESEE region 
experienced growth rates well above the Western European average, the turn in economic 
activity  looks  particularly  sharp.  According  to  the  latest  forecast  by  the  European 
Commission,  GDP  growth  in  several  CESEE  and  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States 
(CIS) countries will be below the euro area average, implying that the catching-up success of 
previous years will come to a temporary halt. Among the countries hit hardest by the financial 
crisis are Ukraine, the Baltic countries and Hungary. However, CESEE countries must not be 
seen as a homogenous region. The financial crisis has a stronger impact on countries with 
weaker  economic 
large  economic 
imbalances. But the outlook for the CESEE region as a whole still remains more optimistic 
than for the euro area. And in the years to come, the region will have higher trend growth 
rates,  on  average,  than  the  "old"  EU  Member  States,  simply  because  they  are  still  in  the 
process of convergence toward higher GDP per capita. Thus, CESEE will remain a driver of 
economic growth in Europe for the foreseeable future. For the moment, however, direct and 
indirect external support is needed as a decisive measure to prevent recession in CESEE 
from becoming worse than in the euro area. 
Although the catching-up process in most CESEE and CIS countries over the last years was 
impressive, it was also characterized by some erroneous trends. 
 
insufficient  policy  credibility  and 
fundamentals, 
8 
 BIS Review 82/2009
   
Let  me  stress  two  aspects  that  have  made  the  affected  countries  extremely  vulnerable  to 
external shocks. First, in some countries credit has probably been expanded too fast. 
The  rapid  process  of  financial  deepening  needed  to  fund  the  elevated  rates  of  economic 
growth in the CESEE region was often accompanied by a rise in foreign ownership in the 
banking system. This was typically a win-win situation for the home and the host countries. 
The  CESEE  countries  benefited  from  technology  transfers  and  access  to  external  funds 
while  non-CESEE  banks  generated  high  rates  of  return  on  their  investments.  But  the 
combination of high returns and needs for (external) funds led to unsustainably high credit 
growth  rates  in  some  countries.  And  in  some  instances,  domestic  regulations  that  were 
aimed  at  limiting  credit  growth  were  eluded  by  e.g.  direct  cross-border  credits.  Another 
concern  in  this  respect  is  the  wide-spread  allocation  of  foreign  currency  credits.  In  some 
CESEE  countries,  the  share  of  foreign  currency  credits  in  total  credits  increased 
tremendously, making them rather vulnerable to exchange rate shocks. Again, this trend is 
limited to some CESEE countries. High shares raise the potential for adverse balance sheet 
effects in particular for households. By contrast, there is a natural hedge for most companies, 
in particular for companies borrowing internationally or subsidiaries receiving I/C loans. 
 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 9
 
The  risk  of  substantial  depreciations  already  materialized  in  the  recent  past.  The 
growing signals of an upcoming global recession following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy 
and  the  sharply  deteriorating  economic  perspectives  for  the  euro  area  led  to  a  sharp 
depreciation  of  CESEE  currencies  in  the  fall  of  2008  and  beginning  of  2009.2  In  most 
countries,  central  bank  interventions  on  foreign  exchange  markets  helped  to  contain  the 
extent of currency depreciation, and since the end of the first quarter of 2009 the recovery of 
several CESEE currencies has signaled a potential reversal in risk assessment. 
Second,  huge  current  account  deficits  and  capital  inflows  contributed  to  overheating  in 
some countries. Again, this is not a common feature of the whole region, but concerns only 
a  small  part  of  CESEE.  In  Central  Europe,  the  catching-up  process  has  reached  a  more 
advanced stage in which the current account deficit has gone down and the repatriation of 
profits on inward FDI stocks constitutes the only or a main source of the remaining current 
account  deficits.  By  contrast,  in  some  Southeastern  European  countries  current  account 
deficits are still large and partly even widening, in particular in Bulgaria and Romania. High 
current account deficits trigger a further worsening of the net foreign asset position which, if 
financed  mainly  by  short-term  debt,  constitutes  a  major  macroeconomic  risk  given  the 
relatively  fragile  international  environment  with  its  intensified  risk  aversion  and  potential 
reversal of financial flows. 
 
                                                 
2   Before,  only  Romania  had  witnessed  a  depreciation  as  a  result  of  its  large  and  rapidly  widening  current 
account deficit. 
10 
 BIS Review 82/2009
     
Against the background of the global recession and the macroeconomic imbalances in some 
CESEE countries, the feedback loops between the financial sector and the real economy will 
trigger severe write-downs in CESEE countries. In the IMF’s Global Financial Stability Report 
of April 2009 the potential write-downs for banks active in emerging markets were estimated 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 11
for the first time. Global potential write-downs in emerging markets amount to almost USD 
800 billion. The potential write-downs for Eastern Europe are estimated to reach USD 185 
billion or 9% of outstanding assets. 
 
 
Although the potential write-downs for Eastern Europe are similar to those of other regions 
(Asia,  Latin  America…),  the  mere  size  of  the  write-downs  points  to  the  need  for  fast  and 
coordinated policy reactions at both the national and international level. The aim is not only 
to  prevent  the  economic  downturn  in  CESEE  from  deepening  further  but  also  to  avoid 
feedback loops between advanced and emerging economies. At the international level, the 
IMF  and  the  European  Union  –  prompted  by  the  high  exposure  of  Western  European 
countries to CESEE and by the fact that many CESEE countries have joined the EU – have 
helped stabilize the region and will continue to do so in the future. 
Without claim to completeness, the IMF and/or the EU agreed on, or started talks on, support 
packages for Hungary, Ukraine, Belarus, Serbia, Turkey, Latvia, Romania and Poland. As a 
consequence  of  the  G20  meeting,  the  IMF  funds  were  raised  to  USD  500  billion  and 
additional Special Drawing Rights of USD 250 billion were agreed upon. The World Bank, the 
EBRD and the EIB announced to lend an additional EUR 24.5 billion to CESEE countries, 
and the European Union raised its current account support in two steps to EUR 50 billion. 
Wherever the macroeconomic fundamentals give leeway, the international rescue packages 
should be accompanied by national packages. 
The crisis in CESEE from the perspective of Austrian Banks 
4.  
Although the direct effects of the financial crisis on Austrian banks have so far been limited 
due  to  their  relatively  small  exposure  to  the  U.S.  subprime  market,  Austrian  banks  have 
been  indirectly  affected  to  a  significant  extent  due  to  higher  refinancing  costs,  declining 
income and higher loan loss provisions. 
 
12 
 BIS Review 82/2009
   
Austrian  banks  were  first  movers  in  the  CESEE  and  CIS  banking  markets  in  the  late 
1980s.  Since  then,  they  have  continuously  expanded  their  market  presence  and  are  now 
significant players across the whole region. Among foreign banks operating in CESEE and 
the  European  members  of  CIS,  Austrian  banks  have  a  significant  market  share,  namely 
about  one-fifth  of  bank  credits  extended  to  this  region  (as  direct  cross-border  credits  or 
indirectly via subsidiaries in these countries). While this share is sizeable, it also makes clear 
that not only Austrian but also other European countries’ banking groups are exposed to this 
region – mainly Germany, Italy, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Greece. 
 
BIS Review  82/2009 
  13
The  exposure  of  Austrian  banks  is  broadly  diversified  across  countries.  The  focus  is 
clearly  on  new  EU  Member  States,  which  account  for  ¾  of  Austria’s  total  exposure  to 
CESEE. 
 
  
Moreover,  Austrian  banks’  subsidiaries  have  a  solid  local  funding  basis,  which  limits  the 
contagion risks via the reversal of financial flows. 
 
  14 
  BIS Review 82/2009
Conversely,  these  home  countries  share  a  particular  responsibility  with  respect  to  the 
stability  of  national  financial  markets  and  financing  structures  in  CESEE  and  CIS,  the 
disruption  of  which  could  severely  exacerbate  the  impact  of  the  international  financial  and 
economic  crisis.  Moreover,  a  deep  slump  of  activity  in  the  region  would  affect  all  EU 
countries’  exports  to  this  region  and  hurt  foreign  direct  investment  in  this  region,  which 
predominantly stems from EU countries. Given their long-term strategic objectives in CESEE, 
Austrian banks continued to support their subsidiaries in CESEE in the past few months and 
will continue to do so in the future. This is evident from a questionnaire sent to five major 
banks, which shows that their net positions increased further in 2008. 
5. 
Summary  
 
Let me finalize my talk by summarizing the main points. The dimension of the crisis called for 
fast  and  coordinated  policy  reaction.  Although  measures  have  been  implemented  that 
prevent  more  harm  in  the  short  term,  it  is  also  necessary  to  define  sound  medium-term 
strategies.  Looking  at  the  reaction  of  Austrian  policymakers,  we  see  a  bank  stabilization 
package of sufficient size, which guarantees the functioning of the Austrian banking sector. 
The  fiscal  package  in  Austria  helps  dampen  the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  real 
economy. 
Turning to CESEE, we see a heterogeneous impact of the crisis. Hence, it is wrong to lump 
together  all  the  countries  in  the  region.  I  am  confident  that  the  massive  financial  support 
provided by international institutions helps stabilize the region. Austrian banks are important 
players on CESEE markets with a regionally diversified exposure. In line with their strategic 
objectives,  Austrian  banks  continue  to  support  their  regional  subsidiaries,  being  aware  of 
their responsibility. 
To  conclude,  let  me  quote  Barack  Obama:  "If  you’re  walking  down  the  right  path  and 
you’re willing to keep walking, eventually you’ll make progress." I am confident that we 
are on the right path and that together, we will be able to manage the crisis well. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 15
