Jan F Qvigstad: Comments on Lars E O Svensson's lecture "Policy 
expectations and policy evaluations – the role of transparency and 
communication" 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the conference "Ten Years of Riksbank Independence", Stockholm, 11 September 2009. 
Introduction 
 It was a great pleasure to accept the invitation to discuss professor and fellow central bank 
deputy  governor  Lars  Svensson’s  lecture  in  connection  with  the  tenth  anniversary  of 
Riksbank independence. 
In  his  lecture,  Lars  Svensson  discussed  communication,  credibility  and  monetary  policy 
evaluation.  He  looks  at  general  issues  for  central  banks  seeking  to  influence  key  rate 
expectations,  using  the  Riksbank  as  an  example.1 I  will  not  venture  to  remark  on  the 
Riksbank’s  assessments  but  will  offer  my  comments  on  the  same  issues  in  the  light  of 
Norges Bank’s experience of interest rate forecasts.  
There  are  a  number  of  similarities  between  the  communication  strategies  of  the  Riksbank 
and Norges Bank. And underlying these strategies is a model developed by, among others, 
Lars Svensson. In his lecture today, he described how to arrive at an interest rate path that 
“looks good”. He showed, as he has on many previous occasions, that this can be formalised 
by finding the interest rate path that minimises a given loss function. 
When does the interest rate “look good”? 
Svensson raises the issue of whether monetary policy is well balanced, not only ex-post but 
also  ex-ante.  In  his  presentation  today,  he  presents  a  system  for  evaluating  and  ranking 
different policy alternatives, showing how Taylor diagrams can be used to evaluate whether 
one  interest  rate  forecast  results  in  lower  volatility  in  inflation  and  the  output  gap  than 
another. If a forecast results in inflation closer to target and a narrower output gap through 
the  forecast  period,  this  forecast  is  selected.  On  other  occasions,  the  choice  between  two 
forecasts can be more problematic. The forecast that is selected will depend on preference 
and the considerations that are given weight. 
I  completely  agree  with  Lars  Svensson  that  policymakers  must  rank  the  different  policy 
alternatives based on their preferences. In some cases, policymakers may wish to keep the 
interest rate high while in others a low interest rate may be preferred. However, it is equally 
important to take account of preferences over time, i.e. having a system to check whether the 
preferences  underlying  the  baseline  scenario  in  one  report  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
previous report. And once preferences have been formalised in a loss function, it is relatively 
simple to find the optimal interest rate path for a given model. The choice of path will then 
depend  on  policymakers’  preferences.  A  policymaker’s  preferences  may  of  course  change 
over  time,  but  I  am  in  favour  of  basing  the  analysis  on  the  same  set  of  preferences  as 
previously. This approach will contribute to consistency in communication over time. 
                                                 
1   Cf. Woodford’s (2005) formulation: ” For not only do expectations matter, […] very little else matters.” 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 1
Criteria for a “good” interest rate path 
Inspired by Svensson, Norges Bank has developed a set of criteria for a “good” interest rate 
path. The intention is to make it easier for others to understand how we think, although the 
criteria also define the agenda for the internal discussion.2
The first criterion for a good interest rate path is to set the interest rate with a view to bringing 
inflation  back  to  target  in  the  medium  term  following  a  shock.  The  primary  objective  is  to 
achieve the inflation target.  
The second criterion reflects the flexibility of inflation targeting. There are many routes to the 
objective.  Which  one  should  we  choose?  According  to  the  criteria,  emphasis  should  be 
placed on finding an interest rate path that also stabilises output and employment.  
So  far,  our  approach  tracks  Svensson’s  theoretical  approach  fairly  closely,  with  some 
deviation from the analytical method he presents in his article. The most important difference 
is  that  we  have  chosen  to  focus  directly  on  the  target,  using  a  loss  function  to  describe 
monetary  policy.  The  approach  proposed  in  the  article  primarily  relies  on  a  description  of 
policy under different rules followed by calculation of the loss using the loss function. 
Because  the  model  is  primarily  a  model  and  reality  is  primarily  reality,  some  tailoring  is 
required  to  connect  model  and  reality.  Some  additional  criteria  have  therefore  been 
formulated.  These  criteria  are  necessary  because  our  models  are  uncertain  and  because 
confidence in monetary policy cannot always be taken for granted. The criteria do not conflict 
with  Svensson’s  monetary  policy  research,  but  can  be  regarded  as  a  bridge  between  the 
model and reality.  
Allow me to show you how the criteria were used in the work on the March Monetary Policy 
Report by outlining the thought process involved. Although the charts I will be presenting are 
a simplification , they serve to illustrate our working methods. Norges Bank’s assessment of 
the  current  situation  and  the  forecasts  –  with  below-target  inflation  and  a  considerably 
negative output gap – might, under criteria 1 and 2, indicate in isolation that the interest rate 
should be set very low and even be negative towards the end of 2009. This is illustrated by 
the green line. However, the Executive Board chose to take a less drastic course of action on 
the basis of the other criteria taken into consideration. 
Criterion 3 states that previous methods of operation should be taken into account and that 
the interest rate should normally only be changed gradually. With emphasis on interest rate 
smoothing in the loss function (i.e. criteria 1+2+3), the result is the black line. This interest 
rate path is still low, and lower than the path that was in fact chosen. 
Criterion 4 states that monetary policy should be robust and criterion 5 that cross-checking 
should  be  carried  out.  In  a  turbulent  economic  situation,  we  were  uncertain  whether  our 
model  was  the  right  one  for  the  Norwegian  economy  and  wanted  to  guard  against  model 
misspecifications. In an economy where unemployment is around 3 per cent and inflation is 
on target, setting the interest rate as low as zero was regarded as going too far. 
A  practical  approach  to  model  uncertainty  is  to  cross-check  using  simple  monetary  policy 
rules  such  as  the  Taylor  rule  (criterion  5).  In  addition  to  the  basic  Taylor  rule,  we  usually 
employ a variation of this rule involving external interest rates, and a rule where the output 
gap  is  replaced  by  GDP  growth.  A  mechanical  application  of  the  Taylor  rule  would  have 
resulted  in  a  forecast  approximately  as  indicated  by  the  blue  line  in  the  diagram,  i.e. 
considerably higher than the interest rate path that was chosen. A higher interest rate path 
would also have resulted in more negative output and inflation gaps. Achieving the inflation 
target would have taken ten years.  
                                                 
2   See  Holmsen  et  al.  (2008)  for  a  discussion  of  the  implementation  and  communication  of  optimal  monetary 
policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2009
An interval for the interest rate is determined based on the criteria, where optimal policy (with 
interest  rate  smoothing)  defines  the  lower  boundary  and  the  Taylor  rule  yields  the  upper 
boundary.  After  an  overall  assessment,  the  interest  rate  forecast  indicated  by  the  red  line 
was selected. The interest rate decision, in Norway as elsewhere, is based on discussion by 
a board. Criteria 3, 4 and 5 introduce conditions that cannot easily be observed. We have to 
apply judgement. The criteria contribute to consistency and structure the discussion. 
The Riksbank also applies judgement when selecting the interest rate path. But Svensson 
does not discuss possible shortcomings in the macroeconomic model. In Chart 10, he shows 
how the various interest rate paths, differing by around ½ percentage point in the period to 
summer,  could  result  in  differences  in  the  inflation  rate  of close  to  4  percentage  points  as 
early as next autumn. Monetary policy seems to be having a very strong impact. It would be 
interesting to hear whether he thinks that relying so heavily on such a model in interest rate 
setting is robust, and how possible errors in the model should be guarded against. 
We  also  know  from  experience  that  market  participants’  perceptions  can  differ  from  ours, 
particularly somewhat further ahead. There can be a variety of reasons for these differences 
and Svensson discusses a number of them. 
It would also be useful to study the volatility surrounding publication of key macroeconomic 
variables. We would prefer to see lower volatility around monetary policy meetings, and that 
any surprises are postponed to a time closer to the publication of new macroeconomic data. 
Solberg  Johansen  (2008)  –  winner  of  the  Bertil  Ohlin  prize  for  best  thesis  in  international 
economics  at  the  Stockholm  School  of  Economics  –  examines  volatility  in  the  yield  curve. 
Her  findings  provide  some  support  for  a  decrease  in  volatility  around  monetary  policy 
meetings,  but  no  strong  evidence  to  suggest  that  financial  market  volatility  around  the 
publication  of  new  data  has  changed  after  Norges  Bank  began  to  publish  interest  rate 
forecasts. Another study that might provide useful input is Ehrmann and Fratzscher’s (2007) 
analysis  of  developments  in  US  market  rates  in  the  period  between  monetary  policy 
meetings under two different communication regimes. 
I  will  close by  concurring  with  Blinder  and  colleagues  (2008)  when  they  write  that:  “…  the 
publication  of  projected  paths  for  the  central  bank’s  policy  rate  appears  to  be  the  “new 
frontier” in central bank communication. But it has been practised in so few countries for so 
few  years  that  we  have  little  empirical  knowledge  of  its  effects  as  yet.  As  more  data 
accumulates, this should be a high-priority area for future research.” It is reassuring to know 
that the economist that has begun this important work is Lars Svensson. 
References 
Blinder, Alan S., Michael Ehrman, Marcel Fratzscher, Jacob De Haan and David-Jan Jansen 
(2008):  “Central  Bank  Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and 
Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature 46, 910-945. 
Ehrmann,  Michael  and  Marcel  Fratzscher  (2007):  “Social  Value  of  Public  Information  – 
Testing the Limits to Transparency”, European Central Bank Working Paper 821. 
Holmsen, Amund, Jan F. Qvigstad, Øistein Røisland and Kristin Solberg-Johansen (2008): 
“Communicating  monetary  policy  intentions:  The  case  of  Norges  Bank”,  Norges  Bank 
Working Paper 2008/20. 
Solberg Johansen, Kristin (2008): “Publishing interest rate forecasts – how does the market 
react?”, mimeo Stockholm School of Economics. 
Woodford, Michael (2005): “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, NBER 
Working Paper Series 11898. 
 BIS Review 110/2009 
 3
       4 
 BIS Review 110/2009
       BIS Review 110/2009 
 5
       6 
 BIS Review 110/2009
 BIS Review 110/2009 
 7
