Ric Battellino: An update on the economy and financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Urban  Development  Institute  of  Australia,  National  Congress  2009,  Brisbane,  31  March 
2009. 
 Introduction 
The  past  six  months  have  certainly  proved  that  we  live  in  a  globalised  world.  Last 
September, the US investment bank, Lehman Brothers, collapsed and several other major 
US financial institutions came under immense stress. These events transformed what was a 
difficult but manageable situation in global markets into a full-blown financial crisis. 
The consequences for the global economy have been severe. Up until these events, most 
forecasters  had  been  predicting  that  the  major  economies  would  have  a  relatively  mild 
slowdown in 2009, and that Asia would be largely unaffected. Those predictions have since 
been replaced by forecasts of a major global downturn, with all significant countries affected. 
Australia  entered  this  difficult  period  in  much  better  shape  than  many  other  countries. 
Disciplined  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  in  earlier  years,  sound  regulation  and  a  prudent 
approach to lending by our banks meant that the country was largely free of major problems. 
It is not surprising therefore that, so far, we have weathered this global downturn better than 
most. We have had more scope than others to move policies in the expansionary direction 
and our banks, being largely free of problem assets, are in a position to keep supplying credit 
to the economy. 
Having said that, no amount of good economic management can totally shield us from what 
is happening in the global economy. 
In my talk today I would like to review how the global economy is evolving; update you on 
how  we  are  seeing  the  domestic  economy;  and  say  a  few  words  about  household  sector 
finances and the housing market. 
it has undermined the confidence of the community; and  
it has led to a sharp slowdown in the availability of credit.  
The global economy 
We all know by now that the global economy is going through a recession. In itself, this is not 
unusual; the world economy has tended to experience a downturn every 7-10 years. 
The current global downturn is, however, more severe than we have experienced for a long 
time. This is because in some important countries a banking sector crisis has been overlaid 
on the regular economic cycle. This has added to the severity of the downturn because: 
• 
• 
This  cycle  is  also  highly  synchronised,  with  every  significant  country  in  the  world  affected. 
Household and business confidence collapsed simultaneously in every country late last year, 
as we all reacted in the same way to the dramatic news being transmitted around the world. 
The events of the past six months have resulted in big changes in the forecasts for the global 
economy. Mid last year, official international bodies were generally forecasting that the world 
economy would grow by around 4 per cent in 2009, only a little below average. Now they are 
forecasting that global GDP will fall by around 1 per cent in 2009, the weakest outcome in the 
post-war period. 
It is widely accepted that a precondition for economic recovery is the restoration of financial 
stability.  Markets  have  at  times  been  frustrated  at  how  long  it  has  taken  countries  with 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 1
banking problems to implement measures to restore the health of their financial institutions. 
But  these  are  very  complex  problems  and  it  takes  time  for  consensus  to  build  about  the 
solution. Another complication is that, not surprisingly, a common initial reaction is to want 
retribution from the financial institutions that are seen as having caused the problem. While 
this is understandable, it makes it difficult for the political process to support making public 
funds available to stabilise the financial system. 
These issues are not new and, by the standards of some past banking crises, the US, the 
country at the heart of the current crisis, is making reasonable progress. The US authorities 
last week announced further plans to restore the health of their financial sector. These were 
followed  by  a  solid  rise  in  share  prices,  particularly  for  banking  stocks,  though  market 
sentiment is clearly still fragile. 
On the real economy, we are starting to notice the odd positive economic indicator in the run 
of US monthly data, in contrast to the universally negative outcomes a few months ago. Let’s 
hope this continues. 
From  Australia’s  perspective,  no  discussion  of  the  global  economy  is  complete  without 
reference to China. Like other countries, China experienced a sharp slowdown in the second 
half  of  last  year,  after  a  couple  of  years  of  extraordinary  boom  in  which  output  growth 
increased  to  around  12  per  cent  per  year.  The  downturn  in  China  has  been  of  great 
significance to Australia, given that China is now our largest trading partner. 
My guess is that the Chinese authorities, like everybody else, were caught by surprise at the 
suddenness  of  the  downturn.  But  they  have  since  reacted  with  great  speed  and  vigour  in 
implementing  monetary  and  fiscal  measures  to  stimulate  their  economy.  There  are  some 
signs that these measures are starting to work. While China is not going to return to a 12 per 
cent growth rate any time soon, it is quite possible that the past six months will turn out to 
have been the period of maximum weakness in the Chinese economy. Of course, it will be a 
while before we know one way or another. 
The Australian economy 
Like  all  other  economies,  the  Australian  economy  was  very  much  affected  by  the 
extraordinary  events  of  last  September.  As  in  other  countries,  confidence  was  severely 
eroded by the spectacle of large US financial institutions either collapsing or coming under 
immense  financial  strain.  Concerns  began  to  arise  about  the  safety  of  our  own  financial 
institutions,  even  though  they  were  in  a  very  strong  position.  The  Australian  Government 
therefore elected, as did governments in other countries, to guarantee the debts of banks. 
In addition to these adverse confidence effects, the Australian economy was also affected by 
the collapse of commodity prices. Mid last year, commodity prices were at boom levels; six 
months later, many had broadly halved. This has resulted in a large loss of real income to the 
economy.  
The  fall  in  commodity  prices  has  also  caused  businesses  to  revise  down  sharply  their 
investment  plans  in  the  year  ahead.  Households  have  also  become  much  more  cautious, 
cutting  back  on  spending  and  increasing  saving.  All  this  meant  that  there  was  a  sharp 
change in the outlook for the economy in the closing months of last year. 
The  Reserve  Bank  responded  to  this  with  a  very  substantial  lowering  of  interest  rates: 
between September last year and February this year the cash rate was reduced from 7¼ per 
cent to 3¼ per cent. 
Other central banks have also cut official interest rates sharply, but in many cases, because 
of problems in their banking sectors, this did not flow through to any great extent to interest 
rates  faced  by  households  and  businesses.  In  essence,  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism  in  many  countries  has  become  severely  impaired,  which  is  why  some  central 
banks have resorted to non-traditional monetary measures. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2009
This problem has not arisen in Australia. The monetary policy transmission process has been 
effective and there remains scope to ease policy further if circumstances require. 
The 400 basis point reduction in the cash rate since last September has reduced the overall 
cost of funds to banks by 340 basis points, after taking into account movements in interest 
rates  in  global  capital  markets.  On  average  banks  have  cut  interest  rates  on  loans  by  the 
same amount – i.e. they have on average fully passed on the fall in their cost of funds to 
borrowers. Interest rates on housing loans have fallen by more, while interest rates on some 
consumer  and  business  loans  have  fallen  by  less.  As  a  result  of  the  reductions  that  have 
occurred, both housing interest rates and business lending rates are at historically low levels. 
In the case of housing, this has produced a very quick response in terms of the pick up in 
loan demand. Housing loan approvals are up 20 per cent since their low point in July. This 
has been concentrated almost entirely among owner occupiers. 
It is not hard to understand why demand for housing loans has responded so quickly. With 
interest rates on housing loans around 5½ per cent, the cash payments involved in servicing 
a housing loan are now not much more than those involved in renting. Combined with the 
First Home Owner Grant, this has attracted a lot of first home buyers into the market. 
Governments are also supporting the economy with increased spending. Perhaps the best 
single  measure  of  this  is  the  change  in  their  fiscal  position.  Across  all  levels  of  Australian 
governments, last financial year there was a fiscal surplus of 1½ per cent of GDP. This year, 
it is estimated there will be a deficit of 2½ per cent of GDP. This turnaround – about 4 per 
cent of GDP – is the largest in the post war period. 
These  measures  will  go  a  long  way  to  offsetting  the  negative  influences  on  the  economy 
coming from abroad,  but the reality is that we  cannot fully insulate ourselves from what is 
happening elsewhere in the world. As such, GDP is likely to fall in 2009. 
Even so, Australia will remain one of the better performing economies in the developed world 
and be well placed to benefit from the renewed global expansion when it comes. 
Household finances and housing 
As I am sure you are all acutely aware, households have experienced a large reduction in 
wealth over the past year or so. Mainly this is the result of the fall in the share market. As 
incomes  have  grown,  we  have  accumulated  more  financial  assets  and  an  increasing 
proportion is held in market-linked investments such as equities and unit trusts. This is the 
natural outcome of financial development and is generally beneficial. It does mean, however, 
that there is more variability in the returns on our investments. 
Many people regard a fall in the share market as an aberration but the reality is that share 
markets produce negative returns every few years. This should be factored into our return 
expectations. If we don’t, we will be over-estimating the long-run rate of return that can be 
achieved on savings. 
It is important that we be realistic in our expectations about returns if we are to achieve our 
financial goals. Assumptions about investment returns have a big impact on decisions about 
how much we need to save out of income, and for how long we need to work, in order to 
accumulate a given amount of money. As a rule of thumb, for every one percentage point 
reduction in the long-run average return on savings, households would need to increase the 
proportion of income saved over their working lives by 3 per cent in order to accumulate a 
given amount of assets. Alternatively they would need to work for an additional 3 years. It is 
interesting that, over the past year, as the share market has fallen, the household saving rate 
has increased substantially and more older workers are either remaining in, or returning to, 
the workforce.  
BIS Review 39/2009 
 3
Even  after  the  large  fall  in  wealth  over  the  past  year,  the  household  sector  is  still  in  a 
relatively  sound  position.  If  we  look  at  household  balance  sheets,  we  see  that,  on  the 
liabilities  side,  households  on  average  have  debt  equal  to  about  one  and  a  half  year’s 
income. On the assets side, they have a property valued about 4 years’ income and financial 
assets equal to 2½ years’ income. 
Let me end with a few words on the housing market. 
This market was fairly subdued in 2008, with prices falling on average by 3 per cent across 
Australia.  Some  states  –  such  as  Western  Australia  which  had  a  late  boom  –  are  now 
experiencing larger falls than average. Prices at the top end of the market have also been 
softer than other segments, no doubt reflecting the deleveraging that is taking place among 
high income households following the global financial crisis. 
Overall, however, the housing market in Australia has held up pretty well compared with that 
in countries such as the US and the UK, where prices have fallen in the order of 20 per cent. 
We continue to believe that the market here will hold up better than overseas. There are a 
number of reasons why this is likely to be so, but perhaps the most important is that we did 
not have the same deterioration in lending standards that occurred elsewhere. By and large, 
the  great  bulk  of  Australians  who  took  out  housing  loans  have  been  able  to  afford  the 
repayments.  Notwithstanding  some  rise  over  the  past  year,  the  90  day  arrears  rate  on 
housing loans is only 0.5 per cent, which is broadly in line with its long run average and well 
below that in countries such as the US and UK. 
In the period ahead, there will be forces pulling the arrears rate in opposite directions. On the 
one hand, as unemployment rises, more households will have difficulty continuing to service 
their housing loans. On the other hand, the very large reduction in interest rates has greatly 
reduced  the  debt  servicing  burden  of  households.  On  an  average-sized  mortgage,  loan 
repayments are now $7,000 a year less than they were six months ago. This is a very large 
reduction, equal to about 8 per cent of average household income. 
The majority of households have chosen not to spend the money that has been freed up. 
Rather, they have maintained high repayments and are therefore moving ahead of schedule 
in  repaying  their  loans.  This  will  give  them  breathing  space  if  they  do  subsequently  find 
themselves in circumstances where their repayments are interrupted. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  sum  up  by  saying  that  the  past  six  months  have  been  a  very  difficult  time  for  the 
world economy. There are some tentative signs of improvement, but in reality it is going to 
take quite some time for the world to recover from the financial shock that has occurred. 
While the Australian economy has also weakened, it has held up better than most during this 
difficult  period,  helped  by  earlier  disciplined  policies  and  prudent  financial  behaviour. 
However, there are limits on how much we can insulate ourselves from what is happening 
abroad, and therefore there are probably still some difficult times ahead. Nonetheless, the 
underpinnings of the Australian economy are sound so we are well placed to benefit from the 
global economic recovery when it comes. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2009
