Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The Spanish economy after the crisis 
Opening address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
“IV Conference on the unique features of Spanish savings banks”/Federación de Usuarios de 
las  Cajas  de  Ahorros  (Federation  of  Savings  Banks  Customers),  Zaragoza,  11  February 
2009. 
 Thank you Mr Chairman, 
The  profound  worldwide  economic  slowdown,  which  in  the  industrialised  countries  has 
already turned into a rapid and sharp recession, is undoubtedly the most serious since the 
1929 Great Depression. In recent months, the collapse of international financial markets has 
been averted only with great difficulty and we don’t yet know what the final consequences of 
the events unfolding will be for the real economy. 
Faced  with  this  situation,  all  efforts  will  inevitably  focus  on  attempting  to  exit  the  crisis. 
Internationally, and within Spain, hitherto inconceivable measures have been adopted, such 
as  unlimited  liquidity  injections  by  central  banks,  extensive  fiscal  stimuli  and  exceptional 
support to the financial system. Naturally enough, governments, politicians, central bankers, 
supervisors  and  academics  are  all  contributing  to  these  tasks.  And  it  is  not  surprising, 
therefore,  that  all  my  speeches  in  recent  months  have  been  to  analyse  the  causes  of  the 
global crisis and to review the various measures to tackle it. 
However, on receiving your much appreciated invitation, I thought I’d take advantage of the 
sense of calm reflection which university fora instil to pause and ponder on what may happen 
to the Spanish economy after the crisis, when the global economy recovers. 
It  is  worth  reflecting  on  the  aftermath  because  the  global  nature  of  the  crisis  is 
"homogenising" the different economies. And by blurring the differences from one economy 
to another, it is hard to discern the different tasks awaiting them. As the crisis left nobody 
unscathed,  not  even  those  countries  which  acted  prudently,  i.e.  those  that  did  not  incur 
excessive debt or whose competitiveness did not worsen, are faring better than those which 
were not so virtuous. But when the crisis ends, differences will re-emerge.  
When a plane taking off from New York almost crashed last month, the health and well-being 
of all the passengers hinged on how the crisis was resolved, without this depending on their 
youth, cholesterol levels, excess weight or the state of their lungs. The drama was the same 
for everybody. Luckily, they all emerged safe and sound from the landing on the Hudson. But 
after that, with the crisis behind, their health and well-being depends once again on the state 
of their organs, diet and exercise, and on taking the right medicine. 
Countries worldwide have entered into a similar negative spiral (a deep slowdown in – and in 
some cases the collapse of – consumption, employment, output, credit, investment...). And 
that might feed the illusion that, once the recession is behind, all countries will recover in the 
same way. But that will not be so. Each country has singular features that will prove pivotal 
when defining the path to follow once the crisis is over. Accordingly, my reflections will focus 
on what distinguishes us from others. 
The  Spanish  experience  shows  that,  from  1985  to  2008,  growth  in  the  economy  was 
outpacing  the  EU  average,  with  the  sole  exception  of  1992  and  1993.  This  spectacular 
growth over the past 23 years has allowed us to draw closer to the welfare levels enjoyed by 
the most prosperous EU countries. But what will happen to the Spanish economy when we 
emerge from the current crisis? Will we witness such satisfactory growth as in the past?  
The reply, as always in economics, is that "it depends". If we do what we have to do, if the 
necessary reforms are made, we will once again grow above the European average. But if 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 1
we do not reform we will probably grow at or below the EU average, with convergence with 
our main economic partners being checked.  
Yet  if  we  have  been  able  so  far  to  advance  without  these  reforms,  is  it  absolutely  vital  to 
adopt them now? Before answering that, let us look at the causes of growth in the Spanish 
economy  in  recent  decades.  Such  high  growth  may  prove  surprising  given  our  economy’s 
shortcomings  or  weaknesses:  a  much  lower  level  of  educational  attainment  than  other 
European  countries,  low  capital  stock,  inferior  technology  and  labour  institutions  which,  as 
we  shall  see,  do  not  generate  the  incentives  needed  to  enhance  individual  and  collective 
efficiency.  Why,  despite  this,  have  we  grown  so  much?  Partly  because  we  made  more 
progress than the other countries in some areas, which has offset our relative shortcomings. 
First, the relative weight of our public sector is much lower than that of the other European 
countries.  Consequently,  the  greater  weight  of  the  private  sector  accounts  for  the  greater 
dynamism of our economy. Next, public spending has been decentralised in a manner akin 
to  Germany  after  World  War  II,  and,  to  date,  that  has  allowed  greater  efficiency  in  the 
allocation  of  spending.  Further,  we  have  also  been  bolder  than  other  countries  in 
privatisation. In recent decades there have been many significant privatisations in practically 
all  productive  sectors,  allowing  us  to  push  ahead  more  than  other  economies  in  infusing 
competition  into  many  goods  and  services  markets.  Unlike  in  other  countries,  privatisation 
has  been  wholesale,  which  is  essential  for  breaking  the  link  between  corporations  and 
governments.  Finally,  up  to  2007  Spain  managed  notable  progress  in  terms  of  balancing 
public finances and reducing public debt. All these aspects might be viewed as some of the 
inherent virtues of the Spanish economy, which account for much of our favourable growth 
differential over the past 20 years. 
What is most surprising is that our economy has been growing despite progressively losing 
external competitiveness. The growth of our prices, unit wage costs and business margins 
has  outpaced  those  of  the  euro  area.  This  has  ultimately  resulted  in  a  sizable  current-
account deficit which, though it may be seen as excessive investment relative to saving, also 
indicates Spain’s insufficient competitiveness, with very poor productivity gains. 
And how has it been possible to grow in the last 23 years despite losing competitiveness? 
Because in addition to the above factors or "inherent virtues”, Spain has had access to other 
possibilities which have also helped it grow. There are two in particular.  
The  first  was  the  resort  to  devaluation.  Though  the  last  devaluation  was  in  1995,  this 
instrument was available until 1999, when Spain entered the euro area. Devaluation allowed 
losses  in  competitiveness  to  be  absorbed  –  without  the  labour  market  being  reformed  or 
corrective measures being taken to enhance productivity – by means of reducing real wages, 
increasing import prices and improving the relative prices of products sold abroad. 
But let's not deceive ourselves. Periodic devaluations, though providing temporary relief that 
allowed  necessary  structural  adjustments  to  be  postponed,  entailed  huge  costs  and  kept 
private  agents  in  a  setting  of  financial  and  exchange-rate  instability  far  from  conducive  to 
sustained growth. 
During our decade in the euro area we have also grown at a higher rate than our partners, 
despite  not  having  the  resort  to  devaluation.  How  has  that  been  possible?  Along  with  the 
effect  of  the  positive  factors  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  should  also  highlight  euro  area 
membership  for  what  it  has  meant  in  terms  of  stability  and  reducing  uncertainty,  and  the 
contribution of immigration, which has added notable flexibility to the Spanish economy. 
Unquestionably, though, a decisive factor in growth from 1999 to 2008 was the extraordinary 
increase in household and corporate debt. In that decade, Spanish domestic demand growth 
was  double  that  of  the  European  Union  because  private  agents'  debt  rose  twofold  in  the 
1999-2007 period. As a proportion of gross disposable income, household debt climbed from 
little more than 60% to 130%, and corporate debt from 270% to almost 600% of the gross 
operating surplus. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2009
freight 
in  services,  railway 
The problem facing us on emerging from the crisis is that although this swift indebtedness 
drove the increase in domestic demand and, therefore, in economic growth in recent years, 
the high level attained will prevent debt from growing in the future at a similar rate to what it 
did  in  the  past.  Moreover,  for  several  years  we  may  well  witness  a  debt  reduction  or 
deleveraging process, meaning its effect on domestic demand will be the opposite of what it 
was in the past, reducing our growth rate. 
The Spanish economy's main problem, then, is that its future looks very different from its past 
since the two possibilities I mentioned – devaluation and increased debt – have disappeared. 
Thus,  even  if  our  economy’s  many  strengths  (a  very  small  public  sector,  privatisation,  low 
public debt, etc.) remain in place and there is no slippage in progress made, Spain will face 
more demanding situations for having forgone these two possibilities. Naturally, were we to 
backtrack on competition, for instance, or were the budget deficit to surge to unsustainable 
levels, our growth would be even more severely impacted, as occurred in the past decade in 
some European countries. 
The only possible means here of recouping the external competitiveness lost following the 
latest upturn is to increase our productivity. And higher productivity, in addition to requiring a 
priority  focus  on  education  and  training,  inevitably  involves  structural  reforms  in  numerous 
fields. As we have limited time, I’ll refer exclusively to the reform of labour institutions, where 
the  Banco  de  España  researchers  have  made  most  valuable  contributions.  Also,  this  is 
surely  the  reform  that  can  most  contribute  to  resolving  the  problem  most  concerning 
Spaniards,  namely  unemployment.  Yet  while  not  mentioning  them  today,  we  should 
remember  there  are  many  other  vital  structural  reforms  needed,  such as  that  of  the  rental 
market,  boosting  competition 
transport,  energy,  public 
administration, etc., and that can also contribute to enhancing productivity and to a return to 
higher growth than the EU average.  
Clearly, inadequate labour institutions generate very harmful effects not only on productivity 
and economic growth, but also on employee welfare. Spaniards need little convincing of the 
problems unemployment poses, problems which assail us even when the business cycle is 
buoyant. In the past year we regrettably posted once again the highest unemployment rate in 
the OECD; and furthermore, the speed at which joblessness in Spain is increasing during the 
current crisis is the fastest among all the developed countries. 
In countries facing a contraction in activity similar to that in Spain, the unemployment rate 
rose only slightly last year (e.g. by 0.2 pp in France), or even fell (Germany). We might argue 
that these countries show much lower increases in the labour force than Spain and that the 
expansion in their construction sectors was not comparable. The problem is that when we 
compare with countries that do have these two characteristics, such as the United States or 
the United Kingdom, Spain's unemployment increase continues to stand out. Specifically, the 
US  unemployment  rate  rose  by  "only"  2.3  pp  in  2008,  somewhat  more  than  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  where  the  increase  from  January  to  October  2008  was  1.4  pp.  These  are  very 
moderate increases when compared with the figure of over 5 pp for Spain in 2008. Evidently, 
the Spanish economy’s labour adjustment mechanisms are not working properly.  
Another harmful effect of an inefficient labour market is that it reduces the room for workers' 
real compensation to improve. In  recent  years, the Spanish economy has had to compete 
abroad  on  the  basis  of  holding  down  its  real  labour  costs,  which  was  imposed  by  the 
economy’s  low  productivity.  This  has  direct  consequences  for  everybody's  welfare, 
particularly  so  for  those  groups  most  adversely  affected  in  terms  of  both  wages  and 
unemployment, namely women and the young. 
These particularities of workers' situation in Spain compared with other developed countries 
–  higher  unemployment,  even  in  the  good  times,  a  swifter  increase  in  unemployment  in 
adjustment  phases,  lower  real  wage  growth,  lower  labour  productivity  growth,  greater 
discrimination against certain groups – match the singularity of our labour institutions when 
compared  with  those  countries.  There  is  a  long  list  of  areas  where  we  differ:  the  practical 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 3
impossibility  of  opting  out  of  collective  bargaining,  the  scant  share  of  compensation  in 
corporate profits, wage indexation mechanisms with no connection to firms' situation, State 
intervention  through  mandatory  authorisations  that  prevent  firms  from  increasing  their 
productivity, etc. But as time presses, I’ll focus on just one of these particularities: the way in 
which we provide for the unemployment contingency.  
Spain  continues  to  adhere  to  unemployment  contingency  arrangements  which,  formerly, 
were similar to those in other European countries, but which have all been reformed in recent 
decades. Under our system, assistance to the unemployed combines a government benefit 
with  the  payment  of  a  one-off  amount  related  to  the  time  the  beneficiary  was  at  a  single 
company. This amount is payable by firms, not the State, and it is occasionally the biggest 
portion  of  the  assistance  to  the  unemployed.  All  these  features  lead  to  numerous 
inefficiencies in the system, which makes for lower productivity and categorical failure in the 
goal of reducing unemployment. 
Under  its  current  design,  unemployment  compensation  is  an  absolute  deterrent  to  labour 
mobility,  since  it  depends  on  workers’  years  of  service  at  the  last  firm  at  which  they  were 
employed. And in today's world the reallocation of workers from one firm to another is crucial 
if  the  economy  is  to  adjust  suitably  to  the  rapid  changes  unfolding  in  demand  and  in 
technologies.  In  that  way,  workers  move  from  firms  in  decline  to  those  pursuing  more 
productive activities. The compensation system in force is not conducive either to the start-up 
or growth of more productive firms. And not only because it deters employers, discouraging 
new hires. Spanish workers themselves ultimately do not accept changing job because even 
though more productive firms  may  offer them substantially better wages, the change does 
not compensate for the fact that any severance payment would be back to zero in their new 
job.  
The fact that unemployment protection largely resides on a compensation package (which is 
colloquially  known  as  firing  costs)  payable  exclusively  by  the  private  sector  also  adds 
numerous  distortions.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  it  discourages  company  start-ups  and 
hiring in general, a matter which, while important, is all the more so now that the inevitable 
and massive reduction in employment in housebuilding needs to be offset by job creation in 
other sectors.  
The Spanish system is inefficient. Yet it would be absurd to ignore the fact that the Spanish 
public  largely  believes  the  current  system  protects  workers.  And  clearly,  if  there  is  no 
widespread  awareness  of  the  harm  the  system  causes,  there  will  be  no  reforms.  It  is 
therefore absolutely vital to study and publicise the reforms other European countries have 
undertaken, choosing those alternatives that allow us to raise our productivity, and thus our 
external  competitiveness,  to  increase  our  per  capita  income  and  quality  of  life,  and  to 
improve the conditions of the most disadvantaged groups.  
In  many  respects  the  current  situation  of  labour  protection  can  be  equated  with  the  trade 
protectionism characterising the Spanish economy until the late 1950s. During that period, 
import  tariffs  and  quotas  were  very  high  in  comparison  with  those  in  other  developed 
countries.  The  belief  until  then  was  that  trade  protectionism  shielded  Spanish  firms  and 
workers, but nothing was further from the truth. The goods sold in Spain were expensive and 
of poor quality, workers' wages were so low that attempting to hold down two jobs was the 
norm and the level of per capita income even fell relative to that of our trading partners.  
The  situation  changed  radically  with  the  opening  up  of  the  Spanish  economy,  when  we 
began to resemble other developed countries. Indeed, this process, which started with the 
1959  Stabilisation  Plan  and  culminated  in  accession  to  the  European  Union  in  1985,  has 
seen Spain successfully converge on European standards of living. The opening up of the 
economy did not only not lead to the disappearance of industry and agriculture; it also raised 
Spaniards' standard of living significantly.  
In short, what was apparently a singular system protecting us was leading us down the road 
to disaster. It was not until an acute crisis hit us hard at the end of the 1950s that we realised 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2009
that what distinguished us from other countries and what we thought was protecting us was 
actually achieving the opposite. 
It  is  now  precisely  in  Spain,  where  employment  protection  purports  to  be  in  good  health 
thanks to the high unemployment severance packages on top of government benefits, where 
labour  shedding  in  the  face  of  the  current  economic  crisis  is  proving  fiercer  than  in  other 
countries.  For  this  reason  we  should  study  the  experience,  for  example,  of  Austria  and 
Denmark,  whose  labour  market  reforms  can  offer  us  some  ideas  for  reform  at  home.  In 
Denmark,  where  the  unemployment  rate  is  4.1%,  the  authorities  opted  to  improve  regular 
benefit  payments  and  to  practically  eliminate  redundancy  payments.  In  Austria,  where  the 
unemployment rate is 3.8%, firms set up an individual fund for each worker which becomes 
available if workers loses their job, acting as a top-up to government unemployment benefits. 
When  workers  find  employment  in  another  firm,  the  unused  portion  of  the  fund  goes  with 
them  and  starts  growing  once  again  with  the  new  firm’s  contributions.  At  the  end  of  their 
working life, the funds available are an additional source of retirement income.  
The virtue of these systems is that they do not deter worker mobility. This is so in Austria 
because, by not forgoing their "established rights", it is workers themselves who manage the 
accumulated resources during periods in which they are unemployed. Also, this arrangement 
offers protection to all workers, even those whose previous terms of employment have been 
short-lived. In Denmark, the choice was of a system which firmly supports the unemployed 
(with substantial unemployment subsidies and intensive training programmes) in a setting in 
which, however, firing costs are very low. 
Just as 50 years ago the external sector crisis obliged Spain to change its trade protection 
policy,  the  current,  serious  unemployment  crisis  should  lead  us  to  examine  what  we  can 
change  in  our  labour  market,  given  what  other  countries  have  done  with  very  favourable 
results.  Admittedly,  this  is  nothing  new,  since  the  Banco  de  España  has  reiterated  in  its 
annual reports, at least in the past 10 years, the need for such reform. What is new is that 
reform has now become absolutely vital; otherwise, when we emerge from the current crisis, 
and in the absence of the instruments that were used in the past, we will be liable to grow far 
below what we did in previous decades.  
The reform of labour institutions is a pressing task, since the short-run effects on hiring are 
absolutely necessary in the current circumstances. But we require action on another front, 
even  though  the  effects  are  longer-term.  I  refer  to  education.  Undoubtedly,  progress  in 
education  is  Spain's  most  important  outstanding  task  in  respect  of  economic  growth, 
enhanced  productivity, 
low 
unemployment. True, Spain has advanced in some fields here, such as university education 
and business schools. But we continue to take up the rear as regards the average quality of 
our citizens’ educational attainment, with the serious consequences this entails.  
It is well known that countries with a better educated population are characterised by having 
higher wages, lower unemployment rates and a higher labour market participation rate. For 
example, both in Denmark and in the United Kingdom, more than two-thirds of the population 
have a post-compulsory education qualification, as against only 50% in the case of Spain. In 
both countries, the average worker has 30% higher spending power than Spanish workers, 
and their unemployment rates in 2007 were 3% and 5%, respectively, less than half the level 
in Spain. 
This  relationship  between  training  and  wages  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  more  highly 
educated workers are more efficient, and therefore obtain higher wages, and by the fact that 
employers always prefer to fire the least productive workers. In fact, the unemployment rate 
in Spain for persons with only a primary education has increased in 2008 by almost 8 pp, as 
against 5 pp in the case of those with a secondary education and only 2 pp in that of persons 
with a further education. The data also show that not only are the largest increases in the 
unemployment rate among groups with lower levels of education, but that these groups also 
have the highest unemployment rates.  
income  distribution  and  also 
the  attainment  of 
fairer 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 5
Yet we should not only strive to improve the educational attainment of our workers before 
they start working. We should also promote training within the firm. If we managed to make 
our labour market institutions more like those of other developed countries, we would also do 
away  with  labour  market  arrangements  that  hinder  workplace  training  and  do  not  give 
employers any incentive to improve their firms’ human capital.  
We  urgently  need  a  debate  between  all  political,  economic  and  social  agents  to  convince 
them of the need for reforms. The government and the parties who support it, the opposition 
parties,  trade  unions,  employers,  academics,  researchers  and  the  media  should  all 
participate. And we should not forget those who the reforms would benefit most: unemployed 
workers  and  employers  who  still  do  not  exist,  but  who  would  be  able  to  if  there  were  a 
significant structural change in labour market institutions.  
Without sufficient social acceptance this debate will obviously not even be joined, so it is very 
important to clearly underline the objectives pursued which I’ve repeated ad nauseam in this 
speech, but which I shall attempt to express again in a different way so as not to tire you. We 
should all agree that the best protection against unemployment is not that which concerns 
itself with subsidising the unemployed, but that which ensures that the majority do not lose 
their job. We should admit that it is useful to allow employers to improve their productivity 
because that way we will see higher real wage growth. And, finally, we should let workers 
take  the  opportunity  to  switch  to  better-paid  jobs  without  losing  a  substantial  part  of  their 
protection in the event that they lose such jobs.  
You  will  have  realised  that  my  approach  to  the  debate  on  labour  market  reform  is  far 
removed from that of those who confine it to the question of whether or not to lower dismissal 
costs. In my view it is a mistake to debate cheaper firing alone, and I believe that we can only 
make  headway  if  we  focus  on  finding  formulae  that  allow  us  to  increase  productivity,  to 
reduce the numbers of unemployed and to improve workers' wages. 
The fact that Spain is today more advanced than other European countries in many areas 
that I mentioned at the start of my speech should not let us forget that there are still some 
fields  in  which  we  can  learn  from  others.  It  is  precisely  this  attitude  of  having  learnt  from 
others, and made the consequent reforms, which largely explains the positive performance of 
the Spanish economy in recent decades. In my opinion, the time has come to do the same 
(to  learn  and  to  reform)  with  labour  market  institutions  which,  as  systematically  stated  by 
international organisations, are the major structural difference remaining between us and the 
more developed countries. 
We must acknowledge that the task is not an easy one. Apart from convincing people about 
their necessity, something historians and economists can help do, the skills of many others 
will be needed to design and implement the reforms. One thorny issue is how to set some 
changes in motion immediately and, at the same time, be sensitive to what may be seen as 
an  alteration  of  established  rights.  Political  acuity  is  crucial  to  resolve  these  problems,  as 
indeed it is also to make the interests of the different groups of workers compatible with each 
other. But it should also reassure us to know that the reform toolbox is full of possibilities: 
calendars, compensation, incentives, etc. Lawyers also have an important job to do, since 
the problem with all structural reforms is that they alter the status quo and, accordingly, it is 
essential to find legal formulae that circumvent the obstacles that may arise in their approval 
and implementation. 
The difficulties that may arise, not only when reforming but also in opening the debate, may 
lead some to ask why, without reforms and, in particular, without modifying our labour market 
institutions, Spain won’t be able to grow as in the past. From what I’ve said already you can 
imagine my reply. It is possible that Spain may be able to grow as in the past, but it is highly 
unlikely. And I say that it is possible solely because, following the general failure of most of 
the forecasts that have been made during the current crisis, we should all be more humble 
when postulating about the future. Honestly, though, it is more difficult to imagine today how, 
without reforms, the Spanish economy can perform as favourably in the future as it has done 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2009
in the last few decades. Moreover, what do we gain by refusing to learn from others about 
what  can  reduce  the  rate  of  unemployment  and  raise  labour  productivity  and  real  wages? 
Even  if  our  economy  can  grow  again  as  it  has  in  the  past,  with  low  productivity  and  with 
higher  unemployment  and  lower  wages  than  our  neighbours,  that  would  not  seem  to  be 
preferable to the strategies for growth that they apply. 
Allow me one final consideration on an argument occasionally deployed, when there are no 
other  arguments  left,  for  not  adopting  structural  measures.  These  reforms,  it  is  said,  may 
work  very  well,  but  they  should  be  postponed  until  later  because  they  are  not  useful  for 
exiting the current crisis. Firstly, some of these reforms, such as those conducive to hiring, 
would  clearly  have  immediate  effects  in  resolving  the  main  problem  of  the  current  crisis, 
namely  unemployment.  Yet  while  it  is  true  that  other  structural  reforms  would  not  have 
immediate direct effects but would yield future results, the decisions economic agents take 
today depend greatly on how they see the future. What has brought decisions to consume 
and invest today to a grinding halt is mistrust of the future; accordingly, if confidence about 
the future is restored, that would have highly beneficial effects not only in the medium run but 
now, in the present.  
In sum, tomorrow we'll broach again the financial and real-sector crisis facing us. And how to 
exit it. We’ll be reflecting on how to break the vicious circles of the lack of confidence. We'll 
discuss  how  it  is  naive  to  believe  these  vicious  circles  can  be  broken  only  in  one  place, 
concluding that what we need is a recovery in the confidence of all economic agents. These 
measures cannot be taken only at the national level; the crisis is a global one and attempts 
should be made to coordinate action to the full worldwide. That makes very strong demands 
on all multilateral fora and institutions, governments, politicians, central bankers, supervisors 
and  all  those  with  responsibilities  in  the  matter.  We  must  all  continue  doing  all  we  can  to 
emerge from the current situation. 
Today,  however,  I  wanted  to  pause  and  look  beyond  the  crisis.  For  one  thing,  we  do  not 
know how deep and long it may be. But what is certain is that this crisis will end. We are 
certain we will finally emerge from it. This is not wishful thinking, but an empirical regularity. 
The economy has worked this way at least since the time Joseph interpreted the Pharaoh's 
dream about lean and fat cows. 
I  wanted  to  focus  today  on  the  future  of  the  Spanish  economy  because  the  essentially 
macroeconomic dimension of the current crisis makes us forget certain things: that our main 
problems are structural; that our chief task is to improve and boost productivity; that we ought 
to seize the moment to reform our regulations and institutions; and because whatever we do 
to improve productivity does not run counter to exiting the crisis but, quite on the contrary, 
may help us emerge more rapidly from it. 
To conclude, let me reiterate what I said earlier. If I’ve talked of only one area of structural 
reform,  namely  labour  reform,  it  is  because  I  think  it  is  the  most  important  one  for  re-
launching  corporate  start-ups  and  reducing  unemployment.  But  is  it  not  the  only  area  of 
reform, and nor are others less necessary. Giving a greater degree of legal security to rental 
contracts, and liberalising the related terms, is absolutely necessary for reducing rental costs 
and  for  making  a  smoother  real  estate  adjustment,  without  a  collapse  of  the  value  of  the 
wealth  in  which  Spaniards  have  their  assets  concentrated.  Re-launching  privatisation, 
liberalisation  and  the  boosting  of  competition  in  numerous  sectors  is  vital  because,  by 
reducing  unwarranted  business  margins,  workers'  real  wages  can  be  increased  without 
harming competitiveness. And thus we could say for many more areas of reform. But we'd 
need many more speeches to talk about this. And fear not, I won't be making them today. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 7
