Anselmo L S Teng: Conference on human resources issues (opening 
remarks) 
Welcome remarks by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, 
on behalf of Mr Francis Tam, Secretary for Economy and Finance of the MSAR, at the 12th 
Conference  of  Central  Banks  of  Portuguese  Speaking  Territories  on  Human  Resources, 
Macao, 14 September 2009.  
 Dear Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning!  
On behalf of the Macao Special Administrative Region, I would like to convey our warm and 
heartfelt thanks to all delegates and guests who have come a long way from Portugal, Brazil, 
Angola, Mozambique, São Tomé e Principé, East Timor and Guinea-Bissau to Macao where 
the East and the West meet.  
I  personally  feel  that  this  conference  has  been  convened  at  an  opportune  moment.  The 
recent financial tsunami started exactly one year ago. Crumbling of the international financial 
system was averted through the strenuous and concerted efforts of central banks round the 
world. Through quantitative easing and generous fiscal policy, the world economy appears to 
have been stabilized, particularly the emerging markets. As we all know, human resources is 
an  important  pillar  in  supporting  a  stable  economy.  I  am  sure  that  this  conference  will 
contribute towards such direction.  
Macao has not been immune to the devastating financial crisis. GDP contracted 7.6% in the 
4th quarter of 2008 but growth rate for 2008 was a positive 13.2%. The first half year of 2009 
saw a decrease of 12.8%. However, due to the spillover effect of the huge stimulus package 
of China, our economy has become stabilized in the second quarter. Unemployment rate has 
been kept to an enviable 3.7%. The impetus for our economy comes mainly from services, 
particularly the tourism services sector.  
The China economy ranked 3rd in the world in 2008. The Portuguese speaking countries are 
a  market  of  more  than  200  million  consumers  and  are  in  possession  of  abundant  natural 
resources.  They  need  consumer  goods  of  reasonable  price  and  capital  for  development. 
China and the Portuguese speaking countries thus make a good match economically.  
Due to its historical heritage and strong connection with Portugal, Macao has developed as a 
service platform for economic and commercial cooperation between China and Portuguese 
speaking  countries.  The  first  Economic  and  Commercial  Cooperation  Forum  of  China  and 
Portuguese Speaking Countries was held in Macao in 2003. In 2006, a ministerial meeting of 
the Forum provided a clear outline for the purpose. The standing secretariat for the Forum 
has  been  domiciled  in  Macao  to  carry  out  every  endeavour  to  fulfil  the  objectives  of  the 
Forum.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  recent  worldwide  recession  has  been  caused  by  the  financial 
sectors of developed economies. It is therefore imperative that errors which have triggered 
this  financial  crisis  should  be  rectified  so  that  such  fallout  will  not  repeat  again.  As  we  all 
know, human assets are the backbone of a financial institution. A stable financial system free 
of any systemic risk should comprise responsible and ethical institutions which in turn should 
be staffed by professionally competent and ethically conscious practitioners. It is therefore a 
timely event to hold a conference with such a theme which will no doubt impart useful and 
practical  knowledge  to  all  participants.  Through  discussions  and  interactions,  we  shall 
emerge  with  fresh  ideas  and  visionary  thinking  conducive  to  maintaining  a  stable  financial 
system. Macao feels honoured to host such a conference for Central Banks of Portuguese 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 1
speaking territories. In view of the background I have mentioned above, I hope Macao will 
continue  to  host  similar  conferences,  meetings  and  seminars  which  are  in  line  with  the 
service platform function of Macao in economic and commercial cooperation between China 
and Portuguese speaking countries.  
Last  but  not  the  least,  I  do  hope  our  guests  from  afar  will,  after  the  exhausting  meeting, 
squeeze out some time to walk around Macao to appreciate the harmony arising from a mix 
of nostalgia, modernity, east and west cultures.  
Finally, I wish you a very happy stay in Macao and hope you will all return home with a good 
impression of the Macao Special Administrative Region.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2009
