Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr:  BSP  and  SSS  –  moving  towards  a  common 
vision 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the SSS anniversary celebration, Quezon City, 1 September 
2009. 
 Social  Security  Commission  Chairman  Thelmo  Cunanan,  SSS  President  and  CEO  Sec. 
Romulo Neri, Former SSS President and CEO Corazon de la Paz-Bernardo, Distinguished 
Members of the Social Security Commission, past and present, COA  Chairman Rey Villar, 
other officers and staff of SSS, fellow workers in government, special guests, members of the 
press, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  part  of  the  52nd  anniversary  celebration  of  the  SSS,  the  Philippine 
institution that has 28 million members or nearly one-third of our country’s population!  
Indeed, the SSS is one of the most important institutions in our country: it is the institution 
that has been providing support and protection to millions of its members who face financial 
challenges from sickness, disability, death, maternity, and other contingencies for 52 years 
now.  
This tells us that SSS has been faithful in fulfilling its responsibilities to its members and that, 
in turn, its members continue to trust SSS with their hard-earned money. For this, the men 
and  women  of  the  SSS,  past  and  present,  deserve  our  appreciation  and  a  long-round  of 
applause!  Let  us  also  give  a  big  hand  to  all  the  Balikat  ng  Bayan  awardees  who  are  the 
exceptional bank partners and top employers that help the SSS achieve its objectives and 
provide good service to its members. Palakpakan din po natin sila!  
Ladies and gentlemen, the continuing stability and strength of the SSS is important not only 
for its members and employees but also for the economy as a whole.  
Among others, each time it extends benefits to its members, the SSS, in effect, reminds them 
of the value of regularly setting aside part of one’s income for the rainy days.  
This  is  important  as  it  is  the  accumulated  savings  of  our  people  that  enable  our  banks  to 
sustain lending for economic activities that generate and keep jobs. In turn, the new additions 
to the labor force keep on expanding the membership base of the SSS. 
Banks  are  also  important  conduits  for  the  collection  of  SSS  premiums  as  well  as  for  the 
distribution of benefits to its members. Clearly, there is synergy between the SSS and our 
banking system.  
Synergy  also  exists  between  the  SSS  and  the  capital  market.  From  the  accumulated 
contributions of its members as well as earnings derived from its funds management, SSS 
has become a major market player. I understand that the investment portfolio of SSS as of 
the first quarter of this year had reached P220 billion. In addition, it has outstanding housing 
and salary loans of about P3 billion to its members as of March 2009. These are investments 
that have multiplier effects on the economy.  
The  SSS  is  also  responsible  for  the  entry  of  many  new  individual  investors  in  the  stock 
market when it extended loans to its members for investments in listed stocks.  
Moving forward, the state of the economy, employment, the capital markets and the banking 
system are important factors for the SSS in planning for its future. 
I will therefore give a brief overview of how these are developing.  
BIS Review 102/2009 
 1
Recent global developments 
Let me start with the global economy that is still grappling with the financial turmoil that has 
triggered the most serious economic downturn since the 1930’s. In the US and in Europe, in 
particular,  this  has  been  a  period  of  significant  external  shocks,  financial  stress,  and,  for 
some, massive loss of wealth and investments.  
Fortunately,  coordinated  response  among  governments  and  central  banks  to  address  the 
global financial crisis and the economic recession has been producing positive results. In its 
latest  assessment,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  noted  that  the  world  economy  is 
stabilizing and that there are clear signs that global growth prospects are reviving.  
However, the improvements are far from uniform across markets and countries. Furthermore, 
the  recovery  is  likely  to  be  sluggish,  in  part  because  while  global  financial  markets  are 
improving,  it  is  still  not  back  to  normal.  Thus,  global  economic  recovery  will  likely  remain 
subdued or muted for some time.  
For Asia, there is a growing consensus that growth is likely to solidify going forward. Against 
this global backdrop, how is the Philippine economy doing?  
Philippine experience: sustained resiliency 
In the case of the Philippines, the picture is of sustained resiliency. Compared to other Asian 
countries, the economic slowdown in the Philippines has been relatively moderate. In fact, 
while neighboring countries slipped into recession, our economy continued to grow, although 
at  a  markedly  slower  pace:  0.6  percent  in  the  first  quarter  this  year  to  1.5  percent  in  the 
second quarter.  
At  the  same  time,  inflation  continued  to  ease.  From  an  average  of  9.3%  in  2008,  inflation 
slowed to 7.1% in January 2009 and declined further to 0.2 percent in July 2009, as prices 
started  to  normalize  from  the  spikes  experienced  in  the  previous  year.  Demand  remains 
steady and is expected to pick up. Inflation is seen to stay within its target range of 2.5 to 4.5 
percent in 2009 and in 2010 generally in line with the 3.5 to 5.5 percent target.  
The continuing benign inflation outlook has allowed the BSP to cut its policy rates by a total 
of 200 basis points since December 2008. These rate reductions are aimed at bringing down 
the cost of borrowing and reducing the financial burdens on firms and households. Further, 
lower  policy  rates  enhance  business  and  consumer  confidence  that  should  sustain  the 
momentum for economic expansion.  
The BSP is happy to know therefore that the SSS has been lowering its interest rates as well. 
For  instance,  I  have  been  informed  that  interest  rates  for  your  business  and  social  loan 
programs were reduced last July by 0.5% to 1%.  
In addition to the cuts in its policy rates, the BSP also moved to ensure sufficient liquidity in 
the  banking  system.  These  liquidity  enhancing  measures  include  the  reduction  in  bank 
reserve requirements by two percentage points and an increase in our peso rediscounting 
budget from P20 billion to P60 billion. This helped sustain bank lending at double-digit growth 
rates.  
At  the  same  time,  continued  reforms  implemented  as  lessons  learned  from  the  past  have 
kept the Philippine banking sector stable through the ongoing financial turmoil. These include 
capitalization build-up to levels above international standards, asset clean-up that saw non-
performing  loans  improve  to  low  single-digit  figures,  and  better  risk-management  practices 
particularly credit and liquidity risks.  
Overall, the consolidated asset base of Philippine banks continues to expand, supported by 
sustained growth in deposits. Our banking system will therefore remain as a safe and stable 
partner of the SSS in reaching out to its members across the Philippines.  
2 
 BIS Review 102/2009
The country’s external payments position also remains a fundamental source of strength to 
the economy. One important lesson learned from the 1997 Asian financial crisis is the value 
of  building  up  our  international  reserves  for  self  insurance. As  of  end-July  2009,  reserves 
have  risen  to  a  record  high  level  of  US$40.0  billion,  enough  to  pay  for  seven  months  of 
imports;  this  is  more  than  double  the  global  standard  of  3  months.  This  strong  external 
position – supported by robust remittances of overseas Filipinos as well as higher receipts 
from business process outsourcing -- makes the Philippine economy less vulnerable to the 
moods and swings of the international financial markets.  
The financial markets have also stabilized. Credit spreads have narrowed compared to levels 
at  the  height  of  the  financial  turmoil;  the  peso  continues  to  be  broadly  stable;  and  foreign 
buying has boosted the stock market.  
Investor confidence has been enhanced further by Moody’s upgrade of the country’s outlook 
from “stable” to “positive”.  
BSP’s policy actions 
Going  forward,  the  BSP’s  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain  appropriately  calibrated  to 
support domestic economic activity, but will always be mindful of emerging risks to inflation.  
The  BSP  will  also  pursue  the  banking  reform  agenda  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system 
remains sound and globally competitive. Key financial and banking sector reforms that would 
lead  to  greater  efficiency,  more  effective  risk  management,  stronger  capitalization,  and 
enhanced corporate governance standards in the banking system will be sustained.  
We are also working for the passage of amendments to the BSP Charter to strengthen BSP’s 
ability  to  ensure  stable  prices  and  a  sound  banking  system  and  financial  stability  in  the 
country.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  credibility  of  institutions  is  anchored  on  their  commitment  and 
ability to pursue their mandate and objectives.  
For  the  SSS  and  the  BSP,  the  convergence  of  some  of  our  objectives  provides  room  for 
collaboration. Financial education is one such area.  
The  BSP  is  actively  involved  in  promoting  lessons  in  saving,  money  management,  and 
investments  to  help  more  Filipinos  benefit  from  opportunities  development  brings  and  to 
protect  them  from  getting  victimized  by  scams.  Equally  important,  having  more  financially-
educated Filipinos make for a stronger and more stable banking system, an objective shared 
by both the BSP and the SSS.  
The  ability  of  the  SSS  to  reach  out  to  millions  of  its  members  makes  it  a  vital  partner  for 
financial education. I hope therefore that we can explore areas for cooperation in expanding 
the reach of our financial education program. This will provide added support for the efforts of 
the SSS to improve the quality of life of its members.  
And since banks remain the principal channel of the SSS for its premium collections, pension 
disbursements and other financial transactions, the BSP’s efforts to continuously strengthen 
our banking system will benefit the SSS and its members as well.  
In addition, the BSP’s initiatives to help develop and deepen the domestic capital market will 
help provide SSS with wider opportunities for investment diversification.  
Finally,  the  BSP’s  commitment  to  price  stability  will  be  key  in  preserving  the  purchasing 
power of pensioners and other SSS stakeholders. 
We look forward therefore to closer collaboration between the SSS and the BSP.  
I also wish the SSS and its other stakeholders a successful partnership that will continue to 
bring timely and meaningful benefits to its members.  
BIS Review 102/2009 
 3
Once again, congratulations to the men and women of the SSS on its 52nd anniversary and 
its continued success in providing social security for 28 million Filipinos. Mabuhay ang SSS! 
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2009
