Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenya’s Ksh.18.5 billion infrastructure bond 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
Launch of the Ksh 18.5 billion Infrastructure Bond Issue, Nairobi, 28 January 2009. 
 Background 
1.0.  
Since 2001, the Government pursued a deliberate policy action to restructure domestic debt, 
with  a  view  to  developing  a  vibrant  bond  market  for  generating  long  term  finance.  The 
success in lengthening the maturity profile of debt instrument has been phenomenon. 
Several measures were instituted to facilitate development of a robust bond market 
(a) 
In  2003,  the  government  lowered  the  cash  ratio  for  commercial  banks  to  release 
liquidity held with a view to reducing interest rates. 
The  Government  also  streamlined  its  domestic  Borrowing  Cash  Plan  in  favour  of 
bonds. As a result, the volume of Treasury bonds rose from Ksh.80 billion in June 
2001 to Ksh.318 billion by end December 2008. The Proportion of long term debt to 
total domestic debt was reversed from 70:30 and now stands on average at 70:30. 
(b) 
But  what  is  needed  now  are  bonds  specific  to  projects  of  a  developmental  nature. 
Infrastructure  financing  is  one  such  target.  The  government  organized  the  first  ever 
Infrastructure  Bond  Conference  on  October  27-28,  2008  at  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary 
Studies.  The  ambition  was  to  launch  a  series  of  infrastructural  bonds  to  finance  targeted 
projects and emulate other countries like: South Africa, Ghana, Botswana, Nigeria, Malaysia, 
and Singapore, among others have used capital markets to finance infrastructure projects. It 
is against this background that the government is launching this first infrastructure bond as a 
starting point. 
Projects/sectors to be funded 
2.0.  
Kenya aspires to be firmly interconnected through sophisticated network of roads, railways, 
ports, airports, and also provide water and sanitation facilities, and telecommunications as a 
key  pillar  of  economic  development  in  the  Vision  2030  blueprint.  But  the  challenge  is  the 
huge capital outlay required, leading to the initiative we are starting today. This recognition of 
infrastructure provision has been recognized as an inhibition in competitive production due to 
heavy transaction costs. 
The  targeted  projects  are  well  documented  in  the  prospectus.  We  may  in  future  allow  a 
monitoring process for these projects to completion. 
The features of this infrastructure bond 
3.0.  
Given  the  long  term  nature  of  the  projects,  the  infrastructure  bond  will  be  of  12  years  to 
maturity with face value of Ksh.18.5bn. This issue is meant to create impact to the market. 
However, the infrastructure bond will be redeemed partially in 2015, 2017 and 2021 as an 
attractive feature for medium term investors who may wish to recoup investment back before 
expiry of the life of the bond. It will also help Treasury at redemption given the huge amount 
involved. 
A number of incentives have been given to make the issue attractive and successful. They 
include;  exemption  from  withholding  tax  on  interest  income,  we  have  revised  agency 
commission upwards, the bond will qualify for statutory liquidity requirements; the bond will 
be  listed  for  trading  at  the  Nairobi  Stock  Exchange,  the  holders  can  use  it  as  collateral  to 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
acquire loans from banks and banks can pledge it as collateral for repos. The infrastructure 
bond also gives attractive coupon rate of 12.5% p.a. The minimum placement amount will be 
Kshs.100,000.00 while any additional amounts will be in multiples of Kshs.50,000.00. 
The  bond  will  be  issued  under  the  provisions  of  the  Internal  Loans  Act  Cap  420  and  the 
Capital Markets Authority Act Cap 485A. 
This pioneer infrastructure bond is expected to lay ground for government agencies to issue 
their  own  specific  infrastructure  bonds.  Moreover,  future  infrastructure  bonds  will  be 
structured alongside the balance sheets of the issuer where stream of earnings from funded 
projects  will  be  used  to  service  the  bonds.  Such  bonds  will  be  issued  strictly  under  the 
Capital Markets Authority’s Asset Backed Securities regulations. 
Honorable  Minister,  Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  my  hope  and  prayer 
that  this  Infrastructure  Bond  will  be  attractive  and  be  fully  subscribed  to  finance  our 
infrastructure – a necessary condition for our economic development. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
