Tarisa Watanagase: Aspects of optimal supervisory arrangements 
Remarks  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  SEACEN 
Governors’ Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 6 February 2009. 
 Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  background  paper  provides  a  good  summary  of  issues  related  to 
the  choice  of  optimal  supervisory  arrangements.  It  is  generally  accepted  that  integrated 
model of supervision may have inherent synergies, economy of scale and scope, very little or 
no  regulatory  arbitrage  and  the  ability  to  identify  problems  sooner.  However,  its  possible 
weaknesses are the blurring of focuses and a tendency to compromise multiple objectives. 
On  the  other  hand,  separate  supervisors  have  been  credited  with  being  more  focused  on 
their mandates, but of course the biggest concern is about supervisory coordination, the lack 
of which can lead to regulatory arbitrage, making supervision ineffective. 
It is also generally accepted that no one model is better or more optimal than the other. It all 
depends  on  the  context  of  each  country,  including  its  supervisory  capacity  and  resources, 
and details in operational arrangements. 
Thailand can certainly agree to such a conclusion. In our case, the Bank of Thailand (BOT) 
supervises the banking sector, which is the core of the financial sector. The Securities and 
Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  supervises  market  conduct,  the  Insurance  Commission 
supervises the insurance companies. This model has worked well so far. By law, the BOT 
chairs  the  Financial  Institutions  Policy  Committee,  whose  members  include  the  Secretary 
General of the SEC and the Insurance Commissioner, that meets on a monthly basis. The 
forum provides the opportunities for policy dialogues, exchange of views and concerns, and 
information updates, among other things. This is the major operational arrangement that we 
have  put  in  place  to  make  the  separate  authorities  model  work  for  us.  No  doubt  other 
operational arrangements can be put in place to make the integrated model work as well. 
Having said that, let me add another dimension to the issue of supervisory arrangement – 
one  that  is  related  to  central  bank’s  other  key  function,  namely,  monetary  policy.  I  believe 
that  supervisory  policy  and  monetary  policy  can  be  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  they  are 
complementary and supportive to each other. I also believe that the often-cited conflicts of 
interest  between  the  two  roles,  if  performed  by  the  same  institution,  may  have  been 
overstated  somewhat.  If  there  are  policy  conflicts,  these  conflicts  will  have  to  be  resolved 
regardless  of  who  is  in  charge  of  supervision.  Then,  would  it  not  be  more  efficient  if  the 
conflicts  could  be  internalized  and  resolved  within  an  institution?  In  fact,  many  possible 
mechanisms  exist  to  help  ensure  full  accountability  for  each  role,  thereby  minimizing 
potential  conflicts  while  getting  synergies  from  having  the  two  roles  under  one  roof.  The 
arrangement we use In Thailand, as I alluded to earlier, is the establishment of two separate 
policy  boards  that  include  outside  experts.  The  linking  pin  is  membership  in  both  policy 
boards by central bank’s senior management,  which makes it possible for information and 
knowledge  in  one  area  to  be  usefully  employed  in  performing  the  other,  without 
compromising the mandate of each policy board. 
For  example,  detailed  supervisory  information  about  banks’  changing  risk  appetite  and 
exposure to different economic sectors and markets – as well as how these risks are being 
managed – can provide useful early warnings about the health of the economy and potential 
systemic  problems  down  the  road.  This  can  be  a  very  important  input  for  monetary  policy 
board. On the other hand, central bank’s oversight of monetary policy and economic stability 
can  strengthen  and  provide  context  to  its  supervisory  responsibilities,  for  example,  in 
identifying  potential  macro  factors  that  may  affect  the  health  of  financial  institutions. 
Decisions about the stance and timing of prudential and supervisory policies in general can 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 1
also be more appropriately made with the full knowledge of macroeconomic conditions and 
monetary policy. 
As can be seen, the two policies are essential to each other and hence it is useful or even 
desirable,  in  my  opinion,  for  central  banks  to  supervise  at  least  the  core  financial  sector, 
whether under a separate or integrated supervision model. This is most evident in times of 
systemic crisis where central banks’ last-resort lending is likely to be called upon and prompt 
decision is vital. Central banks that also supervise core financial institutions would have the 
clear  benefits  of  immediate  access  to  vital  information  and  expert  assessment  from 
supervisory  staff  about  the  health  of  individual  institutions  and  their  systemic  implications. 
This could greatly help reduce the likelihood of any unnecessary delay or even misinformed 
decision that might hamper efforts to stem a financial crisis. 
For emerging market economies, the case for central banks to supervise the core financial 
institutions may be even stronger. This is because, financial markets in these countries are 
typically not well developed enough to serve as an efficient channel for the transmission of 
monetary  policy.  Market  interest  rates  and  even  commercial  banks’  prime  rates  react  only 
sluggishly to changes in central bank’s policy rate, and often with a long time lag. In these 
circumstances,  the  traditional  tool  of  monetary  policy  alone  is  unlikely  to  be  enough  to 
maintain  economic  and  financial  stability.  Since  in  most  emerging  market  economies, 
commercial banks are by far the most dominant players in the financial system, central banks 
with supervisory responsibilities could and should make use of targeted prudential policy to 
tackle financial imbalances and excessive asset price movements, both of which lie at the 
heart of all financial crises. 
This  was  what  we  did  in  2003  to  successfully  contain  incipient  speculative  bubbles  in  the 
property sector by imposing a ceiling on banks’ loan-to-value ratio of high-end housing loans. 
In the same vein, in order to contain household debt at prudent levels to prevent financial 
imbalances,  a  maximum  credit-to-income  ratio  was  imposed  on  credit  card  and  personal 
loans. 
Let me now turn to the current financial crisis and discuss some lessons that are relevant to 
the issue of supervisory arrangement. If we look at the wide range of counties afflicted by the 
current turmoil, we immediately notice that financial sector problems happened in countries 
with  either  supervisory  model.  Notably,  the  US  is  well-known  for  its  multiple  agencies, 
whereas the UK has an integrated one. Yet both countries are currently faced with similar 
financial  sector  problems.  One  cannot  help  but  think  that  there  must  be  certain  common 
supervisory weaknesses that led to the crisis, regardless of the supervisory arrangements. 
So  perhaps  the  key  question  is  not  about  the  institutional  form  but  rather  about  how  to 
strength the regulatory framework to ensure financial stability. 
Of course, this is not an easy task, given the scale and the complexity of the problems that 
we  are  in  right  now.  Several  committees  and  working  groups  of  various  organizations, 
including  the  BIS,  are  working  on  a  number  of  issues  that  have  been  identified  as 
contributing to the crisis, such as the procyclical nature of supervisory and accounting rules 
and the inadequate focus on liquidity risk. I do not know whether there are efforts to try to 
identify common weaknesses of different institutional setup of supervision. But no doubt this 
is an area that more work will be needed. 
To me, both types of institutional setup may have one important common weakness, that is, 
there  does  not  seem  to  be  the  notion  of  a  lead  supervisor  in  either  model.  Allow  me  to 
elaborate on this point. 
In  the  case  of  separate  authorities,  it  would  be  normal  for  each  authority  to  assume  that 
every authority is doing its job according to its mandate. Therefore, one would tend to focus 
only on its own mandate. This can be a problem if some authorities fail to do a proper job, 
others may not be able to take note. Worse still, if there are supervisory gaps, the chance of 
any  one  authority  identifying  potential  adverse  impact  from  areas  outside  of  one’s  own 
mandate is even smaller. Take the US as an example, the authorities and investors did not 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2009
realize that credit rating agencies were not doing an adequate job in their rating of complex 
structured  products.  If  there  were  a  lead  supervisor,  would  the  whistle  have  been  blown 
earlier? I believe that there would have been a better chance if there were a lead supervisor 
with  a  clear  mandate  to  take  the  lead  responsibility  and  who  is  risk  focused.  There  would 
have  been  more  dialogues  through  which  weaknesses  may  have  been  identified  and 
corrected. 
The  idea  of  a  lead  supervisor  has  gained  widespread  support  in  the  area  of  cross-border 
supervision,  as  it  contributes  to  better  coordination,  which  in  turn  could  help  to  prevent  or 
identify problems at an early stage. By the same token, such benefits could be gained in the 
domestic  setting  from  having  a  lead  supervisor  under  the  separate  authorities  model.  Of 
course, in the case of the integrated model, the notion becomes a lead department in the 
same agency, rather than an outside lead supervisor. 
The next question is: who should be the lead supervisor? The obvious answer is it should be 
the  one  that  supervises  the  core  financial  institutions  of  the  country.  And  following  my 
previous argument that a central bank should supervise the core financial sector, the central 
bank should be the lead supervisor. The financial landscape, role, and systemic importance 
of  financial  institutions  evolve  overtime,  so  must  the  scope  of  oversight  and  focus  of  lead 
supervisor. The lead supervisor must closely monitor this evolution and ensure no regulatory 
gap emerges. It can do so by expanding its scope of supervision either directly or indirectly 
through the relevant agencies and build coordination to ensure it can perform its lead role 
properly. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 3
