Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Fifty years of central banking – stability and 
sustainability 
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Ceremony 
for the 50th Anniversary of Bank Negara Malaysia: "50 Years of Central Banking – Stability 
and Sustainability", Kuala Lumpur, 8 February 2009. 
 Bank Negara Malaysia opened its doors as a Central Bank on January 26, 1959, just over a 
year after Malaysia gained independence in August 1957, reflecting the importance that was 
being  accorded  by  our  founding  fathers  to  the  institution  of  Central  Banking.  At  the  very 
outset,  the  Central  Bank  was  entrusted  to  provide  leadership  in  performing  the  traditional 
Central Bank mandate of promoting monetary and financial stability. Equally important was 
the  mandate  to  develop  the  domestic  financial  system  –  a  financial  system  that  would 
facilitate economic growth and development. 
It  is  my  very  great  honour  to  welcome  distinguished  guests  that  have  come  from  different 
parts of the world to join us on this special occasion to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary 
of Bank Negara Malaysia. We also wish to express our appreciation to the Prime Minister of 
Malaysia for his presence as the guest of honour at this occasion.  
Introduction 
Allow  me  to  share  our  experience  during  these  fifty  years  and  our  aspirations  moving 
forward. These five decades have been highly challenging but rewarding with many fulfilling 
outcomes  and  there  were  also  lessons  learned.  While  the  country  has  experienced  great 
prosperity  during  most  of  the  period,  our  economic  and  financial  progress  has  also  been 
punctuated by episodes that have tested our resolve. Rising to address these challenges, the 
growth and economic transformation experienced in these fifty years have been achieved in 
an environment of macroeconomic and financial stability. 
During  the  five  decades,  Malaysia  has  experienced  an  average  annual  growth  that  has 
exceeded 6 per cent and annual inflation that has been less than 3 per cent. The continued 
increase in incomes and the low and stable inflation have not only promoted a high rate of 
savings that has exceeded 30 per cent of GDP but it has also resulted in the financialisation 
of savings. This has allowed Malaysia to rely on domestic sources of funding to finance our 
growth  and  development  during  this  period,  thereby  minimising  our  levels  of  external 
indebtedness. 
Monetary stability 
Being a highly open economy, the sources of monetary instability have generally emanated 
from  external  price  shocks,  which  have  occurred  during  periods  of  high  commodity  and 
energy  prices,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  from  periods  of  excess  demand  and  overheating 
conditions. There essentially have only been two episodes in our history in which overheating 
conditions have generated inflationary pressures; the major period being prior to the Asian 
financial crisis. 
Since the 1990s, monetary policy has been further complicated by volatile capital flows. This 
was evident in several periods, the early nineties, the mid-nineties, and the outflows during 
1997-1998, and in the current period following the de-leveraging by financial institutions in 
the advanced economies. 
In the early days of the Bank, policy actions were focused on the management of liquidity in 
the  financial  system  through  the  imposition  of  statutory  and  liquidity  reserve  requirements, 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 1
and  through  prescription  of  interest  rates  and  portfolio  restrictions,  including  ceilings  on 
lending.  Further  progress  and  sophistication  in  the  financial  sector,  the  deepening  of  the 
financial  markets  and  the  growing  influence  of  capital  flows,  resulted  in  the  reliance  on 
interest  rate  and  other  market-based  instruments  for  monetary  policy.  Further,  with  the 
increased  role  of  expectations,  greater  clarity  in  policy  signals  became  desirable.  Thus  in 
2004,  the  New  Interest  Rate  Framework  was  implemented,  in  which  the  Overnight  Policy 
Rate  became  the  new  policy  rate,  thereby  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism.  The  new  framework  has  also  served  as  a  catalyst  for  efficient 
pricing of financial products and services by banking institutions.  
A key issue for monetary policy in an open economy like Malaysia has been in maintaining a 
flexible exchange rate and monetary independence in the face of increasingly large capital 
flows.  To  better  manage  surges  in  capital  flows  which  have  become  more  prevalent,  the 
range of market-based instruments for monetary policy operations has been widened. The 
rise  in  intra-regional  trade  and  investment  flows  has  resulted  in  greater  importance  being 
accorded to stability of the exchange rate against regional currencies. 
The monetary policy decision-making process at the Bank has also been redefined in which 
the governance for monetary policy is based on the Monetary Policy Committee to achieve a 
more  optimal  process  for  policy  making.  Monetary  policy  communication  and  increased 
transparency have also become highly important in this framework. 
Thus, while the Central Bank's responsibility towards promoting monetary stability conducive 
to  sustainable  growth  has  remained  unchanged  since  the inception  of  the  Central  Bank  in 
1959,  the  strategies,  framework  and  instruments  have  evolved  substantially  to  ensure  its 
effectiveness in delivering the desired objective. 
Financial sector development 
A  key  focus  of  the  Central  Bank  during  these  five  decades  has  been  institutional building, 
financial market development and putting in place the financial infrastructure. The evolution 
of the financial system has seen its transformation from a rudimentary financial system that 
was dominated by the banking sector to a highly diversified financial system, from a highly 
controlled financial system to greater market orientation, from a highly fragmented system to 
one that is more consolidated and rationalised, and to a financial system that is supported by 
an extensive legal regime and regulatory and supervisory framework, and a financial system 
that is more liberalised with stronger international linkages.  
Part  of  the  institutional  building  was  the  establishment  of  regulatory  institutions  that  have 
clearly defined mandates. These institutions join us today in celebrating the long tradition of 
cooperation  to  meet  the  common  purpose.  Specialised  development  financial  institutions 
were also established to promote access to financial services to sectors that are not being 
serviced by existing financial institutions. Financial inclusion, to ensure all economic activities 
and  all  segments  of  society  have  access  to  financial  services,  has  been  a  key  priority. 
Currently, about 80% of our population have some forms of banking accounts 
Other financial infrastructure established by the Bank to support the intermediation process 
includes  the  comprehensive  centrally  coordinated  credit  information  system  at  the  national 
level which allows for better-informed credit decisions by financial institutions. In addition, the 
Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  was  established  to  provide  support  for  small  businesses. 
Cagamas, the national mortgage corporation, was established by the Central Bank to ensure 
a steady flow of funds to the housing industry and develop a secondary mortgage market. 
At  the  centre  of  the  financial  infrastructure  is  the  payments  infrastructure  which  has  been 
enhanced and modernised over the years to achieve greater efficiency and reliability of the 
payments system. The payments landscape has evolved from one that was mainly paper-
based to include a range of new electronic forms of payment. Internet banking which was not 
available in Malaysia as recent as 10 years ago is now widely used by the entire population 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2009
of internet subscribers in the country. The acceleration of the nation's migration to the more 
efficient electronic payments continues to be an important agenda of the Central Bank. 
Complementing institution building has also included the support given to the development of 
talent in the financial services industry. The growth of the financial sector cannot be achieved 
without  adequate  attention  to  the  development  of  the  professional  requirements  of  the 
financial services industry.  
In  the  recent  two  decades,  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  has  also  evolved  in 
Malaysia, including the institutions, markets and supporting legal, regulatory and supervisory 
framework.  The  Islamic  financial  system  now  offers  the  full  breadth  and  depth  of  Islamic 
financial services. Malaysia is the host to the secretariat for the Islamic Financial Services 
Board  in  Kuala  Lumpur  that  sets  the  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards  in 
Islamic finance. 
Financial  market  development  has  also  been  central  to  building  a  robust  financial  system. 
The Central Bank's efforts in this direction have included establishing the institutions and the 
infrastructure to improve market efficiency of money, capital and foreign exchange markets. 
The  Securities  Commission,  the  domestic  rating  agencies,  Cagamas  and  the  Cooperative 
Commission were among the initiatives initiated by the Bank.  
The  development  of  a  robust  and  vibrant  foreign  exchange  market  still  remains  an 
outstanding area of development. As a highly open economy, this market is a vital part of our 
financial system. The country exited from the Currency Board system in 1967 and introduced 
the ringgit (known as the Malaysian dollar then). The changeover was successful. It was a 
time when there was an absence of speculators. It was only in 1997-98 when the ringgit and 
other  regional  currencies  came  under  speculative  attack.  The  volume  of  foreign  exchange 
transactions had become massive, far exceeding volume of trade and the normal financial 
flows. This resulted in exchange rate volatility during the Asian crisis that occurred wave after 
wave. Regional currencies continued to plummet during this period. After more than a year of 
this turmoil and uncertainty in the foreign exchange market, Malaysia implemented selective 
capital  controls  and  de-internationalised  the  ringgit.  This  was  instrumental  in  restoring 
stability in the market. It acted very much like a circuit breaker. Offshore trading of the ringgit, 
the major source for financing the speculative attacks, was effectively eliminated. Within a 
year, all the controls that were imposed were removed. More than 10 years later, the ringgit, 
however,  still 
the 
internationalisation is the development of a robust foreign exchange market in our financial 
system. 
remains  non-internationalised.  An 
important  precondition 
for 
Financial stability 
The events surrounding the current financial crisis has brought into sharp focus the role of 
central banks in financial stability. As these events continue to unfold with great uncertainty 
on  the  financial  markets  and  broader  economy,  allow  me  to  reflect  on  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia's own role in financial stability.  
In addition to its functions as the lender of last resort, Bank Negara Malaysia has also had 
the  responsibility  for  the  regulation  of  banking  institutions.  Since  1988,  the  Bank  also 
assumed  responsibility  for  the  insurance  industry  and  in  2002,  the  development  financial 
institutions. The prudential regulatory and supervisory framework during these fifty years has 
undergone  significant  change.  The  prudential  framework  and  supervisory  approaches 
adopted  by  the  Bank  provided  the  flexibility  to  respond  to  the  new  developments  and 
challenges  that  have  confronted  the  financial  sector.  Several  factors  have  guided  the 
approach adopted by the Bank. The first is to recognise the limitations of the regulatory tools 
and  instruments.  Second,  is  the  acceptance  that  change  is  required  in  the  context  of  the 
changing environment, and the need to carefully assess the trade-offs that arise given the 
different stages of development within the financial sector. And finally, is the need to take into 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 3
account the interlinkages within the financial system, and between financial systems across 
borders. 
Guided by these parameters, the Bank has evolved a prudential framework which at the start 
comprised  simple  prudential  rules  that  addressed  capital,  gearing,  liquidity  and  portfolio 
restrictions, to the now more differentiated and principle-based regulations that reflect levels 
of risk taken by an institution. As a result, significantly greater flexibility is now accorded to 
institutions that are able to demonstrate sound governance practices and risk management 
capabilities. This flexibility has been accompanied by fundamental changes in the approach 
to supervision that has shifted from a predominantly compliance-based approach, to one that 
focuses on an assessment of the risk-taking activities of an institution and the effectiveness 
of  the  control  functions  that  are  in  place  within  the  institution  to  manage  the  risks.  The 
supervisory tools have also been expanded to include more forward-looking assessments of 
the  risks  to  financial  stability,  supported  by  more  dynamic  stress  testing  approaches  and 
enhanced surveillance systems. 
To  a  large  extent,  the  preconditions  for  the  shift  to  principle-based  approach  to  regulation 
have been strengthened through capacity building measures that have been pursued in the 
period  immediately  following  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  The  development  of  the  Financial 
Sector  Masterplan  which  was  released  in  2001  is  a  blueprint  not  only  for  comprehensive 
financial  sector  reforms,  but  also  provided 
the 
modernisation of our financial system.  
The  financial  safety  net  was  also  strengthened  with  the  introduction  of  a  comprehensive 
deposit  insurance  system  and  the  establishment  of  institutions  to  assist  consumers  in 
managing their debt and resolving disputes with financial institutions. These measures have 
contributed towards maintaining confidence in the financial system. 
framework  and  strategies 
the 
for 
The crisis: a defining moment for the bank 
In  the  1990s,  it  became  evident  for  emerging  economies  that  new  challenges  to  stability 
arising  from  the  international  dimensions  of  financial  activity  had  emerged.  In  particular, 
highly volatile and potentially destabilising capital flows had become a dominant feature of 
the  international  financial  environment.  Strong  economic  fundamentals  alone  proved  to  be 
insufficient in containing instability in the domestic economy and financial system. 
Many of us still vividly recall the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 that significantly affected 
several of the countries in the region. What started as a currency crisis turned into a financial 
and economic crisis. During this period, the ringgit exchange rate depreciated by about 40% 
at  the  peak  of  the  crisis;  the  stock  market  declined  by  almost  80%.  While  the  Malaysian 
economy continued to expand in 1997, by 1998, conditions deteriorated significantly and the 
economy  contracted  by  7.5%.  An  extensive  set  of  measures  were  implemented.  This 
included a comprehensive restructuring programme for the financial and corporate sectors. 
While still at the early stage of the crisis, an asset management company was established to 
acquire  and  manage  the  non-performing  loans  of  banking  institutions.  A  special  purpose 
vehicle  to  recapitalise  the  banking  system  and  a  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Committee 
were  also  established  to  provide  avenues  for  voluntary  debt  restructuring  for  businesses. 
Within  six  months  of  the  implementation  of  these  measures,  the  problems  in  the  financial 
sector  were  addressed.  This  led  to  resumption  in  lending  activities  and  the  economy 
expanded  by  6.1%  in  1999.  Notably,  the  stakes  taken  in  the  financial  institutions  were 
disposed back to the private sector with the costs of the exercise being more than covered. 
The Bank's efforts to sustain stability did not end when the Asian financial crisis abated and 
economic recovery was firmly in place. The lesson that the foundations for resilience are built 
during good times was earnestly embraced. Therefore, once stability was restored, the Bank 
embarked on a comprehensive restructuring and reform of the financial sector. This included 
the  consolidation  of  domestic 
the  strengthening  of  corporate 
institutions; 
financial 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2009
governance, risk management and the institutional capacity of domestic financial institutions; 
as well as the deepening of the bond market. These efforts have put the Malaysian financial 
system in a much stronger position to weather the current global financial crisis.  
Regional cooperation 
From the beginning, the Bank has had an active engagement in the region and was from the 
very beginning part of the SEACEN grouping which is the oldest and most inclusive regional 
grouping. Starting in 1967, SEACEN has been a valuable regional forum. While it is a group 
of  highly  diverse  economies,  this  did  not  prevent  it  from  being  a  cohesive  grouping.  The 
permanent  secretariat  of  SEACEN  resides  in  Kuala  Lumpur  since  1979.  The  Bank  is  also 
part of other groupings including EMEAP and the Asian Consultative Council (ACC) of the 
BIS. Collaborative efforts in surveillance, regional financial market development and sharing 
of information have been extensive. In Islamic finance, the Bank is a founding member of the 
Islamic Financial Services Board to promote and enhance the soundness and stability of the 
Islamic financial services industry.  
financial  sector  will 
involve  greater  market 
Modernisation of the Central Bank 
In the 50 years, the Central Bank has also been fundamentally transformed. At its inception, 
the Bank started with 57 people with four departments. The Bank has grown in strength to 
more than 2,600 staff to accommodate our expanded roles. The modernisation of the Bank 
has  involved  change  to  the  legal  framework,  our  organisational  and  governance  structure, 
and  the  nature  of  human  capital,  to  enable  the  Bank  to  become  more  effective  in  the 
changed environment.  
As  we  advance  forward  into  the  future,  the  Bank  will  be  confronted  with  increased 
challenges, and with many of the building blocks in place, the next phase of development of 
the  Malaysia's 
liberalisation  and 
internationalisation.  These  developments  will  intensify  the  demand  for  greater  readiness, 
capacity and capability from the Bank to best serve the nation moving forward.  
This year, the Bank is in the process of submitting to Parliament a new Central Banking Act. 
As  the  economic  and  financial  landscape,  both  domestic  and  international,  is  now 
significantly different from 50 years ago, the proposed Act involves a holistic review of the 
Bank's mandate, governance, accountability and the present legislative framework to ensure 
that  the  Bank  remains  effective  in  performing  its  functions.  The  institutionalisation  of  the 
objectives and mandates of the Bank aims to provide greater clarity to the existing roles and 
functions  of  the  Bank.  The  proposed  Act  will  also  provide  the  Bank  with  the  necessary 
powers and instruments to perform the Bank's roles and functions effectively. The proposed 
Act  will  also  institutionalise  many  of  the  practices  that  have  been  introduced  in  this  recent 
decade which are deemed as critical in ensuring that the Central Bank has the necessary 
authority and state of readiness to face future challenges. 
In concert with these, the new Act will further reinforce the existing governance framework 
with  adequate  mechanisms  to  ensure  sufficient  checks  and  balances  are  in  place.  The 
governance framework will further facilitate and enhance high quality decision-making in the 
Bank,  institutionalising  both  existing  and  new  procedures  and  processes  to  enhance 
accountability,  professionalism  and  transparency.  The  strengthening  of  governance  and 
accountability  will  form  the  prerequisite  for  the  Bank  to  maintain  our  public  legitimacy  and 
autonomy, as well as to ensure the integrity of the Bank as a public institution in serving the 
nation's interests. 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  experience  during  these  fifty  years  in  preserving  monetary  and 
financial  stability  and  in  supporting  the  sustainability  of  economic  development  has  seen 
many  challenges.  Throughout  this  journey,  we  remained  focused  on  what  needs  to  be 
achieved  and  the  vision  of  where  we  want  to  be.  Key  to  our  effectiveness  is  the  internal 
capacity  of  the  Bank.  At  the  heart  of  this  are  the  people  in  the  Bank.  While  the  operating 
environment has changed significantly and the policy focus has evolved, the values that the 
Bank represents, of integrity, respect for diversity, professionalism and expertise, have been 
enduring and reinforced over time.  
Finally,  the  Central  Bank  could  not  have  been  successful  in  achieving  our  objectives  and 
policies if we did not have the support in our country – from the Government, the financial 
and business communities, and the people of the country – for their confidence and trust in 
us  during  these  50  years.  The  Bank,  going  forward,  through  our  policy  actions  and  in 
discharging our responsibilities, will continue to uphold this trust that has been placed upon 
us. 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2009
