W A Wijewardena: The role of statistics and challenges for statisticians  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, at the Stat Day, organized by  University of Colombo, Colombo, 26 March 2009. 
 Consciously or unconsciously, we use statistics in everything we do in our day to day life. 
When  we  say  that  it  rained  yesterday,  we  simply  pronounce  a  fact  we  have  observed  as 
having happened. When we say that it is raining now, we again mention something that we 
have  observed  as  happening.  When  we  say  that  it  will  rain  tomorrow,  we  are  predicting  a 
future event. Our life is full of such statements: facts that have been experienced by us in the 
past, facts that are happening now and being experienced in the present and facts that we 
feel would happen in the future. What has happened and is happening now are our personal 
experiences. What will happen are our learned judgements based on our experiences. If we 
keep  these  experiences  and  learned  judgments  to  ourselves,  then,  it  would  not  form  the 
subject  matter  of  statistics.  It  becomes  statistics  only  when  we  share  them  with  others. 
Hence, statistics is basically, observing, analysing, learning and sharing facts about the real 
world. That sharing of facts need not necessarily be in quantitative or measurable form. They 
can  be  simple  expressions  in  verbal  form  so  that  others  could  form  opinions  on  the 
happenings in the real world. 
Statistics do not have a heart or a religion 
When we express our personal experiences, we step into a dangerous territory. Our personal 
experiences are guided by our emotional and subjective feelings. When we share them with 
others, we are inviting them to accept our emotional and subjective feelings as if they too 
have experienced the same. This is where we run into problems. Unless others too have the 
same  emotional  and  subjective  feelings,  there  is  no  reason  for  them  to  accept  our 
experiences  as  their  experiences.  Hence,  statistics  to  be  shared  by  everyone  should 
necessarily be based on objective considerations. In other words, statistics should not have a 
heart. Its religion should be pure objectivity. It should convey facts as has been observed by 
an  individual  free  from  personal  biases  or  prejudices.  Only  such  an  impersonal  statistical 
framework has the capability of serving people intending to use them for making judgments 
about the real world. 
How economic development occurs? 
An economy has to play a specific role towards its members. It has to produce and supply 
goods and services as demanded by them having consideration for timeliness, quantity and 
quality. When an economy produces these goods and services in larger and larger volumes 
year after year, new wealth is created, raising the well-being of its members. The continuous 
creation  of  wealth  by  people  in  this  manner  raising  the  overall  welfare  levels  brings  about 
what is called “economic development”. That has become the prime objective of all societies 
today as has been demonstrated by the choice of the theme of this Stat Day Event.  
Wealth  is  created  in  any  society  by  people  who  make  choices  between  consumption  and 
production, decide on appropriate production methods and take risk on what they do. A vital 
input which they use for this process is “information”. Statistics is nothing but another name 
for  information  presented  in  a  more  sophisticated  and  analytical  form.  Hence,  any  society 
desiring to attain the highest level of economic development cannot disregard the importance 
of statistics. 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 1
The use of statistics as an input 
If statistics are an input, like any other input, there should be a demand for them. If statistics 
help people to create wealth, they should be prepared to pay a price to acquire them. When 
there  is  a  price  for  statistics,  there  should  be  a  supply  of  statistics  as  well.  It,  therefore, 
connotes that there is a market for statistics, like the market for all other inputs. This means 
that people who have information that can be traded in the market will have to package and 
sell it. The packaging should be done in such a way that the users would be able to consume 
statistics as an instant product without having to process them further in-house. This is the 
biggest challenge which statisticians face today: how to sell their product to would-be users 
as a readily consumable product and help them to create wealth. 
The market for information and statistics 
There are market based statistics-producers in developed countries. The market agents are 
ready to pay a price in order to acquire such statistics. The producers of statistics conduct 
frequent  market  surveys,  analyse  results,  supply  them  on  line  at  a  price  and  help  market 
agents  to  create  wealth.  Unfortunately,  in  Sri  Lanka,  we  do  not  have  such  market  based 
statistics-producers. The collection and analysis of vital data that are useful to market agents 
are being done by a few governmental organisations. Like any other product supplied by the 
government,  such  data are  also  supplied  as  a public  good  free  of  charge.  Even  when  the 
governmental agencies could sell statistics at a price, they do not venture to do so, because 
they are guided by such principles as “doing utmost benefit” to people as a social service. 
The country too, therefore, expects free goods from these governmental organisations. But 
this creates a problem known as “the agent-principal problem” in economics.  
The agent-principal problem 
The agent-principal problem is typical to any government service. It says that the agent who 
is  a  government  bureau  or  a  department  or  even  a  university  does  not  have  incentive  to 
produce its output at its best. The principal who is the user of the service, on the other hand, 
is  scattered  and  not  in  a  position  to  influence  the  agent  to  improve  quality.  This  is  why  in 
many  countries  the  governments  have  tried  to  make  the  agents  amenable  to  public’s 
requirements through the implementation of such devices as “people’s charters”. The result 
is  the  production  of  the  agent  remaining  at  low  quality,  becoming  unreliable  and  failing  to 
satisfy the users. The same fate has befallen the governmental organisations that produce 
and  supply  statistics  to  the  public  free  of  charge.  Many  have  witnessed  the  increasing 
occurrence  of  the  “misuse  of  statistics”  by  those  who  produce  and  supply  statistics  to  the 
market. The Google search machine has documented some 2.5 million cases of the misuse 
of statistics from around the world. 
The misuse of statistics 
Why does the production of statistics become unreliable? There are many pitfalls to which 
statisticians fall when they produce statistics. Wikipedia, the cyber-encyclopaedia, has listed 
out  these  errors  often  committed  by  statisticians.  According  to  Wikipedia,  “a  misuse  of 
statistics occurs when a statistical argument asserts a falsehood”. It could be due to 
both  accidental  and  purposeful.  When  it  is  purposeful,  it  is  always  perpetrated  in  order  to 
gain an undue benefit to the perpetrator. The danger with the wrongful use of statistics is the 
creation of a statistical fallacy that would be costly to those who make use of the deliberately 
doctored statistics. Such statistics are damaging to the quest of knowledge in the sense that, 
once they are rooted in the minds of the people, it would take years to correct the falsehood 
that it would have created in the society. 
The types of misuse of statistics listed by Wikipedia are as follows:  
2 
 BIS Review 36/2009
     First, the statistician may discard the unfavourable data and make use only what is 
favourable for him to prove his point.  
Second, in field surveys, the statistician may ask loaded questions in order to elicit 
an answer of his choice. 
Third,  the  statistician  may  tend  to  over-generalise  facts  and  make  wrong 
conclusions. 
Fourth, the samples used may be biased. 
Fifth, the causality outlined may be fallacious. 
Sixth, the data may have been manipulated in order to show a result favourable to 
some interested party. 
Seventh, data may be dredged or mined in order to find a correlation that would not 
be there. 
How to gain credibility for statistics? 
All these instances of the misuse of statistics make the statistics less reliable and suspicious. 
The  governmental  statistical  agencies  throughout  the  globe  are  criticised  by  public  on  this 
ground. Once the organisations lose credibility regarding the compilation of statistics, it would 
be very hard to regain trust and confidence of users. The statistical bureaus run by former 
Soviet Union and its satellite states have been subject to this criticism. The way to avoid this 
criticism  is  to  adopt  global  best  practices  with  regard  to  compilation  and  dissemination  of 
statistics.  It  requires  countries  to  adopt  a  code  of  ethics  and  practices  when  it  comes  to 
dissemination  of  information.  Many  member  countries  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
have adopted such a code in the form of signing for following the principles of outlined in a 
general  data  dissemination  system  and,  at  a  more  stringent  level,  a  special  data 
dissemination  system.  The  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  is  a  signatory  to  the  IMF’s  General 
Data Dissemination System. 
The final message 
In summary, if statisticians are desirous of supporting economic development, they should 
necessarily  produce  and  supply  statistics  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  market.  It  is 
essential that they produce such statistics as a readily usable product that could be sold in 
the market at a price. It is now time in Sri Lanka for the private statistics-producers to enter 
the  vast  market  of  information.  The  universities  in  this  sense  are  in  an  advantageous 
position, because they have the best human talents with them. It is unfortunate that they sit 
idly  on  this  vast  wealth  of  resources.  It  is  time  that  universities  in  Sri  Lanka  reorient 
themselves  to  gain  advantage  from  the  market  resources  and  become  financially  self 
supporting.  In  addition,  the  universities  should  train  their  statistics  students  to  become 
entrepreneurs of statistics rather than becoming employees of agencies that may plan to hire 
statisticians. 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 3
