Jürgen  Stark:  Economic  and  financial  situation  –  where  do  we  stand? 
(Speaking notes) 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  2.  Zeit  Konferenz  “Neue  Architektur  der  Finanzwirtschaft“,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 September 2009. 
       We have witnessed two years of severe financial distress, with adverse effects on the 
euro area and elsewhere. We have experienced the trough of global and euro area 
negative  growth  around  the  turn  of  2008/2009.  Recent  data  are  increasingly 
encouraging.  We  have  just  been  observing  more  and  more  signs  of  economic 
stabilisation.  Looking  ahead,  economic  activity  is  likely  to  recover  gradually  in  the 
course of next year. 
But  uncertainty  remains  high  and  incoming  data  on  economic  activity  are  likely  to 
remain volatile. Concerns regarding the outlook for a recovery in 2010 mainly relate to 
renewed  increases  in  international  commodity  prices,  intensification  of  protectionist 
pressures and a disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
Regarding price developments, annual HICP inflation in the euro area has temporarily 
dropped into negative territory, but is expected to turn positive again in the remainder 
of this year and evolve in line with price stability. Deflation risk, if there were any, have 
disappeared.  Inflation  expectations  remain  in  line  with  price  stability.  Monetary  and 
credit  developments  confirm  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the 
medium  term.  We  therefore  consider  risks  to  price  stability  broadly  balanced  and 
mainly relating to the outlook for economic activity, higher than expected oil prices, as 
well as higher than expected indirect taxation and administered prices.  
Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  financial  conditions  have  continued  to  improve 
gradually  with  corporate  bond  spreads,  stock  market  volatility,  money  market  term 
spreads and government bond spreads declining. Is this improvement genuine or is it 
due to policy measures by governments and central banks? If the latter was true this 
would be a classical case of moral hazard. These measures cannot be sustained for 
ever. In this sense, there is no room for complacency. There is rather the risk of a re-
emergence of moral hazard once temporary measures by governments and central 
banks are perceived by financial market participants as permanent.  
Where do we stand with financial sector adjustment? Several estimates have been 
made,  both  by  private  and  public  sector  institutions,  of  the  potential  losses  to  be 
absorbed by the financial system as a consequence of the crisis. Let me illustrate the 
situation with some key figures: for euro area financial institutions, we estimate the 
total  losses  over  the  period  2007-2010  to  be  around  USD 650  bn.  Write-downs  on 
securities have so far amounted to over USD 200 billion. Banks have provisioned and 
written  off  over  USD 150 bn  of  their  loan  exposure.  Therefore  we  estimate  further 
potential  losses  to  be  a  little  below  USD 300 bn.  Half  of  the  losses  worldwide  are 
estimated  to  be  borne  by  US  banks,  a  quarter  by  euro  area  banks,  and  another 
quarter by banks located in Switzerland and the UK.  
If  we  want  to  re-establish  economic  and  financial  stability,  we  need  to  develop  the 
lessons from the crisis. To this end it is important to recall what triggered the crisis. 
Low inflation rates and robust growth in the context of global imbalances, as well as 
abundant liquidity, were the main drivers at the macroeconomic level. At the level of 
the financial system it was regulatory arbitrage, deterioration in credit standards and 
increased reliance of banks to fund their assets in short-term markets. 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 1
   Thus,  the  crisis  is  a  consequence  of  a  combination  of  failures  both  in  financial 
markets and on the part of regulatory authorities. Despite market failure having been 
one factor, we must not forget that market participants have simply behaved in line 
with  the  incentives  provided  by  regulatory  authorities.  In  this  respect,  improved 
regulation and oversight of financial markets will be crucial to ensure economic and 
financial  stability.  In  particular,  sound  balance  sheets,  solid  risk  management  and 
transparent  and  robust  business  models  are  key  in  strengthening  the  financial 
soundness  of  banks  and  their  resilience  to  shocks.  The  first  line  of  defence  of 
financial stability is with market participants. To provide for the right incentives, market 
participants  must  be  liable  for  their  actions.  This  is  an  essential  condition  for 
sustainable economic growth and financial stability.  
At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  develop  the  financial  system  further.  To  enhance 
transparency, we need to reduce the complexity of the financial system, institutions 
and products.  
The  crisis  has  painfully  shown  that  ensuring  solvency  of  individual  financial 
institutions does not ensure stability of the financial system as a whole. When funding 
markets  shut  down,  both  solvent  and  insolvent  institutions  are  hit.  Neglecting  such 
wider  systemic  issues  has  been  one  of  the  glaring  inefficiencies  of  prudential 
regulation. Too great an emphasis has been placed on micro-prudential rather than 
macro-prudential aspects. Initiatives are now being taken to close the gap that exists 
in  this  respect,  especially  in  Europe,  where  cross-border  supervision  is  still  a 
challenge. 
Where do we precisely stand today in improving regulation and oversight?  
      At their meetings in November 2008 and April 2009, heads of states of the G20 
countries have agreed on what are the most important challenges for improving 
regulation  and  oversight:  (i)  strengthening  transparency  and  accountability,  (ii) 
enhancing  sound  regulation,  (iii)  promoting  integrity  in  financial  markets,  (iv) 
reinforcing international cooperation and (v) reforming the International Financial 
Institutions. 
Overall,  improvements  in  accounting,  capital  regulation  and  macro-prudential 
supervision feature high on the agenda. The leaders of the G20 called on the IMF 
and  FSB  (Financial  Stability  Board)  to  produce  guidelines  on  how  national 
authorities can assess the systemic importance of financial institutions, markets, 
or instruments.  
Over the past months good progress has been made in the various areas and the 
momentum  needs  to  be  maintained  to  establish  a  sound  regulatory  framework. 
Work has been completed on a number of issues (e.g. enhancements of Basel II, 
as mentioned below) while other areas still need more consideration before they 
will be finalised by the end of 2009 or at the beginning of 2010. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), which is the driving force 
regarding initiatives in the area of micro-prudential regulation, issued in July 2009 
a final package with measures to improve the Basel II framework.  
On  accounting  the  IASB  (International  Accounting  Standards  Board)  is  taking 
various initiatives and shows openness to collaboration with regulatory authorities. 
A couple of important projects are under way.  
But  significant  challenges  remain. Again:  International  bodies  and  governments 
must  not  lose  momentum  in  their  efforts  to  strengthen  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. All the aforementioned issues equally deserve due consideration and 
should be addressed as a matter of urgency. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2009
The world economy after the crisis 
The crisis is not over yet. However, it is worthwhile discussing some preliminary reflections 
about the world after the crisis.  
• 
First,  beyond  these  regulatory  and  supervisory  challenges,  a  successful  crisis 
resolution  will  also  impinge  on  economic  structures  world  wide.  The  global  growth 
model of the last 15 years has failed. We have seen an exceptionally long period of 
strong  growth  in  the  world  economy,  but  that  growth  was  based  on  large  and 
unsustainable global imbalances. For growth to be sustained, it must be more broadly 
balanced, both geographically and across economic sectors.  
Second, the current crisis may dampen economic growth in the future, reduce growth 
in the capital stock and thereby lead to a prolonged reduction in the level of output. 
The  composition  of  output  might  change  as  well.  I  would  not  be  surprised  if  the 
financial sector, the car industry and the construction sector were to shrink regionally. 
The economies that will be affected the most are those where the financial sector has 
expanded significantly in the last 20 years. Especially in those countries the financial 
sector  will  obviously  have  to  become  smaller,  because  it  has  decoupled  too  much 
from  the  real  economy  and  because  experience  suggests  that  banks  may  have 
become too big to fail, too complex to be managed and even too big to be rescued. 
Third, the simple statement that “if banks are too big to fail, they are probably too big 
to exist” is a reasonable rule. In any case, for large banks the capital should increase 
more than they increase in size. The post-crisis financial system should be more risk-
averse,  less  leveraged,  less  complex.  The  prevailing  business  model  will  probably 
place greater emphasis on traditional banking activities, which tend to produce lower 
margins,  but  are  also  more  robust,  less  risky  and  less  volatile.  In  this  respect,  the 
crisis may well turn out to be a catalyst for a paradigm shift, transforming the global 
financial landscape for the better. 
Fourth, the process of globalisation that we have experienced in recent decades has 
been  driven  by  an  increase  in  global  trade  following  the  integration  of  emerging 
market economies into the world economy and the liberalisation of financial markets. 
This high degree of global economic integration has also been a major factor in the 
global  financial  turmoil  and  the  highly  synchronised  downturn  that  we  have  been 
experiencing. This experience must not lead to protectionism. Although protectionist 
measures  may  seem  attractive  in  the  short  run,  they  will  only  exacerbate  the 
downturn, delay the recovery and reduce income potential for everyone.  
Fifth, the government’s role in the economy and the question of what should be left to 
the markets will be key. The crisis has given governments a more prominent role in 
the economy. Governments have become heavily involved in the banking sectors of a 
number of countries, and in some countries they have also taken on a significant role 
in other sectors, such as the car industry. 
Summing up: Have the parties involved learnt their lesson? 
• 
The swift action taken by governments to rescue the banking sector and stimulate the 
economy has been key in stabilising the financial system and the economy. But exit 
strategies from this support need to be developed and consistently implemented to 
contain moral hazard, to forestall a rise in long-term real interest rates and crowding 
out effects, and to insure sustainability of public finances. If this challenge is not met, 
the current crisis is bound to be exacerbated by a sovereign debt crisis. 
In  the  area  of  regulation  a  broad  set  of  measures  is  under  way  and  considerable 
progress has been made. But as signs of stabilisation in the financial system and the 
     BIS Review 102/2009 
 3
economy are emerging, reform appetite is waning and there is a risk of missing the 
opportunity of a paradigm shift in the financial system.  
Especially as the crisis intensified, central banks took immediate and unprecedented 
action by lowering rates to historically low levels and providing ample liquidity.  
Keeping interest rates too low for too long may well lay the basis for new imbalances 
and instability. Central banks need to prepare for credible strategies to phase out their 
support and stand ready to prepare financial markets when they come to unwind their 
credit support measures.  
In academic circles the financial crisis has revived the debate whether central banks, 
in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  should  pay  more  attention  to  financial  variables, 
and  specifically,  whether  inflation  targeting  strategies  do  not  focus  too  narrowly  on 
economic  developments  alone.  Relative  to  this  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy 
has proved to be robust. The monetary pillar provides for discipline not to ignore risks 
to price stability stemming from imbalances in money and credit developments.  
Initiatives  are  now  being  taken  to  close  the  gap  in  the  area  of  cross-border 
supervision  and  between  micro-  and  macro  prudential  supervision.  The  envisaged 
establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  which  the  ECB  will 
support  analytically  and  logistically  marks  an  important  step  in  this  direction.  The 
ESRB  will  monitor  systemic  risk  and  provide  risk  warnings  and  recommendations. 
Effective cooperation and leadership at the European level will be crucial to make the 
ESRB successful in the pursuit of its mandate. 
Is the current improvement in some financial market segments genuine or driven by 
governments and central banks? When the crisis took hold and risk aversion spread, 
leading to de-leveraging and a sharp decline in securitisation public attention focused 
on executive pay as an area for regulation. In fact improving corporate governance 
remains a key area for regulation. Bonus systems need to be changed so as to make 
managers liable for their decisions and provide them with the right incentives to focus 
on longer-term sustainability of their business models rather than short-term profit.  
But corporate governance is just one area where regulation needs to be improved. As 
just discussed significant challenges remain in establishing capital requirements that 
are sufficient for the financial system to withstand adverse shocks, in improving the 
accounting framework, in developing leverage ratios, and, finally, in closing the gaps 
that  exist 
the  area  of  macroprudential  and  cross-border  supervision. 
Notwithstanding  the  current  economic  and  financial  stabilisation  the  momentum 
needs to be maintained to move towards a sound regulatory framework. 
in 
BIS Review 102/2009
      4 
 