Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Overview of the Spanish economy in 2008 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing 
Council of the Bank of Spain on the occasion of the presentation of the Annual Report 2008, 
Madrid, 16 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
The year 2008, the subject of the Annual Report I submit today to the Council, saw strains on 
international ﬁnancial markets heighten and turn into a global ﬁnancial crisis which ultimately 
triggered  a  widespread  loss  of  conﬁdence  and  an  unprecedented  worldwide  economic 
recession.  
The ﬁnancial tensions pushed a large number of banks from a broad range of countries to 
the brink. And they have caused losses in the global ﬁnancial system which, with all the due 
caution  any  estimate  calls  for,  amount  to  trillions  of  euro.  The  crisis  affected  all  ﬁnancial 
markets,  with  some  such  as  the  asset-backed  securities  and  interbank  deposits  markets 
brought  to  a  grinding  halt.  The  habitual  stress  indicators  surged  to  all-time  highs  around 
October  and  remain  at  high  levels  despite  the  improvement  in  recent  months.  Clearly,  the 
globalisation conducive to the growth of ﬁnance in recent years has also been instrumental in 
the swift and simultaneous spread of tensions, seeing them extend further.  
Testifying to the real impact of the ﬁnancial crisis in all its harshness was the contraction of 
over 6% in the world economy at end-2008, and the decline in world trade of more than 20%, 
both  in  terms  of  annualised  rates,  with  most  of  the  more  advanced  countries  in  full-blown 
recession  and  with  growth  in  the  emerging  economies  dwindling  substantially.  The  picture 
worsened further in the ﬁrst quarter of 2009, marking what currently appears to have been 
the crisis at its height. The improvement in the latest indicators suggest contractionary forces 
are abating, and the danger of a continuous deepening of the recessionary spiral appears to 
have been allayed.  
A real and ﬁnancial crisis on the scale currently attained reveals deep-seated weaknesses 
that affect the structural interlinkages of economic systems. In principle, the severity of the 
crisis  depends  on  the  magnitude  of  the  shock  that  triggers  it  and  on  the  strength  of  the 
economies  on  which  it  bears  down.  Evidently,  from  this  perspective,  the  increase  in  US 
subprime mortgage defaults, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and any episode that may 
now be singled out could not alone have triggered a situation of the seriousness and on the 
scale that we have seen. Rather, such episodes preyed on economic and market structures 
that were fragile and that had incubated unsustainable trends which could not be detected or 
corrected in time.  
With  hindsight,  it  was  clearly  a  mistake  to  assume  that  ﬁnancial  markets  had  virtually 
unfettered capacity to improve risk management, and to have given excessive leeway to self-
regulation. Further, the continuous expansion of spending in some advanced economies on 
the basis of growing private debt was a key component of the so-called “global imbalances”, 
about whose dangers many reports warned. But the detection of the problem did not sufﬁce 
either  to  properly  diagnose  its  potential  scope  or  to  act  accordingly.  Indeed,  economic 
policies – and monetary and ﬁnancial policies in particular – were, broadly speaking, clearly 
excessively lax during the upturn.  
Economic  authorities  now  face  the  challenge  of  designing  appropriate  mechanisms  to 
strengthen institutions in their economies and, once the crisis is behind us, to prevent such 
trends from recurring.  
This  challenge  ﬁrstly  involves  a  far-reaching  review  of  some  of  the  basic  principles 
underpinning  ﬁnancial  market  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  in  recent  years.  A  new 
BIS Review79/2009 
 1
balance  must  be  struck  between  regulation  and  self-regulation,  providing  both  ﬁnancial 
institutions  and  other  investors  with  appropriate  incentives  to  curb  the  natural  tendency  of 
ﬁnancial  systems  to  accentuate  business  cycles.  It  will  also  be  necessary  to  extend  the 
purview  of  regulators  and  supervisors,  avoiding  the  presence  of  “blind  spots”  in  ﬁnancial 
systems, and seeking a suitable response to the fact that markets and many market players 
are increasingly more global, both in terms of the geographical scope of their actions and of 
the  products  they  trade.  The  crisis  has  also  highlighted  the  advisability  of  designing  and 
setting  in  place  a  macro-prudential  supervisory  framework  concerned  with  overall  stability 
and which thus complements individual bank-focused microprudential supervisory conduct.  
Macroeconomic strategies should likewise be reviewed in light of the shortcomings they have 
evidenced, in order to detect and correct in time the imbalances I referred to earlier. In the 
case  of  ﬁscal  policies,  greater  emphasis  on  the  sustainability  of  public  ﬁnances  in  the 
medium and long term would have provided a more powerful countercyclical component to 
offset  excessive  private-sector  spending.  As  regards  monetary  policy  strategy,  careful 
analysis  should  be  made  of  the  role  to  be  played  by  the  identiﬁcation  and  appropriate 
coverage  of  risks  to  stability  that  originate,  develop  and,  in  the  worst-case  scenario, 
materialise in ﬁnancial markets.  
Fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  also  share  the  substantial  challenge  of  designing  “exit 
strategies”.  These  allow,  once  the  crisis  has  been  overcome,  for  the  winding  down  of  the 
various measures that central banks and governments have adopted in the face of the risk 
that this crisis might bring the world economy to the verge of a depressive spiral with grave 
consequences.  
The  raft  of  measures  adopted  has  been  wide-ranging,  and  many  are  based  on  common 
principles jointly agreed upon in different international fora. Multilateral cooperation is crucial 
for  successfully  tackling  a  global  crisis.  Further  headway  must  thus  be  made  along  these 
lines,  harnessing  opportunities  such  as  that  provided  by  the  G20  meeting  in  London  last 
April.  Not  in  vain,  one  of  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  past  experience  is  that  economic 
redeployment  behind  national  borders  and  protectionism  are  sure-ﬁre  recipes 
for 
exacerbating and prolonging global crises such as the present one.  
Among the measures adopted, central banks in the advanced economies reacted decisively 
by providing abundant liquidity to ﬁnancial systems and substantially cutting their key interest 
rates.  These  standard  monetary  policy  measures  were  later  complemented  by  other,  non-
conventional  measures.  The  European  Central  Bank  began  very  early  to  increase  liquidity 
assistance and, from October, banks’ applications for liquidity began to be met in full, while 
the range of ﬁnancial assets accepted as collateral for these operations was widened. The 
main reﬁnancing rate has been cut by 325 basis points to an all-time low of 1% following the 
May  meeting.  And,  as  regards  extraordinary  measures,  the  term  over  which  liquidity  is 
injected has been extended to 12 months, and funds are provided in currencies other than 
the  euro,  thanks  to  cooperation  agreements  with  other  central  banks;  the  European 
Investment Bank has been granted the status of eligible counterparty, in order to smooth the 
course  of  the  loans  this  institution  makes  to  European  SMEs;  and  the  decision  has  been 
taken  to  purchase  covered  bonds  and  other  similar  types  of  asset-backed  bonds.  At  the 
same time, an expansionary monetary impulse of unprecedented proportions was set in train 
in Europe, commensurate with the seriousness of the contractionary trends experienced in 
the real and ﬁnancial domain.  
At  government  level,  measures  were  aimed,  ﬁrst,  at  supporting  ﬁnancial  systems  and, 
further, at stimulating demand. Among the former, selective bail-outs of banks of systemic 
importance in the opening months of 2008 were followed, after the heightening of tensions in 
markets as from the summer, by the raising of deposit guarantee scheme limits, government-
backed bank issues, public injections of capital and the purchase or the safeguarding of the 
value of troubled assets held by banks. All these measures were under the umbrella of the 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2009
common  principles  for  concerted  action,  at  the  level  of  the  Heads  of  State  and  of 
Government in Europe, and at the G20 meetings more globally.  
Among  the  demand-stimulus  measures,  and  aside  from  the  operation  of  the  automatic 
stabilisers,  which  are  pivotal  in  economies  such  as  Spain,  measures  based  on  increased 
public spending and aimed, on many occasions, at the groups and sectors most adversely 
affected  by  the  crisis,  tended  to  predominate.  The  European  Economic  Recovery  Plan 
approved in December provides the reference point here for the coordination of measures in 
Europe.  
The Spanish authorities have also adopted a broad set of similarly geared measures. These 
include  the  raising  of  the  limit  on  deposit  guarantees,  the  creation  of  the  Fund  for  the 
Acquisition  of  Financial  Assets  to  purchase  high-quality  assets  from  Spanish  banks, 
guarantees for bank bond issues, various special ﬁnancing facilities instrumented through the 
ICO  (Ofﬁcial  Credit  Institute),  and  the  introduction  of  new  personal  income  tax  deductions 
and the launching of the State Fund for Local Investment and of the Special State Fund for 
revitalising the economy.  
In  Spain,  the  international  crisis  has  impacted  the  economy  at  a  particularly  delicate  time. 
Already under way was a process of adjustment of the imbalances that had built up over a 
long  growth  phase  in  which  Spain  had  shared  some  of  the  above-mentioned  factors  of 
fragility of the world economy, though not all of them and not to the same degree of intensity. 
Certain components were undoubtedly particular to Spain.  
Starting  with  the  shared  elements,  the  expansion  of  Spanish  household  and  corporate 
spending was based excessively on debt. True, the private sector was starting from relatively 
low  debt  levels.  Admittedly,  too,  euro  area  membership  provided  a  particularly  valuable 
framework of stability and broadened ﬁnancing possibilities. No less true, however, was the 
fact  that  the  single  monetary  policy  stance  proved  overly  lax  during  all  these  years  for 
Spanish  domestic  conditions  and  that  ﬁscal  policy,  even  though  substantial  budgetary 
consolidation was undertaken, was not enough to offset the excessive monetary looseness. 
A  greater  containment  of  current  spending  in  the  upturn  would  have  helped  curb  the 
imbalances and would have strengthened the underlying budgetary position.  
Other features of our expansionary phase were, however, more speciﬁc. In Spain, productive 
factors and ﬁnancial resources were overly concentrated in the real estate sector. Further, 
some of the structural constraints of our economy, such as productivity and the functioning of 
the labour market, did not show sufﬁcient improvement.  
Another  singular  factor  has  been  the  position  of  relative  strength  from  which  the  Spanish 
ﬁnancial  system  has  faced  the  crisis.  Spanish  banks  continued  to  pursue  a  “traditional” 
business model during the entire upturn, focusing on retail  ﬁnancial intermediation. This is 
certainly the main reason why, as is widely known, the role of Spanish intermediaries in the 
generation, acquisition and ﬁnancing of toxic assets has proven negligible. As the system’s 
supervisor,  the  Banco  de  España  also  contributed  to  entrenching  this  relative  strength, 
through  a  policy  that  focused  on  the  cyclical  pattern  of  building  up  provisions  and  on  the 
rigorous deﬁnition of the scope of consolidation of ﬁnancial groups.  
The Spanish ﬁnancial system was thus able to ride the ﬁrst wave of the crisis – the nature 
and origin of which, let me remind you, were strictly ﬁnancial – and readapted its sources of 
funding  to  the  new  market  situation.  Loan  securitisation  therefore  left  centre  stage  to 
deposits, short-term commercial paper issues and bank resort to the new abundant liquidity 
provision policy implemented by the ECB for the whole of the Eurosystem.  
Nonetheless, the transformation of the ﬁnancial crisis into a real recession has given rise to a 
second  wave  of  risks 
time  eminently 
macroeconomic. The Spanish ﬁnancial system is facing this second wave with the relative 
advantage of having been less damaged by the ﬁrst. But that is no guarantee of immunity 
since the deterioration of the Spanish economy exerts pressure, through various channels, 
to  ﬁnancial  stability,  whose  nature 
this 
is 
BIS Review79/2009 
 3
on  banks’  and  savings  banks’  income  statements.  I  shall  discuss  this  when  I  turn  to  the 
ﬁnancial system, after having analysed the situation of and outlook for the Spanish economy.  
The Spanish economy did not escape unscathed from the global contractionary trends, and 
in 2008 it underwent a far-reaching adjustment. Declines in GDP were evident from the third 
quarter, leading the economy to post a 0.7% fall in output at year-end in terms of its year-on-
year rate. This recessionary pattern became more visible in the ﬁrst quarter of 2009, when 
GDP decreased at a year-on-year rate of 3%, while employment was down 6% on its level a 
year earlier. As at world level, the improvement since in the latest indicators appears to point 
to some easing of the contractionary trends.  
The adjustment of the Spanish economy is impacting particularly those domestic spending 
components which showed the greatest excesses during the long upturn. The origin of this 
behaviour lies in the overlapping of a series of differing shocks. Firstly, the correction of the 
real estate sector and of the high level of private-sector debt, which had started prior to the 
crisis, already entailed significant elements of spending containment. Further, however, the 
forceful  effects  of  the  international  financial  crisis  and  of  the  global  recessionary  trends 
compounded this situation, amplifying the contraction of domestic demand, eliminating any 
possible  external  support  and  exacerbating  the  loss  of  confidence.  This  latter  factor  was, 
moreover, particularly affected by the impact of the far-reaching deterioration of the labour 
market on income expectations, an important matter which I shall return to later.  
As  a  result  of  these  factors,  there  was  a  marked  decline  in  Spanish  household  spending, 
both on consumption and on residential investment. In 2008, both items accounted jointly for 
80% of the decline in the contribution of national demand to output, which stood at slightly 
more than 4 pp for the year on average. Naturally, the heightening of the ﬁnancial crisis in 
the  ﬁnal  stretch  of  the  year,  and  the  subsequent  deterioration  in  macroeconomic 
expectations, saw the contractionary impulses spread to the other components of domestic 
spending, meaning that business investment ultimately collapsed in the second half of the 
year. Indeed, the sole prop of spending in 2008 was net external demand, which showed a 
marked increase with a contribution of 1 pp to GDP growth for the year as a whole and of 2.3 
pp  in  the  ﬁnal  quarter.  Set  against  the  progressive  weakening  of  the  world  economy,  this 
improvement  in  the  external  contribution  was  due  to  the  notable  slowdown  in  imports, 
whereby the fall in GDP is proving more moderate than in other countries.  
The decline in residential investment, along with the sharp pick-up in the household saving 
rate to 13% of disposable income, entailed an abrupt reduction in household net borrowing, 
insofar as households generated a net lending capacity for an amount equivalent to 0.6% of 
GDP over the year as a whole. The slowdown in household debt intensiﬁed to the extent that 
the debt/GDP ratio began to fall in the closing months of the year. In the case of businesses, 
the  decline  in  productive  investment  also  led  to  a  sharp  reduction  in  net  borrowing,  which 
was ultimately manifest in a slowdown in the rate of increase of the debt ratio, although the 
interest burden still continued to increase.  
As  a  result  of  the  change  in  the  sign  and  intensity  of  foreign  trade,  there  has  been  a 
reduction  in  the  nation’s  high  net  borrowing,  which  stepped  up  in  the  opening  months  of 
2009, as shown by the 25% decline in the ﬁrst quarter when compared with the same period 
a  year  earlier.  Foreseeably,  the  decrease  in  the  external  deﬁcit  will  continue  apace  in  the 
coming  months,  and  it  may  have  halved  within  two  years,  evidencing  the  speed  of  the 
adjustment induced by the depth of the contraction in domestic demand.  
 
On the supply side, the weakness in activity passed through to all productive branches, but 
with particular force to construction and industry. Employment was rapidly eroded following 
fourteen years of uninterrupted job creation. In late 2008 and early 2009, job destruction was 
most intense and, since the labour supply remained notably strong, the unemployment rate 
surged to 17.4% in the ﬁrst quarter of the year, bearing down most on the young and the 
lesser skilled.  
4 
 BIS Review 79/2009
Regrettably,  this  high  unemployment  ﬁgure  shows  that  one  of  the  risks  I  referred  to  when 
presenting  the  Annual  Report  for  2007  has  materialised.  I  insisted  then  on  the  need  to 
prevent the adjustment of the Spanish economy from falling predominantly on employment, 
as  in  previous  recessions,  since  that  would  have  signiﬁcant  adverse  multiplier  effects  on 
demand and activity, via disposable income and future income expectations. And as stated, 
this  is  proving  precisely  to  be  one  of  the  most  powerful  channels  for  the  propagation  of 
contractionary trends. One of the traditional behavioural patterns of the Spanish economy is 
thus  recurring,  revealing  the  persistent  weaknesses  in  its  institutional  framework  and 
arrangements that must be corrected.  
The high increases in labour costs witnessed last year, reﬂecting the rise in inﬂation in the 
ﬁrst  half  of  the  year,  were  not  favourable  to  employment.  Wage  cost  pressures  have  only 
begun to abate in 2009, in line with improved inﬂation expectations, following the declines in 
the rate of change of the CPI in recent months.  
Indeed, after inﬂation had moved on a markedly rising trend in the ﬁrst half of 2008, prices 
slowed sharply in the closing months of the year as a result of the abrupt turnaround in oil 
and food prices and of the marked sluggishness of demand. This deceleration has become 
more pronounced in 2009 to date, with the annual rate of change of the CPI falling in March, 
April and May (-0.9% in this latter month). While the CPI trajectory reﬂects the correction of 
some price rises in the most volatile components in the opening months of 2008, the ongoing 
recession, which is severely affecting consumption, is prompting an adjustment in prices and 
margins that is beginning to impact services and the other less volatile components. And this 
means  that  the  price  growth  differential  with  the  euro  area  has  turned  negative,  and  will 
foreseeably remain so in the coming months.  
The CPI is expected to continue to temporarily post negative rates of change in the coming 
months and, once the statistical effect linked to higher oil prices in the ﬁrst half of 2008 is 
stripped out, inﬂation should resume positive although very moderate rates of change. This 
price  behaviour  is  in  line  with  the  improvements  in  competitiveness  required  to  lessen  the 
scope and costs of the recession, to prompt the necessary adjustments and to embark on a 
sound recovery.  
The outlook for the Spanish economy points to declines in GDP over the rest of the year that 
should  lead  to  a  signiﬁcant  fall  in  2009,  albeit  slightly  lower  than  is  forecast  for  other 
European countries. It is highly likely that the worst of the contraction has already passed, 
and that the intensity of the restrictive impulses will begin to diminish in the second half of the 
year as the broad range of measures implemented progressively deploy their effects. As a 
result,  the  fall  in  activity  in  2010  is  expected  to  be  less  pronounced.  The  course  of 
employment  in  this  scenario,  in  any  event,  is  a  cause  for  concern;  despite  the  somewhat 
more positive signals given by some recent indicators, linked in part to seasonal factors, job 
destruction may run for some time and the unemployment rate may continue further on its 
rising trend.  
The  imbalances  built  up  during  the  long  expansionary  phase,  in  the  form  of  the  inﬂation 
differential  and  the  resort  to  external  ﬁnancing,  are  being  swiftly  reabsorbed,  providing  an 
unquestionable  source of  relief  in the  global  outlook  described.  Yet  this  rapid  correction  is 
occurring on the back of an excessive brake on activity, entailing major costs in terms of job 
destruction,  higher  unemployment  and  the  deterioration  of  the  productive  fabric.  If  the 
institutional features behind these developments are not reformed, there is a risk that, even 
after the most acute phase of the crisis is over, they will continue to hold back the Spanish 
economy’s  possibilities  of  recovery  and  become  a  drag  on  further  progress  in  real 
convergence with Europe.  
To  rebuild  sound  foundations  for  growth,  economic  policy  should  contribute  to  setting  in 
place the appropriate conditions to revive conﬁdence, to return ﬁnancing ﬂows to normal and 
to reinvigorate spending plans. That will require headway in restoring health to the ﬁnancial 
position of the private sector and the banking system, the completion of the adjustment in the 
BIS Review79/2009 
 5
real  estate  sector  and,  above  all,  improvements  in  productivity,  competitiveness  and  job 
creation incentives.  
The correction in the construction sector is proving most intense. And although there is still a 
sizeable stock of unsold housing, the reduction in interest rates and in house prices will no 
doubt  make  the  residential  market  more  accessible.  Cheaper  borrowing  terms  and  the 
easing  of  credit  restrictions  will  also  help  breathe  new  life  into  spending.  But  it  will  be  the 
recovery in external demand, as we move out of the international crisis, that will act as the 
main support. And the more competitive national production is, the more powerful this effect 
will  be.  To  this  end,  and  as  frequently  indicated  by  the  Banco  de  España,  sustained 
increases  in  productivity  must  be  attained  and  the  pertinent  cost,  margin  and  price 
adjustments made.  
The scale of the global recession called for the implementation of demand-side expansionary 
ﬁscal and monetary policies. And it is in this context that the substantial cuts in central bank 
intervention  rates  seen  over  the  past  year  should  be  understood,  cuts  that  have  been 
conducive  to  a  signiﬁcant  decline  in  the  cost  of  ﬁnancing  and  to  a  sharp  expansionary 
stimulus.  In  Spain,  the  potential  effects  of  this  pass-through  are  particularly  powerful  as  a 
result of the prevalence of ﬂoating interest rate loans. 
Spain, too, has moved to adopt demand-stimulating discretionary ﬁscal measures in order to 
bolster the expansionary impact of the substantial transfers of income to the private sector, 
especially to households, arising from the operation of the automatic stabilisers. The ﬁscal 
drive  by  the  Spanish  authorities  is  of  a  considerable  scale  and  generally  exceeds  that  of 
other  developed  countries.  Its  budgetary  impact  has  been  accentuated,  moreover,  by  the 
sharp fall in tax revenue as a consequence of the economic recession and of the magnitude 
of the real estate adjustment; accordingly, the ﬁscal situation has deteriorated rapidly.  
It  should  be  recalled  that  the  Spanish  economy  started  from  a  healthy  budgetary  position, 
with a surplus of somewhat over 2 pp of GDP and a very low public debt ratio compared with 
our European counterparts. Indeed, at last year’s presentation of the Annual Report to the 
Council,  I  referred  to  budgetary  policy  as  one  of  the  main  underpinnings  of  the  Spanish 
economy in this phase of the cycle and I pointed out that the favourable ﬁscal position would 
allow the automatic stabilisers to operate to their full extent without jeopardising budgetary 
stability.  
One  year  on,  the  ﬁscal  results  for  2008  and  the  projections  available  –  which  point  to  a 
budget deﬁcit approaching 10% of GDP in 2010 and to a public debt ratio that might exceed 
the  threshold  of  60%  of  GDP  –  augur  a  drastic  change  in  outlook,  with  the  possibilities  of 
ﬁscal policy boosting spending having been exhausted.  
Fiscal measures that call into question the commitment to budgetary stability in the medium 
term  should  be  categorically  avoided,  since  that  would  adversely  affect  the  cost  of  raising 
funds  and  conﬁdence  in  the  Spanish  economy,  and  it  could  also  generate  expectations  of 
future  tax  rises  that  might  ultimately  sterilise  the  expansionary  effects  of  the  measures 
adopted. Public-sector debt must be prevented from becoming an obstacle once the Spanish 
economy is better placed to grow. Accordingly, priority must be given to promptly deﬁning a 
credible strategy to reduce the deﬁcit to levels compatible with budgetary stability, once the 
exceptional circumstances that led to the rise in the deﬁcit have disappeared.  
The demand-side expansionary ﬁscal and monetary impulses are proving very powerful and 
are contributing to the alleviation of the contractionary forces at play. Evidently, though, the 
possibilities of further using these types of policies have become notably constrained, both at 
home  and  abroad.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that,  once  the  economic  and  ﬁnancial 
fragility  beleaguering  the  world  economy  has  been  resolved,  demand-side  policies  should 
adopt a more neutral stance.  
All these considerations on the diagnosis of the Spanish economy in the current international 
crisis  and  on  the  limited  leeway  available  to  demand-side  policies  mean,  rather,  that 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2009
economic  policy  has  a  central  role  to  play  in  implementing  the  reforms  that  help  improve 
productivity and the behaviour of the factor and product markets. It is in this area that the 
authorities  undoubtedly  have  effective  room  for  manoeuvre,  and  also  considerable 
responsibility.  
Let me begin with the labour market, which is where the most pressing problems are to be 
found.  The  scale  of  job  destruction  has  once  more  highlighted  the  existence  of  distortions 
that emerge with force in recessions and compound contractionary trends. And there is a risk 
that, as in the past, the surge and change in level in unemployment may stick and that this 
will  delay  subsequent  recovery.  Labour  market  dysfunctions  are  also  closely  linked  to  the 
discouraging  behaviour  of  the  economy  in  respect  of  gains  in  economic  efﬁciency  and  in 
productivity, hampering the possibility of attaining genuine improvements in competitiveness 
and of raising growth potential. Economic recovery in Spain requires structural changes that 
will encourage technologically dynamic productive sectors with high growth potential to take 
up  the  baton  from  construction.  For  this  to  occur,  the  labour  market  must  function  so  as 
reallocate  resources,  increase  and  adapt  workers’  skills  to  new  demands,  and  make 
productive processes within companies more efﬁcient.  
Reform  should  focus  on  ensuring  that  labour  conditions  adjust  to  the  economy’s  different 
cyclical junctures  and,  in  particular,  to  the  speciﬁc  circumstances  companies  or  productive 
sectors  face.  That  should  prevent  the  adjustment  coming  about  through  pushing  large 
numbers  of  workers  out  of  the  market.  Changes  are  also  needed  in  hiring  arrangements. 
These must allow workers who have lost their jobs to return promptly to active working life, 
so they do not spend long periods unemployed, the consequences of which were so adverse 
in  the  past.  Improvements  in  labour  market  intermediation  systems  and  in  mobility  and 
training for the unemployed are also very important.  
Resolute  action  here  would  help  check  business  closures  and  lessen  the  risk  of 
decapitalisation, which is admittedly very high at present. If, moreover, signiﬁcant progress 
were  made  in  eliminating  administrative  formalities,  the  Spanish  economy  would  be  better 
placed to resume a high growth rate once the world recovery began.  
To  bring  about  a  new  productive  pattern  enabling  high  rates  of  potential  growth  to  be 
regained,  structural  measures  must  span  a  wide  range  of  ﬁelds.  Improving  the  level  of 
educational attainment  of  the  labour  force is  vital  for  raising  the  quality  and  productivity  of 
human  capital.  Decisive  and  effective  action  in  boosting  the  knowledge  economy  should 
contribute to substantially increasing technological capital and to bridge the gap blighting the 
Spanish  economy  in  this  area.  And  improving  the  competitive  environment  in  which 
businesses  take  their  decisions  is crucial  if  all  these  steps  are  to  result  in  overall  gains  in 
efﬁciency and competitiveness. One key area for progress along these lines is liberalisation 
in  the  services  sector,  which  encompasses  some  of  the  most  dynamic  activities  with  the 
greatest employment-generating capacity and where new forms of labour relations may be 
more  successful.  Further,  the  growing  interaction  between  industry  and  services  has 
increased the inﬂuence of the latter in determining international competitiveness. It is likewise 
necessary  to  continue  pushing  through  liberalisation  and  competition  in  the  network 
industries, so that the conditions in which inputs are provided to other productive activities 
allow  Spanish  companies  to  compete  on  an  equal  footing  with  other  developed  countries. 
The liberalising impulse must be regained, in particular, in the energy, telecommunications 
and rail transport sectors.  
I shall devote the ﬁnal part of my address to analysing the situation of the Spanish banking 
system in greater detail.  
An  economic  environment  marked  by  a  real  and  ﬁnancial  global  crisis  poses  a  ﬁrst-order 
challenge  to  the  normal  pursuit  of  banking  activity.  As  stated,  the  ﬁrst  wave  of  shocks, 
conﬁned  essentially  to  the  ﬁnancial  arena,  did  not  have  appreciable  direct  effects  on  our 
banks, and the indirect effects were absorbed in an orderly fashion. However, as from last 
BIS Review79/2009 
 7
autumn  a  second  wave  of  shocks  was  unleashed,  resulting  in  a  real  global  crisis  which, 
naturally, is impacting Spanish banks.  
The Spanish economy’s entry into recession has consequences for banking and bad debts. 
In  particular,  such  repercussions  include  those  arising  from  the  high  sensitivity  of 
employment – and, therefore, of households’ ability to pay – to the deterioration in activity, 
and those from the adjustment of the real estate sector, the relative weight of which in bank 
balance sheets had become signiﬁcant.  
The deterioration in the economic situation reduces the demand for credit of bank customers, 
whose  spending  plans  and  income  expectations  are  normally  revised  downwards  during 
economic  downturns.  Likewise,  banks  become  more  cautious  about  granting  loans  as  a 
result  of  the  subsequent  upward  revision  of  the  risk  proﬁle  of  borrowers.  In  combination, 
these two factors translate, as we have actually seen, into a substantial slowdown in bank 
credit. Based on the past cyclical behaviour of this variable, the growth rate of bank credit will 
tend  to  stand  below  that  of  GDP.  This  cyclical  component  of  credit  is  currently  being 
reinforced by the difﬁculties still besetting wholesale funding markets and by the need both in 
Spain  and  in  the  rest  of  the  international  ﬁnancial  system  to  redress  the  high  levels  of 
leverage attained in the past.  
The behaviour of banks’ bad debts also follows certain cyclical patterns. Defaults increase 
when, as now, the deterioration in activity weakens the ﬁnancial position of bank customers, 
particularly in the case of households whose members lose their job. Thus, following a long 
economic boom that brought doubtful assets ratios to historically low levels, the year 2008 
saw a sharp rise in such ratios, and the persistence of difﬁculties in the real sector of our 
economy suggests that pressures have not yet dissipated. This is a risk that banks must be 
mindful of and manage appropriately.  
The  diminished  pace  of  activity  and  the  increase  in  bad  debts,  which  are  general  trends 
across  Spanish  banks  and  savings  banks,  exerted  pressure  on  their  income  statements 
already  in  2008.  The  recurring  income  inherent  in  a  traditional  banking  model,  which  is 
therefore  less  reliant  on  ﬁnancial  market  developments,  explains  why,  despite  the  difﬁcult 
economic circumstances, bank results were positive, in clear contrast to those reported by 
many of the institutions in other developed countries’ banking systems.  
But Spanish banks’ results will come under considerable pressure in the future. In the short 
term,  as  a  result  of  the  foreseeable  increase  in  bad  debts.  In  the  medium  term,  because 
competition  for  funds  will  squeeze  operating  margins  and  this  pressure  will  not  be  readily 
offset as it was in the past by the generation of higher volumes of business. And I do not 
believe that the ongoing deleveraging of the ﬁnancial sector, and of the economy in general, 
taking  place  both  in  Spain  and  globally,  should  be  viewed  as  transitory.  Nor  does  it  seem 
feasible  that  further  substantial  contributions  of  private  capital  will  be  forthcoming  if  the 
tensions on international ﬁnancial markets do not subside.  
From  an  overall  perspective  the  Spanish  system  is  in  a  position  to  overcome  all  these 
challenges, though as I have reiterated, talk of immunity is completely out of place. Indeed, 
not  all  banks  are  in  the  same  position  when  it  comes  to  coping  with  the  tensions.  This  is 
because they have pursued different lending policies over recent years in terms of the rate of 
expansion  of  loans  and  of  the  degree  of  risk  concentration.  Even  among  banks  that  have 
followed  similar  strategies,  notable  differences  can  be  identiﬁed  regarding  the  selection  of 
speciﬁc  risks,  their  ability  to  manage  them  and  the  buffers,  in  terms  of  proﬁtability  and 
solvency, available to them to alleviate the effects of any risks that may materialise.  
For  all  these  reasons  banks  should  make  the  changes  necessary  to  adapt  to  the  new 
circumstances.  These  changes  unavoidably  involve  stepping  up  efforts  to  rationalise 
operating costs and to correct the overcapacity in the sector which arises from a worldwide 
tendency towards lower levels of leverage.  
8 
 BIS Review 79/2009
This overcapacity in the banking industry should be tackled through restructuring processes 
that allow a sound and efﬁcient ﬁnancial intermediation system to take root. Such a system is 
a  strength  of  the  Spanish  economy  which  should  be  preserved  so  that,  once  the  crisis  is 
behind us, a sustainable growth path underpinned by the efﬁcient allocation of all resources, 
including ﬁnancial ones, may be resumed.  
This central role of a ﬁnancial intermediation system explains why the State has, in addition 
to  other  support  measures  I  have  previously  discussed,  shown  its  readiness,  like  other 
governments, to provide capital to viable credit institutions that need it. These contributions, 
or  any  other  assistance,  must  nevertheless  be  conditional  upon  the  restructuring  of  the 
institutions that receive these public funds, so as to seek both the lowest cost for taxpayers 
and  maximum  efﬁciency.  This  approach  squares  fully  with  the  common  principles  agreed 
upon  in  the  international  fora  of  which  Spain  is  a  member,  and  which  have  been  backed 
expressly by Parliament with a broad consensus. Hopefully, these principles and this spirit of 
cooperation in matters relating to the stability and resilience of our ﬁnancial system may soon 
result in a series of legal provisions that reinforce the ability to deal with potential problems, 
in line with the tradition of the Banco de España and in keeping with the speciﬁc nature of the 
tensions we are currently experiencing.  
Cooperation, in this case among international authorities, will also be necessary to further the 
design  of  the  new,  globally  applicable  guiding  principles  for  the  working  of  markets  and 
ﬁnancial  –  banking  and  non-banking  alike  –  intermediaries.  Earlier  I  referred  brieﬂy  to  the 
signiﬁcant challenges emerging in this area. Allow me succinctly to review some of the work 
and  recommendations  under  way  in  different  fora  to  palliate  the  structural  weaknesses 
highlighted  so  starkly  by  the  current  crisis  and  to  lay  the  foundations  for  a  new  and  more 
solid international ﬁnancial structure.  
From  the  banking  regulation  perspective,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is 
entrusted  with  implementing  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board, 
along with the plan of action that arose from the November 2008 G20 meeting, which was 
subsequently ratiﬁed at the April 2009 meeting. The work programme the Basel Committee 
has  set  itself  covers  various  areas,  including  most  notably  the  improvement  of  asset  risk 
assessment and management by banks, the adjustments needed to the eligibility of capital 
instruments,  the  new  requirements  for  liquidity  risk,  and  matters  concerning  transparency 
and market reporting.  
In the supervisory domain I should like to highlight the so-called Larosière Report, drafted by 
a group of high-level independent experts which was set up on the request of the President 
of  the  European  Commission.  Their  mandate  was  to  draw  up  proposals  for  improving 
supervisory arrangements in the European Union. Included in the group was an ex-Director 
General of our institution. The Report contains 31 recommendations whose ultimate aim is to 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  crisis  such  as  the  present  one  recurring  and,  should  it  recur,  to 
ensure its costs are minimal. I shall focus, however, only on those recommendations bearing 
directly  on  the  structure  of  ﬁnancial  supervision  in  Europe  in  its  microprudential  and 
macroprudential facets.  
As  regards  microprudential  supervision,  the  Report  proposes  the  creation  of  a  European 
Financial  Supervision  System.  Under  this  system,  the  current  Level  3  Committees  for 
banking,  insurance  and  securities  would  be  transformed  into  three  European  supervisory 
authorities with the power to take binding decisions in certain ﬁelds.  
As  to  macroprudential  supervision,  the  creation  of  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  was 
proposed.  Its  main  purpose  would  be  to  detect  general  risks,  apprising  the  competent 
European authorities thereof, where pertinent, so they might take the appropriate decisions.  
These are some of the initial steps of a process which will no doubt be long, but which will 
profoundly affect the systems of each and every European country. It is thus important that 
Spain should participate actively in the work of these international fora. In this respect, it is 
most satisfying that Spain has been welcomed as a member of the Financial Stability Board, 
BIS Review79/2009 
 9
in 
the  Banco  de  España’s  experience 
the successor of the Financial Stability Forum created in 1999, in which we had not hitherto 
participated.  To  be  sure, 
the  design  and 
implementation of a regulatory and supervisory system that has proven most effective during 
this crisis has been one of the factors that have helped Spain merit this position.  
And  here  I  shall  conclude,  though  not  without  ﬁrst  thanking  the  Governing  Council,  the 
Executive  Commission,  the  Directors  General  and  all  our  staff  for  their  work  this  year.  I 
should like to single out two people to thank: José Viñals, who has been with me at the helm 
of this institution over the past three years, and Javier Aríztegui, who has replaced him and 
assumed the key post of Deputy Governor of the Banco de España. I can safely say that, 
thanks  to  everybody’s  efforts,  the  Bank  has  been  able  to  creditably  perform  the  tasks 
entrusted to it. As stated in my address today, new major challenges will arise in the coming 
months, linked closely to the emergence from the exceptional situation experienced by the 
markets and ﬁnancial institutions over the past two years, and these will no doubt affect the 
core functions the Bank has to perform. I am sure I can count on the support of all of you to 
tackle them satisfactorily. 
10 
 BIS Review 79/2009
