Axel A Weber: A new supervisory architecture for Europe’s banking 
system – the view from policy makers 
Introductory remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the  policy  panel  “A  New  Supervisory  Architecture  for  Europe's  Banking  System:  The  View 
from Policy Makers”, Frankfurt am Main, 5 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Policymakers are fighting on many fronts in this crisis. Around the world, central banks have 
responded with massive interest rate cuts and an extremely large-scale provision of liquidity, 
while national governments have put together significant economic stimulus packages and 
bank  rescue  measures.  We  are  currently  witnessing  the  fact  that  these  extensive 
interventions are having some stabilising effects on financial markets and have, judging by 
the initial signs, probably led to a slowdown in the rapid pace of the downswing in the real 
economy. Nevertheless, the future outlook remains uncertain.  
Green shoots in the financial markets and perhaps also an easing of the sharp downturn in 
the  real  economy  should  not  mislead  us  about  the  shortcomings  in  regulation  and 
supervision that became evident in the crisis. In the past few months, supervisors and central 
banks have set themselves a comprehensive agenda for strengthening financial supervision 
and financial regulation. That agenda now has to be implemented thoroughly and unfailingly.  
This  is  because  the  present  marked  international  will  for  reform  has  created  a  window  of 
opportunity for a redesign. That window will not remain open for ever, however. Necessary 
reforms therefore have to be initiated as soon as possible. The current tendency towards an 
easing  in  the  financial  markets  should  be  used  vigorously  in  order  to  further  enhance  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
One  key  point  on  the  international  agenda  is  strengthening  the  supervisory  architecture, 
focusing  on  two  aspects:  first,  intensifying  macroprudential  analysis;  second  –  and  this 
applies  to  Europe  in  particular  –  furthering  the  development  of  cross-border  banking 
supervision. 
Not least owing to the catalyst function of the euro, there has been a sharp increase in major 
European banks’ cross-border activity over the past few years. Quite generally, an ongoing 
integration of the financial markets can be observed in the euro area. In terms of supervision, 
this  process  has  been  accompanied  by  greater  cross-border  cooperation  and  a  gradual 
harmonisation  of  supervisory  standards.  A  decentralised  system  has  emerged,  in  which 
competence and responsibility lie, for the time being, with the national supervisory bodies. 
This system takes due account of the operations of large internationally active banks and is, 
at  the  same  time,  consistent  with  the  existing  political  and  legal  facts  on  the  ground  in 
Europe. 
This decentralised structure is not set in stone. Neither financial market integration nor the 
supervisory  architecture  has  yet  reached  its  final  stage  in  Europe.  The  current  set-up 
nevertheless represents a sustainable foundation that was not shaken even by the tremors of 
the financial crisis. Europe has done very well with this evolutionary approach which can be 
expanded  further  as  market  evolves.  In  my  view,  the  cooperative  supervisory  model  has 
good prospects of providing a stable setting for financial market regulation both now and in 
the years to come. 
A  redesign  of  the  supervisory  architecture  does  not  just  concern  the  level  at  which 
competencies for supervision of individual institutions are allocated, however. What the crisis 
has  done,  in  fact,  is  to  broaden  the  perspective  of  the  institutions  responsible  for  financial 
stability in terms of paying greater attention to macroprudential issues. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 1
Not  so  very  long  ago,  financial  stability  analysis  often  had  the  reputation  of  being  a 
“fashionable” subject. But the scale of global financial crisis and the force with which it hit the 
real  economy  have  made  it  abundantly  clear  how  important  it  is  to  have  a  more  detailed 
understanding of how institution-specific and systemic factors interact. As you know, central 
banks have been concerned with analysing financial stability for some years now. I strongly 
support  the  attempts  to  gear  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  system  more  closely  to 
macroprudential  principles.  It  is  in  the  interests  of  all  the  financial  market  players  to  press 
ahead  with  the  debate  on  the  substance,  objectives  and  operational  framework  of 
independent analysis of financial stability.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  we  have  here  a  distinguished  panel  of  three  panellists  who  are 
playing  a  leading  role  internationally  and  within  Europe  in  the  evolution  of  the  supervisory 
architecture. I am certain that the next one and a half hours will provide us with a stimulating 
debate on the future direction taken by the supervisory structure in Europe. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2009
