Mark Carney: Inflation targeting in a global recession 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Halifax Chamber of 
Commerce, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 27 January 2009.  
 It's always a pleasure to be in Halifax, a city steeped in history and rich in spirit – a spirit that 
this Chamber has embodied for centuries, with roots dating back to 1750. 
Indeed,  I  am  always  struck  when  I  come  here  by  how  successfully  this  city  celebrates  its 
past, even as it prepares for the future. This dynamism is recognized in the nominees for this 
year's Halifax Business Awards in the current issue of "Business Voice."  
I am honoured to be part of your "Distinguished Speakers Series," although my colleagues 
tell me that "distinguished" is just something people call you when you reach a certain age. I 
have certainly aged since I became Governor, but I will gratefully accept anything that could 
be interpreted as a compliment. In these challenging times, you take what you can get.  
These are challenging times, indeed. We are facing a financial crisis without comparison for 
generations.  Most  financial  markets  have  experienced  historic  declines  in  prices  and 
unprecedented spikes in volatility. Storied financial institutions have fallen. The global capital 
market is under great strain. Issues of financial stability that were once the obsession of a 
pessimistic few are now the daily concern of many. 
In response, governments and central bankers have taken bold measures. More initiatives 
are  likely  in  the  coming  weeks.  These  measures  will  work,  although  it  will  take  time  for 
confidence  to  return  and  for  capital  to  flow  once  again.  In  the  interim,  the  sudden, 
synchronized slowdown across the globe will mean lost jobs and foregone output. This global 
recession has lessened concerns about rising inflation – concerns that seemed all too real 
just  a  few  months  ago,  with  soaring  prices  of  fuel,  food,  and  other  commodities.  In  some 
countries, though, these have given way to concerns that the opposite problem – deflation – 
might materialize. 
In  challenging  times  such  as  these,  people,  rightly,  look  to  a  few  constants:  to  institutions 
they can rely upon and to certain expectations that will be met. My message today is that 
Canadians can rely on the Bank of Canada to fulfill its mandate; they can expect inflation to 
be low, stable and predictable. The relentless focus of monetary policy on inflation control is 
essential in this time of financial crisis and global recession and remains the best contribution 
that monetary policy can make to the economic and financial welfare of Canada.  
Inflation, disinflation, and deflation 
Inflation  is,  of  course,  defined  as  a  persistent  increase  in  the  average  price  of  goods  and 
services;  in  other  words,  a  rising  trend  in  the  cost  of  living.  In  the  broadest  terms,  this  is 
measured by the total, or headline, consumer price index (CPI), which tracks the retail prices 
of a representative "shopping basket" of goods and services over time. It is also the rate that 
the Bank of Canada targets for its monetary policy.  
Disinflation occurs when there is a decline in the rate of increase in prices, while deflation 
refers  to  a  sustained  fall  in  prices;  where  the  annual  change  in  the  CPI  actually  turns 
negative year after year.  
Those of you "distinguished" enough to remember the inflation of the 1970s and 1980s may 
wonder why anyone – particularly a central banker – might be concerned with too low a level 
of inflation or even a fall in the general price level. The answer is that we are not concerned if 
these periods are transitory. In fact, as I will discuss in a moment, the Bank expects total CPI 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 1
inflation to be below zero in the second and third quarters of this year before returning to the 
two per cent target by 2011.  
While such transitory movements in prices are generally harmless over the long term, greater 
risks  arise  from  a  sustained  fall  in  prices.  Such  deflation,  if  left  unchecked,  can  weigh  on 
economic activity in two main ways. First, it increases the real burden of debt, making it more 
difficult  for  indebted  households  to  consume  and  leveraged  firms  to  invest.  Second,  if 
deflationary  expectations  take  hold,  purchases  and  investments  may  be  postponed  in  the 
expectation that they can be executed at a lower price at a later date. After all, if prices are 
falling, why buy that new car or refrigerator – or invest in technology or equipment – when 
they could be cheaper in six or nine month's time?  
A mild deflation took hold in Japan in the 1990s and was associated with a lost decade of 
missed economic opportunity. Today in the United States, the economy is in the midst of a 
serious recession and, with the recent dip in U.S. total CPI inflation to below zero, concerns 
about  the  possibility  of  deflation  there  have  increased.  Recognizing  the  risks,  the  Federal 
Reserve is responding proactively and presciently – cutting interest rates effectively to zero 
and committing to using "all available tools" to maintain price stability. 
With this backdrop, the question is being asked whether sustained deflation could happen 
here in Canada. The possibility is actually remote for three reasons. 
First is the resilience of our economy. The Canadian economy has a number of advantages: 
labour, product, and capital markets that are flexible and open; one of the soundest banking 
systems  in  the  world;  and  households,  corporations,  and  a  public  sector  that  have 
considerable  financial  flexibility.  So  while  our  economy  will  be  tested by  the  current  global 
crisis, it is well positioned to respond. 
Second,  a  floating  currency  means  that  we  have  an  independent  monetary  policy.  Quite 
simply, we are in control of our own monetary destiny. 
Third, we have used that monetary independence to great advantage. As one of the pioneers 
of inflation targeting, Canada has deep experience with the clearest, most powerful monetary 
policy framework. The advantages of that framework have been demonstrated, with inflation 
brought down and kept low and stable since the early 1990s, and they are equally relevant in 
times of disinflationary pressures. To underscore this point, and before turning to the outlook 
for growth and inflation, let me review the Bank's monetary policy framework. 
Inflation targeting 
In its simplest terms, monetary policy is concerned with how much money circulates in the 
economy, and what that money is worth. The single, most direct contribution that monetary 
policy can make to sound economic performance is to provide Canadians with confidence 
that  their  money  will  retain  its  purchasing  power.  That  means  keeping  inflation  low,  stable 
and  predictable.  Monetary  policy  makers  have  learned  over  decades  that  it  pays  to  be 
precise about this objective. 
The  cornerstone  of  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  framework,  therefore,  is  its  inflation  target 
which since 1991 has been set jointly with the Government of Canada. The target aims to 
keep the annual rate of inflation, as measured by the CPI, close to 2 per cent – the midpoint 
in a range of between 1 and 3 per cent.  
The  agreement  sets  out  one  clear  objective  –  the  inflation  target  –  and  the  Bank  is 
accountable  to  Canadians  through  its  open  and  transparent  communication  of  success  in 
achieving that objective. If inflation deviates from the target, the Bank will explain the reasons 
why, what it will do to return it to target, and how long the process is expected to take. Our 
Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  released 
that 
communication.  
is  an  example  of 
last  Thursday, 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2009
Canada has been served extremely well by its inflation-targeting policy framework, which has 
been widely emulated. Since the targets were initiated, the rate of inflation, as measured by 
the  CPI,  has  averaged  very  close  to  2  per  cent.  The  Bank's  exemplary  record  of  inflation 
control has meant that we have avoided the destructive effects of high inflation prevalent in 
earlier  decades  –  effects  that  were  disproportionately  felt  by  poorer  Canadians,  and  that 
reduced our living standards and increased our unemployment. As in other countries where 
inflation targeting has been adopted, inflation and interest rates have generally been lower 
and less volatile. 
It  is  important  to  underline  that  the  Bank  approaches  inflation  control  in  a  symmetric  way. 
This means that we care as much about inflation below the target as about inflation above 
the  target.  Just  as  inflation  targeting  has  proven  its  ability  to  prevent  the  entrenchment  of 
high and volatile inflation, it also has the power to prevent the onset of persistent deflation. 
Expectations and the 2 per cent target 
When a shock threatens to push inflation either above or below the target range, the Bank of 
Canada will act to bring inflation back to the 2 per cent target. This certainty – that the Bank 
will  act  –  helps  to  keep  expectations  of  future  inflation  close  to  the  inflation  target. 
Economists call this "anchoring inflation expectations," and it brings a number of benefits: it 
helps  to  reduce  swings  in  interest  rates,  lowers  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  Canadians, 
contributes to a more stable, competitive cost of capital for our companies and, ultimately, 
supports more sustainable growth in output and employment.  
What matters most for economic decisions is the real interest rate, which is the nominal rate 
less the expected inflation rate over the relevant time horizon. Importantly, provided medium 
term inflation expectations remain well-anchored around the 2 per cent target, the Bank can 
keep real interest rates low even in the face of temporarily falling prices.  
One of the realities of monetary policy is that it takes time to take effect. For this reason, it 
must be forward looking. To do that, we use a number of indicators to determine how serious 
and long-lasting inflation (and disinflationary) pressures might be.  
Much  as  we  aim  for  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation,  there  will  always  be  sharp 
movements in total or headline inflation. These are generally driven by volatile price changes 
in a small number of goods and services. In Canada, for example, fully 90 per cent of the 
monthly variations in the CPI are linked to price changes in just 8 of the 54 major goods and 
services  categories  included  in  the  index.  Further,  these  price  changes  are  often  quickly 
reversed and can add considerable "noise" to total CPI, making it difficult to discern genuine 
movements in trend inflation.  
For  this  reason,  the  Bank  uses  core  inflation  as  an  operational  guide.  By  focusing  on  the 
more stable components, the Bank can get a better fix on the underlying trend in inflation. 
This  is  important  because  monetary  policy  operates  with  long  and  variable  lags,  and  any 
attempt  to  control  short-term  movements  in  inflation  is  likely  to  prove  counterproductive, 
destabilizing both inflation and real economic activity.  
Our experience in Canada has shown that core inflation is a better tool for discerning inflation 
trends than is total CPI. Indeed, when the two deviate, total CPI inflation tends to converge 
on  core  inflation  rather  than  the  reverse.  When  total  inflation  temporarily  moves  higher  or 
lower than the target, households and businesses know that it will probably return to target 
within a relatively short time. 
The present situation offers a compelling example. When there is a sudden and persistent 
shock,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  past  few  months  from  outside  our  borders,  the  immediate 
effects may be felt before the full effect of the monetary policy response kicks in. However, 
these monetary actions will have an impact on economic output and will bring inflation back 
to the target. 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 3
Current outlook  
With this background, let me turn now to the current economic climate and its implications for 
inflation.  
The  outlook  for  the  world  economy  has  deteriorated  significantly  in  recent  months.  The 
financial crisis intensified last autumn and spilled over into an already weak global economy. 
This,  in  turn,  put  further  strains  on  the  global  financial  system,  increased  uncertainty  and 
sharply  reduced  the  confidence  of  businesses.  The  major  advanced  economies,  including 
Canada, are now in recession, and emerging-market countries are increasingly affected. In 
response to the sudden downturn in global demand, energy prices have fallen further, and 
global inflationary pressures have abated rapidly.  
Stabilization of the global financial system is a precondition for economic recovery. To that 
end, governments and central banks are taking bold and concerted actions. There are signs 
that  these  extraordinary  measures  are  starting  to  gain  traction,  although  more  will  be 
required  and  it  will  take  some  time  for  financial  conditions to  return  to  normal.  In  addition, 
considerable monetary and fiscal policy stimulus is being provided worldwide. 
As a result of these global developments, Canada's economic growth is expected to decline 
through mid-2009. Canadian exports are already falling sharply because of the downturn in 
external demand, especially from the United States. Here at home, demand is also declining 
as  Canadians  households  experience  a  reduction  in  their  net  worth.  This  reflects  lower 
commodity prices, as well as steep declines in consumer and business confidence.  
That  said,  the  Canadian  economy  is  expected  to  begin  recovering  later  this  year  and  to 
accelerate to above-potential growth in 2010 as policy actions begin to take hold and with 
support from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. On an annual average basis, then, 
real GDP is projected to decline by 1.2 per cent in 2009 and to rebound by 3.8 per cent in 
2010.  
What does this mean for inflation? It means that we should expect a temporary divergence 
between  headline  and  core  inflation  in  the  coming  quarters.  Reflecting  the  sharp  year-on-
year falls in energy prices (and assuming that  energy prices follow recent prices in the oil 
futures markets), total CPI inflation should fall relatively abruptly, dipping below zero in the 
second and third quarters of 2009. 
I want to emphasize that this projected brief period of falling prices does not signal the onset 
of  deflation  for  four  reasons.  First,  most  prices  will  not,  in  fact,  be  falling.  At  present,  the 
prices of more than half the goods in the CPI basket are actually rising at more than the 2 per 
cent target.  
Second,  while  core  CPI  inflation  in  Canada  should  ease  through  2009,  its  anticipated  low 
should be 1.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of this year – still within the target range for total 
CPI.  
Third,  consistent  with  the  past  experience  that  I  referred  to  earlier,  and  reflecting  the 
accommodative stance of monetary policy, we expect total CPI inflation to begin to converge 
towards core, starting at the end of this year, reaching 2 per cent by mid 2011.  
Fourth, we should again see the benefit of well-anchored inflation expectations in helping to 
return actual inflation to the target. While measures of near-term inflation expectations have 
been volatile recently, reflecting the sharp swings in energy prices, over the longer term, they 
remain well anchored at 2 per cent. Indeed, the Consensus Economics' forecast for total CPI 
inflation in 2009 fell to 0.7 per cent in January, but moves back up to 1.9 per cent for 2010. 
Consensus expectations farther out remain at 2 per cent. 
This pattern in near- and medium-term inflation expectations is very similar to what we saw 
during  the  sharp  commodity-price  spike  last  spring.  At  that  time,  short-term  expectations 
moved up sharply while medium term expectations remained anchored at 2 per cent. These 
expectations proved to be well justified as total inflation fell back into line with core inflation.  
4 
 BIS Review 9/2009
The ongoing effectiveness of monetary policy 
The Bank's projection of an economic recovery reflects, in part, the monetary easing that we 
have already put in place – cutting the policy rate by 350 basis points since December 2007. 
Guided by its forward-looking framework, the Bank began cutting interest rates sooner – and 
has cut deeper – than most other central banks. With the usual lag, these moves will have a 
powerful impact on economic activity and inflation.  
Nonetheless,  some  are  questioning,  with  rates  already  so  low  and  global  credit  markets 
strained, whether the Bank's moves can still have an effect.  
We know from experience that inflation control works much more predictably when there are 
well-functioning financial markets operating within a sound and stable financial system. The 
Canadian system has been under some strain since the onset of global difficulties, but it is 
important to keep those strains in perspective.  
It bears repeating that the Canadian banking system does not face the same challenges as 
those  in  other  major  economies.  Canadian  banks  had  modest  exposures  to  the  U.S. 
subprime  market  and  other  complex  structured  products.  More  importantly,  our  banks  are 
better capitalized and substantially less leveraged than their international peers. In contrast 
to many international banks, which face enormous pressures to scale back their assets and 
liabilities to bring them into line with their capital, Canadian banks have actually been raising 
private capital to grow their businesses. Indeed, over the past year, they have raised over 
$15 billion in Tier 1 capital from the private capital markets.  
Consequently,  Canadian  banks  continue  to  lend.  This  is  significant,  because  banks  are  a 
more important part of our financial system than in many other countries, and their relative 
strength means that total credit is continuing to grow in Canada. That said, we expect this 
credit  growth  to  slow  in  the  coming  months  as  result  of  declining  demand  during  the 
recession. 
It is worth noting that our lower overnight rates have largely been passed through at shorter 
maturities. Since the easing cycle began in December 2007, we have lowered the overnight 
rate by 350 basis points. The prime rate has fallen by 325 basis points, Bankers Acceptance 
rates (key short-term financing instruments for corporations) have fallen by about 380 basis 
points, and variable rate mortgages by about 185 basis points.  
At  longer  maturities,  the  declines  have  been  more  modest.  In  part, this  reflects  the  typical 
pattern, as long-term rates tend to be less volatile than short-term rates over the business 
cycle.  For  example,  five-year  fixed-rate  mortgages  have  fallen  by  just  over  one  and  a  half 
percentage points. Corporate bond yields have been virtually flat, as a substantial increase in 
the  risk  premium  charged  by  investors  has  offset  the  decline  in  government  bond  yields. 
While the widening of spreads at longer maturities is larger than usual, this partly reflects the 
fact that these spreads were unusually narrow to begin with. 
The  Bank  has  taken  into  consideration  the  higher  risk  premiums  demanded  in  today's 
markets in setting its overnight rate. As well, it has taken into account the effect on future 
Canadian  inflation  of  the  lower  level  of  foreign  demand  that  has  resulted,  in  part,  from 
financial difficulties in other countries. The policy rate is lower than it otherwise would be in 
the absence of these difficulties.  
Finally,  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate  in  monetary  policy  should  not  be  overlooked.  The 
substantial past depreciation of the Canadian dollar provides an important offset to weaker 
global demand and lower commodity prices. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  that  the  inflation  target  that  has  served  Canada  so  well  when 
inflation was above the 1 to 3 per cent control range, will also serve it well when inflation falls 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 5
temporarily  below  that  range.  So  let  me  leave  no  doubt,  no  uncertainty  about  the  Bank's 
commitment. Our focus is clear, our actions consistent, and our objective explicit: 2 per cent 
CPI inflation.  
Guided by Canada's inflation-targeting framework, the Bank will continue to monitor carefully 
economic and financial developments in judging to what extent further monetary stimulus will 
be  required  to  achieve  the  2  per  cent  target  over  the  medium  term.  The  Bank  retains 
considerable policy flexibility, which we will use as required.  
While  the  current  financial  crisis  presents  challenges  for  policy-makers  and  citizens  alike, 
Canada faces those challenges from a position of strength. In time, the global financial crisis 
will end, and the global economy will recover, although the speed with which this will happen 
is subject to a high degree of uncertainty.  
As  we  work  through  this  difficult  period,  you  can  be  assured  that  the  Bank  of  Canada 
remains  relentless  in its  focus  on keeping inflation  low, stable,  and  predictable  – the  most 
important contribution we can make to the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2009
