Shyamala Gopinath: Sub-national fiscal reforms and debt management – 
Indian experience  
Paper by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, presented 
at the workshop on “Sub-national Fiscal Reform and Debt Management”, organised by the 
Economic Policy and Debt Department, World Bank, Washington, 29 April 2009. 
Assistance provided by Sanjay Hansda and Arghya Mitra in preparation of the paper is gratefully acknowledged. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be here amongst you and address the World Bank Sub-national 
Fiscal Reform and Debt Management Forum. There is more than one reason on my part to 
accept this invitation, but more importantly, to share with you the turnaround story at the sub-
national level in India. The relevance of fiscal reforms and creation of fiscal space even at the 
sub-national level can hardly be over-emphasised in the context of the on-going slowdown 
the  world  over.  Indeed,  contrary  to  the  general  perceptions,  we  find  in  India  that  even  the 
sub-national  authorities  have  important  counter-cyclical  role  to  play.  Interestingly,  the 
Reserve Bank of India as the debt manager of Governments – federal and provincial – has 
all  through  been  closely  associated  with  the  task  of  putting  in  place  a  reformed  fiscal 
architecture  in  the  country.  Let  me  now  share  with  you  the  details,  which  run  into  eight 
sections, the first being the Constitutional position of the sub-national Governments. In the 
absence of firm data on local bodies (the third tier of government in India), the analysis is 
confined to the level of provincial governments. 
I.  
Constitutional provisions and debt management 
The Constitution of India has adopted a federal system of polity and governance, originally 
envisaging a two-tier structure: Central (i.e., federal) Government and State (i.e., provincial) 
Governments.  With  the  Constitution  (73rd  and  74th)  Amendment  Acts,  1992,  Local  Self-
Government  Institutions  (LSGIs),  i.e.,  rural  and  urban  local  bodies  have  been  accorded 
constitutional  status  as  the  third-tier  of  Government.  The  Constitution  provides  for 
preparation of annual budgets and borrowings by the Centre, respectively, under Articles 112 
and 292 and by the States under Articles 202 and 293. 
The  Constitution  assigns  important  responsibilities  to  the  States  in  many  sectors  such  as 
agricultural  development,  infrastructure,  poverty  alleviation,  water  supply  and  irrigation, 
public order, public health and sanitation. States have also concurrent jurisdiction in areas 
like education, electricity, economic and social planning and family planning. In addition to 
provision  of  general  administration,  State  Governments  thus  provide  various  social  and 
economic  services  and  also  transfer  resources  to  the  third  tier  of  government  –  rural  and 
urban local bodies such as municipalities. In keeping with larger responsibilities assigned to 
the  States,  their  expenditure  accounts  for  a  substantial  portion  of  the  Government  sector 
expenditure (Centre plus States) in India and stands higher than in several other countries 
such  as  Australia,  Denmark,  Argentina, USA and Germany (World  Bank, 2005). While the 
State Governments collect about one-third of the total Government sector receipt, they incur 
more than three-fourths of the total expenditure on social services and more than half of that 
on economic services.  
The  States’  ability  to  undertake  and  perform  the  developmental  functions  adequately  and 
effectively  is  critically  predicated  on  their  fiscal  position,  which  is  a  function  of  their  own 
efforts in generating resources – tax, non-tax receipts and borrowings as also the resource 
transfer from the Central Government. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 1
Sub-national borrowings 
Article 293 of the Indian Constitution imposes certain restrictions on the borrowings by State 
Governments.  The  Article  stipulates  that  a  State  may  not,  without  the  consent  of  the 
Government of India, raise any borrowings if it has any loan outstanding, which is repayable 
to the Government of India. Furthermore, under the Constitution, State governments, unlike 
the  Centre,  cannot  borrow  externally.  The  Centre  plays  the  role  of  an  intermediary  in  the 
transfer of external borrowings to States. Because of these controls exercised by the Centre, 
there is not much scope for fiscal profligacy at the State level and accordingly, there have 
been no instance of bankruptcy by any State Government. This also represents the largely 
unitary structure of the Indian federal polity despite the significantly important Constitutional 
roles that have been assigned to the sub-national Governments. 
The  major  heads  of  borrowings  by  States  include:  (i)  open  market  borrowings,  (ii)  special 
securities issued to National Small Savings Fund (NSSF), (iii) loans from banks and financial 
institutions  (negotiated  loans),  (iv)  loans  from  the  Centre,  (v)  State  Provident  Funds,  (vi) 
deposits and advances and (vii) reserve funds. 
Loans from Centre 
“Loans from the Centre”, which used to be a major source of State finances have since lost 
its significance.  
Special Securities issued to National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) 
The Central Government has set up the NSSF, which is akin to a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) providing an autonomous source of finance for the  Governments. It mobilises small 
savings  through  post  offices  and  banks  and  lends  against  special  non-tradable  securities 
issued by the States and the Centre as per the proportion fixed by the latter. The loans have 
a maturity of 25 years with an initial moratorium of five years in the repayment of principal. 
One-twentieth of the amount is repaid every year beginning from the sixth year. The special 
securities  currently  carry  a  rate  of  interest  of  9.5%,  as  fixed  by  the  Centre,  resulting  in  a 
spread of around 1.5% for the Centre. While repayments to the NSSF are generally made 
out  of  fresh  accretion,  net  outflows  since  2007-08  have  exposed  the  NSSF  to  ALM 
mismatches.  
Open market borrowings 
The market-borrowing programme of the State Governments (as also borrowings by way of 
negotiated loans and Central loans) is finalised by the Government of India and the Planning 
Commission,  keeping  in  view  the  provisions  of  Article  293(3)  of  the  Constitution  of  India. 
Once the Government of India indicates, generally at the beginning of the fiscal, the size of 
State-wise net allocation of market borrowings to the Reserve Bank, the Bank decides on the 
timing and volume of issues, taking into account the market and liquidity conditions and the 
cash needs of the States.  
Debt management in 1990s 
In terms of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Bank acts as the fiscal agent and the 
debt manager to the State Governments by way of mutual agreement. Accordingly, the RBI 
is the banker to 26 States while it is the debt manager to all the 28 States. During the 1990s, 
the  Reserve  Bank  used  to  complete  the  combined  borrowing  programme  of  all  the  States 
generally in two or more tranches through issue of bonds with a pre-determined coupon and 
pre-notified amounts for each State (Traditional Tranche Method). High statutory pre-emption 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2009
in  the  form  of  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR)  and  the  small  size  of  State  Government 
borrowings ensured the success of these primary issues.  
In 1997, State Governments were given the option to enter the market individually to raise 
resources using the tap method or the auction method. In 1999, States began to adopt the 
auction method and some States were able to mobilise loans at competitive rates, whereas 
other States had to pay higher rates. The spreads in tap tranches were subsequently raised 
to  around  50  basis  points  in  2001-02  from  25  basis  points  earlier  with  the  introduction  of 
Umbrella Tap Tranche for a total targeted amount at a predetermined coupon. The tap used 
to be normally kept open for 1-3 days. With the deterioration in the State fisc and defaults in 
State guaranteed securities, the spread over secondary market yield of Central Government 
security  increased  steadily.  The  market  seemed  to  have  ceased  to  differentiate  amongst 
States  in  terms  of  their  fiscal  performance.  The  share  of  market  borrowings  by  auctions 
declined from 15.0 per cent during 2001-02 to 2.3 per cent in 2004-05 and the Reserve Bank 
had  to  play an  active  role  in convincing  some of  the  leading  players  to  subscribe  to  State 
Government securities.  
II.  
Fiscal decline of the states in late 1980s 
During  the  1970s  and  the  first  half  of  the  1980s,  States  had  a  relatively  healthy  fiscal 
position. The buoyant growth in States taxes particularly sales tax contributed to a surplus in 
the  revenue  account  between  the  mid-1970s  and  the  mid-1980s.  Although  the  States 
slashed  their  investment  activities  faced  with  revenue  deficit  from  1987-88,  their  debt  and 
debt  servicing  burden  soared  with  the  high  cost  borrowing  financing  current  expenditure 
amidst  growing  fiscal  imbalances  during  1986-87  to  1997-98.  Fiscal  imbalances  worsened 
after 1998-99 following a sizeable pay hike of the employees in sequel to the implementation 
of the Fifth Pay Commission’s recommendations at the State level. States faced mounting 
pension  burden  which  in  case  of  many  States  increased  at  a  faster  rate  than  salaries. 
Interest burden also grew steadily warranting increasing borrowings to bridge the GFD. The 
GFD of States deteriorated sharply from 2.9 per cent in 1997-98 to 4.6 per cent in 1999-2000 
before declining marginally to 4.4 per cent in 2003-04. By 2003-04, the aggregate liabilities of 
States peaked at 33.2 percent of GDP from 20.9 per cent in 1996-97. The burgeoning fiscal 
gap fed on itself as the ratio of interest payments to revenue receipts of States deteriorated 
sharply from 13.0 per cent in 1990-91 to 26.0 per cent in 2003-04. 
The structural imbalance in State finances stemmed from their limited resource base vis-à-
vis growing expenditure. The narrow tax base of the States with greater reliance on indirect 
taxes  such  as  sales  tax  and  the  lack  of  harmonised  inter-State  tax  structure  allowed 
distortions  and  rigidities  to  emerge  in  late  1980s.  The  States’  own  tax  revenue  which 
financed 32.2% of the total expenditure in 1980s has shown only a marginal rise to 34.5% in 
1990s. The internal resource mobilisation by the States was further constrained by stagnant 
user  charges  as  also  the  fact  that  the  State  PSUs  such  as  the  State  Electricity  Boards 
(SEBs)  and  State  Transport  Undertakings  were  running  into  losses.  Given  the  relatively 
higher responsibility for the States for social and economic development, the resulting fiscal 
gap is financed, among others, by vertical resource transfer from the Centre to the States. 
However, the resource flow from the Centre decelerated from 15.2% in 1980s to 14.5% in 
1990s  following  the  fiscal  reforms  initiated  by  the  Centre.  The  deceleration  in  transfers 
emerged  despite  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  tax  transfers  recommended  by  various 
Finance Commissions. This reflected the low level of buoyancy in both income tax and union 
excise duties, the then two components of shareable taxes with States.  
BIS Review 83/2009 
 3
III.  
Sub-national fiscal reforms 
Reflecting  the  fiscal  stress,  the  expenditure  for  developmental  activities,  which  are  directly 
related  to  growth,  has  suffered;  on  the  other  hand,  expenditure  on  non-developmental 
purposes,  largely  committed,  has  witnessed  a  steady  rise.  Fiscal  adjustment  based 
predominantly  on  expenditure  reduction  may  have  adverse  implications  for  growth, 
particularly when government expenditure in India is lower than that in the OECD countries. 
It  was  felt  that  fiscal  strategy  based  on  revenue  maximisation  could  provide  necessary 
flexibility  to  the  pattern  of  expenditure.  Thus,  sub-national  fiscal  adjustment  started  in  late 
1990s  as  follows,  motivated,  among  others,  by  the  reform-linked  assistance  (i)  from  the 
Centre  as  part  of  the  Medium-Term  Fiscal  Reform  Programme  in  line  with  the  Eleventh 
Finance Commission and (ii) from the multilateral agencies. 
(i)  
Tax reforms 
States initiated several measures towards enhancement/restructuring of the taxes within their 
fold, such as, land revenue, vehicle tax, entertainment tax, sales tax, electricity duty, tax on 
trades  and  professional  tax.  It  was  recognised  that  competitive  sales  tax  reductions  for 
attracting  investment  led  to  revenue  losses  without  commensurate  gains.  With  a  view  to 
harmonising  inter-State  taxes  and  ultimately  switch  over  to  State-level  value  added  tax 
(VAT), States initially introduced uniform floor rate during 2000 before finally switching over 
to  the  Value  Added  Tax  (VAT)  in  lieu  of  sales  tax  between  April  2005  and  January  2008, 
which has been an unqualified success in raising the tax revenue for the States.  
(ii)  
Non-tax measures 
States also undertook measures to enhance non-tax revenues by reviewing/rationalising the 
royalties payable to them, including those on major and minor minerals, forestry and wildlife, 
revision of tuition fees, medical fees, irrigation water rates and tariffs on urban water supply. 
The  issue  of  user  charges  since  not  in  commensurate  with  the  cost  of  public  services 
continues to be a concern.  
(iii) 
Expenditure management 
The State Governments’ measures to contain expenditure, inter alia, include restrictions on 
fresh  recruitment/creation  of  new  posts,  review  of  manpower  requirements  and  cut  in 
establishment expenses and reduction in non-merit subsidies through better targeting. 
(iv) 
Public sector restructuring 
Several States have shown interest in undertaking a comprehensive review of the functioning 
of the State Public Sector Undertakings (SPSUs), including the possibility of closing down of 
non-viable  units  after  providing  for  suitable  safety-nets  to  the  employees  including  VRS. 
States encouraged private sector participation in the transport and power generation sectors, 
set up the State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) and pursued with unbundling or 
corporatisation of the SEBs. One of the major tasks entrusted to the SERC is to rationalise 
tariff rates. Further, the States have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the 
Union Ministry of Power to undertake reforms in a time-bound manner. 
(v)  
Institutional reforms 
Faced with mounting deficits and market fatigue in States’ borrowings, States embarked on a 
rule-based pursuit of fiscal reforms by enacting the fiscal responsibility legislation (FRL), first 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2009
by  Karnataka  (2002)  and  followed  by  Kerala,  Punjab  and  Tamil  Nadu  (all  in  2003).  Uttar 
Pradesh  enacted  FRL  in  2004.  The  enactment  of  FRL  was  incentivised  by  the  Twelfth 
Finance  Commission  (TFC)  and  all  but  two  States  have  enacted  FRLs  by  May  2007. 
Following the recommendations of the Core Group on Voluntary Disclosure Norms for State 
Governments  (2001),  States  are  being  sensitised  to  the  principle  of  transparency  in 
Government operations so as to ensure macro fiscal sustainability and fiscal rectitude. States 
have since enhanced transparency in State budgets. Some of the States also provide details 
on outstanding guarantees. In addition, a few States have started disseminating information 
on consolidated budgetary position, which are inclusive of off-budget borrowings. 
IV.  
Finance Commissions and state finances 
Under article 280 of the Constitution, the President of India appoints a Finance Commission 
every five years. The Commission is charged with making recommendations to the President 
on  the  distribution  of  the  taxes  between  the  Centre  and  the  States  and  the  consequent 
distribution among  the  States  themselves.  It  also  recommends  grants  in  aid  to  States  and 
suggest measures to strengthen the functioning of the third tier governments comprising of 
Panchayati Raj (for rural areas) and Municipal bodies (for urban areas).  
11th Finance Commission 
In  pursuance  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Eleventh  Finance  Commission  (EFC),  the 
Central Government set up an Incentive Fund for State fiscal reforms. Each State was given 
the target of a minimum improvement of 5% in the revenue deficit as a proportion of their 
revenue receipt each year till 2004-05. For States with a revenue surplus, 3% improvement 
in  the  balance  in  the  current  revenue  was  required  for  release  of  funds  under  this  facility. 
Accordingly, several State Governments drew up Medium-Term Fiscal Reforms Programme 
(MTFRP) and entered into MoUs with the Union Ministry of Finance. The MTFRP of States 
covered  various  areas  such  as  fiscal  consolidation,  public  sector  enterprises  reform, 
power/irrigation sector reforms and fiscal transparency. 
12th Finance Commission 
The subsequent Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) felt that it would be appropriate for the 
States to take advantage of the prevailing market rates and avoid the spread charged by the 
Centre on the assistance provided by it. The pattern of Central assistance included loan as a 
major  element  in  respect  of  general  category  States,  which  was  implicitly  funded  from 
borrowings by the Centre and hence, the terms of loans extended to the States reflected the 
Centre’s cost of borrowings. The TFC, therefore, recommended that the Central Government 
should  not  act  as  an  intermediary  for  future  lending  and  allow  the  States  to  approach  the 
market directly. If some fiscally weak States were unable to raise funds from the market, the 
Centre  could  borrow  for  the  purpose  of  on-lending  to  such  States,  but  the  interest  rates 
should remain aligned to the marginal cost of borrowing for the Centre. This approach was 
accepted  by  the  Central  Government,  in  principle,  to  be  implemented  in  phases,  in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank.  
Second,  the  TFC  recommended  back-to-back  transfer  of  external  assistance  to  the  States 
from  the  Centre  with  the  States  having  to  bear  full  exchange  rate  risk.  Third,  the  TFC 
recommended  a  fiscal  restructuring  plan  based  on  the  enactment  of  fiscal  responsibility 
legislation,  inter  alia,  including  (i)  elimination  of  revenue  deficit  (RD)  by  2008-09  and  (ii) 
containment of gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to 3.0 per cent of GSDP. If the States are able to 
fulfil  these  requirements,  they  would  be  entitled  to  debt  relief  including  debt  write-off  in 
respect of Central loans. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 5
Implementation of 12th Finance Commission’s recommendations 
In  order  to  operationalise  the  new  arrangements,  the  Government  of  India  constituted  a 
Technical Group under my chairmanship, which submitted its report in December 2005 and 
made  several  recommendations.  Accordingly,  there  has  been  progress  in  adoption  of  the 
auction method for borrowing by the States. In addition, State Development Loans (SDLs) 
were made eligible for repo transactions under the liquidity adjustment facility of the RBI in 
April 2007 and it has been decided to introduce the non-competitive bidding facility in respect 
of the primary auctions of SDLs. 
The Central Government, on its part, initiated several measures to ease the debt burden of 
States: (i) the Debt Swap Scheme (2002-03 to 2004-05), (ii) Debt Consolidation and Relief 
Facility  (DCRF)  (effective  fiscal  2005-06)  that  allowed  rescheduling  of  central  loans  at  a 
reduced rate of interest of 7.5 per cent and debt waiver (subject to enactment of FRL and 
adherence to revenue deficit reduction targets) and (iii) reduction of interest rate on securities 
issued to NSSF during 1999-2000 to 2001-02 carrying interest rate of 11.0-13.5 per cent to 
10.5  per  cent  (effective  fiscal  2007-08).  Further,  in  accordance  with  the  decision  of  the 
National  Development  Council,  the  obligatory  share  of  the  States  in  the  NSSF  has  been 
reduced to 80 per cent from 2007-08. 
As regards borrowings from banks and financial institutions (negotiated loans), it is our view 
that  such  borrowings,  negotiated  by  States  on  a  bilateral  basis  with  lenders,  overlap  with 
open market borrowings as the lenders belong to the same set of market participants. The 
Reserve  Bank  is  the  debt  manager  for  all  the  28  State  Governments  by  entering  into 
voluntary  agreement  with  them  and  the  States  should,  therefore,  confine  their  banking 
requirements with the Reserve Bank and not borrow from other banks. 
Consolidated Sinking Fund 
At  the  request  of  the  State  Governments,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  prepared  a  model 
Consolidated  Sinking  Fund  (CSF)  Scheme  and  circulated  it  amongst  them  for  adoption  / 
consideration  in  1999.  The  Twelfth  Finance  Commission  had  recommended  that  the  CSF 
may  cover  repayments  in  respect  of  all  the  loans  of  the  State  Governments  (and  not  just 
open  market  borrowings).  Against  this  backdrop,  the  Reserve  Bank  circulated  a  revised 
model scheme of CSF amongst the State Governments in May 2006 and of the 18 States 
that have set up CSF, 14 States adopted the revised CSF scheme. As at end-March 2009, 
the  outstanding  balance  of  the  State  Governments  in  CSF  is  Rs.240 billion  accounting  for 
about 1.5 per cent of the outstanding liabilities of the State Governments.  
Prepayment of debt 
The  upsurge  in  the  surplus  cash  balances  of  the  State  Governments  since  the  middle  of 
2004-05, in sharp contrast to the liquidity pressures witnessed in the earlier period, posed 
newer challenges to the financial and cash management of the State Governments. In the 
context of build up of cash balances which involve a negative carry, a few States proposed to 
utilise their surplus cash to pre-pay a part of their outstanding open market debt. Accordingly, 
the  RBI  conducted  two  rounds  of  buyback  auctions  in  respect  of  two  States  in  2006-07. 
During  2007-08,  buy-back  of  securities  was  carried  out  for  a  State  using  the  anonymous 
electronic trading (NDS-OM) platform.  
Thirteenth Finance Commission 
The Thirteenth Finance Commission (ThFC) since constituted in November 2007 is expected 
to submit its report by October 2009. Its recommendations would be applicable for five years 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2009
(2010-11 to 2014-15). The Commission would make recommendations on the distribution of 
the taxes between the Centre and the States and among the States, grants in aid to States, 
and suggest measures to strengthen the functioning of the third tier governments. The ThFC 
will  also  consider,  inter  alia,  the  impact  of  the  proposed  implementation  of  Goods  and 
Services Tax (GST), the need to improve the quality of public expenditure and the need to 
manage  ecology,  environment  and  changed  climate  consistent  with  sustainable 
development. The Commission shall review the state of the finances of the Union and the 
States,  and  suggest  measures  for maintaining a  stable  and  sustainable  fiscal  environment 
consistent  with  equitable  growth.  The  Commission  may  also  review 
the  present 
arrangements as regards financing of Disaster Management with reference to the National 
Calamity  Contingency  Fund  and 
the  Calamity  Relief  Fund  and  make  appropriate 
recommendations thereon. The ThFC may also suggest a roadmap for 2010 to 2015 with a 
view to maintaining the gains of fiscal consolidation after bringing the liabilities of the Central 
Government on the deficit targets. It is expected that the ThFC, like its predecessors, would 
do justice to the issues related to vertical and horizontal equity even as taking the process of 
fiscal consolidation further. 
State Finance Commission 
The  Constitution  (73rd  and  74th)  amendment  Acts,  1993  have  respectively,  accorded 
constitutional  status  to  rural  and  urban  local  bodies  as  the  third  tier  of  Government.  The 
Amendments  provide  for  constitution  of  State  Finance  Commissions  every  five  years. 
Following the recommendations of the State Finance Commissions (SFCs) and taking into 
account  the  devolutions  made  by  the  Central  Finance  Commission  (CFC),  the  State 
Governments  are  required  to  devolve  resources  to  their  local  bodies.  Not  all  States  have 
constituted  SFCs.  and  a  fewer  States  have  submitted  action  taken  reports  (ATRs)  on  the 
recommendations made by the SFCs as noted by the Twelfth (Central) Finance Commission 
(TwFC). The TwFC, inter alia, recommended that SFCs should follow a normative approach 
in  the  assessment  of  revenues  and  expenditure  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  gap  that  may  be 
considered  by  the  CFC  and  that  the  principal  recommendations  of  the  SFCs  may  be 
accepted without modification as in the case of CFC. 
V.   Role of the Reserve Bank of India in sub-national finances 
The  RBI  has,  over  the  years,  closely  interacted  with  the  State  Governments  in  its 
developmental role – particularly in areas of development of agriculture, and small industries. 
The RBI was specifically entrusted with an important promotional role, since its inception, of 
financing  agricultural  operations  and  marketing  of  crops.  In  fact,  the  Agricultural  Credit 
Department was created simultaneously with the establishment of the RBI in 1935. 
Study of State Finances 
The  Reserve  Bank  prepares  and  publishes  an  annual  Study  on  the  State  Government 
Finances. This is a unique study since it compiles, consolidates and analyses detailed data 
on the budgets of all the State Governments. It also documents the policy initiatives on State 
finances and debt management by the State Governments, the Government of India and the 
Reserve Bank. The study has been well received by policy makers and academicians, both 
in India and abroad, and is an important reference document. 
Model fiscal responsibility legislation 
The RBI played a facilitating role in the States’ endeavour for rule-based fiscal reforms by 
providing  the  Secretariat  support  to  a  group  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  for  preparing  a 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 7
model  fiscal  responsibility  legislation  for  the  States.  The  final  report  was  submitted  to  the 
Reserve Bank in January 2005. The Group recommended that the model legislation would 
generally  follow  the  pattern  of  the  Central  FRBM  Act,  and  build  upon  the  State  fiscal 
responsibility legislations already enacted. The Group also took into account the international 
best  practices  available  in  the  area  as  well  as  the  recommendations  of  the  various 
committees  on  fiscal  transparency  and  on  the  issues  related  to  voluntary  disclosure  of 
information  by  the  State  Governments.  Various  dimensions  of  the  fiscal  legislative 
framework,  such  as,  the  choice  of  targets,  the  road  map,  independent  evaluation  criteria, 
prioritisation  of  capital  expenditure,  treatment  of  contingent  liabilities  including  guarantees 
and computation of pension liabilities were deliberated upon to arrive at a consensus. 
State Finance Secretaries Conference 
Clearly,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  gone  beyond  its  statutorily  mandated  obligations  and  has 
provided the platform for interface between the RBI and the State Governments based on 
mutual  trust  on  issues  related  to  State  finances  where  the  other  stakeholders  –  including 
representatives  from  the  Government  of  India,  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  and  the 
Planning  Commission  –  are  also  invited  to  participate  in  the  Conference.  There  are 
occasions  when  fiscal  experts,  leading  commercial  bankers  and  representatives  of  credit 
rating agencies were also invited to participate and contribute to the specific issues on the 
agenda. Since 1997, 21 such conferences have been held and decisions have been arrived 
at, in a consensual manner, on many critical issues such as revisions in limits on Ways and 
Means advances and Overdraft Regulation Scheme, adoption of auction method for market 
borrowing, setting up of Consolidated Sinking Fund, ceiling on guarantees and establishment 
of Guarantee Redemption Fund, disclosure and transparency in budget-making, and model 
fiscal responsibility legislation at the State level. 
Standing Technical Committee on States’ borrowings 
The  Bank’s  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  2006-07  proposed  to  constitute  a  Standing 
Technical  Committee  (STC)  under  the  aegis  of  the  State  Finance  Secretaries  Conference 
with representation from the Central and State Governments and the Reserve Bank to advise 
on  the  wide-ranging  issues  relating  to  the  borrowing  programmes  of  Central  and  State 
Governments through a consensual and cooperative approach. The STC was, accordingly, 
constituted  in  December  2006  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Government  of  India  and  in 
consultation  with  States.  All  States,  the  Central  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  are 
members of the Committee.  
VI.  
State Government Guarantees and fiscal risk management 
Against  the  imperative  of  infrastructural  development  on  the  one  hand  and  resource 
constraint on the other, the States resorted to provision of guarantees mainly to third tier sub-
national  entities  and  State  level  public  sector  (but  also  private  sector)  bodies,  to  promote 
capital  formation  for  economic  development  without  regard  to  fiscal  capacity  for  debt 
servicing in the event of devolvement of guarantees on State Governments. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  sensitized  the  States  about  the  fiscal  risk  associated  with  such 
guarantees, need for transparency with regard to the guarantee policies and the magnitude 
of  guarantees.  The  Reserve  Bank  provided  the  forum  in  the  form  of  State  Finance 
Secretaries Conference where the issues related to guarantees were discussed. Further, the 
Reserve Bank provided the technical expertise and provided the Secretariat to the various 
Groups on State Guarantees. Pursuant to the recommendations of a Technical Committee, 
several  States  have  since  fixed  a  ceiling  on  guarantees  to  be  issued  by  them.  Further,  a 
Group  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  on  the  Fiscal  Risk  on  State  Government  Guarantees 
8 
 BIS Review 83/2009
(2002)  underlined  the  importance  of  according  appropriate  risk  weights  in  respect  of 
devolvement of guarantees and suggested estimation of risk weighted guarantees so as to 
make adequate budgetary provisions for honouring these guarantees once they devolve on 
the  States.  Since  2003,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  also  organising  workshops  on  the 
evaluation  of  fiscal  risks  of  guarantees  for  the  benefit  of  State  Government  officials.  The 
Report of the Fiscal Responsibility Legislation at the State Level (2005) recommended fixing 
a  limit  on  annual  incremental  risk-weighted  guarantees  in  relation  to  their  GSDP/total 
revenue receipts. Many States have incorporated this recommendation in their FRL although 
this was not mandated by the TwFC for receiving debt relief. Consequent to the improvement 
of  the  fiscal  position  of  States,  the  record  of  honouring  of  guarantees  by  the  State 
Governments has significantly improved. 
Guarantee Redemption Fund 
The Reserve Bank, in its capacity as a regulator of banks and financial institutions, issued a 
circular in 2003 to the effect that they should exercise due diligence and proper appraisal to 
ensure  project  viability,  irrespective  of  the  provision  of  State  Government  guarantees.  The 
Reserve  Bank  also  circulated  a  draft  scheme  on  Guarantee  Redemption  Fund  (GRF) 
amongst the State Governments for voluntary adoption. As on March 31, 2009 the aggregate 
investments of the nine State Governments that have set up the GRF amounted to Rs.30.4 
billion. 
VII.  
Debt management in an era of fiscal consolidation 
With  the  implementation  of  the  TwFC’s  recommendations,  the  year  2005-06  marked  a 
watershed  in  the  evolution  of  State  finances  and  debt  management.  During  2005-06,  48.5 
per cent of the market borrowings were raised through the auction route as compared with 
2.3  per  cent  in  2004-05.  The  moderation  in  fiscal  imbalances  and  enactment  of  fiscal 
responsibility legislation facilitated the smooth transition to the conduct of entire open market 
borrowings  by  the  auction  route  since  2006-07  as  proposed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  its 
Annual  Policy  Statement  2006-07.  This  was  notwithstanding  the  sharp  increase  in  the  net 
market borrowings from 0.3 per cent of GDP in 2006-07 to 1.9 per cent of GDP in 2008-09. 
Reflecting  the  maturity  profile  of  State  Governments  as  also  the  timing  of  issuances,  the 
weighted average cost of States’ borrowings was marginally higher than that of the cost of 
borrowings of the Centre. The spread over the Central Government Securities has declined 
from 34 basis points in 2004-05 to 16 basis points in 2008-09 (Table). 
 
The interest rates on market borrowings continued to remain lower than 9.5 per cent charged 
for borrowings from the NSSF. The shift in borrowings from the NSSF and from the Centre to 
market  borrowings  has  reduced  the  weighted  average  cost  of  borrowings  of  State 
Governments and at the same time, improved their maneuverability on the desired quantum 
of borrowings. 
States’  market  borrowings  have  been  by  way  of  plain  vanilla  fixed  coupon  securities 
denominated  in  domestic  currency  which  have  several  advantages.  This  has  accorded 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 9
certainty to the budgetary expenditure and reduced balance sheet risks. The uncertainties in 
the cost of borrowings arising from the frequent resetting of interest rates that are associated 
with floating rate bonds are absent. 
The maturity of State Government security is usually 10 years although securities of 11-13 
years have also been issued. The longish maturity of State Governments has protected the 
State  Government  balance  sheet  from  refinancing  risk.  Since  the  10-year  segment  is  the 
most liquid segment of the yield curve reflecting demand from most segments of the market, 
the illiquidity premium is thus kept lower for the States. 
Special Reserve Fund 
Under the Constitution, States cannot raise market borrowings from abroad. States are thus 
protected  from  exchange  rate  risk.  States,  however,  are  exposed  to  exchange  rate  risk 
consequent  to  the  acceptance  of  the  TwFC  recommendation  relating  to  on-lending  of 
external assistance loans to State Governments on a back-to-back basis. A few States had 
expressed difficulties in making budgetary provisions in respect of external assistance loans 
if  the  exchange  rates  are  volatile.  In  this  context,  the  Technical  Group  on  Borrowings  by 
State Governments, which was set up under my chairmanship, felt that States could consider 
setting  up  sinking  funds  for  managing  exchange  rate  risks  which  could  be  funded  by  the 
savings resulting from payment of lower rate of interest on external borrowings in favourable 
times.  The  modalities  for  setting  up  of  the  fund  were  subsequently  discussed  in  the  State 
Finance Secretaries Conference.  
VIII.   Ways and Means Advances to the State Governments 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been extending Ways and Means Advances (WMA) to 
the  State  Governments  since  1937,  under  the  provisions  of  Section  17(5)  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India Act, with the objective of covering temporary mismatches in cash flows of their 
receipts  and  payments.  According  to  the  Act,  such  advances  are  repayable  not  later  than 
three months from the date of making that advance. The maximum amount of such advance 
by the RBI and the interest charged thereon are, however, not specified in the RBI Act but 
are regulated by voluntary agreements with the State Governments. At present, RBI is the 
banker for 26 States (i.e. barring Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim) and the Union Territory of 
Puducherry. 
There are two types of WMA viz., (i) Normal or clean advances, which were introduced in 
1937;  and  (ii)  Special  or  secured  advances,  instituted  in  1953,  and  which  are  provided 
against the collateral of Government of India securities. State-wise limits in respect of Normal 
and  Special  WMA  are  fixed  based  on  certain  parameters;  these  limits  have  been  revised 
periodically over the years. An overdraft (OD) occurs whenever these limits are exceeded. 
Maximum time-period (days) and/or financial limits for which State Governments can remain 
in OD have been specified; these limits have also been revised periodically. Payments are 
suspended on behalf of the State Governments in case OD limits are breached.  
In  view  of  the  significant  improvement  in  the  cash  position  of  the  State  Governments,  the 
normal WMA limits which were raised periodically – usually on an annual basis – have been 
retained at the level prevailing since 2006-07. The WMA limits for 26 States and the Union 
Territory of Puducherry stand at Rs.9,925 crore. 
10 
 BIS Review 83/2009
IX.  
Global financial crisis and the way forward 
Fiscal outturn 
The consolidated fiscal position of the State Governments witnessed significant improvement 
in  the  recent  years  reflecting  the  higher  share  in  Central  transfers  as  a  follow-up  of  the 
recommendations of the TwFC, States’ own efforts at revenue augmentation, rationalisation 
of revenue expenditure and the cyclical upturn in the global economy that had a ripple effect 
on State finances. States recorded a revenue surplus of 0.6 per cent in 2006-07 for the first 
time since 1986-87. For the fiscal 2008-09, 25 States presented a revenue surplus budget. 
Seventeen States budgeted their GFD at less than 3 per cent of GSDP.  
The  outstanding  liabilities  of  States  declined  from  the  peak  of  33.2  per  cent  in  2003-04  to 
28.3 per cent in 2007-08 (RE) and were budgeted to decline further to 27.4 per cent in 2008-
09  (BE).  With  the  decline  in  the  outstanding  liabilities,  the  ratio  of  interest  payments  to 
revenue receipts was estimated to decline to 15.1 per cent in 2008-09 from a peak of 26.0 
per cent in 2003-04. The States have thus achieved the targets of fiscal deficit and debt/GDP 
ratio  at  the  aggregate  ahead  of  the  schedule  recommended  by  the  12th  Finance 
Commission. Faced with the global financial crisis, the States were thus on a relatively firm 
ground having left with some fiscal space and accordingly given additional allocation of open 
market  borrowings  equivalent  to  0.5  percentage  point  of  a  State’s  GSDP  as  a  part  of  the 
second fiscal stimulus package over and above the mandated 3.0 per cent during 2008-09. 
Impact on States’ borrowings 
During 2008-09, the increase in net market borrowings of States has met with some investor 
fatigue  reflecting  the  bunching  of  borrowings  by  States  during  the  second  half  and  the 
additional market borrowings by the Centre (Rs.1,16,000 crore or 2.1 per cent of GDP) over 
and above the budgeted amount. The spread increased to 102-236 basis points in auctions 
conducted during January 13, 2009 to March 24, 2009 from 30-98 basis points during the 
first half of 2008-09. Notwithstanding the increase in the spread, the cut-off yields ruled low 
at  6.65-8.89  per  cent  during  January-March  2009  as  compared  with  8.39-9.90  per  cent 
during the first half of 2008-09 in view of the reduction of the monetary policy rates, decline in 
inflation and flight to safety by investors. 
Impact on States’ receipts and way forward 
The spill-over impact of on-going global financial crisis on State finances can be gauged from 
the revised estimates (RE) of 2008-09 as available in respect of 19 States in their budgets for 
2009-10. A moderate growth in revenue receipts outstripped by a higher growth in revenue 
expenditure resulted in moderation in revenue surplus. There has been a decline in States’ 
own tax revenue and share in central taxes during 2008-09 (RE) over the budget estimates 
(BE). Despite this, consolidated revenue receipts in the RE have shown some improvement 
over the BE mainly on account of increase in States’ own non-tax revenues and grants from 
the Centre. During 2009-10 at the consolidated level, States are expecting some recovery on 
account  of States’  own  tax  revenue  as  well  as  in  share  in  central  taxes.  However,  States’ 
own non-tax revenue is budgeted to decline during 2009-10. 
As per the RE, aggregate expenditure of States for 2008-09 increased by 5.7 per cent over 
the  BE  largely  on  account  of  increase  in  capital  outlay.  However,  during  2009-10,  while 
revenue  expenditure  is  budgeted  to  increase by  12  per  cent,  capital outlay  is  budgeted  to 
decline by 6.6 per cent. As a result, total expenditure of States is budgeted to increase by 9.6 
per cent. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 11
Consolidated revenue surplus of 19 States as percentage of GDP has shown moderation in 
the RE of 2008-09, while it is budgeted to be wiped out and turn into deficit during 2009-10. 
The moderation in revenue surplus coupled with a decline in non-debt capital receipts and 
increase  in  capital  outlay  led  to  deterioration  in  gross  fiscal  deficit  (GFD)  in  the  revised 
estimates of 2008-09. In fact, to address the issue of slowdown, Central Government allowed 
the States to increase the limit of fiscal deficit to 3.5 per cent during 2008-09. Thus, States 
were allowed to raise the additional market borrowing to the extent of 0.5 per cent of GSDP. 
This  additional  fiscal  space  was  to  be  utilized  for  making  capital  investment.  In  addition, 
some  States  have  also  introduced  stimulus  packages  to  boost  investment  particularly  in 
infrastructure sectors. GFD as a percentage to GDP is budgeted to increase further during 
2009-10.  
We expect that once the global economy begins to recover, the sub-national governments 
would  re-affirm  their  commitment  to  the  fiscal  responsibility  and  be  back  onto  the  path  of 
fiscal consolidation. Meanwhile, the challenge for the governments and the RBI is to manage 
the transition with as little pain as possible. 
12 
 BIS Review 83/2009
