Philipp Hildebrand: Banking regulation – changing the rules of the game 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Twelfth  Annual  International  Banking  Conference,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Chicago, Chicago, 25 September 2009. 
I would like to thank Jürg Blum, Rita Kobel, and Signe Krogstrup for their valuable support in drafting this speech. 
I also want to thank Bertrand Rime for helpful comments and discussions. 
 Introduction  
I  want  to  thank  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  for  the  kind  invitation  and  the 
opportunity to speak to you this evening. It is a privilege to be here. A year ago, we were in 
the midst of a perfect financial storm. Following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in mid-
September, the imminent collapse of the global financial system became a distinct possibility. 
To  avert  such  an  outcome,  a  bold  and  unprecedented  international  policy  response  was 
needed and promptly initiated. In the US as well as in Europe, several of the world’s largest 
financial institutions required public capital injections, and their nondeposit liabilities had to 
be  guaranteed.  A  number  of  countries  were  forced  to  expand  their  deposit  insurance 
programs.  In  some  cases,  governments  or  central  banks  purchased  or  guaranteed  bank 
assets.1   
In  spite  of  the  rapid  policy  response  aimed  at  stabilizing  the  global  financial  system,  the 
broader economy was heavily hit. Trade and industrial production literally fell off a cliff. In the 
fourth  quarter  of  2008  and  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  global  economic  activity  recorded  its 
weakest performance in decades. 
Today,  the  situation  has  improved  very  significantly.  The  unprecedented  global  policy 
response  has  had  its  intended  effect.  The  financial  system  is  showing  clear  signs  of 
stabilization.  Incoming  economic  data  over  the  last  couple  of  weeks  suggest  that  global 
economic  activity  is  improving.  The  economic  rebound  in  the  coming  months  may  even 
exceed  expectations.  At  the  same  time,  looking  beyond  the  near  term  horizon,  our 
economies  and  the  financial  system  continue  to  face  considerable  uncertainties  and 
challenges. Yet, certain parts of the financial industry appear tempted to go back to business 
as  usual.  Industry  statements  and  comments  made  by  some  banks  on  regulatory  reforms 
reflect this trend.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am deeply convinced that it is our common responsibility and duty 
not to let this happen. Let me begin by laying out three hopefully compelling reasons why we 
must secure fundamental regulatory reform of the financial sector. 
The first reason is that too much of the risk taken in the financial sector ultimately resides 
with  taxpayers.  The  rescue  of  significant  parts  of  the  global  financial  system  from  near-
certain collapse by public authorities came at very substantial risk and costs to taxpayers. 
According  to  data  collected  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  here  in  the  United 
States,  for  example,  the  total  potential  costs  of  various  support  measures  taken  –  capital 
injections, asset purchases, and guarantees of bank debt – amount to about 40 per cent of 
GDP. For some European countries, these numbers are even higher. While in some cases 
governments and central banks have been able to reduce their exposures, sometimes even 
with a profit, the involvement of the public sector remains important. The ultimate outcomes 
of these involvements are uncertain. Moreover, the consequences of the crisis in terms of job 
                                                 
1   Ben  S.  Bernanke  gave  a  thorough  overview  of  the  various  measures  taken  worldwide  in  his  speech 
“Reflections on a Year of Crisis” at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Annual Economic Symposium, 
Jackson Hole, on 21 August 2009. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 1
and  wealth  losses,  huge  increases  in  discretionary  and  non-discretionary  public  spending, 
and dramatic declines in public revenue is bound to be enormous. In some countries, public 
debt is set to rise at a pace never seen before in peace time. At the end, the citizens of our 
respective countries will have to foot the bill, one way or another. 
The  second  reason  is  that  the  crisis  also  generates  important  intangible  costs  which  are 
often overlooked. Confidence in the financial sector and those running it has been severely 
damaged.  Moreover,  because  a  small  number  of  individuals  have  dogmatically  equated 
markets  with  the  unbounded  pursuit  of  short-term  profits,  faith  in  the  benefits  of  a market-
based  economic  system  has  been  undermined.  Finally,  the  extraordinary  public  policy 
response to the crisis has potentially prepared the ground for even more moral hazard in the 
future.  
The third reason is that this financial crisis will not be the last one. Between 1973 and 1997 
alone,  there  were  139  documented  financial  crises  in  various  parts  of  the  world.2  Some 
suggest  that  we  should  redesign  the  global  financial  system  in  such  a  way  that  there  will 
never be a financial crisis again. This is neither desirable nor realistic. As long as we want a 
financial system that performs a meaningful and useful function for the real economy, we will 
have to live with financial cycles. Moreover, the current crisis has clearly demonstrated the 
limitations of complex regulations and models. Even the most complex models will never be 
infallible. What we can and should do is to limit the likelihood of and the fallout from future 
crises.  
It  would  be  an  inexcusable  mistake  to  miss  this  opportunity  to  see  through  fundamental 
regulatory reform. We have to address the vulnerabilities that were at the root of this crisis 
and  are  likely  to  be  at  the  root  of  those  in  the  future.  For  this  purpose,  we  need  simple, 
effective measures that can be implemented rapidly once the crisis is over. 
There are intensive efforts under way to increase the resilience of the financial system. With 
the  support  of  the  G20  leaders,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  initiated  an 
impressive number of reform projects.3 Good progress has been made on many measures. 
In some important areas, however, decisions have yet to be taken. In line with proposals by 
the FSB, I believe we need to pursue a dual-track approach to reforming the global financial 
system, combining preventive measures with measures facilitating the orderly resolution of 
large international banks in the event of a future crisis.  
An ounce of prevention  
We have all been told that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Considering the 
enormous costs associated with the cure of the current crisis, this holds especially true when 
it comes to financial stability. Most importantly, we need to strengthen the shock absorbers of 
the financial system. In the context of banks this means that they have to hold more capital 
and more liquidity. Strengthened shock absorbers in the form of higher capital and liquidity 
buffers have several beneficial effects. 
Bigger  buffers  enable  banks  to  absorb  larger  negative  shocks  without  triggering  an 
idiosyncratic,  let  alone  a  systemic  crisis.  Furthermore,  bigger  buffers  ensure  that  banks 
themselves  bear  a  larger  share  of  their  downside  risks.  Not  only  does  this  reduce  the 
potential  burden  for  taxpayers,  but  it  also  creates  stronger  incentives  for  the  banks 
themselves  to  operate  prudently.  If  shareholders  know  that  they  have  to  absorb  potential 
                                                 
2   Barry Eichengreen and Michael D. Bordo: “Crises now and then: What lessons from the last era of financial 
globalization?”, NBER working paper 8715, January 2002. 
3   “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, April 2008, and the 
recommendations and principles to strengthen financial systems that the FSB published on 2 April 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2009
future losses rather than passing them on to taxpayers, they will likely become less willing to 
let  management  engage  in  excessively  risky  activities.  Ultimately,  this  incentive  effect  can 
help make future crises less likely. 
Strengthening capital requirements  
The  crisis  has  nakedly  exposed  the  dangers  of  excessive  leverage.  It  also  revealed  a 
number  of  fundamental  weaknesses  of  existing  capital  requirements.  While  model-driven 
risk-weighted  capital  requirements  are  sensible  and  should  be  maintained,  they  are  not 
perfect  and  very  likely  never  will  be.  Most  of  us  have  had  to  learn  the  hard  way  that  the 
modeling  of  risk  involves  substantial  risks itself.  Despite  risk-weighted capital  ratios  that  in 
most  cases  exceeded  the  regulatory  minima,  leverage  was  a  key  source  of  vulnerability 
going into the crisis. Excessive leverage not only intensified the impact of mistakes on the 
financial situation of individual banks. It also amplified the crisis as ongoing deleveraging in 
the industry inevitably put downward pressure on financial markets and on the real economy. 
It  is  now  also  clear  that  banks  were  undercapitalized  at  the  start  of  the  crisis.  Mounting 
losses  quickly  depleted  their  capital  base,  and,  with  a  few  notable  exceptions,  the  banks 
found themselves in desperate need of massive support measures by the public sector.  
To  address  these  weaknesses,  a  considerable  amount  of  work  has  been  done  and  is  still 
underway in the FSB and in a number of working groups of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision.  In  line  with,  and  in  full  support  of  these  efforts,  I  am  convinced  that  a  more 
robust capital framework needs to be built around the following features: 
• 
The amount and the quality of capital have to be increased very substantially. Capital 
buffers need to be high and robust enough for banks to survive a crisis on their own 
and thus to foster confidence in the system as a whole. In the medium term, this will 
be feasible without causing drastic adjustments at banks that might be harmful to the 
real economy. Looking at the banks that received public support, many of them paid 
out more in dividends and share buybacks during the years preceding the crisis than 
they subsequently faced in losses. 
As  a  supplement  to  the  risk-based  capital  requirements,  a  simple  and  commonly 
defined  leverage  ratio  restriction  needs  to  be  introduced.  A  leverage  ratio  prevents 
the  buildup  of  excessive  leverage  and  serves  as  a  backstop  to  the  complex,  but 
fallible risk-based capital requirements. 
To  address  procyclicality,  banks  will  have  to  build  up  capital  buffers  above  the 
minimum requirements in good times. In difficult times, banks will be allowed to fall 
significantly below  the  target  levels  defined for  good  times.  Allowing  banks  to  draw 
down  capital  without  violating  any  minimum  requirements  helps  to  mitigate  the 
harmful effects of deleveraging. 
  Overall,  regulators  must  no  longer  allow  banks,  especially  systemically  important  ones,  to 
operate  at  such  worryingly  low  capital  levels  as  have  been  observed  in  the  buildup  of  the 
current  crisis.  At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  the  finance  ministers  and  central  bank 
governors of the G20 were very explicit on this.  
More robust liquidity requirements  
The  crisis  has  also  provided  a  number  of  important  lessons  regarding  liquidity.  In  short, 
banks’  liquidity  holdings  were  insufficient.  This  holds  true  for  the  quantity  but  also  for  the 
quality of liquidity. One of the explanations for these insufficient holdings of liquidity was that 
the  stress  scenarios  considered  by  banks  were  far  too  optimistic.  While  secured  funding 
remained the most stable source of refinancing, it was much less stable than what banks and 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 3
regulators  had  assumed.  Moreover,  it  quickly  became  apparent  that  liquidity  problems  at 
single banks imposed considerable stress on the entire international system. 
As  in  the  area  of  capital,  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  are  working  at  full  throttle 
towards  an  internationally  coordinated  liquidity  standard  for  banks.  In  my  view,  this 
internationally  harmonized  standard  needs  to  have  the  following  basic  features  to  be 
effective: 
• 
The  standard  should  reflect  a  very  adverse  scenario,  including  a  massive  loss  of 
confidence from depositors, a disruption of secured funding and a loss of liquidity on 
major  segments  of  the  securities  markets.  The  new  standard  will  only  be  able  to 
promote stability if the underlying scenario is severe enough. A moderate scenario is 
not sufficient to bolster confidence in situations of turmoil. 
The  standard  should  require  banks  to  hold  a  buffer  consisting  of  assets  whose 
liquidity  and  value  is  robust  to  massive  disruptions  in  the  financial  markets.  The 
presumption should be that government securities form the bulk of the buffer. 
 Overall,  the  new  liquidity  standard  should  substantially  strengthen  banks’  liquidity  base. 
Banks must be in a much better situation to weather liquidity shocks without having to resort 
to public support. 
As a consequence of these higher capital and liquidity buffers, the relevant banks may seem 
more boring. Their rate of return on equity will be lower. At the same time, their earnings are 
bound to be less volatile and they will likely be more beneficial for the economy as a whole. 
With  such  changes  must  come  a  change  in  banks’  compensation  policies  and  practices. 
Compensation  cannot  be  a  one-way  street  and  must  become  risk  aligned  and  long-term 
oriented. 
Facilitating the orderly resolution of banking problems  
Prevention is key but it will not be foolproof. Even with these better shock absorbers in place, 
large and systemically important banks will again experience severe financial stress at some 
point  in  the  future.  Here  we  must  accept  that  we  still  have  not  dealt  with  the  fundamental 
reason  why  systemically  important  banks  cannot  be  allowed  to  fail.  The  truth  is  that,  if 
tomorrow morning a systemic institution were to be on the brink of failure, we would again 
face the terrible choice of coming to its rescue or risking the stability of the financial system.  
The  fact  that  financial  institutions  which  are  too  big  or  too  interconnected  to  fail  exist  is  a 
flagrant  contradiction  of  one  of  the  key  principles  and  beliefs  on  which  any  market-based 
economy is built: Competition should ensure that the most efficient – and not the largest and 
most risk-loving – survive in the market place. It is evident that a change of rules is required. 
The  financial  system  of  the  future  should  expose  financial  institutions  of  all  sizes  and 
structures  to  the  test  of  the  market  place.  In  the  event  that  some  of  them  fail,  we  need  a 
system  that  allows  for  the  orderly  resolution  of  large  and  complex  financial  institutions.  In 
other words, we require a system that permits us to let systemically relevant institutions fail 
safely. 
One  of  the  principal  hurdles  to  achieving  this  objective  is  that  it  requires  international 
coordination. Many of you will argue that the notion that we could agree on an international 
framework  for  the  orderly  resolution  of  cross-border  financial  institutions  is  utopian.  Your 
skepticism  is  understandable.  After  all,  much  work  has  gone  into  trying  to  address  this 
problem for at least 30 years, arguably with little concrete success. The many technical and 
legal problems have impeded any meaningful progress. 
Despite  this  unfortunate  track  record,  I  would  argue  that  the  real  problem  has  not  simply 
been a lack of technical answers to admittedly very difficult problems. After all, where there’s 
a will, there’s a way. What we urgently need now is the political will to address the technical 
difficulties  and  to  cooperate  internationally  in  pursuit  of  a  solution.  In  1961,  President 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2009
Kennedy announced to the world that the United States would go to the moon before the end 
of the decade. At that point, the NASA engineers clearly hadn’t solved all technical problems 
associated with landing a man on the moon. It seems to me that the key to solving these 
problems was a clearly stated political objective. Much like John F. Kennedy’s commitment 
nearly  50  years  ago,  we  now  need  a  bold  and  international  political  commitment  to  put  in 
place a framework for the orderly resolution of cross border financial institutions. Provided we 
have such an unequivocal commitment, solutions will eventually emerge. 
A new framework needs to ensure that a failing bank can continue to fulfill the functions that 
are critical for the functioning of the economy. It needs to provide regulatory tools that will 
help reduce the size and complexity of systemic institutions. This will require a close dialogue 
and  meaningful  cooperation  between  the  public  authorities  and  the  banks.  The  framework 
should also prevent destabilizing effects of a failure on the rest of the financial sector – for 
example  by  building  and  improving  on  financial  market  infrastructures  that  reduce 
counterparty credit risk. Ultimately, however, it must not exclude the possibility that a large 
and complex cross-border financial institution can be – and should be – subject to insolvency 
proceedings where reorganization is not possible. 
Of course, we must accept the reality that different national resolution regimes will continue 
to coexist. To make it perfectly clear: I am not proposing to create a global resolution regime 
to replace national regimes. Such an endeavor strikes me as the equivalent of a journey not 
to  the  moon,  but  to  outer  space.  But  that  should  be  no  excuse  for  not  improving  the 
framework for cooperation across the relevant countries. 
Concluding remarks 
The worst of the crisis is behind us, and there are intensive efforts under way to increase the 
resilience  of  the  financial  system.  Banks  are  again  generating  profits  and,  in  some  cases, 
very  substantial  profits,  not  least  because  of  the  costly  public  support  measures,  many  of 
which remain in place. As the situation improves, complacency can easily become the rule of 
the game. We forget the severity of the crisis and fall prey to renewed lobbying of a powerful 
and recovering industry. We must not let this happen. Strong and bold entrepreneurial and 
political  leadership  is  now  required  to  see  the  necessary  changes  for  the  financial  system 
through, as demonstrated today by the G20 leaders in Pittsburgh. Clearly, there are many 
areas in financial regulation that can and in many cases should be improved. Given what is 
at stake, there is clearly a need to prioritize. I have briefly laid out to you this evening where I 
see those priorities. Thank you for your hospitality and patience. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 5
