W A Wijewardena: Microfinance – issues in the current context  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, at the Seminar on Microfinance Services in Sri Lanka, Colombo, 29 June 2009. 
 A  new  word  that  has  been  added  to  Sri  Lanka’s  vernacular  usage  recently  has  been 
“sakvithi”. This word has so far not got into lexicographers’ lexicon in its new sense. Literarily, 
it means the “Chief God of Heavens”. But, the contemporary media have used it in a different 
sense, drawing on a recent episode of fraud that had ended up pauperising many investors 
who were ambitious of high gains. Hence, its contemporary meaning has been clear even to 
its first-time spotters. The picture created in the mind when one hears the word is not that of 
a  god  but  a  man:  a  man  bent  on  deceiving  others  with  false  promises  of  unusually  high 
gains, but at the end, finishes up by appropriating to him their wealth. It is also the picture of 
a  man  who  has  played  with  the  psychological  frailties  of  people  with  crafty  marketing  and 
propaganda by projecting himself as a saint, friend and saviour. Those who fall for his artful 
schemes  will  get  one  thing  for  sure:  complete  loss  of  their  life-time  savings.  It,  therefore, 
foretells of shattering of hopes which they may have cherished about a better future as well. 
Sakvithi’s lessons for microfinance 
Sakvithi episode is not an isolated incident of breach of trust. It received so much of media 
attention  due  to  three  reasons:  sheer  magnitude  of  the  amounts  defrauded,  high-society 
profile of some of the investors and the glamorous sainthood that had long been afforded to 
the man responsible for losing people’s money. There are many more such schemes where 
people willingly invest without properly assessing the risk and the return. They often fail to 
ask the simple question which anyone with a fortune may have asked before parting with his 
money:  could  the  schemes  continue  to  generate  a  high  income  to  pay  a  high  return 
indefinitely in the future. But the desire to become rich quickly mars their rational mind and 
they unknowingly fall victim to the promise of high returns. 
What can microfinance learn from this? A lot. When one analyses the sakvithi episode, by 
disaggregating its tragic final outcome into sub components of devices employed, each such 
sub component teaches us a valuable lesson. These lessons, when viewed from a centric 
point,  boil  down  to  two  important  aspects  of  microfinance:  the  governance  structure  which 
microfinance 
the  self-discipline  which  microfinance 
beneficiaries should cultivate. Both these important elements in microfinance should not be 
mere  eye-washes  to  satisfy  someone  who  demands  of  such  behaviour  by  the  respective 
parties. They should be faithfully and vigorously followed in order to prevent the microfinance 
industry from meeting with an untimely death. 
institutions  have 
to  adopt  and 
What normally happens in Sakvithi-style investment schemes? 
Sakvithi  episode  is  a  classic  example  of  the  ability  of  shrewd  persons  to  exploit  society’s 
desire for accumulating quick wealth by skipping the hard path which it should normally take. 
Hence, it is also an exploitation of people’s desire to become rich. This desire is embedded 
equally in both the poor and the rich: the poor to get out of poverty quickly and the rich to 
become richer and more influential. 
Hence, the schemes of quick high returns are craftily designed to satisfy this psychological 
desire. Many schemers who pose as micro-financiers too resort to this tactic and the poor 
unknowingly fall victim to their schemes. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 1
The modus operandi of such schemers has been the same. They would form a microfinance 
institution because it is in high vogue today and the society is ready to accept it as social 
responsibility  which  one  should  perform  for  community’s  benefit.  This  explicit  social 
legitimacy  allows  them  to  operate  under  the  umbrella  of  microfinance  which  is  artificially 
boosted  by  appropriate  marketing  and  fitting  propaganda.  In  this  manner,  savings  are 
mobilised  from  the  poor  and  funds  are  raised  from  the  donors.  Eventually,  the  end-use  of 
resources  is  not  for  helping  the  poor,  but  for  siphoning  for  other  activities.  When  such 
activities  do  not  generate  a  continuous  income  sufficient  to  meet  the  obligations  to 
depositors,  the  micro-financier  is  not  left  with  a  choice,  but  to  default  the  savers  who  had 
placed their trust in him. 
The  end  result  is  the  deep  suspicion  which  the  poor  would  have  about  the  entire 
microfinance  industry.  The  authorities  too  would  view  microfinance  as  a  destabilising  and 
fraudulent element in the financial system. This leads to a credibility issue and a reputation 
risk in microfinance industry. Once the industry loses its reputation, it is difficult to regain the 
same irrespective of whatever is being done by some genuine microfinance practitioners. 
The damage to the industry is done by some “black sheep” who are not controllable by other 
genuine performers. In this manner, the quick returns are earned by “ill-willed” practitioners, 
but the social cost has to be borne by the entire industry. 
Hence, the major challenge faced by microfinance industry today is to save itself from the 
spurious micro-financiers. 
Who is a poor person? 
The poor are normally defined by reference to income level or calorie intake or the level of 
opportunities available. All these definitions represent some aspects of the poor which are 
important. Yet, they do not accurately depict the real nature of the poor. 
A  poor  person  is  a  person  who  is  unable  to  assess  the  risks  faced  by  him  and  take  the 
required mitigating measures to avoid them. The risk factor is more suitable to identify the 
poor,  because  the  poor  have  to  operate  in  a  market  which  is  full  of  risks.  If  he  can 
successfully wade through the risks, he could succeed in the market as well. If he fails, he 
would remain a poor forever having to depend on outside help. 
Greed is the killer 
Not many in a society would be able to correctly assess the risks faced by them. If they are 
unable to assess the risks, then, they cannot expect to take risk mitigating measures as well. 
Many  reasons  can  be  adduced  to  this  general  failure  of  individuals  to  assess  risks 
appropriately.  They  may  not  have  been  taught  to  assess  risks.  Or,  their  risks  would  have 
been  assumed  by  others,  chiefly  the  government,  and  as  a  result,  the  moral  hazard 
behaviour  would  have  prompted  them  to  take  unnecessary  risks.  Even  when  they  are 
educated and there are no opportunities for moral hazard practices, they may still take risks 
purely  guided  by  their  extreme  greed.  When  the  greed  overtakes  the  rational  mind,  the 
individual may be blind to what he would get if the scheme fails. People belonging to both 
rich and poor categories fall into this last category. It is these people who normally fall easy 
prey  to  cunning  tricksters  who  are  planning  to  strip  them  of  their  wealth  by  making  false 
promises. 
All  that  is  necessary  is  to  arouse,  by  means  of  a  well-orchestrated  marketing  plan,  their 
greed.  The  spurious  micro-financiers  use  person  to  person  contact  method  to  outreach 
potential  victims  and  lure  them  to  leave  their  wealth  in  the  hands  of  total  strangers.  The 
promise  of  high  returns  is  so  tempting  that  individuals  who  are  in  other  circumstances 
perfectly rational and ready even to advise others of good investment outlets get carried by 
enchanting talks and end up losing their money.  
2 
 BIS Review 82/2009
The responsibility of microfinance practitioners 
The  wide-spread  existence  of  spurious  microfinance  institutions  in  the  society  projects  the 
entire  microfinance  industry  as  a  fraudulent  activity  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  and  law 
enforcement authorities. This is not a healthy sign for the future of microfinance industry at 
all. 
Microfinance practitioners should put a stop to this unhealthy development by establishing a 
proper  governance  structure  in  microfinance  institutions.  They  teach  the  poor  of  the 
importance  of  and  the  need  for  leading  a  responsible  life.  This  responsible  life  includes 
behavioural traits like being truthful, being honest, being respectful and being exemplary. The 
cultivation  of  these  qualities  in  life  makes  the  poor  wholesome  individuals  and  that  is  the 
ultimate goal of any microfinance intervention in the society. 
If the microfinance practitioners do not practise what they preach, then, it is a serious lapse 
of  the  governance  structure  of  microfinance  institutions.  Since  governance  principles  are 
rules of good behaviour and there is no effective way of ensuring their proper practice, the 
practitioners  should  make  an  extra  effort  to  follow  them.  It  requires  full  commitment  and 
devotion  on  the  part  of  microfinance  practitioners  and,  in  turn,  depends  on  the  personal 
qualities  which  they  have  cultivated  in  themselves.  Such  quality  developments  come  from 
long-term  training,  discipline  and  fear  of  losing  credibility  and  reputation.  In  other  words, 
microfinance practitioners should have the long-term sustainability, and not quick profit, as 
their goal. 
It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  develop  microfinance  practitioners  before  they  are  allowed  to 
develop microfinance beneficiaries. 
Noble eight-fold path is a guide for everyone 
The  Buddha  preached the  Noble  Eight-fold  Path  to  be  followed  by  both  the  kings and  the 
subjects  alike.  It  is  a  complete  personal  development  programme  for  those  who  aspire  to 
become successful and be of help to others in the society. 
It is a moral code that requires people to speak rightly, act rightly, live rightly, make efforts 
rightly, know rightly, concentrate rightly, think rightly and understand rightly. 
The Noble Eight-fold Path is not a moral code that should be enforced by means of a moral 
law. It is simply a voluntary action which everyone should follow for his own benefit and for 
the benefit of others. 
In essence, the Noble Eight-fold Path converts the followers to be truthful, honest, respectful 
and exemplary. When these qualities become essential traits of the personality of those who 
run  organisations,  such  organisations  do  not  have  to  worry  about  governance  principles. 
That  is  because,  in  such  organisations,  right  practice  and  right  men  become  totally 
inseparable from each other. 
Above all, such organisations would not attempt to cheat their customers by offering them 
seemingly attractive, but spurious investment programmes. 
Moral development is equally important as technical development 
Laws  can  promote  good  governance  but  they  cannot  ensure  its  adoption  in  organisations. 
The  experience  of  many  regulators  is  that,  on  many  occasions,  organisations  vociferously 
announce  of  governance  principles,  but  in  practice,  totally  disregard  them.  In  other  words, 
with  respect  to  governance,  there  is  a  wide  gap  between  what  is  on  paper  and  what  is 
actually practised. 
In the case of microfinance institutions, this gap has to be eliminated totally. A sure way to do 
it  is  to  develop  microfinance  practitioners  both  morally  and  technically.  To  attain  a  high 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 3
performance level, technical developments are necessary; but, without moral development, 
its sustainability cannot be guaranteed. 
Hence, the moral development of microfinance practitioners must receive the highest priority 
in any microfinance training programme. In simple terms, they should cultivate truthfulness, 
honesty,  respectfulness  and  exemplar  in  them.  A  mere  technical  knowledge  without  these 
quality  traits  in-built  into  their  personality  would  be  meaningless  as  far  as  the  future  of 
microfinance industry is concerned. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2009
