Daniel K Tarullo: Regulatory reform 
Testimony  of  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 29 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for the invitation to testify this morning on systemic regulation, prudential matters, resolution 
authority, and securitization. The financial crisis was the product of many factors, including 
the tight integration of lending activities with the issuance, trading, and financing of securities; 
gaps in the financial regulatory structure; widespread failures of risk management across a 
range  of  financial  institutions;  and,  to  be  sure,  significant  shortcomings  in  financial 
supervision. More fundamentally, though, it demonstrated that the regulatory framework had 
not kept pace with far-reaching changes in the financial sector, and the concomitant growth 
of new sources of risk to both individual institutions and the financial system as a whole.  
Because the roots of the crisis reached so deeply into the very nature of the financial system, 
a broad program of reform is required. Much can be, and needs to be, done by supervisors – 
under their existing statutory authorities – to contain systemic risk generally and the too-big-
to-fail problem in particular. As the discussion draft released by Chairman Frank recognizes, 
there  is  also  a  clear  need  for  the  Congress  to  provide  significant  additional  authority  and 
direction to the regulatory agencies. 
Essential  elements  of  this  legislative  agenda  include:  ensuring  that  all  financial  institutions 
that  may  pose  significant  risk  to  the  financial  system  are  subject  to  robust  consolidated 
supervision;  establishing  a  systemic  risk  oversight  council  to  identify,  and  coordinate 
responses to, emerging risks to financial stability; directing all financial supervisors to take 
account  of  risks  to  the  broader  financial  system  as  part  of  their  normal  oversight 
responsibilities; establishing a new special resolution process that allows the government to 
wind down in an orderly way a failing financial institution that threatens the entire financial 
system while also creating a credible process for imposing losses on the firm's shareholders 
and  creditors  and  assuring  that  the  financial  industry,  not  taxpayers,  ultimately  bears  any 
additional costs associated with the resolution process; providing for consistent and robust 
prudential  supervision  of  key  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements;  and 
addressing weaknesses in the securitization process that came to light during the crisis. 
Chairman Frank's discussion draft addresses each of these areas and, in the Board's view, 
provides a strong framework for achieving a safer, more stable financial system. In addition 
to  addressing  these  areas  for  legislative  change,  I  will  discuss  some  of  the  actions  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  our  supervisory  colleagues  are  taking  under  existing  authorities  to 
strengthen the supervision and regulation of financial institutions – particularly large, complex 
institutions – and to prevent regulatory arbitrage. 
Consolidated supervision of systemically important financial institutions 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  risks  to  the  financial  system  can 
arise not only in the banking sector, but also from the activities of other large, interconnected 
financial firms – such as investment banks and insurance companies – that traditionally have 
not been subject to the type of mandatory prudential regulation and consolidated supervision 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 1
their 
financial  activities  – 
interconnectedness  of 
applicable  to  bank  holding  companies.  Chairman  Frank's  discussion  draft  would  close  this 
important  gap  in  our  regulatory  structure  by  providing  for  all  financial  institutions  that  may 
pose significant risks to the financial system to be subject to the framework for consolidated 
prudential  supervision  that  currently  applies  to  bank  holding  companies.  As  I  will  discuss 
shortly, it also provides for these firms to be subject to enhanced standards, reflective of the 
risk they pose to the financial system. These provisions should prevent financial firms that do 
not own a bank – but that nonetheless pose risks to the overall financial system because of 
the  size,  risks,  or 
from  avoiding 
comprehensive supervisory oversight. 
In  one  sense,  a  requirement  that  all  systemically  important  firms  be  subject  to  prudential 
supervision would not lead to a major change in our regulatory system. During the financial 
crisis,  a  number  of  very  large  financial  firms  became  bank  holding  companies.  Thus,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  already  become  the  consolidated  supervisor  of  most  of  the  nation's 
large, interconnected financial institutions. Yet a critical part of a reform agenda directed at 
systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  is  ensuring  that  other  financial  firms  that  may 
pose a systemic threat also are subject to robust consolidated supervision. Such a measure 
would allow the regulatory system to adapt if activities migrate from supervised institutions to 
other firms, leading those firms to become very large and interconnected, or in response to 
other  developments  in  the  financial  system.  Moreover,  such  a  provision  would  serve  as  a 
kind of insurance policy against the possibility of a firm that opted for the benefits of being a 
bank  holding  company  during  the  financial  crisis  deciding  to  exit  that  status  during  calmer 
times. 
The  discussion  draft  also  would  require  the  development  of  enhanced  regulation  and 
supervision,  including  robust  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk-management  requirements,  to 
address  and  mitigate  systemic  risks.  Enhanced  requirements,  particularly  for  large, 
interconnected firms, are needed not only to protect the stability of individual institutions and 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  but  also  to  counteract  any  incentive  for  financial  firms  to 
become very large in order to be perceived as too big to fail. This perception can materially 
weaken what should be the normal market incentive of creditors to monitor the firm's risk-
taking  and  appropriately  price  these  risks  in  their  transactions  with  the  firm.  When  this 
incentive is weakened, moral hazard increases, allowing the firm to raise funds at a price that 
may not fully reflect the firm's risk profile. As a result, the firm is likely to choose a level of risk 
that is excessive both for itself and, potentially, for society at large. Moreover, this distortion 
creates a playing field that is tilted against smaller firms not perceived as having the same 
degree  of  government  support.  Development  of  a  mechanism  for  the  orderly  resolution  of 
nonbank  financial  firms  that  threaten  financial  stability,  which  I  will  discuss  later,  is  an 
important additional tool for addressing the too-big-to-fail problem.  
The  discussion  draft  would  reinforce  the  changes  in  supervision  already  under  way  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  banking  agencies.  As  already  announced,  we  have 
strengthened  capital  requirements  for  trading  activities  and  securitization  exposures.  We 
continue to work with other regulators to strengthen the capital requirements for other types 
of on- and off-balance-sheet exposures and to improve the quality of capital overall.1 
Beyond these generally applicable capital requirements, we must develop capital standards 
and  other  supervisory  tools  addressed  specifically  to  the  systemic  risks  of  large, 
interconnected firms. One possible approach is a special charge – possibly a special capital 
requirement – that would adjust based on the risks posed by the firm to the financial system. 
Ideally, this requirement would be calibrated to become more stringent as the firm's systemic 
risks  increase,  although  developing  a  metric  for  such  a  requirement  would  be  highly 
                                                 
1   See Bank for International Settlements (2009), "Basel II Capital Framework Enhancements Announced by the 
Basel  Committee,"  press  release,  July  13;  and  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2009), 
Enhancements to the Basel II Framework (Basel, Switzerland: Basel Committee, July). 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2009
challenging.  Another  potentially  promising  option  is  to  require  that  selected  financial 
institutions issue specified amounts of contingent capital. Such capital could take the form of 
debt  instruments  that  convert  to  common  equity  during  times  of  macroeconomic  stress  or 
when losses erode the institution's capital base. Such instruments would pre-position capital 
on the balance sheets of each of these institutions, ready to be converted into the form that 
provides the best loss-absorption capacity precisely when that capacity is most needed. And, 
if well devised, it would inject an additional element of market discipline into large financial 
firms, because the price of those instruments would reflect market perceptions of the stability 
of the firm. 
The  financial  crisis  also  highlighted  weaknesses  in  liquidity  risk  management  at  major 
financial  institutions,  including  an  overreliance  on  short-term  funding.  To  address  these 
issues, the Federal Reserve helped lead the development of revised international principles 
for  sound  liquidity  risk  management,  which  have  been  incorporated  into  new  interagency 
guidance  now  out  for  public  comment.2  Together  with  our  U.S.  and  international 
counterparts, we are also considering quantitative standards for liquidity exposures similar to 
those for capital adequacy, with the goal of ensuring that internationally active firms can fund 
themselves  even  during  periods  of  severe  market 
instability.  With  supervisory 
encouragement,  large  banking  organizations  have,  for  the  most  part,  already  significantly 
increased their liquidity buffers and are strengthening their management of liquidity risks. 
Beyond  modifying  applicable  rules  and  standards,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  revamping  its 
approach toward supervising the largest financial institutions. In doing so, we have drawn on 
our  experience  earlier  this  year  in  conducting  the  special  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program (SCAP), which involved forward-looking, cross-firm, aggregate analyses of 19 of the 
largest bank holding companies. While the SCAP itself was an extraordinary exercise for an 
extraordinary time, we are incorporating into our ongoing supervisory process the essential 
SCAP  approach  of  bringing  firm-specific  assessments  of  on-site  examiners  together  with 
systematic analyses of industry experience, economic trends, and possible stress scenarios. 
Thus, we have increased our emphasis on horizontal examinations, which focus on particular 
risks  or  activities  across  a  group  of  banking  organizations,  and  we  have  broadened  the 
scope of the resources we bring to bear on these reviews. 
For example, we currently are conducting a horizontal assessment of internal processes for 
evaluating capital adequacy at the largest U.S. banking organizations, focusing in particular 
on how shortcomings in fundamental risk management and governance for these processes 
could impair firms' abilities to estimate capital needs. This exercise is central to the goal of 
having  each  firm  maintain  adequate  capital  to  provide  a  buffer  against  possible  losses 
associated  with  its  particular  set  of  activities  and  exposures.  Using  findings  from  these 
reviews,  we  will  work  with  firms  over  the  next  year  to  bring  their  processes  into  line  with 
supervisory expectations. Supervisors will use the information provided by firms about their 
processes as one factor in the assessment of the adequacy of firms' overall capital levels. 
For  instance,  if  a  firm  cannot  demonstrate  a  strong  ability  to  estimate  capital  needs,  then 
supervisors  will  place  less  credence  on  the  firm's  own  internal  capital  evaluation  and  may 
demand higher capital cushions, among other things. 
As part of this overall approach to large institution supervision, we are creating an enhanced 
quantitative  surveillance  program 
that  would  use 
supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-based indicators in an effort 
large,  complex  organizations 
for 
                                                 
2   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008), Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and 
Supervision (Basel: Basel Committee, September). Information about the proposed guidance is available at 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Administration (2009), 
"Agencies Seek Comment on Proposed Interagency Guidance on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management", 
joint press release, June 30. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 3
to identify emerging risks to specific firms as well as to the industry as a whole. This work will 
be  performed  by  a  multidisciplinary  group  composed  of  our  economic  and  market 
researchers, supervisors, market operations specialists, and other experts within the Federal 
Reserve  System.  In  addition,  periodic  scenario  analysis  will  be  used  to  enhance  our 
understanding  of  the  consequences  of  changes  in  the  economic  environment  for  both 
individual  firms  and  for  the  broader  system.  Finally,  to  support  and  complement  these 
initiatives,  we  are  working  with  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  to  develop  more-
comprehensive and more-frequent information-reporting requirements for the largest firms. 
The  crisis  also  has  highlighted  the  potential  for  compensation  practices  at  financial 
institutions to encourage excessive risk-taking and unsafe and unsound behavior – not just 
by  senior  executives,  but  also  by  other  managers  or  employees  who  have  the  ability, 
individually or collectively, to materially alter the risk profile of the institution. Bonuses and 
other compensation arrangements should not provide incentives for employees at any level 
to  behave  in  ways  that  imprudently  increase  risks  to  the  institution,  and  potentially  to  the 
financial system as a whole. 
Last  week,  the  Federal  Reserve  issued  proposed  guidance  on  incentive  compensation 
practices  to  promote  the  prompt  improvement  of  incentive  compensation  practices 
throughout  the  banking  industry.3  This  guidance,  which  is  consistent  with  the  international 
principles  and  standards  issued  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  earlier  this  year,  will  be 
supplemented by supervisory initiatives to spur and monitor the industry's progress toward 
the  implementation  of  safe  and  sound  incentive  compensation  arrangements,  identify 
emerging best practices, and advance the state of practice more generally in the industry.4 
One  of  these  initiatives  involves  a  special  horizontal  review  of  incentive  compensation 
practices  at  28  large,  complex  banking  organizations  under  the  Federal  Reserve's 
supervision. 
To  be  fully  effective,  consolidated  supervisors  must  have  clear  authority  to  monitor  and 
address safety and soundness concerns and systemic risks in all parts of an organization, 
working  in  coordination  with  other  supervisors  wherever  possible.  As  the  crisis  has 
demonstrated,  large  firms  increasingly  operate  and  manage  their  businesses  on  an 
integrated,  firmwide  basis,  with  little  regard  for  the  corporate  or  national  boundaries  that 
define  the  jurisdictions  of  individual  functional  supervisors,  and  stresses  at  one  subsidiary 
can  rapidly  spread  within  the  consolidated  organization.  A  consolidated  supervisor  thus 
needs  the  ability  to  understand  and  address  risks  that  may  affect  the  risk  profile  of  the 
organization as a whole, whether those risks arise from one subsidiary or from the linkages 
between  depository  institutions  and  nondepository  affiliates.  Chairman  Frank's  proposal 
would make useful modifications to the provisions added to the law by the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act in 1999 that limit the ability of a consolidated supervisor to monitor and address 
risks within an organization and its subsidiaries on a groupwide basis. 
Systemic risk oversight 
For  purposes  of  both  effectiveness  and  accountability,  the  consolidated  supervision  of  an 
individual firm, whether or not it is systemically important, is best vested with a single agency. 
However, the broader task of monitoring and identifying systemic risks that might arise from 
the  interaction  of  different  types  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  –  both  regulated  and 
                                                 
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance 
on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22. 
4   See Financial Stability Forum (2009), FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, April, available on 
the  Financial  Stability  Board's  website.  (The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  subsequently  been  renamed  the 
Financial Stability Board.) Also see Financial Stability Board (2009), FSB Principles for Sound Compensation 
Practices: Implementation Standards, September. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2009
unregulated – may exceed the capacity of any individual supervisor. Instead, we should seek 
to marshal the collective expertise and information of all financial supervisors to identify and 
respond to developments that threaten the stability of the system as a whole. 
The  discussion  draft  released  by  Chairman  Frank  would  advance  this  objective  in  two 
important ways. First, it would establish an oversight council – composed of representatives 
of the agencies and departments involved in the oversight of the financial sector – that would 
be responsible for monitoring and identifying emerging systemic risks across the full range of 
financial institutions and markets. In addition, the council would have the ability to coordinate 
responses  by  member  agencies  to  mitigate  identified  threats  to  financial  stability.  And, 
importantly,  the  oversight  council  would  have  the  authority  to  recommend  that  its  member 
agencies,  either  individually  or  collectively,  adopt  heightened  prudential  standards  for  the 
firms under the agencies’ supervision in order to mitigate potential systemic risks. Examples 
of  such  risks  could  include  rising  and  correlated  risk  exposures  across  firms  and  markets; 
significant increases in leverage that could result in systemic fragility; and gaps in regulatory 
coverage  that  arise  in  the  course  of  financial  change  and  innovation,  including  the 
development  of  new  practices,  products,  and  institutions.  The  council  also  would  identify 
those  financial  firms  that  should  be  subjected  to  enhanced  prudential  standards  and 
supervision on a consolidated basis.5 
Second, the discussion draft would reinforce the authority of individual financial agencies to 
take  macroprudential  considerations  into  account  in  exercising  their  supervisory  and 
regulatory 
interlinkages  and 
interdependencies  among  firms  and  markets  that  could  threaten  the  financial  system  in  a 
crisis,  provides  an  important  complement  to  the  current  microprudential  focus  of  financial 
supervision  and  regulation.  Each  supervisor's  participation  in  the  oversight  council  would 
greatly strengthen that supervisor's ability to see and understand threats to financial stability 
and craft appropriate responses for the institutions and markets under their supervision. 
The Federal Reserve already has begun to incorporate a systemically focused approach into 
our  supervision  of  large,  interconnected  firms.  Doing  so  requires  that  we  go  beyond 
considering  each  institution  in  isolation  and  pay  careful  attention  to  interlinkages  and 
interdependencies  among  firms  and  markets  that  could  threaten  the  financial  system  in  a 
crisis. For example, the failure of one firm may lead to runs by wholesale funders of other 
firms  that  are  seen  by  investors  as  similarly  situated  or  that  have  exposures  to  the  failing 
firm. These efforts are reflected, for example, in the expansion of horizontal reviews and the 
quantitative surveillance program I discussed earlier. 
functions.  A  macroprudential  outlook,  which  considers 
Improved resolution process 
Another critical element of an agenda to contain systemic risk is the creation of a new regime 
that would allow financial firms to fail without posing risks to the broader financial system or 
the economy. In most cases, the federal bankruptcy laws provide an appropriate framework 
for the resolution of nonbank financial institutions. However, the bankruptcy code does not 
sufficiently protect the public's strong interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of a nonbank 
financial firm whose failure would pose substantial risks to the financial system and to the 
economy. Indeed, after the Lehman Brothers and AIG experiences, there is little doubt that 
we need an alternative to the existing options of bankruptcy and bailout for such firms. 
                                                 
5   To  fulfill  these  responsibilities,  the  discussion  draft  would  provide  the  council  access  to  a  broad  range  of 
information from its member agencies regarding the institutions and markets that the agencies supervise and, 
when the necessary information is not available through that source, the authority to collect such information 
directly from financial institutions and markets. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 5
The  discussion  draft  released  by  Chairman  Frank  would  provide  the  government  with 
important new tools to restructure or wind down a failing firm in a way that passes on losses 
to shareholders and creditors of the firm while mitigating the risks to financial stability and the 
economy. For example, it would allow the government to sell assets, liabilities, and business 
units of the firm; transfer the systemically significant operations of the firm to a new bridge 
entity that can continue these operations with minimal disruptions; and repudiate contracts of 
the firm, subject to appropriate recompense. 
This proposal would not guarantee the survival of any financial firm, nor is it designed to aid 
shareholders or creditors of a failing firm. To the contrary, the proposal would establish the 
expectation  that  shareholders  and  creditors  of  the  firm  will  bear  losses  as  a  result  of  the 
firm's failure. And any assistance provided in the course of the resolution process to prevent 
severe  disruptions  to  the  financial  system  would  be  repaid  by  the  firm  or  the  financial 
services industry. Establishing credible processes for imposing losses on the shareholders 
and  creditors  of  a  failing  firm  is  essential  to  restoring  a  meaningful  degree  of  market 
discipline  and  addressing  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  Indeed,  restoring  discipline  through 
changes  directed  at  the  behavior  of  investors  and  counterparties  would  be  an  important 
complement to the regulatory and supervisory changes that I discussed earlier, which seek 
to address the too-big-to-fail problem through actions directed at the firms themselves. 
Financial firms of any size should be resolved under the bankruptcy code whenever possible. 
Thus, this new regime should serve only as an alternative to the bankruptcy code, available 
when needed to address systemic concerns, and its use should be subject to high standards 
and checks and balances. The discussion draft would allow the new regime to be invoked 
with respect to a particular firm only with the approval of multiple agencies, and only upon a 
determination that the firm's failure and resolution under the bankruptcy code or otherwise 
applicable  law  would  have  serious  adverse  effects  on  financial  stability  and  the  U.S. 
economy. These standards, which are similar to those governing the use of the systemic risk 
exception to least-cost resolution in the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, appear appropriate 
and should help ensure that these new powers are invoked only when circumstances dictate 
their use. 
The discussion draft provides that the ultimate costs of any assistance needed to facilitate 
the orderly resolution of a large, highly interconnected financial firm be recouped through the 
sale or dissolution of the troubled firm, supplemented by assessments on financial firms over 
an  extended  period  of  time  if  necessary.  We  believe  this  approach  provides  a  path  to 
resolution  for  financial  firms  in  a  way  that  both  mitigates  risk  to  the  financial  system  and 
protects taxpayers. The availability of a workable resolution regime with appropriate funding 
would  eliminate  the  need  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  use  its  emergency  lending  authority 
under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to prevent the disorderly failure of specific 
failing institutions. 
It is important, however, that the Federal Reserve, as the nation's central bank, retain our 
long-standing authority to address broader liquidity needs within the financial system under 
section  13(3)  when  necessary  to  maintain  financial  stability.  During  the  recent  crisis,  our 
ability  to  establish  broad-based  liquidity  facilities  proved  critical  in  containing  the  severe 
pressures  that  threatened  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  in  reopening  key  financial 
markets.  We  used  this  authority  only  when  the  need  for  action  was  evident  to  both  the 
Federal Reserve and the Treasury, a practice that could be formalized by the Congress.  
Payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  in  revising  the  financial  regulatory  system,  we  must  look 
beyond the causes of the current crisis and seek to address areas of potential systemic risk 
in  the  future.  Such  areas  include  critical  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements, 
which are the foundation of the nation's financial infrastructure. These arrangements include 
centralized  market  utilities  for  clearing  and  settling  payments,  securities,  and  derivatives 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2009
transactions, as well as the decentralized activities through which financial institutions clear 
and  settle  such  transactions  bilaterally.  While  these  arrangements  can  create  significant 
efficiencies  and  promote  transparency  in  the  financial  markets,  they  also  may  concentrate 
substantial  credit,  liquidity,  and  operational  risks.  In  addition,  many  of  these  arrangements 
have direct and indirect financial or operational linkages and, absent strong risk controls, can 
themselves be a source of contagion in times of stress. Thus, it is critical that systemically 
important payment, clearing, and settlement systems and activities be subject to strong and 
consistent prudential standards designed to ensure the identification and sound management 
of credit, liquidity, and operational risks.  
Unfortunately,  the  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  systemically  important 
payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  is  fragmented,  creating  the  potential  for 
inconsistent standards to be adopted or applied. In light of the increasing integration of global 
financial  markets,  it  is  important  that  these  arrangements  be  viewed  from  a  systemwide 
perspective,  and  that  they  be  subject  to  strong  and  consistent  prudential  standards  and 
supervisory oversight. 
The Federal Reserve has direct supervisory responsibility for some of the largest and most 
critical systems in the United States and has a role in overseeing several other systemically 
important  systems.  But  a  coherent  framework  for  supervision  of  these  systems  does  not 
exist,  and  our  current  authority  depends  to  a  considerable  extent  on  the  specific 
organizational form of these systems. Chairman Frank's discussion draft would provide the 
Federal  Reserve  with  additional  authorities  to  ensure  that  appropriate  standards  and 
oversight  are  applied 
important  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement 
arrangements. 
to  systemically 
Improving the securitization process  
The  financial  crisis  revealed  a  number  of  significant  shortcomings  in  the  securitization 
process that contributed importantly to the stresses experienced by the markets as well as to 
the  outsized  losses  some  firms  faced  once  markets  began  to  deteriorate.  The  ability  of 
brokers and lenders to readily securitize and sell to third parties loans that they were making, 
regardless of  their  risks,  contributed  to  the  overall  decline  in  underwriting  standards  in  the 
years  leading  up  to  the  crisis.  Moreover,  capital  requirements  failed  to  provide  adequate 
incentives  for  firms  to  maintain  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  sufficient  to  absorb  extreme 
systemwide shocks without taking actions that could tend to amplify the effects of the shocks. 
In addition, institutional investors of all sorts – including financial institutions, pension funds, 
and overseas investors – put excessive reliance on the rating agencies' assessment of the 
risks  associated  with  a  range  of  structured  products.  In  part,  investors'  reliance  on  ratings 
reflected  the  lack  of  transparency  of  many  structured  products,  which  made  independent 
assessments of risk difficult. However, it subsequently became clear that the rating agencies 
had  not  themselves  understood  the  extent  of  the  risks  associated  with  complex  structured 
instruments,  particularly  those  related  to  subprime  mortgages.  Once  those  risks  were 
realized,  the  ratings  of  many  of  these  securities  were  downgraded  sharply,  with  investors 
taking very large and unexpected losses. 
Addressing  these  weaknesses  will  require  action  on  several  fronts.  As  I  noted  earlier,  the 
Basel Committee has announced improvements to bank capital standards for securitization-
related  exposures,  thereby  better  aligning  these  standards  with  the  risks  presented  by 
securitizations. 
loans  backing  a 
securitization, as well as regarding the originators of such loans, also is needed to reduce the 
opacity that has impeded effective discipline in the market for asset-backed securities (ABS) 
and encouraged undue reliance on credit rating agencies. Chairman Frank's discussion draft 
would advance this goal by authorizing the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to 
transparency 
regarding 
individual 
Improved 
the 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 7
develop  enhanced  disclosure  requirements  for  ABS,  including  loan-level  information  and 
information  identifying  the  originators  or  brokers  of  the  underlying  loans.6  Using  authority 
granted by the Congress in 2006, the SEC already has adopted or proposed several rules to 
improve the transparency, quality, and integrity of the credit rating process for securitizations 
and other structured finance products.7 
Requiring  that  originators  or  securitizers  of  loans  packaged  for  securitization  retain  some 
exposure to the credit risk associated with the loans also could help restore confidence in the 
securitization  market  and  encourage  the  application  of  sound  underwriting  criteria  to  all 
loans,  including  those  intended  for  securitization.  The  details  of  such  a  requirement  are 
probably best left to rulemaking by the implementing agencies. Complexities are created by 
the  broad  range  of  assets  that  are,  or  may  be,  securitized,  as  well  as  by  the  different 
approaches that may be taken to securitization. A credit exposure retention requirement may 
thus need to be implemented somewhat differently across the full spectrum of securitizations 
in  order  to  properly  align  the  interests  of  originators,  securitizers,  and  investors  without 
unduly restricting the availability of credit or threatening the safety and soundness of financial 
institutions. 
Charter conversions and regulatory arbitrage 
Finally,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  one  potential  gap,  which  I  know  is  of  interest  to  this 
Committee,  already  has  been  addressed  by  the  joint  efforts  of  the  banking  agencies.  The 
dual banking system and the existence of different federal supervisors create the opportunity 
for insured depository institutions to change charters or federal supervisors. While institutions 
may engage in charter conversions for a variety of sound business reasons, conversions that 
are  motivated  by  hopes  of  escaping  current  or  prospective  supervisory  actions  by  the 
institutions’  existing  supervisors  undermine  the  efficacy  of  the  prudential  supervisory 
framework. 
Accordingly, the Federal Reserve welcomed and immediately supported an initiative led by 
the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  to  address  such  regulatory  arbitrage.  This 
initiative  resulted  in  a  recent  statement  of  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination 
Council  reaffirming  that  a  charter  conversion  or  other  action  by  an  insured  depository 
institution  that  would  result  in  a  change  in  its  primary  supervisor  should  occur  only  for 
legitimate  business  and  strategic  reasons.8  Importantly,  this  statement  also  provides  that 
conversion requests should not be entertained by the proposed new chartering authority or 
supervisor  while  serious  or  material  enforcement  actions  are  pending  with  the  institution's 
current  chartering  authority  or  primary  federal  supervisor.  In  addition,  it  provides  that  the 
examination  rating  of  an  institution  and  any  outstanding corrective  action  programs  should 
remain in place when a valid conversion or supervisory change does occur. 
                                                 
6   Encouraged  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  others,  the  American  Securitization  Forum  already  has  taken 
important  steps  along  these  lines,  developing  model  disclosures  for  residential  mortgage-backed  securities 
that would provide investors standardized loan-level information. 
Increased  transparency  regarding  the  pricing  of  ABS  also  can  support  enhanced  market  discipline  by 
providing  investors  important  signals  regarding  other  market  participants’  assessments  of  the  quality  of 
individual issues. Along these lines, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority recently proposed including 
ABS in its post-trade reporting system, a step that deserves the support of policymakers. 
7  
8   See  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (2009),  "FFIEC  Issues  Statement  on  Regulatory 
Conversions," press release, July 1. 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2009
Conclusion 
In  closing,  let  me  reiterate  the  importance  of  moving  ahead  with  the  elements  of  the 
administrative  and  legislative  reform  agenda  that  I  have  discussed.  These  reforms,  taken 
together, will enhance financial stability, increase market discipline in transactions involving 
large  financial  firms,  and  reduce  both  the  probability  and  severity  of  future  crises.  The 
Federal Reserve looks forward to continuing work with the Congress and the Administration 
as the legislative process moves forward. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 9
