Svein Gjedrem: The financial crisis – the path ahead 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
annual meeting of the Norwegian Savings Banks Association, Oslo, 22 October 2009. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. This lecture does not contain assessments of the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting.  
 The past two years have been turbulent for banks, their customers and the authorities. The 
turbulence began to affect Norway in earnest last autumn. Norway has experienced banking 
crises before, and there is much to be learned from the management of these past crises.  
One  who  experienced  his  fair  share  of  crises  was  Nicolai  Rygg,  another  central  bank 
governor from this part of Norway and the son of a local shoemaker. The name stems from 
the Rygg farm in Randaberg. In 1923, Handelsbanken, the fifth largest bank in Norway, was 
on the brink of collapse.1 At that time, government interventions were to a greater extent kept 
out  of  the  public  eye  and  the  bank  received  government  support  in  secret.  However,  the 
Government had approved the allocation without informing the Storting. As a result, Prime 
Minister  Abraham  Berge  and  six  government  ministers  were  impeached.  In  his  testimony, 
Rygg stated:  
“Through both of these years, 1921 and 1922, ceaseless efforts had been made week after 
week to resolve a wretched situation. There was a constant stream of worries, one thing after 
another, one disheartening report after another, and minor setbacks were followed by major 
setbacks. It was reminiscent of an operating theatre. The task was onerous not only because 
of its proportions, but also because of the oppressive weight of the anxiety that accompanied 
it.”2  
“The  greatest  risk  lay  in  the  fact  that  this  anxiety  had  now  become  pervasive.  The  very 
foundations  of  confidence,  the  nation’s  confidence  in  its  own  credit  institutions  had  been 
shaken  …  The  most  important  objective  was  therefore  to  prevent  an  avalanche,  seek  to 
contain the damage, hang on and hold back. That was the dominant thought, to prevent total 
collapse,  for  the  danger  of  this  was  indeed  present…  and  the  general  atmosphere  of 
nervousness  manifested  itself  in  the  most  peculiar  ways.  In  the  blind  panic  that  ensued, 
unreasonable  attacks  were  made  on  institutions  that  were  more  than  deserving  of  their 
depositors’ confidence.”3  
There may have been a similar feeling in many countries last autumn that the “oppressive 
weight of anxiety had become pervasive”. 
The recent financial crisis started with problems in the US subprime market. It was difficult to 
foresee  that  problems  in  a  small  segment  of  one  market  could  have  such  dramatic 
consequences for financial markets the world over. But the financial system had changed.  
                                                 
1   See  Knutsen,  Sverre  and  Gunhild  J.  Ecklund  (2000):  ”Vern  mot  kriser?  Norsk  finanstilsyn  gjennom  100  år 
(Defence against crisis? 100 years of Norwegian financial supervision)”, p.95. 
2   Rygg, Nicolai (1950): Norges Bank i mellomkrigstiden (Norges Bank in the interwar years), Gyldendal Norske 
Forlag, p. 98. 
3   Sejersted,  Francis  (1973):  Ideal,  teori  og  virkelighet.  Nicolai  Rygg  og  pengepolitikken  i  1920-årene  (Ideal, 
theory and reality. Nicolai Rygg and monetary policy in the 1920s) Cappelen, p. 51. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 1
   2 
 BIS Review 131/2009
Today  we  can  see  that  the  crisis  was  amplified  by  the  surprise  at  how  closely  financial 
markets are interconnected.4 Losses on high-risk US subprime mortgages triggered general 
distrust  in  the  financial  system.  Financial  institutions  began  to  doubt  their  counterparties. 
They did not know whether counterparties held sufficient capital to cover any losses. Even 
worse, they were uncertain whether counterparties’ counterparties would be strong enough 
to  withstand  losses.  So  they  stopped  lending  to  each  other.  In  the  interwar  period,  as 
described by Rygg, depositors were responsible for the flight of funding. This time, that role 
was taken by banks’ lenders. Confidence had evaporated.  
Many banks worldwide had to take losses. The liquidity crisis turned into a solvency crisis. 
Banks in Norway have also noted that borrowers have experienced problems servicing their 
loans. However the increase in non-performing loans has been modest compared with the 
banking crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
                                                   
4   See  for  example  Caballero,  Ricardo  J.  and  Pablo  Kurlat  (2009):  “The  ‘Surprising’  Origin  and  Nature  of 
Financial  Crises:  A  Macroeconomic  Policy  Proposal”.  Paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas’ Jackson Hole Symposium. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 3
Output in Norway fell through two successive quarters and although unemployment picked 
up last autumn, it is still lower than in previous downturns. Norwegian banks felt the impact of 
the turnaround in the economy, but government measures have prevented the liquidity crisis 
from  becoming  a  crisis  in  the  real  economy.  Norwegian  banks  primarily  experienced  a 
liquidity  crisis  and  not  a  solvency  crisis.  The  Icelandic  bank  Glitnir’s  Norwegian  subsidiary 
received a short-term loan from the Norwegian Banks’ Guarantee Fund. But there has never 
been any risk that distressed banks would overstretch our fund-based guarantee scheme. 
Lessons from the crisis – the work ahead 
The global financial crisis has revealed weaknesses in the financial system.  
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  EU  are  working  on  proposals  for 
revising the regulatory framework and introducing new regulations. Banks will be required to 
build up larger capital and liquidity buffers and to strengthen the quality of bank capital. The 
proposals  also  aim  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  bank  behaviour.  Banks  should  build  up 
buffers in good times that can be drawn on in periods of stress. The authorities will focus in 
particular on methods of regulating systemically important banks. 
 Bank capital 
Banks  play  a  key  role  in  ensuring  that  depositors’  savings  are  managed  securely,  in 
extending credit and providing payment services. Banks are commercial enterprises, but they 
are  also  similar  to  public  utilities.5  Banks  differ  from  other  firms  in  that  they  fund  their 
activities  through  deposits  from  customers  who  do  not  know  the  extent  of  risk  taken  by 
banks. Since a collapse in the banking system would have very severe consequences, the 
authorities have  a  strong  interest  in  ensuring  that  banks  operate  in  a responsible manner. 
Banks are therefore subject to stricter regulation than other companies and are supervised 
by the authorities. 
In principle, banks diversify risk by extending  many small loans to firms, local government 
and households. In isolation, this implies that banks can operate with far lower equity capital 
                                                 
5   For a discussion of the role of banks in the economy, see King, Mervyn (2009): “Finance: A Return from Risk”, 
Bank of England, speech to the Worshipful Company of International Bankers, Mansion House. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2009
than other companies. When times are good, banks will have the incentive to deplete their 
capital base and take higher risk in order to “put equity capital to work”.  
 Banks  are  therefore  required  to  hold  capital  in  proportion  to  their  risk-taking,  the  so-called 
minimum Tier 1 capital requirement. Tier 1 capital is composed of equity capital and other 
capital that can be used to absorb losses on a going-concern basis. Risk-weighted assets, 
i.e.  the  calculation  basis  for  the  Tier  1  capital  requirement,  must  reflect  the  risk  the  bank 
exposes  itself  to.  A  bank’s  exposures  are  therefore  assigned  different  risk  weights. 
Experience  shows  that  banks’  losses  on  residential  mortgage  loans,  which  are  highly 
collateralised,  are  lower  than  on  corporate  loans.  Risk  weights  are  therefore  lower  for 
residential mortgage loans than for corporate loans.  
The financial crisis has revealed shortcomings in the definition of the minimum Tier 1 capital 
requirement and changes will be made in both the numerator and the denominator. 
The quality of Tier 1 capital will be subject to stricter requirements. Risk weights for some 
exposures will be higher, with improved risk coverage for trading book and off-balance sheet 
exposures. The minimum Tier 1 capital ratio may also be changed. 
There is no simple answer to the question of the correct capital level for a bank. In order to 
quantify  risk,  banks  have  developed  risk  models.  Risk  can  be  calculated  using  advanced 
methods,  but  the  figures  on  which  the  calculation  is  based  too  often  reflect  the  current 
economic situation. The possibility that the situation can change abruptly is not sufficiently 
taken  into  account.  It  became  evident  during  the  financial  crisis  that  risk  measured 
beforehand in a model can differ substantially from the actual outcome observed.  
Due  to  risk  model  uncertainty,  many  investors  prefer  to  take  account  of  a  bank’s  ratio  of 
equity capital to total assets. The Basel Committee has proposed the introduction of such a 
simple, non-risk based measure, i.e. a maximum leverage ratio requirement (minimum equity 
ratio requirement). A minimum equity ratio requirement also limits the number of times banks 
can leverage their equity. With a minimum equity ratio of 5 per cent, for example, equity can 
be leveraged 20 times. 
Today, capital requirements for residential mortgage loans in particular are very low. The risk 
models employed by Nordic banks seem to apply risk weights for residential mortgage loans 
that are as low as between 7 and 15 per cent. Banks seeking to “put equity capital to work” 
are under very strong pressure to increase leverage. A risk weight of for example 10 per cent 
for residential mortgage loans with a minimum Tier 1 capital requirement of 4 per cent would 
mean  that  NOK  1  in  equity  capital  could  be  behind  as  much  as  NOK  250  in  residential 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 5
mortgage  loans.  Introducing  a  leverage  ratio  requirement  could  have  the  effect  of  curbing 
banks’ debt financing and risk-taking. 
Banks  in  Canada  are  subject  to  both  a  strict  national  capital  adequacy  requirement  and  a 
maximum leverage ratio. Banks are required to maintain a minimum Tier 1 capital ratio of 7 
per cent. The leverage ratio is defined individually for each bank. In principle, the leverage 
ratio  should  not  be  greater  than  20.6  Canadian  banks  have  weathered  the  financial  crisis 
well, also because of the less pronounced role played by market funding.7  
At the end of the 1800s, the equity ratio for banks in Norway was about 12 per cent. Over the 
years, this ratio has gradually decreased, falling to its lowest level during the banking crisis at 
the end of the 1980s. Government bank rescue measures and recapitalisation brought the 
ratio up to 8 per cent. Equity capital has not fully kept pace with growth in lending since then 
and the equity ratio has declined to 6 per cent. Today, the ratio is even lower than it was 
following the bank crises in the 1800s and the beginning of the 1900s. 
                                                  
6  
In more precise terms, the sum of a bank’s assets and certain off-balance sheet items must not be greater 
than 20 times capital. For banks that are “in good standing” and that satisfy certain requirements, this multiple 
can increase to 23. See Financial Stability Review, Bank of Canada, June 2009. In the US, the ratio of Tier 1 
capital to total adjusted assets must be at least 3 per cent for banks rated “strong” and 4 per cent for all other 
banks. The ratio applies on a consolidated basis. See “Background Note: Banking and the Leverage Ratio”, 
World Bank, http://crisistalk.worldbank.org/2009/03/banking-and-the-leverage-ratio.html. 
7   See Northcott, Carol Ann, Graydon Paulin and Mark White (2009) “Lessons from Canada ”, Quarterly Journal 
of  Central  Banking,  Volume  XIX,  No.  4,  May,  and  Ratnovski,  Lev  and  Rocco  Huang  (2009):  “Why  Are 
Canadian Banks More Resilient?” IMF Working Paper No. 152, July. 
6 
 BIS Review 131/2009
For a number of Norwegian banks, the ratio of equity capital to total assets is lower than 5 
per cent.  
 Strengthen the quality of capital 
Under  the  current  rules,  up  to  50  per  cent  of  a  bank’s  Tier  1  capital  can  consist of  hybrid 
instruments,  which  are  a  combination  of  debt  and  equity.  The  remainder  must  comprise 
common  equity  only.  Perpetual  capital  securities  and  other  hybrid  instruments  cannot  be 
used as easily as equity capital to absorb losses on a going concern or at liquidation. The 
possibility of limiting Tier 1 capital to common equity is now being considered.  
Hybrid  instruments  make  up  a  large  share  of  Tier  1  capital  in  many  European  banks  and 
many  banks  must  strengthen  the  quality  of  capital.  There  is  therefore  a  risk  that  political 
processes will prevent any significant increase in the minimum Tier 1 capital requirement. 
The Norwegian authorities have been restrictive in their approval of hybrid instruments. The 
Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway – with strong support from the Ministry of Finance 
during the last 20 years – has ensured that banks have been required to fully consolidate all 
 BIS Review 131/2009 
 7
assets  when  calculating  capital  requirements.  Since  established  practice  in  Norway  is 
already strict, the new rules may not in themselves affect banks to any great extent.  
Capital and macroprudential supervision 
 A lesson learned from the financial crisis is that regulation of financial institutions should seek 
to limit risk not only in each bank, but also in the financial system as a whole. Banks’ growth 
strategies seldom take into account that one bank’s behaviour can affect other banks and the 
financial system. The interlinkages between financial institutions amplify risk in the financial 
system. In our assessments, it is important to be aware of any build-up of systemic risk.  
Residential mortgages provide a good illustration of the difference between the individual risk 
for a bank and systemic risk. Even during the 1990s banking crisis, Norwegian banks’ losses 
on  residential  mortgages  were  low.  Today’s  low  risk  weights  for  residential  mortgages 
provide  strong  incentives  for  banks  to  extend  these  mortgage  loans.  However,  housing 
market fluctuations, which go hand in hand with shifts in saving behaviour, are nonetheless a 
source  of  business  cycle  fluctuations  and  substantial  losses  when  banks  have  to  write  off 
loans to firms selling goods and services to households.  
8 
  BIS Review 131/2009
The Norwegian housing market is vulnerable. Both a high level of tax incentives for house 
ownership and a large volume of adjustable-rate mortgages contribute to wide fluctuations in 
activity  and  prices.8  The  rise  in  house  prices  in  the  past  two  decades  has  also  been  very 
strong compared with countries where housing bubbles have burst.  
To finance strong growth in residential mortgages, banks have to rely to a great extent on 
borrowing, thereby increasing their vulnerability to a liquidity squeeze. Thus, low risk weights 
for residential mortgages also lead to higher liquidity risk in the banking system as a whole.  
It  is  important  to  be  aware  of  the  similarities  between  developments  in  the  Norwegian 
housing market and bank lending and developments in the countries most severely affected 
by the crisis. In Norway, the lead-up was similar with rising house prices, accelerating credit 
and  consumption  growth  and  lower  saving.  Interest  rate  setting  managed  to  stabilise 
developments somewhat. Economic policy was perhaps more successful in Norway and the 
government had larger buffers. But the soft landing in the Norwegian economy so far is also 
attributable to a good measure of luck, not least as oil prices rapidly rebounded after falling 
from USD150 per barrel to 35.  
Stricter requirements for systemically important banks 
The bankruptcy of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers rapidly led to a general crisis of 
confidence in the financial system. Central banks and government authorities implemented 
extensive measures to mitigate the impact of the crisis.  
At a meeting in Washington on 10 October 2008, the G7  countries stated that they would 
protect their systemically important institutions.9 This was a decisive measure.  
                                                  
8   See Van den  Noord, Paul (2005): “Tax Incentives and  House Price Volatility in the Euro Area: Theory  and 
Evidence”,  Économie  Internationale  101,  pp.29-45.  This  study  shows  that  house  price  volatility  is  higher  in 
countries where tax regimes favour owner-occupied housing. See also IMF (2004): World Economic Outlook, 
September,  p.81.  The  article  shows  that  house  price  volatility  is  higher  in  countries  with  predominantly 
adjustable-rate mortgages. 
IMF (2008): “Communiqué of the International Monetary and Financial Committee of the Board of Governors 
of the International Monetary Fund”, 11 October. 
9  
BIS Review 131/2009 
 9
But  the  social  and  economic  costs  have  been  considerable,  particularly  reflected  in  the 
dramatic fall in output and employment in most advanced economies. Moreover, government 
support for banks has been costly in many countries.  
The crisis has shown that regulation of systemically important banks should be considerably 
more stringent. This can be achieved by introducing overall higher capital requirements or 
seeking to restrict growth in these institutions by imposing stricter requirements than for other 
banks.  In  Switzerland,  it  has  been  decided  that  the  capital  adequacy  requirement  for  the 
country’s two large banks in good times will be twice the international minimum requirement. 
To prevent a procyclical impact, this target will apply as of 2013.10  
 In  Norway  and  other  countries,  all  banks  are  subject  to  the  same  capital  adequacy 
requirements, but the large banks have generally chosen to leverage their capital further than 
other banks. This is not advisable. 
The UK government intends to propose a plan that would require large banks to elaborate a 
plan for orderly unwinding, often referred to as “living wills”, stating which parts of a bank’s 
operations  will  be  sold  if  a  distressed  bank  is  compelled  to  raise  fresh  capital.11  The 
authorities will then be able to split up or wind down banks quickly, whatever their size or 
complexity.  
But an additional economic cost is incurred when governments rescue banks. This may have 
adverse effects on bank behaviour. In the field, this is referred to as measures that increase 
the risk of moral hazard.  
                                                 
10   In bad times, the capital adequacy requirement is reduced to 1.5 times the international minimum requirement. 
See Swiss Federal Banking Commission (2008): “SFBC and large banks agree to set higher capital adequacy 
targets and introduce a leverage ratio”, press release 4 December. 
11   See  Myners,  Paul  (2009):  “Developing  a  New  Financial  Architecture:  Lessons  Learned  from  the  Crises”, 
speech at the Financial Times Global Finance Forum, 18 September, HM Treasury. The same theme is also 
dealt  with  in  Bair,  Sheila  (2009):  “Remarks  by  FDIC  Chairman  Sheila  Bair  to  the  International  Institute  of 
Finance, Istanbul”, FDIC, 4 October. 
10 
 BIS Review 131/2009
I can provide an example. A creditor may for example assume that big banks are in practice 
“insured”  by  the  authorities,  which  will  also  be  reflected  in  rating  agencies’  assessments. 
Banks considered systemically important receive a higher rating. 
 As a result, funding costs for these banks are lower, allowing them to increase leverage and 
expand even further. 
 Reducing the procyclicality of bank behaviour 
Both international studies and Norges Bank studies indicate that the current capital adequacy 
rules,  Basel  II,  amplify  the  procyclical  effects  arising  from  bank  behaviour.12  During  an 
expansion, bank earnings are high. Ample supply of capital leads to high credit growth. In a 
                                                 
12   See  Andersen,  H.  (2009),  “Norwegian  Banks  in  a  Recession:  Procyclical  Implications  of  Basel  II”,  Working 
paper 2009/4, Norges Bank , and Kashyap, A.K. and Stein, J.C. (2004), “Cyclical Implications of the Basel II 
Standards”, Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Quarter 1, p. 18-31. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 11
downturn, loan losses increase and erode the banks’ capital. Banks respond by tightening 
lending. Bank behaviour therefore amplifies fluctuations in economic activity.  
 An  analysis  by  Norges  Bank  sheds  light  on  the  procyclical  effects  of  the  Basel  II  capital 
requirements. The analysis is based on a path where the Norwegian economy is exposed to 
a severe disturbance. During a downturn, the debt-servicing capacity of borrowers declines 
and  the  value  of  bank  collateral  falls.  The  risk  of  bank  losses  increases.  This  leads  to  an 
upward  adjustment  of  the  risk  weights  used  to  calculate  the  minimum  capital  requirement 
under  Basel  II.  The  minimum  capital  requirement  increases.  The  shorter  the  data  series 
applied by banks in their risk models are, the more the capital requirements fluctuate with 
business cycles. The effects may be considerable. Higher capital requirements for banks in a 
downturn will amplify the downturn. In an upturn, the effect will be the opposite.  
If  banks  apply  a  time  series  that  is  longer  than  20  years,  which  includes  at  least  one 
pronounced  economic  downturn,  the  effect  on  the  minimum  capital  requirement  during  a 
downturn  under  Basel  II  will  not  be  as  strong  as  when  the  banks  use  short  series.  Risk 
weights calculated on short series that do not include downturns are thus of little value.  
There are also other approaches to reducing the procyclicality of bank behaviour.  
In  Spain,  banks  have  had  to  provision  for  potential  losses  through  the  cycle.  They  were 
required to provision using non-tax deductible amounts for future losses at the time the loan 
was extended. Such dynamic provisioning has probably functioned effectively also because 
this system did not require that the supervisory authorities or the banks themselves had to 
decide that capital should be increased.  
12 
 BIS Review 131/2009
Nordic cooperation 
 Equal  competition  considerations  require  that  banking  rules  are  practiced  as  evenly  as 
possible across countries.  
For Norway, there are limits to how effectively regulations specific to Norway will be because 
we are part of the Nordic banking market. The Nordic region, however, is a well-suited region 
for an active use of regulatory measures. Nordic banks engage in cross-border operations. 
At the same time, they have little activity outside of the Nordic region. Nor are foreign banks 
from  other  regions  large  in  this  region.  The  conditions  are  therefore  in  place  for  effective 
cooperation in the area of banking regulation and crisis management between the political 
authorities, supervisory authorities and central banks.  
In the growth period from 2004 to 2008, foreign banks expanded rapidly in the Nordic market, 
but during and after the crisis they curbed their activity. I am afraid it can be said that they 
have amplified fluctuations in Norwegian markets. However, we assume the decline in their 
market share over the past year is attributable to their being harder hit by the international 
crisis than Norwegian banks.  
Liquidity management  
More capital is important for the solidity of the banking sector. However, we must not forget 
that  the  turbulence  first  translated  into  a  liquidity  crisis,  as  was  the  case  for  the  UK  bank 
Northern Rock in autumn 2007 when depositors rushed to withdraw their savings.  
For Norwegian banks, the crisis has essentially been a liquidity crisis. Norwegian banks were 
affected  because  they  became  dependent  on  market  funding.  The  financial  crisis  has 
revealed  that  substantial  short-term  money  market  funding  is  risky.  When  it  comes  from 
foreign markets, the risk of funding shortfalls increases. In the mid-1980s, Norwegian banks 
also borrowed heavily in foreign markets. In spring 1986 – following a sharp fall in oil prices – 
confidence in the Norwegian economy plummeted, and liquidity flowed out of the country as 
was the case in autumn last year.  
The  funding  source  that  is  considered  to  be  the  most  stable,  deposits,  has  become  less 
important over time. It is our assessment that the funding of Norwegian banks is a structural 
problem. When the financial crisis is behind us, we expect banks to give increased weight to 
deposits and long-term loans as funding sources.  
BIS Review 131/2009 
 13
 The  maturity  of  banks’  market  funding  should  be  longer  than  it  was  before  the  financial 
turbulence. During the financial crisis, investors were reluctant to provide long-term funding 
and required high risk premiums. Prospects for banks in general have now improved and risk 
premiums have declined. Strengthening of banks’ equity capital is helping to reduce the risk 
facing  bondholders.  Bond  premiums  are  nevertheless  likely  to  remain  clearly  higher  than 
prior  to  the  financial  crisis.  Investors  cannot  be  certain  that  government  will  cover  bond 
investors’  losses  when  banks’  capital  evaporates  during  the  next  banking  crisis,  c.f.  the 
planned UK proposal to impose a “living will” on the large institutions.  
A favourable source of funding for banks is covered bonds, referred to as OMF in Norway. 
These  debt  instruments  are  secured  by  sound  collateral  backed  by  residential  mortgages, 
public  loans  or  commercial  property  loans.  The  risk  premium  on  these  loans  is  therefore 
lower than on ordinary bank bonds. The covered bond market was also heavily impacted by 
the financial crisis. Activity in the secondary market has been low, and investors showed little 
interest  in  new  issues.  The  swap  arrangement  introduced  by  the  Norwegian  authorities 
eased the situation for banks. The market has recently improved.  
Covered bonds have a long tradition in other countries’ housing markets. As manager of the 
Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  Norges  Bank  has  taken  initiative  to  strengthen  the 
European  covered  bond  market.  Together  with  several  other  large  investors  and  support 
 14 
 BIS Review 131/2009
from a number of central banks, the “Covered Bond Investor Council” was established. One 
of the main aims of the Council is to improve liquidity in the covered bond market, through for 
example more transparent and standardised borrowing terms.  
The Norwegian covered bond market is new and small compared with that of other countries. 
Covered  bonds  are  well  suited  for  pension  portfolios  and  other  assets  with  a  long  time 
horizon. Further ahead, there should therefore be good possibilities for Norwegian banks to 
procure  long-term  funding.  Since  residential  mortgages  usually  feature  a  long  maturity, 
bonds should also have a long maturity. Before the financial crisis, mortgage-backed covered 
bonds were normally issued with a maturity of five to ten years in European countries.13  
But this source of funding also has its limitations. The larger the share of borrowing that has 
first  claim  on  banks’  assets  is,  the  higher  the  risk  becomes  for  other  lenders  and  for 
depositors  with  savings  above  the  guaranteed  amount.  The  risk  for  the  Norwegian  Banks’ 
Guarantee Fund may increase if covered bonds become too dominant.  
The Basel rules require capital for banks’ assets, but do not stipulate how the assets are to 
be  financed  or  their  liquidity.  It  is  now  being  considered  whether  common  requirements 
should be introduced as to the amount of liquid assets a bank must hold to survive a stress 
situation over a period of for example 30 days without drawing on loans in the central bank. 
In addition, there will be funding stability requirements.14 The Basel Committee is expected to 
make concrete proposals in the course of the year.  
One of the first countries that introduced stricter requirements is the UK, where banks are 
required to apply a stress situation with a duration of three months.15  
Assets that would qualify as sufficiently liquid should be easily sold in the market – also in 
stress  situations.  The  financial  crisis  showed  that  many  assets  held  by  banks  for  liquidity 
purposes were not particularly liquid. In the UK, the authorities will only accept that banks’ 
liquidity buffers include government bonds of high quality and deposits in the central bank.  
Norges Bank’s macroprudential supervision – use of stress tests 
Through recent decades, financial stability analyses have become increasingly important in 
many central banks. An important element in the analysis is to assess the vulnerability of the 
financial  system  to  macroeconomic  disturbances.  Stress  tests  are  commonly  used  in  this 
exercise. Norges Bank uses stress tests to assess the consequences for Norwegian banks 
of  several  risks  having  a  negative  impact  simultaneously.  We  will  develop  this  tool  further 
and take account of the experiences of other countries. We will seek to be transparent about 
the assumptions and results.  
Asset prices, credit and monetary policy 
There  is  a  division  of  roles  in  economic  policy.  Fiscal  policy,  through  growth  in  public 
spending, influences the real krone exchange rate and the size of the international exposed 
business  sector  in  the  long  term.  Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long 
term and can in addition contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment.  
                                                 
13   See European Central Bank, December (2008): “Covered Bonds in the EU Financial System”. 
14   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009): “Comprehensive Response to the Global Banking Crisis”, 
press release of 7 September. 
15   Financial Services Authority (2009): “Strengthening Liquidity Standards”, Policy Statement 09/16, UK October. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 15
 House prices in Norway have risen sharply and probably excessively. 
We must take account of developments in equity prices and property prices when projecting 
inflation and output. Norges Bank’s interest rate setting does not rely solely on one simple 
rule. Instead, we seek to take account of all factors that influence inflation and output in the 
medium  term,  and  the  key  policy  rate  is set  on  the  basis of  an  overall  assessment.  Asset 
prices such as house prices, the exchange rate and credit growth therefore have a bearing 
on  Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting.  A  written  formulation  of  Norges  Bank’s  monetary 
policy reaction function would be fairly comprehensive and include all the variables that are 
considered.  
However,  a  reaction  function  must  not  be  confused  with  the  monetary  policy  target  –  our 
target function. The fact that we give weight to variables such as the exchange rate, house 
prices and credit growth in interest rate setting does not imply that there are specific target 
for  these  variables.  The  operational  target  for  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time.  
Interest rate setting in a small, open economy can be particularly challenging in periods of 
strong credit growth and a wide interest rate differential against other countries. A tightening 
of monetary policy in Norway specifically aimed at curbing property prices and credit growth 
can  result  in  a  rising  krone  exchange  rate,  a  weaker  labour  market  and  excessively  low 
inflation.  
Should  we  seek  to  avert  bubbles  in  the  housing  market  even  when  medium-term  inflation 
prospects are moderate? On this point, it is our judgement that a distinction must be made 
between  giving  greater  weight  to  credit  growth  and  house  price  inflation  in  the  reaction 
function and defining house price inflation as an independent monetary policy objective. So-
called “leaning against the wind” would not require adjustments to Norges Bank’s approach, 
bearing in mind that our reaction function already gives weight to asset price movements and 
credit  growth.16  Should  central  banks  also  set  explicit  targets  for  asset  prices?  In  our 
judgment the answer is no, but we should probably apply a fairly long horizon for achieving 
the target so that we seek to take account of any imbalances that might disturb activity and 
inflation further ahead.  
                                                 
16   See  for  example  White,W.R.  (2009):  “Should  Monetary  Policy  “Lean  or  Clean”?”,  Working  paper  no.34, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
16 
 BIS Review 131/2009
Household  behaviour  in  the  housing  market  is  a  considerable  economy  policy  challenge. 
This is primarily because demand for housing and housing loans is heavily subsidised by the 
tax system and loan supply is marked by the near-absence of an equity capital requirement 
for providing housing loans.  
Exit strategies 
In  line  with  other  countries,  the  Norwegian  authorities  implement  extensive  measures  to 
improve banks’ access to liquidity and longer term funding after the Lehman Brothers failure. 
This  contributed  to  improved  funding  conditions  for  Norwegian  banks.  As  the  situation  in 
financial markets returns to normal, the measures will be wound down.  
Recently, we have seen an improvement in money and credit markets. We have therefore 
started reducing the use of unconventional measures.  
In recent months, liquidity has not been supplied through currency swap lines or liquidity in 
foreign currency. Loans at long maturities have not been provided since February – several 
of the loans have now matured.  
As  markets  are  now  returning  to  normal,  liquidity  supply  will  be  adjusted  so  that  money 
market  rates  reflect  the  key  policy  rate.  We  want  the  banks  to  redistribute  liquidity  in  the 
interbank market.  
The  underlying  structural  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  i.e.  liquidity  excluding  Norges 
Bank’s liquidity provision, has been negative in recent years. Structural liquidity is influenced 
by  ingoing  and  outgoing  payments  via  the  government’s  account  in  Norges  Bank  and  is 
projected to increase ahead, primarily because the government can partly finance increased 
lending to state banks, payments from the Government Bond Fund and the State Finance 
Fund  and  share  subscriptions  by  drawing  on  their  large  deposits  in  Norges  Bank.  The 
banking system’s demand for central bank loans will then decrease considerably. 
 BIS Review 131/2009 
 17
 The swap arrangement involving covered bonds in exchange for government securities has 
made a considerable contribution to securing banks’ long-term funding. This spring we saw 
that the covered bond market started to reopen. The minimum price in the swap arrangement 
is thus adjusted to the interest rate forming in the market. The arrangement will be phased 
out in the course of autumn.  
Norges  Bank  temporarily  eased  its  collateral  requirements  to  facilitate  banks’  access  to 
borrowing in the central bank. Banks’ borrowing needs are falling, and a good supply of high-
quality collateral, particularly Treasury notes, has increased markedly. 
 We  are  of  the  view  that  the  conditions  are  now  appropriate  for  reversing  these  temporary 
changes. We will also tighten the collateral requirements. Today the planned changes have 
been circulated for comment. The acceptance of new securities eligible as collateral under 
the temporary rules is now discontinued. Securities that were already accepted as collateral 
under the temporary rules can normally be used as collateral until they mature or up to no 
later  than  15  February  2012  when  the  last  long-term  fixed-rate  loan  in  Norges  Bank  has 
matured. 
We have also announced a change in the so-called bank quota. Under today’s rules, 35 per 
cent of a bank’s borrowing facility in Norges Bank can be based on collateral in bonds issued 
18 
 BIS Review 131/2009
by  other  Norwegian  banks.  It  is  a  disadvantage  that  the  provider  of  the  collateral  and  the 
collateral are from the same sector. At the same time, it is a competitive disadvantage for 
Norwegian banks when their issues are covered by the quota, while this is not the case for 
issues by for example Swedish and Danish banks. Therefore, from 1 December 2010 we will 
include foreign bank issues in the bank quota without increasing the percentage rate of 35. 
From  15  February  2012,  we  will  discontinue  access  to  using  bank  issues  as  collateral  for 
loans.  
Covered bonds will still be eligible as collateral, also when the bonds are issued by a bank’s 
own  mortgage  company.  We  assume  that  this  will  also  contribute  to  developing  the 
Norwegian covered bond market.  
Conclusion 
 Allow me to conclude. 
Developments in recent months indicate that the financial crisis in Norway will not develop 
into a real economic crisis. We have not experienced a bank solvency crisis as was the case 
20 years ago. Unless the Norwegian economy is exposed to new major shocks, we expect 
the bankruptcy rate for Norwegian enterprises to stabilise or to be at about the same level 
recorded in the moderate downturn at the beginning of this decade. 
Nevertheless,  the  crisis  has  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks, 
also in Norway.  
It  is  our  hope  and  belief  that  international  cooperation  will  set  the  stage  for  an  improved 
regulatory framework and systems. For us in Norway, it is important that the Nordic countries 
can stand together.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 19
