Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  Scottish  business 
organisations, Edinburgh, 20 October 2009. 
 Two  years  ago  Scotland  was  home  to  two  of the  largest and  most  respected international 
banks.  Both  are  now  largely  state-owned.  Sir  Walter  Scott  would  have  been  mortified  by 
these events. Writing in 1826, under the pseudonym of Malachi Malagrowther, he observed 
that: 
“Not only did the Banks dispersed throughout Scotland afford the means of 
bringing  the  country  to  an  unexpected  and  almost  marvellous  degree  of 
prosperity, but in no considerable instance, save one [the Ayr Bank], have 
their own over-speculating undertakings been the means of interrupting that 
prosperity”. 
Banking has not been good for the wealth of the Scottish – and, it should be said, almost any 
other  –  nation  recently.  Over  the  past  year,  almost  six  million  jobs  have  been  lost  in  the 
United  States,  over  2½  million  in  the  euro  area,  and  over  half  a  million  in  the  United 
Kingdom. Our national debt is rising rapidly, not least as the consequence of support to the 
banking system. We shall all be paying for the impact of this crisis on the public finances for 
a generation. 
The  United  Kingdom  faces  two  fundamental  long-run  challenges.  First,  to  rebalance  the 
economy, with more resources allocated to business investment and net exports and fewer 
to consumption. That is consistent with the need – now widely accepted – to eliminate the 
large structural fiscal deficit and to raise the national saving rate. It is part of a need for a 
wider rebalancing of domestic demand in the world economy away from those countries that 
borrowed and ran current account deficits towards those that lent and ran surpluses. 
Second,  both  the  structure  and  regulation  of  banking  in  the  UK  need  reform.  Banks 
increased  both  the  size  and  leverage  of  their  balance  sheets  to  levels  that  threatened 
stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  They  remain  extraordinarily  dependent  on  the  public 
sector for support. That was necessary in the immediate crisis, but is not sustainable in the 
medium term. 
These  two  challenges  are  interrelated.  In  creating  the  crisis,  imbalances  in  the  world 
economy  led  to  unusually  low  real  interest  rates  and  large  net  capital  flows  from  the 
emerging  market  economies  to  the  developed  world.  That  provided  the  fuel  which  an 
inadequately  designed  regulatory  system  ignited  to  produce  the  financial  firestorm  that 
engulfed us all. If our response to the crisis focuses only on the symptoms rather than the 
underlying causes of the crisis, then we shall bequeath to future generations a serious risk of 
another crisis even worse than the one we have experienced. 
Tonight  I  want  to  focus  on  the  second  of  those  challenges  –  reform  of  the  structure  and 
regulation  of  the  banking  system.  Why  were  banks  willing  to  take  risks  that  proved  so 
damaging  both  to  themselves  and  the  rest  of  the  economy?  One  of  the  key  reasons  – 
mentioned by market participants in conversations before the crisis hit – is that the incentives 
to manage risk and to increase leverage were distorted by the implicit support or guarantee 
provided by government to creditors of banks that were seen as “too important to fail”. Such 
banks could raise funding more cheaply and expand faster than other institutions. They had 
less  incentive  than  others  to  guard  against  tail  risk.  Banks  and  their  creditors  knew  that  if 
they were sufficiently important to the economy or the rest of the financial system, and things 
went wrong, the government would always stand behind them. And they were right. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 1
The sheer scale of support to the banking sector is breathtaking. In the UK, in the form of 
direct or guaranteed loans and equity investment, it is not far short of a trillion (that is, one 
thousand billion) pounds, close to two-thirds of the annual output of the entire economy. To 
paraphrase  a  great  wartime  leader,  never  in  the  field  of  financial  endeavour  has  so  much 
money been owed by so few to so many. And, one might add, so far with little real reform. 
It is hard to see how the existence of institutions that are “too important to fail” is consistent 
with  their  being  in  the  private  sector.  Encouraging  banks  to  take  risks  that  result  in  large 
dividend and remuneration payouts when things go well, and losses for taxpayers when they 
don’t, distorts the allocation of resources and management of risk. 
That  is  what  economists  mean  by  “moral  hazard”.  The  massive  support  extended  to  the 
banking sector around the world, while necessary to avert economic disaster, has created 
possibly  the  biggest  moral  hazard  in  history.  The  “too  important  to  fail”  problem  is  too 
important to ignore. 
There are only two ways in which the problem can – in logic – be solved. One is to accept 
that some institutions are “too important to fail” and try to ensure that the probability of those 
institutions failing, and hence of the need for taxpayer support, is extremely low. The other is 
to  find  a  way  that  institutions  can  fail  without  imposing  unacceptable  costs  on  the  rest  of 
society.  Any  solution  must  fall  into  one  of  those  two  categories.  What  does  this  mean  in 
practice? 
Consider the first approach. To reduce the likelihood of failure, regulators can impose capital 
requirements on a wide range of financial institutions related to the risks they are taking. This 
is the current approach underpinned by the Basel regime. In essence, it makes banks build a 
buffer  against  adverse  events.  It  has  attractions  but  also  problems.  First,  capital 
requirements  reduce,  but  not  eliminate,  the  need  for  taxpayers  to  provide  catastrophe 
insurance. Second,  the  “riskiness” of  a  bank’s activities and  the  liquidity  of  its funding  can 
change suddenly and radically as market expectations shift. This means that what appeared 
to be an adequate capital or liquidity cushion one day appears wholly inadequate the next. 
Indeed,  the  Achilles  heel  of  the  Basel  regime  is  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  constant 
capital  ratio  which  delivers  the  desired  degree of  stability  of  the  banking  system.  After  the 
experience  of  the  past  two  years,  and  a  decade  or  more  in  which  capital  ratios  fell  and 
leverage  ratios  rose  to  historically  unprecedented  levels,  banks  need  more  capital  to 
persuade  investors  to  fund  them.  A  larger  buffer  gives  new  creditors  greater  comfort  that 
their claims will be met in future, without resort to the public purse. And rather than pay out 
dividends  or  generous  remuneration,  banks  should  use  earnings  to  build  larger  capital 
buffers.  But  how  much  larger?  We  simply  don’t  know.  A  higher  ratio  is  safer  than  a  lower 
one, but any fixed ratio is bound to be arbitrary. 
One way of dealing with this problem is to require banks to take out insurance in the form of 
“contingent  capital”,  that  is  capital  in  a  form  that  automatically  converts  to  common  equity 
upon  the  trigger  of  a  threshold  that  kicks  in  before  a  bank  becomes  insolvent.  If  a  bank’s 
regulatory  core  tier  1  capital  –  common  equity  –  remained  above  the  threshold,  nothing 
would  happen.  But  if  the  regulatory  core  tier  1  capital  fell  below  the  threshold  then  the 
contingent capital would automatically be converted to common equity. When bank failures 
impose  costs  on  the  rest  of  the  economy,  it  is  reasonable  to  insist  that  banks  themselves 
purchase  a  sufficient  degree  of  insurance  in  the  form  of  a  large  capital  cushion  available 
automatically before insolvency. 
Such  contingent  capital 
instruments,  such  as 
subordinated  debt,  which  banks  have  been  permitted  to  count  as  capital  under  the  Basel 
regime, but which do not provide a reliable capital buffer until too late – after the bank has 
failed. So at present the taxpayer is providing capital that is exposed to future losses rather 
than investors in debt-like capital instruments of a troubled bank. Whether investors would be 
willing to provide contingent capital on the required scale would depend upon the price, but 
at least the cost would fall where it belongs – on the banks. 
instruments  are  very  different 
from 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2009
So  the  first  approach  to  the  “too  important  to  fail”  problem  might  be  made  to  work  with  a 
requirement for contingent capital. It is worth a try. But it has three drawbacks. First, banks 
still have an incentive to take really big risks because the government would provide some 
back-stop catastrophe insurance. Second, experience has shown that it is difficult to assess 
risks  of  infrequent  but  high-impact  events,  and  so  it  is  dangerous  to  allow  activities 
characterised  by  such  risks  to  contaminate  the  essential  –  or  utility  –  services  that  the 
banking  sector  provides  to  the  wider  economy.  Both  of  these  drawbacks  mean  that  it  is 
almost impossible to calculate how much contingent capital would be appropriate. And a third 
drawback  is  that  the  approach  probably  requires  the  extension  of  detailed  regulation,  and 
especially a special resolution regime, to all institutions deemed “too important to fail” – or 
could  become  “too  important  to  fail”  in  the  middle  of  a  crisis  –  in  order  to  prevent  a  bank 
failure  leading  to  conventional  insolvency  procedures.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  that 
scope would be easy to define beforehand. Failure to deal with the underlying problem draws 
regulators deeper into murky waters. 
The second approach rejects the idea that some institutions should be allowed to become 
“too important to fail”. Instead of asking who should perform what regulation, it asks why we 
regulate banks. It draws a clear distinction between different activities that banks undertake. 
The  banking  system  provides  two  crucial  services  to  the  rest  of  the  economy:  providing 
companies and households a ready means by which they can make payments for goods and 
services  and  intermediating  flows  of  savings  to  finance  investment.  Those  are  the  utility 
aspects of banking where we all have a common interest in ensuring continuity of service. 
And  for  this  reason  they  are  quite  different  in  nature  from  some  of  the  riskier  financial 
activities that banks undertake, such as proprietary trading. 
In other industries we separate those functions that are utility in nature – and are regulated – 
from  those  that  can  safely  be  left  to  the  discipline  of  the  market.  The  second  approach 
adapts those insights to the regulation of banking. At one end of the spectrum is the proposal 
for “narrow banks”, recently revived by John Kay, which would separate totally the provision 
of payments services from the creation of risky assets. In that way deposits are guaranteed. 
At  the  other  is  the  proposal  in  the  G30  report  by  Paul  Volcker,  former  Chairman  of  the 
Federal Reserve, to separate proprietary trading from retail banking. The common element is 
the aim of restricting government guarantees to utility banking. 
There are those who claim that such proposals are impractical. It is hard to see why. Existing 
prudential  regulation  makes  distinctions  between  different  types  of  banking  activities  when 
determining  capital  requirements.  What  does  seem  impractical,  however,  are  the  current 
arrangements. Anyone who proposed giving government guarantees to retail depositors and 
other creditors, and then suggested that such funding could be used to finance highly risky 
and speculative activities, would be thought rather unworldly. But that is where we now are. 
It is important that banks in receipt of public support are not encouraged to try to earn their 
way out of that support by resuming the very activities that got them into trouble in the first 
place. The sheer creative imagination of the financial sector to think up new ways of taking 
risk  will  in  the  end,  I  believe,  force  us  to  confront  the  “too  important  to  fail”  question.  The 
belief  that  appropriate  regulation  can  ensure  that  speculative  activities  do  not  result  in 
failures is a delusion. 
Separation  of  activities  does  not  resolve  all  misaligned  incentives.  Where  private  sector 
entities  outside  of  the  utility  banking  sector  engage  in  a  high  degree  of  maturity 
transformation  on  a  scale  that  could  have  consequences  for  the  rest  of  the  economy,  the 
government would not want to stand aside when such an entity fails. That is the heart of the 
matter. Maturity transformation reduces the cost of finance to a wide range of risky activities, 
at least some of which are beneficial, but the implicit government guarantee means that the 
true  cost  of  that  maturity  mismatch  does  not,  as  it  should,  fall  on  those  who  receive  the 
benefits.  The  aim  of  policy  should  be  to  minimise  or  eliminate  that  subsidy.  Separation  of 
activities helps not hinders that objective, not least because it is the mixture of activities that 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 3
reduces  the  robustness  of  the  system.  Although  there  are  no  simple  answers,  it  is  in  our 
collective interest to reduce the dependence of so many households and businesses on so 
few institutions that engage in so many risky activities. The case for a serious review of how 
the banking industry is structured and regulated is strong. 
By  international  standards  UK  banking  is  highly  concentrated.  There  are  four  large  UK 
banking  groups.  Of  these  four,  two  are  largely  in  state  ownership  and  their  assets  are  a 
multiple of the assets of the next largest bank. As in the English Premier League, getting into 
the top four will not be easy for those outside it. But in both cases I hope greater competition 
will produce less rigidity in the composition of the top four. 
Whichever  approach  to  the  “too  important  to  fail”  problem  is  adopted,  there  is  growing 
agreement that such financial institutions should, as I argued at the Mansion House in June, 
be made to plan for their own orderly wind down – to write their own will. I welcome that, but 
without  separation  of  the  utility  from  other  components  of  banking  it  will  be  necessary  to 
develop  detailed  resolution  procedures  for  a  very  wide  class  of  financial  institutions.  The 
options  may  turn  out  to  be  separation  of  activities,  on  the  one  hand,  or  ever  increasingly 
detailed  regulatory  oversight,  with  the  costs  that  that  entails  for  innovation  in,  and  the 
efficiency of, the financial system, on the other. 
So  far,  I  have  discussed  measures  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  can  continue  to 
function when individual institutions find themselves in difficulty. But there are broader policy 
goals  relevant  to  financial  stability.  The  crisis  certainly  suggests  that  there  is  a  need  for 
additional policy tools that can (a) moderate the growth of the financial sector and (b) lean 
against  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  credit  cycle.  The  Bank  is  working  with  others  to 
explore  such  macro-prudential  instruments,  and  we  will  be  setting  out  our  thinking  in  a 
discussion  paper  and  a  speech  by  Paul  Tucker  later  in  the  week.  Given  the  difficulty  of 
applying such tools to overseas banks, their use in (a) is likely to be more productive than in 
(b). The key point though is that parallel to the long-established role which monetary policy 
plays in taking away the punch bowl just as the party gets going, so there is a role for the 
central  bank  to  use  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  for  financial  stability  purposes  by 
turning down the music just as the dancing gets a little too wild. 
As we focus on how to create a sound and stable financial system, we cannot neglect the 
rest of the economy. Recent months have brought better news here. Around the world, the 
sharp falls in output that occurred over the winter have largely come to an end, and business 
and consumer confidence have improved somewhat. It is likely that in the second half of this 
year,  the  UK  economy  will  return  to  positive,  if  modest,  growth.  Financial  markets  have 
improved, with banks finding it easier and less costly to access wholesale funding markets, 
and in time this should ease lending conditions to households and businesses. 
These developments are encouraging. But they need to be seen in context, and we should 
be under no illusion that the path to a sustained recovery will be smooth and painless. 
Output is still well below and unemployment well above their levels of a year ago, and are 
likely to remain so for sometime. To keep inflation close to the 2% target, monetary policy 
tries to keep a balance between overall demand and supply. Judging that balance, given an 
impaired banking sector and the likelihood of a significant fiscal tightening over the next few 
years, is particularly difficult. 
At the moment, inflation is 1.1%. Many have forgotten that only a year ago it reached 5.2%. It 
is likely that inflation will remain volatile over the coming year. It will pick up over the next few 
months reflecting higher petrol prices, recent falls in sterling and the  reversal of the cut in 
VAT. Looking through these short-run factors, however, inflation will be determined by the 
path of money spending relative to the supply capacity of the economy. Over the past year 
money spending, which normally expands at around 5% a year, has fallen by 5%. That is 
already pulling down on inflation and will continue to do so until spending recovers. To put 
money spending back on a desirable trajectory is likely to require a pick up in the growth rate 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2009
of broad money in the economy. That is precisely what our asset purchase programme, by 
injecting more money directly into the economy, aims to achieve. 
In deciding when and by how much our present programme of asset purchases should be 
either expanded or reduced, the Monetary Policy Committee will continue to base its decision 
each month on a judgement of the action required to meet the 2% target for inflation. 
Before the financial crisis, a generation of households and businesses had accepted that the 
discipline of a market economy was the most promising route to prosperity. Uncomfortable 
though  it  seemed,  the  importance  of  more  flexible  labour  markets,  greater  competition  in 
product  markets,  regulation  of  privatised  utilities  and  allowing  unsuccessful  businesses  to 
fail, came to be widely understood. Then, out of what must have appeared to many of you to 
be a clear blue sky of economic stability, arose a financial firestorm that wreaked substantial 
damage to the real economy, and we have not yet seen its full consequences. The case for 
market discipline is no less compelling for banking than for other industries. 
So  I  am  sure  that  we  can  turn  this  crisis  to  our  long-run  advantage  by  reviewing  and 
reforming the structure and regulation of banking. As Sir Walter Scott noted, the failure of the 
Ayr Bank in 1772 “was a terrible [warning], and has been so well attended to in Scotland … 
forcing a capital on the district could only lead to wild speculation, instead of supporting solid 
and  promising  undertakings”.  Of  the  bankers  themselves,  Scott  recognised  that,  while  the 
majority  were  “good  men”,  “there  may  have  been,  among  so  numerous  a  body,  men  of  a 
different  character,  fishers  in  troubled  waters,  capitalists  who  sought  gain  not  by  the 
encouragement of fair trade and honest industry, but by affording temporary fuel to rashness 
or avarice”. 
If  unsustainable  capital  flows  provided  the  fuel  and  an  inadequately  designed  regulatory 
system ignited the fuel, the past two years have shown how dangerous it is to let bankers 
play with fire. This is not a question of blame – as Sir Walter rightly said, the majority in the 
industry are “good men” and women. It is a matter of the incentives they face. To protect our 
genuinely  successful  financial  centres  –  of  which  Edinburgh  is  clearly  one  –  reform  of 
banking  is  essential.  With  that,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  have  attended  to  our  terrible 
warning and our varied and internationally competitive financial services industry will thrive. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 5
