Philipp M Hildebrand: Policy implications of the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Conference,  “From  Fragility  to  Stability”,  University  of  Geneva, 
18 November 2009. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Jürg  Blum  and  Rita  Kobel  for  their  valuable  support  in  drafting  this 
speech.  I  also  want  to  thank  Nicole  Allenspach,  Philipp  Haene,  and  Signe  Krogstrup  for 
helpful comments and discussions. 
 Introduction 
It  is  an  honour  to  speak  at  the  University  of  Geneva  this  evening.  I  want  to  thank  Rajna 
Gibson for her kind invitation. 
A year ago, we were in the midst of a perfect financial storm. Following the bankruptcy of 
Lehman  Brothers  in  mid-September,  the  imminent  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system 
became a distinct possibility. Since those dark days, the situation has manifestly improved. A 
bold and unprecedented global policy response has had its intended short-term effect. While 
important questions remain as to the sustainability of the global recovery, we are no longer 
staring  into the  abyss  of  financial  and  –  potentially  –  economic  chaos.  The  worst  financial 
crisis for at least 70 years has not resulted in a new Great Depression.  
On the other side of the ledger, the tangible and intangible costs of this crisis are enormous. 
The potential costs of the support measures taken – capital injection, asset purchases, and 
guarantees of bank debt – in the G7 countries together with Australia, the Netherlands, Spain 
and Switzerland amount to about twenty per cent of GDP in these economies.1 Moreover, 
the  consequences  of  the  crisis  in  terms  of  job,  output  and  wealth  losses,  unprecedented 
increases in public spending and declines in public revenues are enormous. In the end, the 
citizens  of  the  individual  countries  involved  will  have  to  foot  the  bill,  one  way  or  another. 
Arguably  the  most  important  intangible  cost,  however,  is  the  fact  that  governments  had  to 
issue an explicit guarantee for systemically relevant institutions, in effect executing a partial 
government take over of the financial system.2  
Going forward, the world of finance will not be the same anymore. It should therefore come 
as no surprise that at the national and international level intensive efforts are underway to 
increase the resilience of the financial system.  
In recent months, these international reform efforts have included the presentation of many 
reports  and  recommendations.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  published  two 
comprehensive  sets  of  recommendations  to  improve  financial  regulation.3  Both  have  been 
endorsed  by  the  G20  leaders.  The  public  sector  has  not  been  alone  in  issuing 
                                                 
1   The outlays totalled eight per cent of GDP. These figures relate to government support measures introduced 
between September 2008 and June 2009. Source: “An assessment of financial sector rescue programmes”, 
BIS  paper  No  48,  July  2009.  In  Switzerland,  the  potential  costs  of  capital  injection  and  asset  purchases 
amounted to about nine per cent of GDP. While the Swiss government has been able to sell its stake in UBS 
with a profit, the SNB exposure in illiquid assets taken over from UBS still amounts to approximately USD25 
billion. 
2   “We  agree  to  take  decisive  action  and  use  all  available  tools  to  support  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  and  prevent  their  failure.”,  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  Plan  of  Action, 
10 October 2008. 
3   The recommendations and principles to strengthen financial systems, published on 2 April 2009 (based on the 
“Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, April 2008), and 
“Improving Financial Regulation: Report of the Financial Stability Board to G20 Leaders”, 25 September 2009. 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 1
recommendations.4  Individual  firms  and  industry  groups,  most  notably  the  Institute  of 
International Finance (IIF), have become increasingly vocal in stating what they consider to 
be appropriate and inappropriate changes to the global financial regulatory framework.5  
In  short,  good  progress  is  being  made  on  many  issues.  In  particular,  some  of  the  largest 
banks  have  begun  to  reorient  their  business  models  and  operating  procedures.  But  many 
implementation challenges – in regulation as well as in business strategy – lie ahead of us. 
Moreover,  given  the  proliferation  of  ideas  put  forward  by  both  the  public  and  the  private 
sector, it is increasingly difficult to keep track of competing recommendations. And perhaps, 
most worryingly, the momentum for reform appears to have slowed, partly because markets 
have  stabilised,  partly  because  the  public  is  losing  interest  and  partly  because,  as  Jerry 
Corrigan  recently  said,  “the  subject  matter  of  reform  is  so  very  complex  and  often 
controversial.”6  
In  view  of  the  complexity  of  the  issue,  allow  me  to  lay  out  the  regulatory  reform  priorities 
which  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  believes  we  must  focus  on  in  our  efforts  to  build  a 
more robust financial system for the future. Fully in line with proposals by the FSB and the 
decisions  already  taken  by  the  G20  leaders,  we  must  pursue  a  dual-track  approach  to 
reform, combining preventive measures and resolution measures:  
The  preventive  measures  aim  at  reducing  the  probability  of  bank  failures 
and  systemic  crises.  Note  that  I  deliberately  use  the  word  “reduce”. 
Eliminating all instability would be neither feasible nor desirable. 
The resolution measures aim at reducing the negative consequences in the 
event  that  failures  or  systemic  crises  occur  –  despite  hopefully  greater 
resilience in the future.  
In  what  follows,  it  is  useful  to  bear  in  mind  the  extraordinary  situation  we  face  here  in 
Switzerland.  In  international  comparison,  our  banking  sector  is  very  large  relative  to  our 
economy.  Currently,  total  assets  of  the  Swiss  banking  sector  exceed  seven  times  GDP. 
Furthermore, the Swiss banking sector is highly concentrated. Based on total assets, the two 
big  banks,  UBS  and  Credit  Suisse,  have  a  market  share  of  more  than  two-thirds.  These 
exceptional  orders  of  magnitude  clearly  necessitate  prudent  decision-making  when 
determining the appropriate regulatory framework for banks in Switzerland. 
Preventive measures 
Let me first turn to the preventive measures. These measures should focus on strengthening 
the shock absorbers of the financial system and thereby making the system more resilient. In 
the  context  of  the  most  significant  banks,  this  essentially  means  that  they  have  to  hold 
substantially more and better quality capital and liquidity.  
Strengthening capital requirements 
As  we  all  know,  the  crisis  has  revealed  fundamental  weaknesses  in  existing  capital 
requirements.  
                                                 
4   Other important reports include “Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability” by the Group of 30, 
and “The Global Financial Crisis: A Plan for Regulatory Reform”, Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, 
May 2009. 
5   “Restoring Confidence, Creating Resilience: An Industry Perspective on the Future of International Financial 
Regulation and the Search for Stability”, Institute of International Finance, July 2009. 
6   Speech  by  E.  Gerald  Corrigan,  Managing  Director  at  Goldman  Sachs,  at  the  Presidential  Symposium, 
University of Rochester, 10 October 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2009
To address these weaknesses, a considerable amount of work has already been done and is 
still  underway  in  the  FSB  and,  crucially,  in  a  number  of  working  groups  of  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS).7 In line with, and in full support of these efforts, 
the Swiss authorities are convinced that a more robust capital framework needs to be built 
around the following features: 
First,  the  amount  and  quality  of  capital  need  to  be  increased  very  substantially.  In  the 
medium  term,  this  will  be  feasible  without  giving  rise  to  drastic  adjustments  at  banks  that 
might  be  harmful  to  the  overall  economy.  The  key  to  this  will  be  a  sufficiently  long  time 
horizon and, crucially, more discipline in retaining earnings. The outlook for future earnings is 
by  definition  uncertain.  Nonetheless,  if  we  review  the  banks  that  have  received  public 
support,  it  is  striking  that  many  of  them  paid  out  more  in  dividends  and  share  buybacks 
during the years preceding the crisis than they subsequently faced in losses. 
Second,  as  a  supplement  to  the  risk-based  capital  requirements,  a  simple,  commonly  and 
coherently  defined  leverage  ratio  restriction  needs  to  be  introduced,  of  the  sort  already 
applied  in  a  number  of  major  financial  centres.  A  leverage  ratio  prevents  the  build-up  of 
excessive leverage and serves as a backstop to the complex, but fallible risk-based capital 
requirements.  Fundamentally,  anybody  who  claims  that  the  leverage  ratio  is  a  useless  or 
even  a  counterproductive  complementary  regulatory  instrument  is  arguing  that  gross 
exposure doesn’t matter. If there is one lesson we should learn from the crisis, it surely is 
that gross exposure manifestly matters a great deal.  
Third, to address procyclicality, banks will have to build up capital buffers above the minimum 
requirements in good times. In difficult times, banks will be allowed to fall significantly below 
the  target  levels  defined  for  good  times.  Allowing  banks  to  draw  down  capital  without 
violating  any  minimum  requirements  should  help  mitigate  the  potentially  harmful  effects  of 
de-leveraging.8  
In  Switzerland,  compatible  with  these  features,  FINMA  issued  decrees  imposing  higher 
capital  requirements  on  the  two  big  banks  at  the  end  of  last  year.  According  to  these 
decrees, the big banks will have to meet risk-weighted capital requirements that are double 
what they were before the crisis. As a complement, FINMA has introduced a leverage ratio. 
In good times, the capital base has to account for at least 5 per cent of the total adjusted 
assets.9 To prevent a procyclical impact, these targets will apply as of 2013 at the earliest, 
giving  banks  enough  time  to  recover  from  the  crisis.  Furthermore,  the  big  banks  will  be 
allowed to temporarily fall short of these targets in bad times. 
The Swiss experience suggests that the largest banks can adjust rapidly, even to ambitious 
new  capital  requirements,  without  causing  collateral  damage  to  the  overall  economy.  To 
reduce  uncertainty  and  to  facilitate  the  planning  process  at  banks,  it  is  crucial  that  the 
ultimate target levels are clearly communicated, and that a sufficiently long phase-in period is 
provided for. This will enable banks to adjust to the new rules in an orderly fashion.  
One interesting question is whether contingent capital, i.e., debt that is converted to capital if 
a particular event is triggered, can be devised in such a way as to enhance capital standards. 
There may well be a role for contingent capital, in effect defining in advance a debt-to-equity 
swap.  In  order  for  such  a  contingent  convertible  capital  structure  to  be  effective,  it  will  be 
                                                 
7 
It will thereby be important to carefully assess the combined effect of these changes. To this end, the Basel 
Committee  will  conduct  a  quantitative  impact  study  in  2010,  before  determining  the  final  calibration  of  the 
improved requirements. 
8   To reduce the procyclicality of capital regulation, promoting more forward-looking provisions is an additional 
promising  avenue  to  pursue.  In  this  area,  progress  will  depend  a  great  deal  on  the  accounting  standard 
setters. The Basel Committee is working closely with accounting standard setters on this issue. 
In  the  case  of  Switzerland,  several  adjustments  are  made  to  total  assets.  Most  importantly,  the  domestic 
lending business is excluded. 
9  
BIS Review 145/2009 
 3
crucial  that  the  converted  capital  be  equivalent  to  true,  loss-absorbing  core  capital  and 
incorporate a precise definition of the event that triggers conversion. The Basel Committee 
and the FSB have committed themselves to examining this further.10  
More robust liquidity requirements  
The crisis has also provided a number of important lessons regarding liquidity. On the whole, 
banks’  liquidity  holdings  were  clearly  insufficient.  This  holds  true  for  the  quantity  but, 
crucially, also for the quality of liquidity.  
One  of  the  explanations  for  these  insufficient  holdings  of  liquidity  was  that  the  stress 
scenarios considered by banks were far too optimistic. While secured funding remained the 
most  stable  source  of  refinancing,  it  was  much  less  stable  than  banks  and  regulators  had 
assumed.11  
Liquidity  problems  at  individual  banks  have  imposed  considerable  stress  on  the  entire 
international  system.  To  prevent  a  destabilization,  central  banks  had  to  provide  massive 
liquidity support. In some countries, this support has been provided against collateral of poor 
quality and even on an unsecured basis.  
As  in  the  area  of  capital,  the  Basel  Committee  is  moving  rapidly  towards  an  international 
liquidity standard for banks. This standard should incorporate the following basic features to 
be effective: 
The standard should reflect an adverse scenario, including a significant loss of confidence 
from depositors and a severe disruption of secured funding. Moreover, the standard should 
require  banks  to  hold  a  buffer  consisting  of  assets  whose  liquidity  and  value  is  robust  to 
massive disruptions in the financial markets. Overall, the standard should materially improve 
banks’ liquidity positions and make their funding more robust. 
In  Switzerland,  liquidity  requirements  for  the  big  banks  are  in  the  process  of  being 
comprehensively revised. In line with the features I have just outlined, the new regime will 
ensure that the big banks are able to cover their potential liquidity needs in the event of a 
widespread  loss  of  market  confidence.  The  new  regulation  will  enter  into  force  in  spring 
2010. 
Compensation 
With the preventive measures I have just mentioned it will also be necessary to strengthen 
the incentives for prudent risk taking within financial institutions. Compensation systems must 
not remain the one-way street they were for many individuals and firms in the run up to the 
crisis. They must become risk aligned and long-term oriented. Banks and regulators must not 
let the returning competitive pressures for competent staff erode the momentum toward this 
goal.  This  is  why  we  need  a  strong  and  broad  international  commitment  to  implement  the 
FSB  Principles  for  Sound  Compensation  and  the  corresponding  FSB  Implementation 
Standards at national levels, in a manner that is consistent across national borders.12  
                                                 
10   See  also  Squam  Lake  Working  Group  on  Financial  Regulation,  “An  Expedited  Resolution  Mechanism  for 
Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities”, April 2009. 
11   During the crisis, the volume and maturities of repo transactions decreased sharply. 
12   A  number  of  countries,  including  Switzerland,  have  already  passed  national  norms  in  response  to  the  FSB 
standards. The FSB will conduct a peer review by spring 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2009
Facilitating the orderly resolution of banking problems 
While we can reasonably expect that preventive measures will strengthen the resilience of 
the  financial  system,  we  cannot  ignore  the  problem  of  bank  failures.  Even  with  much 
improved  shock  absorbers,  large  and  systemically  important  banks  will  again  experience 
severe financial stress at some point in the future. Here we must accept that we still have not 
dealt  with  the  fundamental  problem  that  systemically  important  banks  cannot  currently  be 
allowed to fail. The truth is that, if tomorrow morning a systemic institution were once again to 
find  itself  on  the  brink  of  failure,  we  would  again  face  the  terrible  choice  between  either 
coming  to  its  rescue  at  the  expense  of  taxpayers  or  putting  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system at risk. Moreover, as long as banks can expect public support, market discipline will 
always be undermined. 
Moral hazard has been exacerbated by the fact that there is no longer any ambiguity about 
the  willingness  of  the  public  sector  to  bail  out  large  banks.  In  other  words,  we  must 
acknowledge  that  the  wide-ranging  public  support  measures  have  aggravated  the  moral 
hazard problem associated with large and complex financial institutions. 
Frankly speaking, we have no choice but to address the specific challenges of banks that are 
“too big” or “too interconnected” to fail. If we are committed to a market-based system, the 
financial system of the future must expose financial institutions of all sizes and structures to 
the ultimate test of the market place. The very definition of a market economy is that it must 
allow for failure as a sanction of excessive risk taking or managerial incompetence. In the 
event that large, systemically relevant financial firms face the threat of failure in a next crisis, 
the financial system of the future must allow for their orderly resolution. Such a system needs 
to ensure that failure of a large bank does not have serious negative consequences for the 
provision of financial services to the real economy. 
There are several possible routes to achieve this goal. We need to examine all the available 
options with an open mind. The optimal policy is likely to combine different elements.  
As I explained in the introduction to this speech, here in Switzerland the problem of “too big 
to fail” is particularly pronounced. Accordingly, the FINMA and the SNB are jointly evaluating 
different  avenues.  The  two  big  banks  are  now  closely  involved  in  this  work.  We  welcome 
their active engagement. At the international level, the FSB and its member bodies are also 
addressing  this  problem  at  the  request  of  the  G20  leaders.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is 
imperative that a real solution to this problem be found. 
At  the  forefront  of  our  efforts  to  mitigate  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  must  be  an 
internationally agreed and orderly process to allow for the wind down of large, systemically 
important financial institutions in the event of a severe crisis. 
Obviously, there are many technical and legal problems that have impeded any meaningful 
progress in reaching international coordination in this matter. But what has been missing is a 
bold  and  international  political  commitment  to  put  in  place  a  framework  for  the  orderly 
resolution of large cross-border financial institutions. Provided we have such an unequivocal 
commitment, solutions will eventually emerge.  
Needless  to  say,  we  must  accept  the  reality  that  different  national  resolution  regimes  will 
continue to coexist. Let me be very clear on this: A full-fledged global resolution regime is a 
noble but seemingly unrealistic goal. We should not conclude from that, however, that the 
framework for cooperation across countries cannot be improved. One possibility is to work 
towards  mutual  recognition  arrangements  of  compatible  national  resolution  regimes. 
Recognising  other  resolution  regimes  helps  each  nation  to  adapt  its  own  structures  and 
processes in order to reduce frictions in crisis episodes. 
We  should  require  that  firms  more  clearly  delineate  different  functions  within  their  internal 
structures and simplify those structures. This will help facilitate an orderly wind down in the 
event  of  a  severe  crisis.  It  will  probably  also  enhance  effective  management  and  risk 
management in these firms. This is an important point. As the crisis has demonstrated, in a 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 5
number of cases it can be argued that firms were not only too big, but also too complex to be 
managed effectively. 
Furthermore,  we  need  a  financial  market  infrastructure  which  –  to  the  extent  that  this  is 
possible – minimises the destabilising effects of a failure on the rest of the financial sector. A 
key  element  that  cannot  be  emphasised  enough  is  the  ongoing  effort  to  centralise  the 
clearing and settlement processes in the derivative market. This enhances transparency and 
reduces counterparty risk. Opposition to infrastructure reform by those firms that have in the 
past benefited from complexity and lack of transparency must be firmly overcome. 
At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  that  central  counterparties  themselves  can 
become  single  points  of  failure,  with  potentially  devastating  consequences.  Central 
counterparties must therefore have sufficient financial resources to withstand the default of 
the largest participants. Operators and regulators should carefully evaluate the adequacy of 
the risk management models and financial resources of central counterparties. Only if central 
counterparties  are  financially  sound  can  they  play  their  critical  role  in  preserving  financial 
stability. 
Finally, as an ultimate resort, we cannot ignore the need to consider measures that address 
the size of banks, indirectly or directly.13 Admittedly, there are some benefits from size. But 
the empirical evidence suggests that these benefits are rather limited. Economies of scale, 
whereby  larger  amounts  can  be  produced  at  lower  average  cost,  already  appear  to  have 
been exhausted in the case of relatively small banks.14 Obviously, banking systems made up 
of only small banks are not immune to crisis episodes. But let us not make the mistake of 
using  another  problem  as  an  excuse  to  shy  away  from  the  severe  moral  hazard  problem 
associated  with  the  largest  banks.  It  is  also  sometimes  argued  that  interconnectedness 
matters more than size when it comes to systemic importance. It is evident that both size and 
interconnectedness  matter.  Recent  empirical  evidence,  however,  indicates  that  systemic 
importance increases more than proportionately with size.15
The debate about the plans to split up some very large European banks demonstrates the 
difficulty  of  measures  aimed  at  size.  At  the  same  time,  the  debate  illustrates  that  such 
measures are not impossible. The extent to which we are required to travel down this difficult 
path will depend a great deal on how much genuine progress we are able to make on the 
reforms I have tried to outline this evening. 
Competitiveness 
All  the  measures  to  improve  financial  regulation  which  I  have  discussed  tonight  raise  the 
delicate issue of banks’ competitiveness. Of course, it is not the intention of any regulator to 
hurt banks. However, somebody has to bear the costs of preserving financial stability. Up to 
now, through the implicit and now explicit government guarantees, taxpayers were bearing a 
considerable part of these costs. By strengthening regulation, these costs are to be shifted to 
the banks. In economic terms, the new regulatory framework endeavours to internalise the 
externalities caused by banks. 
                                                 
13   See,  for  instance,  Group  of  Thirty,  Financial  Reform:  A  Framework  for  Financial  Stability,  p.  59:  “To  guard 
against excessive concentration in national banking systems, with implications for effective official oversight, 
management  control,  and  effective  competition,  nationwide  limits  on  deposit  concentration  should  be 
considered at a level appropriate to individual countries”. 
14   Cf. for example, Y. Altunbas et al., “Efficiency in European banking”, European Economic Review 45, 2001, 
pp. 1931-1955. 
15   Cf.  N.  Tarashev,  C.  Borio,  and  K.  Tsatsaronis,  “The  systemic  importance  of  financial  institutions”,  BIS 
Quarterly Review, September 2009, pp. 75-87. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2009
The inconvenient truth is that effective regulatory reform inevitably imposes some costs on 
banks. In the words of the late Milton Friedman, “there is no such thing as a free lunch”. The 
current  crisis  of  the  global  financial  system  was  not  an  accident.  It  was  the  result  of 
optimising  behaviour  on  the  part  of  market  participants.  Given  the  rules  of  the  game,  they 
were maximising short-term profit. It is therefore too simplistic to vilify bank managers. With 
respect to regulation, however, this implies that if we do not change the rules of the game, 
which  guide  this  optimising  behaviour,  we  will  sooner  or  later  end  up  in  a  similar situation 
again.  
Costs  are  only  one  determinant  of  banks’  competitiveness.  Safety,  soundness,  and 
trustworthiness  are  other  important  factors.  Hence,  if  we  view  competitiveness  from  a 
broader  perspective,  strengthening  financial  regulation  ultimately  has  some  benefits  for 
banks,  too.  While  some  business  areas  may  become  less  attractive,  others  will  gain.  In 
Switzerland,  for  instance,  where  wealth  management  forms  the  backbone  of  the  banking 
industry, financial stability is a crucial factor for success. In this context, it is interesting and 
certainly promising to note that the two big Swiss banks now emphasise their strong capital 
position as an important competitive advantage.  
Nevertheless,  to  be  on  the  safe  side  regarding  a  level  playing  field,  ideally  all  regulatory 
reform  should  be  internationally  coordinated.  To  this  end,  the  SNB  is  investing  very 
substantial  resources  to  contributing  actively  to  international  regulatory  reform  projects, 
especially within the FSB and the Basel Committee. Indeed, a main raison d’être of these 
international bodies is to ensure a level playing field. We must accept, however, that not all 
countries  are  confronted  with  the  same  urgency  for  reform  as  we  are  in  Switzerland.  As  I 
have  already  explained  to  you  this  evening,  given  the  size  and  importance  of  our  banking 
sector, our country is particularly vulnerable to a financial shock. Agreeing on an international 
common denominator of regulatory reform may turn out to be insufficient for the Swiss case. 
Ultimately,  it  will  be  a  political  decision  to  choose  the  level  of  risk  Switzerland  is  willing  to 
accept,  both  for  the  financial  and  for  the  real  sector.  Given  the  particular  situation  in 
Switzerland, higher-than-average regulatory standards are warranted. 
Conclusion 
The  worst  of  the  crisis  is  behind  us,  and  intensive  efforts  are  underway  to  increase  the 
resilience of the financial system. Banks are again generating profits. In some cases, these 
profits are very substantial and are clearly linked to the public support measures, many of 
which are still in place. 
As  the  situation  improves,  complacency  can  easily  become  the  rule  of  the  game.  We  will 
forget the severity of the crisis and fall prey to lobbying by a powerful and recovering financial 
industry. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we must not let this happen. The stakes are simply too high. 
Equally,  the  most  prominent  banks  should  invest  their  efforts,  not  in  resisting  fundamental 
change, but in genuinely supporting the work to bring it about, in the interests of a more long-
term and less volatile global banking and, ultimately, economic growth model.  
If  we  fail  to  reform  fundamentally  the  financial  system  and  the  position  of  the  largest 
systemically  relevant  firms  in  that  system,  we  will  undermine  one  of  the  most  basic 
mechanisms of any market economy, namely that of punishing failure. What is more, we will 
– to quote Mervyn King – bequeath to future generations a serious risk of enduring another 
crisis  even  worse  than  the  one  we  have  just  experienced.16  My  biggest  concern  is  that  a 
future  crisis  on  a  larger  scale  could  create  such  an  immense  regulatory  and  protectionist 
                                                 
16   Speech by Mervyn King to Scottish business organisations, Edinburgh, 20 October 2009. 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 7
backlash,  that  the  very  market-based  system,  on  which  so  much  of  our  current  welfare  is 
based, will be threatened. In that sense, it is in the long-term interest of banks themselves to 
support  the  far-reaching  efforts  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient.  If  our  reform 
efforts falter, we risk having to look back one day at the vast and unprecedented stabilisation 
efforts undertaken by so many governments and central banks and conclude that they were 
short-sighted. For how can we justify the costs of these efforts, which will have to be borne 
for  at  least  a  generation,  without  fundamentally  addressing  the  flaws  that  got  us  into  this 
terrible crisis in the first place?  
Ladies and Gentlemen, there are many areas in financial regulation that can and should be 
improved. Given what is at stake, there is a need to prioritise. I have attempted to lay out to 
you today where the SNB puts those priorities and where it will focus its greatest efforts in 
the months and years to come. Together with FINMA, it is our duty to provide robust analysis 
and  to  issue  sound  recommendations  that  will  help  put  our  financial  system  on  a  more 
sustainable foundation.  
In certain areas, like capital requirements, regulators can issue – and have issued – decrees 
intended to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. With respect to the “too big to 
fail” problem, political decisions are required. The topic is crucial. The consequences of not 
addressing it adequately could be severe in the event of a future crisis. Politicians need to 
become acquainted with and get involved in this matter. The sooner, the better!17
                                                 
17   The  Swiss  government  has  recently  mandated  a  group  of  experts  to  make  proposals  to  limit  the  risk 
associated with large firms. 
8 
 BIS Review 145/2009
