Durmuş Yılmaz: The impacts of the current crisis on OIC member 
countries 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, in the Meeting of the Governors of the Central Banks and the Financial Authorities of 
the Organization of the Islamic Conference Member Countries, Istanbul, 3 October 2009. 
 Governors  of  Central  Banks  and  Financial  Authorities  of  the  Member  Countries  of  the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), Dear Guests,  
I  would  like  to  express our  pleasure  to  host  this  event  and  such  distinguished  participants 
here  in  Istanbul.  Welcome  to  the  meeting  of  the  Governors  of  the  Central  Banks  and  the 
Financial Authorities of OIC  member countries, which is the only organization that gathers 
Islamic world under one roof. 
What  makes  this  meeting  more  meaningful  is  that  we  are  also  celebrating  the  40th 
anniversary  of  the  Organization  of  the  Islamic  Conference  and  25th  anniversary  of  the 
Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Cooperation of the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference (COMCEC) this year. As the cradle of civilizations for centuries and the 
European capital of culture in 2010, Istanbul is an ideal venue for this meeting. 
Dear Guests,  
The current global financial and economic crisis, we have been experiencing since last year, 
has profound negative impacts on the economies of many countries in all parts of the world, 
reinforcing inspiration and need for restructuring the current order of the global community 
based on the principles of justice, equity, participation and peace. The efforts are in progress 
at the international level to build the institutional, legal and humanitarian infrastructures of the 
globalization that we are de-facto living during the last 20 years. 
The  Muslim  World  had  the  experience  of  building  and  maintaining  a  global  order  that 
embraced  diversity  and  harmony  over  the  regions  spreading  from  Atlantic  to  Pacific  and 
Central Asia to Central Africa from early 9th century till the end of 17th century where not 
only  Muslims  but  also  all  members  of  the  humanity  experienced  economic,  social  and 
political integration at a global scale and, unlike the turmoil and turbulence in the rest of the 
world, free trade and free movement of people prevailed without any discrimination against 
ethnic and religious identities. 
As member countries of the Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Cooperation 
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (COMCEC), our goal is to make a meaningful 
contribution to the idea of building a sustainable and stable global order to reach peace and 
prosperity that embraces differences between the civilizations as a source of richness and 
not a reason for clash, on the principles of justice, equity, participation and freedom for the 
humanity.  The  agreements  we  reach  today  will  constitute  the  building  blocks  of  our 
inspiration. 
Distinguished Guests,  
Since  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  the  world 
economies  surfaced  quite  rapidly  and  destructively.  The  deterioration  in  risk  perceptions 
destroyed banks’ appetite to extend credit to the real sector. Sharp declines in asset prices 
and  households’  expectations  led  to  a  swift  rise  in  precautionary  savings.  Conditions 
worsened rapidly in labor market and job losses have reached levels never seen since the 
Great Depression. 
Unprecedented policy reactions to crisis taken by government and central banks worldwide 
have managed in stabilizing the financial conditions of banks and reduced funding pressures. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 1
Thanks  to  the  decline  in  counter-party  and  liquidity  risks  and  the  ease  of  tension  in 
international markets, emerging market equities have rapidly gained ground, bond spreads 
have  narrowed,  and  volatility  in  exchange  rates  came  down.  Commodity  prices  have 
rebounded  from  their  recent  low  levels.  Capacity  utilization ratios  and  industrial  production 
have globally recovered compared to the first quarter of 2009. 
However,  taking  into  account  the  loss  of  confidence  and  the  size  of  the  damage  financial 
institutions and households have suffered, the fragility in the financial sector and reluctance 
in consumption and investment is likely to continue in the near future. Despite recent signs of 
revival in global economy, the pace of economic activities remains weak. Problems prevail in 
the  credit  markets.  Unemployment  rates  keep  rising.  In  summary,  all  indicators  point  to  a 
recovery, which is slow, gradual and painful. 
Distinguished Guests,  
Global problems require global solutions. Quite often, changing an existing system is more 
difficult and expensive than forming a new one. It is obvious that this ongoing crisis is going 
to end sooner or later as did previous crisis. The lessons we derived from this experience will 
lead global decision makers to reconsider their policies. We have already started to observe 
critical and permanent changes in global financial order. The future of the financial system 
will be in a much better shape with a pre-emptive approach. The coordination is especially 
needed in terms of better regulation and supervision of financial market instruments. 
In  order  for  the  mission  of  the  COMCEC  and  thus  of  the  Organization  of  the  Islamic 
Conference to be successful, it is necessary for the decision making mechanisms to acquire 
a  more  active  and  global  dimension.  The  success  of  the  economy  policies  of  the  Islamic 
counties under the roof of the COMCEC depends on the formation of measures to increase 
trust and establishment of a close cooperation in economic and commercial areas. 
Annual meetings of the Governors  of the Central Banks of the COMCEC countries will be 
very  important  in  terms  of  catching  up  with  the  world’s  agenda  and  following  the  recent 
developments.  Economic  activities  of  the  related  countries  will  be  supported  the  most  by 
increasing the cooperation between the central banks of the COMCEC countries, enhancing 
the  functioning  of  the  active  mechanisms  of  communication  in  international  platforms  and 
sharing the experiences. 
The  recovery  of  the  economies  of  the  Islamic  countries  will  be  fastened  by  increasing  the 
exchange of information in the fields of economy, finance and banking among the member 
and observer countries’ central banks and financial authorities. Sharing the experiences of 
related countries that spread in a vast geography on financial policies and central banking is 
invaluable for all of us. 
In conclusion, I would like to thank once again the staff of the SESRIC and the Central Bank 
of Turkey for their efforts during the preparation of the meeting, and all the participants who 
have contributed to the meeting with their scientific works and valuable experiences. Hoping 
for a successful meeting, I once again would like to say welcome. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2009
