Patrick Honohan: Regulatory policy development and new regulatory 
activity 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial 
Services  Authority  of  Ireland,  to  the  Joint  Oireachtas  Committee  on  Economic  Regulatory 
Affairs, Dublin, 15 December 2009. 
 Mr Patrick Honohan was accompanied by Martin Moloney, Secretary to the Financial Regulatory Authority, and 
Joe Doherty, Head of the Central Bank’s Legal Unit. 
I  would  like  to  highlight  a  number  of  key  areas  which  currently  dominate  regulatory  policy 
development and new regulatory activity.  
Resolving the crisis  
1. 
First  and  foremost  in  the  magnitude  of  its  impact  is  the  resolution  of  the  current  banking 
crisis.  The  weakened  financial  position  of  the  banks  and  the  extensive  government 
guarantee  provided  to  their  depositors  and  other  claimants  clearly  calls  for  exceptional 
measures  here.  There  has  been  greatly  intensified  and,  indeed  what  has  been  termed, 
“intrusive” supervision of the operations of the main banks covered by the guarantee. This 
involves  on-site  presence  on  a  daily  basis  by  several  regulatory  staff  in  each  of  the 
institutions covered by the government guarantee. They have been sitting in as observers on 
key decision-making committees in each of these banks as well as conducting a number of 
specific investigations and reviews.  
The  government’s  crisis  resolution  strategy  involves  cleaning  out  a  very  large  block  of 
troubled  property-related  loans  from  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  replacing  them  with 
NAMA  bonds  guaranteed  by  the  government.  This  will  ease  the  banks’  ability  to  mobilise 
funds for their ongoing operations. At the same time, since these loans are to be purchased 
by  NAMA  at  “long-term  economic  values”  (not  far  above  current  market  prices),  the 
purchases  will  serve  to  crystallise  losses  on  the  banks’  books  in  amounts  likely  to  be  in 
excess of the provisions already taken. This is likely to give rise to a need for measures to 
increase the banks’ cushion of capital, needed to absorb any future losses. To the extent that 
needed capital cannot be sourced by the banks themselves, the government has indicated 
that it will be prepared to make the necessary investments. Quantifying the needs and the 
possibilities is an important task here in which the regulatory staff are centrally involved.  
Ensuring safe and sound finance  
2. 
Quite apart from this problem of crisis management, there is the ongoing task of ensuring the 
safe and sound operation of financial firms in Ireland, both those dealing with the domestic 
market and those primarily concerned with the export of financial services through the IFSC.  
Some  of  this  safety  and  soundness  work  is  routine  in  character,  requiring  precision, 
predictability and efficiency: for example the authorisation of investment fund prospectuses. 
Many thousands of such funds are given a standardised vetting by our staff before they can 
be  listed,  and  in  this  way  some  degree  of  protection  is  provided  to  the  investors  in  these 
funds.  
Other parts of what I call the safety-and-soundness work is more qualitative and judgmental. 
Regulation attempts to limit reckless or self-dealing behaviour by financial firms both (i) ex 
ante  in  advance  by  vetting  the  persons  in  charge  for  their  fitness  and  propriety,  and  by 
checking on compliance with clear rules of behaviour and (ii) ex post by means of penalties if 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
(ii) 
it  is  discovered  that  violations  have  been  committed.  We  are  on  the  lookout  for  ways  of 
improving both dimensions.  
(i) 
Thousands of financial firms in Ireland are regulated entities. Experience worldwide 
shows how hard it is for regulators to detect all fraudulent behaviour on the part of 
financial firm management. Very often important breakthroughs are made thanks to 
the revelations of whistleblowers. Transparency International, for example, has in a 
recent  report  highlighted  this  issue  for  our  financial  system.  We  are  seeking  the 
introduction  of  a  statutory  regime  to  encourage  whistleblowers  and  to  provide  a 
specific process for them.  
Enforcement of clear rules is crucial and I am determined that there will not be any 
reluctance  on  the  part  of  the  regulatory  staff  to  pursue  violations.  There  will  of 
course  be  full  cooperation  with  any  criminal  prosecutions,  where  they  arise,  and 
(otherwise)  impose  the  appropriate  administrative  sanctions.  For  this  reason, 
following discussions with Matthew Elderfield, the new head of financial supervision, 
who will be starting in a few weeks, we have decided to make a senior appointment 
to take charge of enforcement. As you know there have been high-profile allegations 
of wrongdoing in the context of the banking crisis. I do not wish to talk in any detail 
about these (indeed I cannot do so) beyond saying that, detailed investigations of 
these  are  in  progress  and  the  regulatory  staff  have  contributed  vigorously  to  this 
process.  
More  generally,  there  will  be  an  increase  in  staffing  and  the  introduction  of  new  internal 
structures in what is rapidly becoming a unitary central banking organisation without artificial 
and unnecessary internal barriers. With Matthew Elderfield, who brings his own considerable 
experience  and  skills  to  upgrading  and  restructuring  regulation  in  Ireland,  we  have  been 
planning details of the new structures and approaches that will be adopted.  
As far as structures are concerned, I can mention that, in addition to the Enforcement role, 
we  have  just  announced  the  creation  of  new  senior  level  positions  with  responsibility  for 
markets supervision and policy and risk.  
Supervision will be calibrated to the risks posed by the different firms in the sector and will 
involve applying the existing rule-book, strengthened as necessary to plug the holes revealed 
by  the  crisis.  In  particular,  we  will  not  be  slow  to  implement  new  stronger  rules,  being 
developed as we speak, by international bodies such as the Basel Committee.  
Despite  the  extensive  powers  already  available  to  the  regulatory  authorities,  it  would  be 
useful  and  appropriate  to  have  clarity  on  a  number  of  additional  points;  these  are  being 
discussed  at  present  with  the  Department  of  Finance  with  a  view  to  their  inclusion  in  the 
proposed  legislation  restructuring  the  Central  Bank.  One  particular  area  relates  to  the 
requirements  of  confidentiality,  which  (as  they  are  currently  being  interpreted)  seem  to  go 
well  beyond  what  is  necessary  or  appropriate  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  privacy  of 
customers  and  commercial  interests.  As  things  stand,  the  regulatory  staff  can  end  up 
appearing passive and defensive when called to speak on specific issues in public.  
A final aspect of safety and soundness to which I would like to refer is the admission of large 
and  complex  export-oriented  firms  into  the  Irish  market.  I  welcome  the  participation  of 
foreign-owned firms – both those aiming to supply the domestic market and those that are 
export-oriented  –  they  provide  competition  and  business  opportunities.  But  the  crisis  has 
revealed the reputational risks to Ireland of having a failure in such an entity. This means that 
we have to redouble our efforts to ensure that only sound institutions are allowed to enter 
and that they are comprehensively supervised to ensure that they continue to be sound. I will 
certainly not allow Ireland to become a soft option for firms or activities that are no longer 
welcome elsewhere. This means more supervisory staff with the necessary skill levels; these 
can be paid for by a levy on the supervised firms (I think we should move towards a 100% 
chargeback  basis).  I  also  feel,  though,  that  specific steps need  to  be taken  to  ensure  that 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
there is no expectation that the state would come in to take exceptional steps to rescue such 
entities.  
Consumer protection  
3. 
Consumer protection cannot and will not be ignored in the regulatory structure. Failures here 
are  not  as  spectacular  as  a  solvency  crisis,  but  can  be  as  damaging  to  the  affected 
consumers. There will be no downgrading of this aspect of the regulatory work. The statutory 
codes of conduct for mortgage and SME lending are already, I believe, making some impact 
on  what  are  difficult  current  issues;  and  the  Law  Reform  Commission  also  made  valuable 
recommendations – but I feel that more will be needed.  
In this area a central concern is of course that of achieving an improvement in the flow of 
credit to SMEs. To an extent this would generally not be considered part of the remit of the 
financial  regulator,  conflicting  as  it  can  so  easily  with  the  requirement  of  safety  and 
soundness, but wearing my wider hat as Governor, it is right that I should be alert to possible 
policy changes that might help here. To be sure, the financial restructuring of the banks will 
help set them on a course that gives them not only the financial resources but the incentive 
to focus on new business, but experience elsewhere shows how slow recovering banks are 
to get lending going smoothly again.  
We  know  that  credit  is  not  growing  and  that  spreads  have  widened.  At  least  some  of  this 
reflects the poor creditworthiness in present market conditions of many loan applicants. The 
difficulty  is  that  second-guessing  banks  on  their  credit  appraisal  decisions  and  on  their 
pricing of credit risk is, under present circumstances, fraught with threats to the Exchequer, 
which  will  largely  absorb  any  additional  credit  losses  incurred  by  the  banks.  This  is  a 
challenge for which I have found no ideal solution. It may be that the banks could improve 
their  loan  appraisal  technology:  there  have  been  many  advances  in  this  area  in  other 
countries,  which  have  not  been  fully  exploited  by  our  banks  given  their  concentration  in 
recent times on property-related lending. Perhaps the credit review system announced in the 
budget, with its comply or explain mechanism, if well implemented, can be the catalyst for 
such improvements.  
Understanding what happened 
4. 
The failures of the Irish banking system have rocked the economy and the public finances, 
with  severe  effects  impacting  almost  all  members  of  society.  As  the  acute  phase  of  crisis 
management and resolution draws to a close, it is time to start thinking how we might learn 
the lessons about our society that an understanding of the crisis can give us. Now that we 
have  the  prospect  of  the  banks  emerging,  in  the  coming  months,  with  a  strong  financial 
underpinning and renewed management, an imminent recurrence does not seem to be on 
the cards. We understand some of what happened, but some of it is still hard to understand. 
At the Central Bank we have, I believe, taken important lessons on board and are making 
significant  improvements  in  the  way  financial  regulation  and  financial  stability  work  is 
conducted. I expect that the Oireachtas will, in time, decide to authorise some form of inquiry 
to try to understand the deeper, underlying causes of this crisis so that wider lessons can be 
learnt for the future. In considering how best to do this, I suggest that new models need to be 
explored.  The  crisis  is  not  simply  a  question  of  discovering  who  did  what  and  who  knew 
what. Uncovering the deep roots of the crisis will require expertise and broad social scientific 
understanding more than merely forensic skills.  
BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
