Ardian Fullani: Cooling down the liquidity situation in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 6th Vienna Economic 
Forum, Regional Cooperation – Challenges and Chances: "20 Years after the fall of the Iron 
Curtain", Vienna, 9-10 November 2009. 
 The  argument  the  organisers  have  found  is  very  relevant,  particularly  when  it  comes  to 
central banks of the Western Balkan. Actually, as far as I am informed from my colleagues, 
constrained  liquidity  (especially  in  foreign  currency)  and  lending  tightening  are  two  fragile 
points, which may put us in a difficult position in the months to come.  
This  set  of  two  arguments  carries  over  a  dual  problem:  the  short-term  one,  which  puts 
banking system stability at risk, while providing its own implications even on the economic 
activity and on macro stability in a broader sense. 
The second problem is related to the financial support of the country’s economic activity in 
the future, given the recent years, when lending to the economy has constituted one of the 
main contributors in this regard.  
So  far  I  deem  that  we  have  been  effective  in  short-term  management  of  these  problems. 
Similarly to the European Central Bank and other central banks of the developed countries, 
we  (the  central  banks  of  our  region)  have  succeeded  in  supplying  the  market  with  ample 
liquidity, combining a variety of operational tactics and instruments. It is understandable that 
it is easier as concerns liquidity in national currency, whereas as concerns the one in foreign 
currency, at least in Bank of Albania’s case, we did never consider acting as a lender of last 
resort for providing foreign currency assets to the banking system. On the other hand, we 
exerted  maximum pressure on the parent banks to ensure capital adequacy and sufficient 
credit lines to their banks, and for the sake of truth, we have found a spirit of cooperation and 
concrete actions in this regard, without any exception.  
Today,  one  year  after  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  I  would  say  that  all  the 
measures taken by central banks in certain countries of the region resemble to one-another.  
The Bank of Albania considered as indispensable the prudential monitoring of the situation, 
taking  a  number  of  actions,  which  significantly  dampened  the  pressure  over  the  banking 
system. These actions have helped cooling down the liquidity situation and have been in line 
with the operational actions applied by the European Central Bank in response to the crisis.  
First, an ad-hoc task force was set up. Its main responsibility still continues to be the daily 
monitoring  of  the  situation  for  each  individual  bank.  Our  direct  conclusion  was  that  the 
analysis should consider all micro-level aspects, each and every cell of the system and its 
indicators. 
Second, a number of facilities were adopted for the incessant supply of the system with the 
required  liquidity.  The  type  of  auction  for  the  injection  of  liquidity  changed  to  fixed-price 
auctions, the collateral base for repo agreements expanded, the use of the required reserve 
increased from 20 to 40 percent, and the spread between the Bank of Albania’s key interest 
rate and overnight loan dropped from 175 to 75 basis points. 
Third,  through  a  special  act,  the  Bank  of  Albania  required  higher  capitalization  of  banking 
activity  from  the  banking  sector,  adding  to  the  guarantee  of  the  banking  sector’s  financial 
soundness. 
Making  a  generalization,  I  deem  that  the  measures  adopted  over  this  period  are  unusual, 
extraordinary  and  contrary  to  the  “constitution”  of  modern  central  banks  as  regards  the 
liquidity,  money  market  and  monetary  policy  transmission  channels.  However,  we  well 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 1
understood  the  philosophy  that  “the  purpose  justifies  the  ways”.  For  the  sake  of  financial 
stability, all the measures taken are justifiable and have proved effective. So far so good.  
However, I think that the current situation makes the central bank more vulnerable from the 
viewpoint of monetary policy independence and efficiency. Liquidity by all means, whatever 
the size, whatever the maturity, and whatever collateral for an indefinite period of time, would 
damage irremediably the monetary policy and the financial stability in a second round.  
Preserving  balances  is  more  complex,  if  we  take  into  consideration  even  the  other  major 
vulnerability related to high degree of euroisation (high share of foreign currency component 
to money supply structure) and lack of convertibility of our national currencies.  
Taking into consideration even the impossibility of the European Central Bank to serve as 
liquidity  provider  to  our  countries,  I  would  deem  that  the  spaces  available  to  us  in  the 
framework  of  current  legal  and  regulatory  aspect  have  already  been  exhausted  (from  the 
liquidity viewpoint). Otherwise, I would say we have reached a critical point, below which no 
space for action is left.  
Let  me  emphasise  that  now  that  the  crisis  highlighted  many  “vulnerabilities”  of  this  rapid 
catching  up,  the  analysis  should  go  beyond  just  accepting  it  as  valid.  This  becomes 
necessary if we take into consideration the designing of a different economic growth model.  
In this context, I am more and more convinced that the global crisis was a development that 
advanced  in  time  the  need  for  inevitable  steering  of  many  imbalances  that  our  economies 
accumulated over the last 10-15 years. 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2009
