Rundheersing Bheenick: Commitment to regional cooperation in Africa – 
COMESA 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Opening 
Ceremony of the 14th Meeting of the COMESA Committee of Governors of Central Banks, 
Balaclava, 29 October 2009. 
 In  the  past  year  in  this  region  of  Africa  we  have  been  the  innocent  bystanders  in  the 
maelstrom  following  a  major  upheaval  in  the  western  economic  system.  I  said  innocent 
bystanders, but it is perhaps more appropriate to say intelligent bystanders in the face of 
this western debacle.  
Whilst the count of banking failures in the USA now reads like the death toll in Afghanistan, 
we in COMESA have had no banking failures, no collapse of confidence, no credit crunch, no 
gross  excesses  in  risk  taking,  no  gigantic  bailouts  and  no  government  take-over  of  vast 
swathes  of  the  financial  services,  creating  an  unprecedented  moral  hazard  for  the  whole 
finance sector. In truth, banking in COMESA is safe in our hands, fellow-Governors, in this 
sane corner of a financial world, elsewhere gone mad.  
We  have  set  an  example  to  the  West  in  thrift,  in  probity,  in  sound  management,  in 
transparency and in prudent regulation. There are of course some states in the wider region 
of  Africa  which,  it  is  alleged,  often  confuse  Swiss  banking  accounts  with  their  own  central 
bank reserves. But broadly speaking, in this bleakest of times, Africa has come out rather 
well. So I am delighted that we are here together to spend some hours basking in the glories 
of our recent past and looking ahead to review our prospects for, what I believe is, an even 
brighter future for our region.  
Some financial commentators in the west are heralding 2010 as the time for getting back to 
normal: others are more cautious. They are talking, not about “business as usual”, but rather 
about getting on to a “new normal”. Let me then reflect on how I see this “new normal” 
from  the  perspective  of  our  banking  business  in  COMESA  and  our  opportunities  for 
promoting greater economic and social prosperity in the region.  
But, first of all, let me say on behalf of the Bank of Mauritius, what a pleasure it is to welcome 
you all here this morning on the occasion of this opening ceremony. I wish to extend a very 
special  welcome  to  my  fellow-Governors,  central  bankers  and  representatives  of  regional 
and 
I  welcome 
Dr Mkwezalamba,  the  Commissioner  for  Economic  Affairs  at  the  Africa  Union  Commission 
and Mr Ghosh, Mission Chief of the IMF. I also recognize in the audience our special guest, 
Mr.  Bingham,  Secretary-General  of  the  Central  Bank  Governance  Forum  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements.  
This 14th Meeting of the COMESA Committee of Governors underlines our commitment to 
regional  cooperation.  As  COMESA  pursues 
its  “variable  geometry”  approach  and 
consolidates the Free Trade Area, the Customs Union and the Common Investment Area, 
we gather here to chart the way forward in the specific area of monetary cooperation, on the 
pathway towards closer economic integration.  
Some have previously talked of a target date of 2012: that is getting awfully close. So we 
should remember that the fuller Union in the United States after the War of Independence, 
the  joining  together  of  North  and  South  in  peaceful  co-operation,  took  more  than  half  a 
century; closer to us the EU which started in 1956 with the Treaty of Rome – and some say 
even  earlier  with  the  Coal  and  Steel  community  –  the  EU  is  still  unsure,  more  than  half  a 
century later, about the passage of the Treaty of Lisbon, to achieve full integration across its 
wider region. So we should not be too hasty, but we must move forward step by measured 
international  organizations  who  have 
this  morning. 
joined  us 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 1
step. Central Bankers are cautious by nature and can be relied upon not to rush things. In 
these fraught times, we may be forgiven for being somewhat over-cautious. 
I  believe  this  is  a  propitious  moment  of  real  opportunity  for  COMESA.  For  whilst  we  may 
have watched in the past year, with growing alarm, the assets of the western banking system 
melting  away,  and  its  leadership  status  in  tatters,  we  can  with  advantage  learn  from  this 
discomfiture.  For  the  gigantic  western  financial  liabilities  remain,  as  the  balance  sheet 
recession is not so much about flows but about stocks. The big issue for us all is not about 
the  future  of  capitalism  but  about  the  future  of  capital  management.  The  media  may  keep 
banging on that the western crisis is all about a burst bubble in house prices. Not at all! The 
real challenge is not about revaluing houses but about stimulating the potential of the real 
economy, stupid!  
The crisis in the USA and the European Union has moved in three distinct phases: we had, 
first, the collapse of finance; then there was the collapse in consumption and manufacturing; 
and now we are witnessing the demise of the labour market as jobs evaporate. But for us, in 
emerging  markets  and  developing  countries,  the  situation  is  quite  different.  We  remain  as 
before  relatively  solid  in  each  of  these  three  areas.  Indeed,  for  us  in  COMESA,  the  real 
economic  problem  is  not  so  much  about  those  matters  which  are  plaguing  the  developed 
world but more about how best to make use of our basic natural assets of land and other 
natural resources, the much neglected third pillar of all economic systems.  
The paradox here is that our underlying assets of natural resources are threatened, not from 
western financial mismanagement and their bloated bubble valuations of doubtful assets, but 
from our undervaluation, rather than overvaluation, of them.  
So we must now focus more on how finance can better release the potential locked up in the 
real economy. At the same time, we must beware of those – whether from the West, or from 
the  East,  –  bringing  gifts  tied  with  strings  to  promote  post-colonial  re-colonisation  and 
expropriation  of  our  land,  our  natural  resources  and  our  cultures.  The  old  Roman  adage 
“Timeo Danaos atque dona ferentes” bears repeating for we forget its timeless lessons at our 
grave risk and peril! 
We must therefore now use our monetary strengths to focus more on our natural riches, for 
therein lies our unrealised potential. The time is prime for the region to play a major part in 
global affairs. The time has come for Africa.   
Some commentators continue to assert that growth in Africa continues to depend critically on 
provision  of  adequate  external  financing.  But  in  truth  we  should  now  be  setting  goals  to 
release ourselves from the financial and cultural strings of aid. What we need is more trade, 
not more aid. This is the big challenge for us since it is closely aligned with our successful 
pursuit  of  the  COMESA  Macroeconomic  Convergence  criteria.  This  is  on  our  Agenda  this 
week and I believe the solution to this dilemma is very much in our own hands. We are now 
working closer together in this region to promote our own internal market and to attend to the 
grave issues of poverty and social need.  
The foundation for our internal market lies in the development of effective regional institutions 
that  facilitate  trade.  And  the  keystone  for  the  overarching  institutional  structure,  is  the 
Regional Payment and Settlement System (REPSS) which is now being put in place. This 
home-grown payment system, will reduce the cost of payments in intra-regional transactions 
by more than 50 per cent. Over half of the COMESA members are in the process of opening 
accounts. The Live-Mode pilot earlier this month (October) has proved a success. And I trust, 
before  the  year  is  out,  all  our  Central  Banks  will  have  signed  up  as  full  participating 
members.  For  REPSS  is  not  only  the  springboard  for  further  liberating  trade  within  the 
region,  but  also  the  point  from  which  we  can  make  that  final  leap  from  convergence  to 
Monetary  Union.  It  is  an  essential  point  for  the  take-off  for  us  to  emulate  in  Africa  the 
economic  and  commercial  achievements  of  our  partners  in  Europe,  whose  proven 
experience is a continuing source of inspiration to us.  
2 
 BIS Review 142/2009
This  process  of  institutional  capacity-building  is  essential  for  promoting  overall  regional 
development.  This  was  indeed  the  foundation  of  the  prosperity  of  the  European  Common 
Market,  as  it  picked  itself  up  in  the  1950’s,  and  provided  regional  support  to  the  poorest 
countries so that they could also step up as local partners and develop the wider market.  
Post-war  Europe  and  our  neck  out  of  the  woods  have  this  much  in  common.  Regional 
integration  under  COMESA  offers  a  valid  way  through  some  of  the  global  challenges  that 
confront us. Who can deny the enormous synergy packed in a regional group like COMESA, 
with  its  combined  market  access  of  more  than  415  million  people?  The  larger  economic 
space is already encouraging increased inter- and intra-regional trade. In 2008, intra-regional 
trade within COMESA stood at over US$15 billion; it has more than doubled since 2003, and 
quadrupled during the decade. Moreover, with REPSS, we not only offer faster settlement of 
payments  but  we  also  cut  the  transaction  costs  by  more  than  a  half,  thus  giving  a  further 
boost to trade.  
With REPSS in place, each member-state will have cheaper access to bigger markets and 
with the Common Investment Area, it will stimulate foreign direct investment in our region. It 
will help to diversify our productive export base. This must go hand in hand with progress 
towards  the  achievement  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  on  poverty,  education, 
gender challenges, better health, a sustainable environment and more effective partnership 
for sustainable development.  
Exploiting the economies of regional scale is already strengthening our national resilience to 
exogenous shocks, reducing the prevalence of conflicts, enhancing our voice in international 
fora, and improving our terms of trade with other regions, on top of expanding intra-regional 
trade.  
In  this  process,  the  Monetary  Cooperation  Programme,  ultimately  to  achieve  the  goal  of 
Monetary Union, is absolutely essential. Monetary cooperation will foster belief in the wider 
policy goals and reduce the risk of policy reversals. Here we can learn much, not just from 
European  experience,  but  also  from  experience  elsewhere  in  Africa  such  as  the  Western 
African Economic and Monetary Union which has made significant progress in this area. 
I  am  glad  to  note  that  we  shall  also  be  examining  the  framework  for  financial  sector 
development  and  financial  stability  during  our  meeting.  Financial  Stability  has  come  to  the 
fore as a subject of vital interest to all of us. Soon after I took office in early 2007 I set about 
restructuring the Bank to enable it to respond in a dynamic manner to the new and emerging 
financial  sector  issues  that  I  could  see  on  the  horizon.  One  of  the  changes  that  I  brought 
about was the establishment of a Financial Stability Unit in October 2007, with a clear cross-
cutting mandate to identify and assess financial stability issues. But as the sky was then a 
spotless blue and the financial crisis not even a distant prospect, this initiative hit a wall of 
incomprehension  and  ignited  a  raging  turf  war.  I  did  not  do  myself  any  favours  either  by 
talking of a financial stability czar, with an oversight of work across various divisions of the 
Bank  and  indeed  beyond  the  Bank.  Since  then,  the  Bank  has  published  three  Financial 
Stability  Reports  at  six-monthly  intervals.  We  are  now  in  consultation  with  the  Financial 
Stability  Institute  for  the  Bank  to  host  a  regional  seminar  on  financial  stability  next  year.  I 
therefore welcome the proposal to set up Financial Stability Units in COMESA central banks 
and we stand ready to exchange our own experience with COMESA member-states. 
At this meeting, here in Mauritius, we shall also be looking at some of the missing elements 
as we seek to create the conditions and institutions to achieve convergence. We expect to 
get on with the job of creating the COMESA Monetary Institute which we have been talking 
about  for  quite  some  time  now.  We  know  the  critical  role  that  the  European  Monetary 
Institute  has  played  in  paving  the  way  for  the  advent  of  the  Euro.  We  believe  that  the 
COMESA Monetary Institute is vital for undertaking the preparatory work for the COMESA 
Monetary Union. 
A word about the prospects for the continent. The IMF expects a growth rate of 1.2 per cent 
in  2009  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  compared  with  an  estimated  5.5  per  cent  in  2008.  If 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 3
government policies remain supportive, and global economic growth recovers, as currently 
expected,  Sub-Saharan  African  growth  should  pick  up  to  around  4.1  per  cent  in  2010.  By 
comparison, the prospect for the USA in 2009 is that it remains in recession throughout this 
year, along with the rest of the developed world. Africa thus stands out with the promise of 
substantial positive growth this year along with China, Australia, India, Indonesia and a few 
others. Our prospects for 2010 are thus up with the leaders in the world.   
In  Mauritius,  there  are  abundant  signs  of  continuing  economic  improvement  –  growth 
remains positive, inflation is down, we have an overall surplus in our balance of payments, 
net international reserves are at a historical high – all indicators showing a genuine capacity 
for resilience in the face of unprecedented external shocks. Most of all, the crisis has been 
grasped by Mauritians as an opportunity to open new dimensions in development, not least 
confronted  as  we  are  with  the  impact  of  climate  change.  The  Vice  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister of Finance and Economic Empowerment, whom we are pleased to have with us this 
morning,  will  be  presenting  the  nation’s  budget  later  next  month  and  he  has  already 
announced that “Shaping The Recovery” will be his main thrust. This is all in the spirit of the 
national strategy of “Maurice Ile Durable”, the policy for securing sustainable development, 
announced  last  year  by  our  Prime  Minister  at  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly. 
Mauritius,  with  many  friends  from  Africa,  will  be  asserting  our  case  at  the  Copenhagen 
meeting on climate change.  
Allow me, fellow-Governors, to place on record our gratitude to the Bureau of the COMESA 
Committee of Governors of Central Banks and to the Secretary-General of COMESA for their 
support to Mauritius as we offered to host one of the two new African Technical Assistance 
Centres which the IMF is establishing in Africa. As we know, Mauritius has now been chosen 
as the location for AFRITAC (South) and the Bank of Mauritius must now make up for lost 
time and refurbish its former offices to accommodate this Centre to make it operational as 
rapidly  as  possible.  So,  fellow-Governors,  thank  you  very  much  for  trusting  us  with  this 
important assignment.  
We welcome the decision from the Tripartite Summit of COMESA, in Kampala in October, 
that  the  three  African  Regional  Economic  Communities  should  work  together  towards  a 
single  Free  Trade  Area,  with  fast-tracking  the  attainment  of  the  African  Economic 
Community, as first envisaged in the Treaty of Abuja in 1991.  
Institutions that we have set up in years past – some of which go back to pre-COMESA days 
– are busy advancing this agenda. In monetary co-operation in COMESA, we have the PTA 
Bank, the PTA Reinsurance Company, the African Trade Insurance Agency and the African 
Commerce Exchange which are all very much involved.  
Among the new institutions, I am pleased to see that the COMESA Fund will soon be up and 
running with its two windows, the Adjustment Facility and the COMESA Infrastructure Fund, 
based here in Mauritius. The first window addresses the problems related to liberalization of 
the  economies  of  member-states  while  the  second  window  addresses  infrastructural 
problems  of  the  region.  Out  of  the  EU  allocation  of  €78  million,  a  sum  of  €5  million  has 
already been disbursed. The pilot Aid-for-Trade programme for the North/South Corridor has 
mobilized nearly US$3 billion, with a further programme planned for the rest of the COMESA 
region. We have every reason to believe that the COMESA Fund will hit the ground running! 
So, with all this ferment of activity, it is difficult not to get excited about the continent. Africa is 
moving on, so move over in front, you are blocking the way, we are now in the fast track. 
For our meeting this morning we have before us a wide-ranging and important Agenda. Let 
me just single out six key points that I believe will provide a focus for our discussions and 
give a real added boost in our exciting journey towards economic integration.  
We shall 
• 
First, review the choice of Monetary Policy Regimes and we shall be guided by the 
Distinguished Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, Prof Ndung’u. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2009
     Second,  listen  to  a  presentation  by  the  international  expert  Gavin  Bingham  of  the 
Bank for International Settlements on issues in the Governance of Central banks, to 
be enlightened on emerging best practices and improve on our current performance. 
Third, receive country reports on progress towards macro-economic convergence – 
which is the acid test of how well-prepared we are for closer union. 
Fourth,  hear  of  progress  in  the  establishment  of  Financial  Stability  Units  and  the 
production  of  Financial  Stability  reports  by  Central  Banks,  to  enhance  our 
surveillance and increase our resilience. 
Fifth,  consider  the  Draft  Charter  of  the  COMESA  Monetary  Institute  towards 
strengthening our regulatory and supervisory framework. 
And  finally,  agree  on  the  choice  of  a  host  Central  Bank  to  house  the  COMESA 
Monetary Institute.  
That is quite an agenda.  
I have underlined what I believe are some of the crucial issues for us, and the opportunities 
before us, for further solid progress. And let us not forget that, whilst the West debates the 
merits and demerits of the Anglo-Saxon, the Swedish and the Japanese finance models, to 
get  them  out  of  the  current  disaster  zone,  we  here  in  Africa  are  refining  our  own  African 
model.  Our  model  has  served  us  well  to  avoid  our  economies  being  sucked  into  the 
maelstrom of the western self-made crisis. So, as we are getting well on the way to our own 
Economic  Union,  and  things  are  looking  up,  we  can  truly  boast:  Now  Africa  is  going 
places! 
Let us keep moving. And enjoy the ride. Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 5
