Rundheersing Bheenick: Positive response to the crisis and major 
financial developments in Mauritius 
Statement  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
14 October 2009. 
 What a period of exceptional turbulence it has been for the finance and banking sector and 
for globalised economies like that of Mauritius! The year (FY 08/09) began ordinarily enough, 
with  our  focus  resolutely  on  the  achievement  of  price  stability  especially  as  inflation 
threatened to enter double-digit territory. Within a matter of weeks, Lehman Brothers became 
a household name for all the wrong reasons, engulfing companies, countries and continents 
far removed from the original epicentre of the crisis in the US subprime market.  
The downside of globalisation, until then a subject of little mainstream interest, manifested 
itself in the speed at which the contagion spread. Never since the Great Depression has the 
world  economy  come  so  close  to  the  brink  of  collapse.  For  a  small  open  economy  which 
depends critically on open trade flows for both its imports of essential items, like food and 
fuel, and for the necessary exports to be able to pay its way in the world, the situation was 
fraught indeed! 
As fear gripped major markets, it became increasingly difficult for economic operators and 
regulators  alike  not  to  give  in  to  panic  and  ensure  a  level-headed  response  to  a  situation 
which was not only rapidly deteriorating but also clouded with growing uncertainty. The rupee 
started depreciating as foreigners disinvested from both stocks on the local exchange and 
dumped Government paper. It did not matter one iota that domestic banks had no exposure 
to toxic assets and had reduced non-performing loans to a historically low level. And, for that 
matter, it did not help that an international rating agency chose this year to threaten the two 
largest domestic banks with a possible downgrade. 
How did we react to these various external shocks and threats? We put the banking sector 
on high alert, with daily monitoring of all major movements, to enable us to take pre-emptive 
and  timely  action  at  the  slightest  sign  of  any  adverse  development.  Thus,  no  sooner  had 
reports begun to reach us that trade credit lines, traditionally extended to domestic banks by 
large foreign banking institutions, were being withdrawn that the Bank decided to set up a 
Special Line of Credit in foreign currency to meet the shortfall, thus becoming one of the first 
Central Banks in emerging countries to provide trade financing which is the very life blood of 
a trading nation. And that was several months before the G-20 at its London meeting in April 
2009 emphasised the importance of trade credit in supporting global economic recovery. 
The crisis also brought the Ministry of Finance and Economic Empowerment (MOFEE) and 
the  Central  Bank  on  a  convergent  path  as  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  entered  a  phase  of 
maximum  coordination  where  Government  came  up  with  a  Fiscal  Stimulus  Package, 
approximating 3.8% of GDP, while the Central Bank embarked on a series of cuts in the Key 
Repo Rate (KRR) and a reduction in the minimum Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR).  
In parallel, both MOFEE and the Bank actively joined the international debate to search for a 
lasting solution out of the financial and economic crisis. We paid particular attention to de-
stigmatising access to IMF resources. The Flexible Credit Line that was rapidly put in place 
by the G-20 was tailor-made to meet the requirements of the Mauritian situation in the face of 
an expected worsening of our external accounts. Without any ex-ante conditionality, this line 
provided  a  way  of  staunching  any  unexpected  massive  forex  outflow  and  financing  the 
growing balance of trade deficit that, under this scenario, could no longer be funded by the 
combination  of  net  foreign  investment  inflows  and  the  rise  in  earnings  on  the  services 
account on which the economy depended to balance its books.  
BIS Review 145/2009 
 1
Luckily for us, the situation never got out of hand and there was no need to have recourse to 
this facility after all. There was even an unexpected bonus for Mauritius as far as relations 
with the Fund were concerned: effective February 2009, our exchange rate arrangement was 
reclassified from “managed floating” to “free floating” as from 1 November 2008 – which is 
nothing  short  of  remarkable  given  that  this  period  witnessed  interventions  by  many  major 
Central Banks in support of their currencies.  
Let me now briefly highlight some major developments during the year.  
• 
The  banking  sector  continued  its  growth  during  the  period  March  2008  to  March 
2009 – with an 11% rise in deposits from Rs503 billion to Rs557 billion, a 20% rise 
in advances from Rs342 billion to Rs409 billion, and a 22% rise in bank profits from 
Rs11 billion to over Rs13 billion.  
The supervisory and regulatory framework was enhanced and modernised – with a 
seamless transition from Basel I to Basel II for capital adequacy after a frictionless 
year of parallel run, and the revision of some guidelines especially those relating to 
credit concentration and related party transactions. 
The  Bank  initiated  the  publication  of  regular  bi-annual  Financial  Stability  and 
Inflation  Reports  starting  with  the  first  issues  in  July  2008  and  November  2008 
respectively, thus fulfilling one of the requirements of its enabling legislation. 
The  foreign  exchange  market  saw  growing  competition  with  the  issue  of  14  new 
licences  to  money  changers  and  one  to  a  foreign  exchange  dealer:  nine  of  these 
had commenced operations before 30 June 2009. 
We  enhanced  our  Islamic  finance  credentials  by  hosting  a  Seminar  on  Islamic 
Capital  Markets  jointly  with  the  Financial  Services  Commission  and  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board, which the Bank joined as an Associate Member in 2007. 
We  authorised  the  local  branch  of  a  major  international  bank  to  provide  Islamic 
financial services through a window operation.  
We  achieved  greater  transparency  regarding  fees  and  commissions  charged  by 
banks by enforcing a standard template for reporting fees and commissions by all 
banks in Mauritius because we believe that a better-informed consumer can lead to 
more competitive outcomes and cheaper services.  
We  pursued  our  efforts  to  graduate  to  the  IMF’s  more  demanding  Special  Data 
Dissemination Standards, thereby demonstrating our commitment to the provision of 
data of quality and frequency to rank with the best anywhere. 
Faced  with  the  deteriorating  external  environment  and  its  knock-on  effects  on  the 
domestic economy, the Monetary Policy Committee met six times during the year – 
including a special meeting in July 2008, when the relentless upward pressure on 
inflation with serious risks of high inflation expectations becoming entrenched, made 
it more appropriate to raise the policy interest rate by 25 basis points to 8.25% per 
annum. The Bank raised the minimum CRR effective 15 August 2008, which led to a 
rise in short-term interest rates, thereby further tightening monetary conditions. 
Subsequently,  the  monetary  policy  stance  was  loosened,  with  the  KRR  being 
reduced  by  a  cumulative  total  of  250  basis  points  in  the  period  of  six  months  to 
March 2009. This monetary easing was done in conjunction with the expansionary 
fiscal policy designed to shore up the domestic economy, which I referred to earlier. 
The  Bank  took  over  the  Debt  Management  function  from  MOFEE,  including  the 
responsibility for the drafting of the Government Debt Management Strategy. 
Total  Government  debt  stood  at  Rs134  billion  as  at  end-June  2009  as  against 
Rs122 billion at end-June 2008 – at less than 60% of GDP, a far cry from the rising 
debt levels in the major economies, some of which exceed 100% of GDP. The Bank 
BIS Review 145/2009
          2 
         has  smoothed  out  the  weekly  issues  of  Treasury  Bills  and  provided  an  advance 
monthly  issuance  calendar  to  the  market.  The  Bank  also  introduced  online 
auctioning  of  Treasury  Bills  on  a  pilot  basis,  thus  paving  the  way  for  the  issue  of 
single-maturity instruments on different days and for greater efficiency in the money 
markets.  
We  revisited  our  portfolio  management  approach  –  which  was  designed  for  a 
context where our reserves were a fraction of their current level – in search of higher 
yield without sacrificing quality and without taking unnecessary risks. As I mentioned 
in my Statement introducing the Annual Report of last year, we had separate Peer 
Reviews  carried  out  by  both  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and  the 
Reserves  Advisory  and  Management  Program  of  the  World  Bank’s  Sovereign 
Investments Partnership. Both reports have now been received.  
Any  change  in  our  portfolio  management  strategy  is  tied  up  with  changes  in  our 
accounting  approach  and  the  profit  allocation  framework  as  well  as  with  the  risk 
appetite  that  is  now  warranted  in  the  circumstances.  We  envisaged  changing  our 
accounting  approach  to  allow  for  dynamic  provisioning  of  expected  losses  from 
“negative carry” resulting from forex sterilisation operations. Our first attempt to do 
this  was  unfortunately  aborted  with  the  Bank  thus  missing  an  opportunity  to  rank 
among  the  pioneers  of  this  approach  which  has  gained  wide  recognition  after  the 
crisis. The disallowed provision had to be remitted by way of a second transfer of 
profit during the year.  
The Bank hosted the 7th meeting of Governors of the Association of African Central 
Banks in July 2008 and, in that same month, co-hosted with the Centre for Central 
Banking  Studies  of  the  Bank  of  England,  a  seminar  on  “Inflation  Targeting, 
Modelling and Forecasting”. Later on during the year, the Bank co-hosted with the 
African  Export  and  Import  Bank  an  event  to  publicise  the  latter’s  products  to  the 
Mauritian business community.  
The Bank has been appointed as the Settlement Bank for the COMESA Regional 
Payment  and  Settlement  System  (REPSS).  The  REPSS  project  is  now  under 
implementation.  
Since  the  IMF  announced  that  it  was  increasing  the  number  of  African  Regional 
Technical Assistance Centers (AFRITACs), the Bank joined MOFEE in lobbying for 
Mauritius to be the venue for AFRITAC (South). We expect to report on this in more 
detail in the next report. 
The Bank has extended the coverage of the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau to 
allow  collection  of  credit  information  from  all  institutions,  including  leasing, 
insurance,  hire  purchase  and  utility  companies,  which  will 
further 
improvement in credit quality.  
The Bank entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Central Statistics 
Office  (CSO),  to  provide  for  a  more  structured  collaboration  between  the  two 
institutions.  This  was  preceded  by  a  weekend  brainstorming  session  between  the 
Bank, MOFEE, and the CSO. 
We give in this Report for the first time some metrics which will allow the informed 
observer to gauge our efficiency in meeting our mandate at least cost. It will be seen 
that an entire working month (23 meetings against a statutory minimum of 12) was 
taken  up  with  Board  meetings  and  the  dividing  line  between  governance  and 
management  became  increasingly  blurred  –  which  would  no  doubt  make  an 
interesting case-study for institutions like the BIS, the central bank of central banks, 
concerned with central bank governance issues. 
lead 
to 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 3
 The Bank launched a commemorative gold coin to mark the 40th Anniversary of the 
Independence of Mauritius. The coin has been the fastest-selling coin in the history 
of  the  Bank,  with  the  issue  being  sold  out  in  less  than  five  days.  This  feat  has 
inspired us to come up with a “Father of the Nation” Platinum Series, made up of 
three different coins to be launched over the next three years, beginning in October 
2009.  
In the previous year, we had already reached record levels in terms of training fellowships 
extended to our staff to widen the Bank’s knowledge base. This year, we continued with this 
tradition with a total of 85 training opportunities provided to staff, or about the same level as 
the previous year. We intend to pursue in this direction to enhance our skill levels to enable 
us to meet new challenges. 
On  behalf  of  the  Bank,  I  wish  to  extend  my  appreciation  to  our  staff  who  have  put  in 
tremendous effort and hard work to allow the Bank to fulfil its mandate. The close working 
relations  with  the  industry  were  continued  through  different  fora  such  as  the  Banking 
Committee,  involving  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association  (MBA)  and  all  Chief  Executive 
Officers of banks, the Bureau Meeting involving the MBA and the Management of the Bank 
of Mauritius, and various regular meetings at other levels such as those with Treasurers and 
Compliance  Officers.  Without  this  close  collaboration,  the  transition  to  Basel  II  would  not 
have  proceeded  as  smoothly  as  it  did.  A  special  word  of  thanks  therefore  goes  to  the 
Chairman,  the  Chief  Executive  and  members  of  the  MBA  for  facilitating  the  task  of  the 
regulator.  
To  conclude,  let  me  thank  the  Prime  Minister  for  his  presence  at  the  launch  of  the 
commemorative  coin  and  his  continued  support  during  these  trying  times.  I  take  this 
opportunity  to  also  thank  the  Vice  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Empowerment  for  the  close  collaboration  and  support,  which  has  helped  enormously  to 
maintain  confidence  in  the  economy  and  give  it  a  much-needed  sense  of  direction  and 
cohesion in these troubled times. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2009
