Njuguna Ndung’u: Developments in the Kenyan domestic bond market 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
Launch  of  the  Automated  Trading  System  (ATS)  for  Treasury  bonds,  Nairobi  Stock 
Exchange, Nairobi, 7 December 2009. 
 The Chairman of the Nairobi Stock Exchange, Mr. Eddy Njoroge, 
The Chief Executive Officer, Capital Markets Authority, Mrs. Stella Kilonzo, 
The Chief Executive Officer, Nairobi Stock Exchange, Mr. Peter Mwangi, 
The Chief Executive Officer, Central Depository and Settlement Corporation, Mrs. Rose 
Mambo, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Good Morning. 
It gives me great pleasure to be with you this morning at the official launch of he Automated 
Trading  System  (ATS)  for  Treasury  bonds.  This  indeed  is  a  major  milestone  in  the 
development of domestic bond market. 
1.  Market reforms 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  other  stakeholders  have  so  far  undertaken  significant 
reforms in the domestic bond market. These initiatives, which include the introduction of the 
ATS, are aimed at enhancing the safety and efficiency in the processing of secondary trading 
of Government securities as ell as other securities among other market activities. 
The ATS project 
2. 
The ATS project was initiated by the Central Bank of Kenya, the Nairobi Stock Exchange and 
the  Capital  Markets  Authority.  The  two  institutions  constituted  Technical  Committee  to 
oversee the automation of trading of Treasury bonds through the NSE. The main objective of 
this initiative was to make bonds trading secure, efficient and a vibrant market. The expected 
improvement  in  market  activity  will  also  improve  market  liquidity  and  encourage  more 
investors to participate in the bond market. 
The  Technical  Committee,  in  consultation  with  key  stakeholders,  has  developed  operating 
rules  and  guidelines  for  the  proposed  automated  trading  of  bonds  through  the  NSE;  an 
integrated  operating  system;  an  interface  that  links  the  Central  Bank’s  CDS  Registry  and 
KEPSS  (RTGS)  payments  system  with  the  NSE’s  ATS  trading  platform  to  facilitate 
automated  trading,  settlement  and  delivery  of  bonds  on  a  Delivery  versus  Payment  (DvP) 
basis. 
Main highlights of the ATS 
3. 
The following are the main highlights of the system: 
i. 
ii. 
CBK remains the Registry for Government of Kenya securities. 
Trading of Treasury bonds continues to take place at the NSE, and hence does not 
cater for Over the Counter (OTC) trading. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Stock brokers will continue to exercise their role as agents of the investors in placing 
sale and buy trade orders. 
Cash settlement of all trades through this system will take place through the Kenya 
Electronic  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (KEPSS)  also  known  as  Real  Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS) domiciled at the Central Bank of Kenya. 
The  trading  process  will  be  premised  on  a  Delivery  versus  Payment  (DvP) 
arrangement. 
Transactions  Settlement  Cycle  will  be  at  T+3,  but  parties  can  opt  to  shorten  this 
period. 
It  is  our  sincere  hope  and  expectation  that  the  roll  out  of  automated  trading  for  Treasury 
bonds, together with the recent automation of corporate bond trading, will mark the turning 
point for trading of Fixed Income Securities at the Bourse. This also comes at a time when 
re-opening of benchmark bonds has been very successful, creating adequate liquidity around 
each  bond.  This  fits  in  very  well  with  the  roadmap  for  capital  markets  development  as 
envisaged in Vision 2030. 
Recent trading developments 
4. 
I am pleased to note that since the roll out of this new system on 27th November, 2009, the 
market has witnessed renewed interest and enthusiasm from bond traders. As of today, we 
have  recorded  11  completed  trades  totaling  Kes.1.72  billion  and  16  trades  totaling  to 
Kes.2.235 billion are at various stages of processing. 
As we successfully move away from the manual/open outcry method of trading in Treasury 
bonds to the new system, we expect to see more activity in this segment of the market. We 
trust  that  market  players  will  carry  out  their  functions  professionally,  observing  the  highest 
standards  of  integrity  and  transparency  so  that  the  investing  public  can  reap  full  benefits 
arising from the same. 
We  at  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  review  the  operations  of  the  system  and  related 
processes to ensure that it meets the expectations of investors and conforms to best practice 
in the market. 
Appreciation 
5. 
Finally,  may  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  all  stakeholders  and  members  of  the  ATS 
Technical Committee for working tirelessly to ensure that the project succeeds. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
