Mario Draghi: Islamic finance 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, Seminar on Islamic Finance, organized by the Bank of Italy, Rome, 
11 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  today  to  this  Seminar,  organized  by  Banca  d’Italia  on  the 
subject  of  Islamic  finance,  the  component  of  the  financial  industry  which,  complying  with 
Islamic prescriptions, avoids, in particular, the use of interest in financial transactions. This is 
predicated  on  the  principle  that  profits  should  be  considered  legitimate  only  upon  the 
condition that they be generated from fully sharing in the business risk of an investment (the 
so called “profit and loss sharing principle”).  
Islamic finance has witnessed a rapid expansion over the last decade, with annual growth 
rates of assets in the range of 10-15 per cent, and a wide dissemination across countries, 
beyond  its  traditional  centers  of  gravity  in  the  Middle  East  and  South  East  Asia.  The 
development of Islamic securities, notably the sukuks, has also contributed to increasing this 
sector’s activity in international capital markets.  
Although official statistics are not yet available to accurately measure global developments of 
the industry, private estimates assess its current size at above $ 800 billion dollars, in terms 
of  intermediated  assets,  with  more  than  600  institutions  engaged  in  Islamic  finance  and 
operating in around 50 countries; in the last few years, the industry has also been developing 
in Europe, with the opening of some Islamic banks in the UK, the issuance of a sukuk bond 
by  a  German  Land,  and  increased  activity  in  the  field  of  Islamic  investment  funds 
management.  
The  growth  of  Islamic  finance  in  recent  years  is  one  aspect  of  the  increased  role  being 
played in the global financial system by a number of emerging economies. This is, of course, 
a welcome development, as it opens up new opportunities for the productive channeling of 
financial resources both to these countries and other markets. It does, however, also add to 
the  complexity  of  the  global  financial  system.  As  the  recent  crisis  has  taught  us,  growing 
complexity calls for enhanced international cooperation by policymakers and regulators, lest 
the benefits of a dynamic financial system are jeopardized by instability.  
The active participation of the monetary authorities of Saudi Arabia and of Indonesia – the 
country with the largest Muslim population in the world – in the work of the Financial Stability 
Board  is,  in  this  respect,  an  important  contribution  to  the pursuit  of our  common  goal  of  a 
sound global financial system.  
There can be no effective cooperation, however, without an adequate knowledge of the key 
features of different components of the financial system, and of their interactions. It is in this 
spirit that Banca d’Italia has taken the initiative to organize today’s Seminar, with the aim of 
better understanding the characteristics of this industry and its implications for the financial 
system in Europe and in Italy.  
For Banca d’Italia, it is an important opportunity to deepen our knowledge of this subject, in 
view of its relevance for the Bank’s institutional duties, as a member of the Eurosystem and 
as the Authority for banking and financial supervision in Italy: we have, therefore, chosen to 
specifically  focus  the  Seminar  on  issues  pertaining  to  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision.  
A  cursory  look  at  the  program  should  be  sufficient  to  suggest  that  Islamic  finance  and  its 
interactions  with  conventional  financial  practices  are  a  source  of  numerous  intriguing 
questions. I am therefore confident that the subject will stimulate the interest of participants in 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 1
today’s  Seminar,  and  most  grateful  to  the  highly  qualified  representatives  from  various 
monetary  and  banking  authorities,  International  Institutions,  and  academia  who  have 
accepted to join the three panels.  
I  mentioned  the  importance  of  policy  cooperation  for  the  safeguard  of  a  sound  global 
financial  system.  Dr.  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  the  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  who  has 
kindly accepted to be the keynote speaker of today’s Seminar, is an outstanding example of 
a civil servant who has put international cooperation at the center of her professional activity, 
throughout her distinguished career: she has, in this respect, chaired the EMEAP’s Taskforce 
on “Regional Cooperation among Central Banks in Asia” and is currently Chairperson of the 
BIS Asian Consultative Group. An accomplished economist, she is also one of the leading 
experts  in  Islamic  Finance,  having  played  a  key  role  in  the  establishment  of  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board, of which she was later Council Chairperson in 2007.  
Unfortunately, official engagements with the Malaysian government, which were set only in 
the  last  few  days,  have  prevented  Dr.  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz  from  traveling  to  Europe  for  this 
Seminar. While she cannot be physically with us today, she has nevertheless made a point 
of participating in the event, and has sent us a video recording of her address, which we are 
now going to show.  
Let me therefore leave the “virtual” floor to Dr. Akhtar Aziz, looking forward to her address, 
and to the interesting sessions which will unfold during the day. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2009
