Ardian Fullani: The current performance and development prospects of 
the Albanian economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
forum  with  representatives  of  main  businesses  operating  in  Albania,  Tirana,  23  November 
2009. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  among  you  today,  to  share  with  you  our  views  on  the  current 
performance  and  development  prospects  of  the  Albanian  economy.  As  the  most  dynamic 
part of the Albanian economy, your contribution has been tangible in the country’s economic 
development  during  transition.  Your  incentive,  your  willingness  and  devotion  have  brought 
about tangible results in the country’s development. In a single figure, the Albanian economy 
performance  may  be  summarized  in  the  growth  of  above  65  percent  of  gross  domestic 
product and well-being per citizen during these years of transition. Our development prospect 
remains  as  much  positive.  The  country’s  macroeconomic  stability,  the  continuation  and 
deepening  of  structural  reforms  as  well  as  the  geopolitical  reality  of  approximation  to 
developed  economies  of  the  European  Union,  would  help  in  a  fuller  release  and 
remuneration of your potential and energies.  
Today’s forum aims to highlight the economic development of the country and initiate a broad 
public discussion on alternatives of the future economic growth models.  
Now,  let  me  start  by  making  a  brief  statement  of  the  latest  developments  of  the  Albanian 
economy, and further dwell upon our viewpoints on the country’s economic development in 
the future.  
Economy performance during the crisis 
The developments over 2009 have indicated that the Albanian economy has been impacted 
by  the  recent  global  crisis,  mainly  as  a  consequence  of  decreased  foreign  demand  and 
remittances, higher risk premiums, reduced and high-cost financing resources. However, our 
economy  continued  to  record  positive  economic  growth  rate  during  this  period,  while  the 
domestic inflationary pressures remain subdued. The country’s economic activity has been 
sustained  by  the  fiscal  stimulus  and  the  preservation  of  steady  consumer  demand,  while 
investments and exports have recorded lower growth rate in the first nine-month period of the 
year.  
The economic performance over the first 9-month period of the year, albeit positive, attests to 
growth rate slowdown, reflected even in the gradual slackening of inflationary pressures. In 
spite of a slight improvement during 2009, the current-account deficit remains high, reflecting 
high  levels  of  consumption  in  the  Albanian  economy  and  unfeasibility  of  production 
capacities to meet it. The fiscal policy has had an expansionary nature during 2009, reflected 
mainly  in  increased  budget  spending,  mainly  due  to  rapid  growth  of  capital  expenditures. 
Budget revenues maintained a slower-than projected rate, due to slow-down in the economic 
growth rate during this period.  
Consequently,  the  additional  budget  spending  has  been  financed  through  the  use  of 
privatization receipts and the higher public borrowing.  
This  policy  has  exerted  pressure  over  the  increase  of  government  debt  securities’  interest 
rates of long-term maturity. Financial markets attested to an improved liquidity situation and 
agent’s  recovered  confidence  in  these  markets.  The  persistent  Bank  of  Albania’s  liquidity 
supply  to  the  money  market  helped  to  calm  the  market  participants  down  and  supply  the 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 1
market  with  funds,  which  served  to  the  private  sector’s  domestic  currency  intermediation. 
The needs for liquidity in the interbank market have decreased, hence exerting no pressure 
on short-term interest rates.  
The  prudent  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  helped  relieve  the  tension  in  the 
financial  market,  while  the  latest  base  interest  rate  cut  should  be  translated  into  greater 
lending to the private sector.  
As  we  have  already  stated  even  previously,  the  Bank  of  Albania  regards  the  future 
Albanian  economic  activity  with  a  prudent  optimism.  I  mean,  in  spite  of  the  great 
shock we have gone through, the macroeconomic and financial stability of the country 
has not been affected. Furthermore, the restoring of confidence in the banking system 
opens the way to recovery of the lending process and sustaining of the economy with 
funds. On the other hand, the Bank of Albania keeps on pursuing a prudent stance, 
because the financial risks on the economy have not been completely overcome. The 
banking system has still liquidity shortages, whereas the global economy continues to 
be frail. Therefore, the economic prospect will depend on our joint work and on the 
performance of global economic and financial markets.  
Dear participants, 
In  the  optics  of  historical  developments  and  particularly  of  recent  events,  I  would  like  to 
briefly  dwell  upon  several  vulnerabilities  that  we,  as  the  politic,  supervisory  and  regulatory 
authority, have highlighted, as well as the lessons we should draw and the issues we should 
address for the country’s further economic development. 
Lessons from the crisis  
Right from the beginning, I would like to emphasize that generally, the philosophy of 
the  country’s  economic  development  has  been  accurate.  Market  openness  and 
increased competition have made the Albanian economy benefit the fruits of private 
sector  initiatives.  The  practice  of  economies  based  on  free  market  principles  has 
broadly indicated that this sector remains the most efficient engine of the economic 
activity.  
This process has been sustained even by the constant reduction of the state’s share to the 
economy,  as  well  as  by  its  focus  on  procurement  of  public  goods  and  infrastructure 
development. Positive financial market development has generated the necessary funds for 
supporting  investments  and  consumption  in  the  economy.  Though  chiefly  for  historical 
reasons, our banking system has based its activity on the intermediation of domestic funds of 
the  economy,  the  recent  developments  indicated  that  it  remains  as  much  capable  in 
generating foreign funds to provide capital and liquidity backstop to the Albanian economy. 
On the other hand, the integration of our financial system into the European one has raised 
the resilience of the Albanian economy to various shocks, of which the latest is still under 
operation. It has also brought about a necessary expertise in terms of financial and economic 
business  administration,  has  developed  the  infrastructure  and  means  of  payments  in  the 
economy and has helped efficient risk transfer in the economy.  
In  spite  of  accomplishments,  I  think  the  country’s  growth  model  needs  modifications  and 
improvements,  aiming  at  enhancing  its  efficiency  and  stability.  Under  the  conditions  of  an 
economy that requires dynamism for moving from a transition economy to an emerging one, 
the  commitment  for  a  sustainable  and  long-term  development  should  be  the  subject  of 
current and future economic reforms, at both, political and institutional level, and enterprise 
and consumer level.  
Which are the vulnerabilities noticed in this regard?  
First,  domestic  consumption  and  investments  have  been  the  main  beneficiaries,  while  the 
Albanian  economy  has  not  yet  succeeded  in  establishing  a  competitive  export  sector, 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2009
capable of generating steady foreign currency income, which would enable the preservation 
of external economic balances. From another viewpoint, this development does not seem as 
balanced in sectoral terms. So, some sectors such as trade, construction and services have 
contributed disproportionally the country’s development while others, such as agriculture and 
industry have contributed less.  
Second, Albanian economy continues to suffer from structural vulnerabilities, which contract 
its  competitiveness  in  international  markets  of  products  and  capital.  This  behaviour  is 
illustrated  even  by  international  competitiveness  indices  compiled  recently  by  the  World 
Economic Forum, where Albania is ranked below regional countries. Some acute problems 
refer to the need for enhancing education and infrastructure, in all dimensions. Both these 
problems  restrain 
the  country’s 
development. 
Third, efficiency in using the economy funds should be improved even at micro level. This 
implies  the  need  for  improving  private  businesses’  management  and  control  systems, 
enhancing analytic and forecasting capabilities, as well as transparency. 
Allow me to further deal with some of the above-mentioned issues. 
the  attraction  of 
investments  and 
impede 
foreign 
Stable economic development of the country  
As we have continuously underlined in our periodical reports, the economic growth over the 
recent  years  has  been  strongly  supported  by  the  banking  system  lending.  The  growth  of 
banking lending has provided an impulse of about 7 percentage points of GDP in the last five 
years,  making  a  pronounced  and  evident  contribution  to  the  growth  of  consumption  and 
investments in economy. Their growth has provided room for expanding the production basis 
and  improving  the  welfare.  However,  it  has  also  generated  macro  and  microeconomic 
imbalances.  
At macroeconomic level, the high consumption and investments were followed by increasing 
inflationary  pressures  and  higher  trade  and  current  account  deficit.  These  signs  of 
overheating  were  clear  signals  that  that  level  of  consumption  could  not  be  kept  for  a  long 
time, hence calling for controlling measures by the monetary authority.  
This is also the key to understand our prudent monetary policy during the period 2006–2008. 
The  institutional  investment  we  have  made  during  these  years  in  terms  of  consolidating 
macroeconomic and financial stability was rewarded with a much more moderate and milder 
impact  of  the  global  crisis  than  in  the  regional  countries.  In  concordance  with  the  modern 
philosophy of macroeconomic administration, the Bank of Albania remains committed to not 
allowing  that  rapid  and  short-term  economic  growth  impair  the  long-term  development 
perspectives of our country. 
At microeconomic level, the growth of consumption in economy was followed by increased 
indebtedness  in  Albanian  households’  and  businesses’  balance  sheets  and  by  over-
investments  in  certain  sectors  of  the  economy.  Both  these  indicators  are  either  at  lower 
levels than in the regional countries, or at similar levels; hence, they cannot be specified as 
problematic. However, their rapid growth rate creates the idea of a short-term vision of the 
economic agents, and in particular cases, even avoidance of rationality. 
Dwelling  upon  household  consumption,  the  Bank  of  Albania  invites  all  economic 
agents  to  be  more  forward-looking  and  realistic  in  their  consumption  and  savings 
plans. This invitation does not imply the contraction of consumption or the change of 
preferences related to it, but merely placing it in the context of long-term plans that 
equal  income  and  expenditure  at  a  household  level.  Beyond  the  time-related 
dimension,  as  we  have  continuously  drawn  the  attention,  borrowers  should  be 
cautious as regards their loan currency. This implies that the matching of their loan 
currency with that of their income would be their best protection. In a more pragmatic 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 3
approach, this advice may be reduced into an appeal for a close consultation with the 
banking system and the financial market’s specialized agents.  
The  latest  global  crisis  –  in  particular  in  the  US  and  England  –  showed  that  the  impaired 
households’  balances  sheets  create  room  for  strong  economic  shocks  and  condition  the 
country’s long term growth. On the other hand, it showed that the countries that succeeded in 
preserving a clear certificate of consumer’s financial soundness, wherein Albania is part of, 
had  a  more  moderate  impact  and  enjoy  good  premises  for  a  more  rapid  growth.  In  a 
philosophical approach, the key lesson of the market economy is that all consumption must 
be paid for. There is no free lunch.  
Back to businesses and investment loans, whose portfolio is 2/3 of the total banking system 
credit, my message is the same in principle: expand the time span of your decision-making 
and foreign investment and base them on detailed and scrutinized business plans’ analysis. 
What  I  would  like  to  underline  is  that  this  message  should  be  perceived  by  you 
urgently,  since  you  have  the  necessary  financial  and  human  resources  to  be  more 
prudent  in  borrowing  and  investments.  Time  is  ripe  for  the  Albanian  businesses  to 
avoid the group behaviour, where one business idea is almost automatically followed 
and  adopted  by  other  businesses,  without  first  studying  the  market  size,  the 
competitive advantages, the level of expertise or the financial efficiency of using the 
funds,  according  to  all  the  chains  a  careful  and  prudent  decision-making  should  go 
through.  
The latest tendency for diversifying the Albanian businesses is useful in principle; however, it 
should not be made to the detriment of specialization and efficiency, or even less without first 
making the macroeconomic and sectoral analyses.  
The inter-sectoral performance of the economy is another issue I would like to discuss with 
you  today  and  which  I  briefly  mentioned  earlier  in  my  speech.  The  country’s  economic 
development  has  been  characterized  by  a  growth  and  investment  model  which  has 
favoured  the  services  and  construction  businesses,  compared  to  the  exporting 
industries  or  the  competitive  ones  in  imports.  Although  this  performance  somehow 
reflects the tendency to perform similarly to the economic structure of developed and 
advanced  economies,  it  has  resulted  in  over-investments  in  certain  sectors.  The 
economy development cannot be stable if the allocation of funds is not carried out by 
adhering to the principle of sector productivity and efficiency. The misuse of financial 
funds  impairs  the  agents  and  the  whole  economy,  providing  severe  and  long-term 
consequences  on  corporate  balances  sheets  and  debts,  on  labour  market  and  on 
capital and technology allocation among sectors of the economy.  
To  minimize  such  risks,  the  Bank  of  Albania  advises  you  to  discontinue  the  inertial 
moves in your behaviour and realistically assess the regional and European context in 
your  choices.  The  competitive  advantages  of  Albania  should  not  be  sought  only  in 
natural resources, or in meeting of yet unserved demands of the Albanian market, but 
also in the cheap work force of the country and in its position as a future EU member. 
The increasing interaction with the banking system would help to clarify your plans 
and reduce the financial risk, providing you with the opportunity to focus on business 
risk administration you are specialized in.  
Completing  my  discussion  related  to  stable  development  of  the  country,  I  would  like  to 
underline that the banking system can and should do more in this respect.  
The  financial  system  is  the  brain  of  a  market  economy;  it  determines  the  expected 
return and risk of investments in the economy, enabling later on the prioritized use of 
limited  financial  funds.  Despite  its  good  performance,  the  Albanian  banking  system 
should  do  more  to  incorporate  macroeconomic  and  sectoral  analyses,  and  also  the 
country’s  financial  stability  in  decision-making.  The  development  of  research  units 
within large banks is actually a requirement of the time we are living in. Moreover, more 
efforts should be made, to increase the support of small and medium-sized enterprises with 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2009
funds. In addition, a more aggressive marketing of derivative instruments, which will lower 
the  corporate  financial  risk,  particularly  of  those  operating  in  the  export  sector,  requires  a 
greater attention from the banking system.  
What  I  just  mentioned  will  be  an  important  part  of  the  future  philosophy  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania  in  the  field  of  structural  reforms  in  the  financial  market  and  in  developing  and 
advancing its supervisory and regulatory function in it.  
Structural vulnerabilities and the need for reform  
A useful lesson that the Bank of Albania has learnt from the crisis is the need to continue and 
deepen  the  structural  reforms  in  the  economy.  These  reforms,  not  only  will  create  a  more 
appropriate  environment  for  promoting  the  private  entrepreneurship,  but  will  also  increase 
the  economy’s  resilience  to  shocks.  They  also  help  to  absorb  foreign  direct  investments, 
which  are  the  best  support  to  the  country’s  development  in  the  medium  and  long  run. 
However, as stipulated even in the EBRD’s report, Albania is among the few countries that 
have continued structural reforms even during 2009.  
In this regard, Albania has lagged behind the regional countries, attracting in total only about 
USD 1100 per capita of FDI during the 20 years of transitions.  
In the entire broad framework of reform-related problems, I would like to dwell today upon the 
need for investments in education and infrastructure. A well-known business maxim is that: 
Employees are a company’s most precious asset. To the Bank of Albania it signifies that 
the higher the professionalism, the higher our institutional independence.  
To a broader sense, this is also relevant for the national economy. Our country’s progress, 
the  convergence  with  the  developed  countries  of  East  Europe  and  even  beyond,  with  the 
European Union countries, will depend on our level of education. Competition in national and 
international markets is above all based on the generation of ideas and their use in the final 
products. Referring again to the Global Competitiveness Index, Albania is ranked the 90th as 
regards  the  level  of  education  and  high-level  training,  and  only  the  109th  and  126th 
respectively at the level of business sophistication and innovation. These vulnerabilities will 
ever-increasingly become an obstacle for the country’s economic growth in the future, unless 
addressed on due time.  
Public  reform  in  the  education  system  and  the  need  for  more  backup  funds  should  be  a 
priority of every development policy. On the other hand, I consider that the Albanian business 
can and should do more for supporting the Albanian education. First, the business can and 
should be more supportive to higher education institutions, at the same time cooperating with 
them in the area of market research and student training. The economic development history 
shows  that  the  countries,  which  have  invested  in  education,  are  currently  in  the  group  of 
most developed countries of the global economy. Second, I think that more efforts should be 
made  in  attracting  and  absorbing  the  brain  in  the  administration  and  management  of  your 
businesses.  
Investing  in  education,  in  enhancing  professionalism  and  expertise,  is  the  best 
investment we can make for the future of our country.  
Parallel to this, the enhancement of our development infrastructure should be a priority issue. 
Beyond the road infrastructure development, which rightly is a priority of the public sector, 
the Albanian business can and should do more in this regard. The use of common business 
resources to resolve problems in supplying electricity, water and sanitation, and local roads, 
should  be  regarded  as  an  effective  option  of  overcoming  these  problems.  Creating 
differentiated  and  specialized  development  areas  will  open  more  opportunities  to  them  to 
benefit  from  scale  economies  and  common  solution  of  problems.  Also,  computer  and 
telecommunication  infrastructure  are  sectors,  which  can  and  should  be  addressed  more 
efficiently by the private sector.  
BIS Review 158/2009 
 5
Business administration and transparency  
Though  I  addressed  some  problems  even  earlier  in  my  speech,  now  I  would  like  to  dwell 
briefly upon the problem of administration and corporate transparency enhancement. 
Corporate  administration  is  the  linking  bridge  between  ideas  and  results.  It  affects 
funds usage efficiency and differentiates profitable from non-profitable businesses.  
In  light  of  this,  I  think  that  the  above-mentioned  issues,  the  extended  time  span  of 
investments,  their  support  in  market  researches  and  prudent  business-plans,  the 
orientation  of  businesses’  positioning  in  national,  regional  and  global  context,  the 
increase  in  specialization  and  professionalization,  the  fostering  of  cooperation  with 
the financial system, require ongoing investments in terms of your management.  
Finally,  I  think  that  transparency  of  your  businesses  is  an  aspect  that  deserves  a  greater 
attention. Its enhancement would help first of all the trading and financial transactions among 
businesses, fostering confidence and decreasing their risk. Also, the long-term and ongoing 
relation with the financial system is conditioned by reciprocal transparency between parties. 
Beyond the banking system relations, transparency is a serious obstacle in the establishment 
and operation of capital market in Albania. In this regard, I think that the Albanian business 
should be aware of the fact that transparency enhancement and increased formalization are 
in its long-term interest.  
Dear participants, 
Long-term  visions  are  translated  into  success  achieved  through  work  and  short-term 
sacrifices.  The  Bank  of  Albania  invites  you  to  foster  the  cooperation  in  resolving  these 
problems of mutual interest.  
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 158/2009
