Jean-Pierre Roth: The financial crisis is receding – what will the future 
bring? 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the Centro di Studi Bancari, Vezia, 15 December 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 After the financial crisis, the global economy will enter a phase of weak economic growth. 
Unemployment  levels  in  the  industrialised  countries  will  be  comparatively  high.  Public 
finances in these countries have been heavily depleted, both by the crisis and by the needs 
arising from the ageing of their populations, and will need to be consolidated. In monetary 
terms,  inflation  will  remain  under  control,  at  least  in  those  countries  whose  central  banks 
enjoy a strong level of independence. 
Switzerland is comparatively well equipped to meet these challenges. Its public finances are 
in a healthy state and it is sufficiently open to the world to  participate in its most dynamic 
markets.  With  its  tradition  of  high  quality  and  cutting-edge  technology,  Switzerland  is  well 
positioned to react to specific market requirements. Moreover, it can draw on considerable 
financial resources and, thanks to the openness of its labour market, also has easy access to 
labour  resources,  without  which  growth  would  not  be  possible.  Switzerland’s  only  major 
drawback is the fact that it is a lightweight in the geopolitical arena, which makes it almost 
impossible for it to defend itself against protectionist tendencies and discriminatory measures 
taken by big countries.  
The Swiss government must therefore take a strong stand on behalf of free trade, while also 
ensuring  that  the  private  sector  operates  within  the  best  possible  framework  for  its  further 
development. Ultimately, our future welfare depends on the vitality of the private sector, not 
on any state intervention. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
