William C Dudley: Still more lessons from the crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Columbia University World Leaders’ Forum, New York, 
7 December 2009. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here this evening. I was a freshman here at 
Columbia nearly 40 years ago. I’m certainly glad to be back, but I must admit that there is a 
downside: It does make me feel a bit old in the process.  
Tonight, I want to talk about two broad sets of issues: First, the Federal Reserve’s role in 
responding to the crisis and the steps we must take to reduce, as much as possible, the risks 
of this type of costly and painful episode in the future and, second, the economic outlook for 
2010 and some of the challenges that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) faces in 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  actions  undertaken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  over  the  past  two  and  a  half  years  have 
been critical to stabilizing the financial system and preventing the extraordinary distress in 
markets from causing a deeper and more protracted economic downturn. Much of the Fed’s 
ability to respond as effectively as it did during this crisis, whether it was from a monetary 
policy, a “lender-of-last resort” or a supervisory perspective, came from its breadth and depth 
of  knowledge  and  experience  with  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  financial 
market infrastructure, both inside and outside of the United States. That said, there is also no 
question that the Federal Reserve and other regulators could have done more to prevent this 
crisis.  That  is  why,  even  as  the  Fed  has  engaged  in  extraordinary  efforts  to  stabilize  the 
financial system over the past couple of years, it has also been moving quickly to make the 
internal changes necessary to strengthen our effectiveness. In addition, the Fed  has been 
working with other regulators in and outside of the U.S. to craft and implement the broader 
changes in regulation and supervision that are necessary to make our financial system more 
robust and resilient going forward.  
Turning to the outlook, the recession now appears to be over, but the economy is still weak 
and  the  unemployment  rate  is  much  too  high.  These  circumstances  underpin  the  FOMC’s 
commitment to keeping short term rates exceptionally low for an extended period. However, 
at the same time, it deserves emphasizing that the Federal Reserve will be willing and able 
to exit from this period smoothly when the time comes to ensure that inflation stays low and 
inflation expectations well anchored. 
As always, my comments represent my own views and opinions, not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.  
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  clear  that  the  Fed  and  other  regulators,  both  here  and 
abroad,  did  not  sufficiently  understand  some  of  the  critical  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
system,  including  the  consequences  of  inappropriate  incentives,  and  the  opacity  and  the 
large  number  of  self-amplifying  mechanisms  that  were  embedded  within  the  system. 
Likewise,  we  did  not  appreciate  all  the  ramifications  of  the  growth  of  the  shadow  banking 
system and its linkage back to regulated financial institutions until after the crisis began.  
Of course, understanding now what we did not understand then is only half the battle. We 
need to respond to ensure that ongoing changes in our financial system do not threaten the 
stability of the financial system in the future.  
For  one,  the  crisis  is  provoking  a  reevaluation  of  our  views  on  how  to  respond  to  asset 
bubbles. For years, central bank orthodoxy has been that you cannot identify asset bubbles 
very well. Thus, the strategy has been to move aggressively to clean up such bubbles after 
they have burst.  
BIS Review 161/2009 
 1
I think our level of confidence in that approach has been considerably reduced in the wake of 
the crisis that we have just experienced. The costs of cleaning up after the fact have been 
immense.  
But make no mistake – developing an effective, more proactive approach is not easy. Among 
the important questions that need to be answered:  
1. 
How does one identify bubbles – which I’ll define here as persistent large deviations 
in asset prices from their fundamental value – in real time? 
What  instruments  can  be  used  to  limit  the  development  of  bubbles  and/or  allow 
bubbles  to  deflate  in  non-catastrophic  ways  that  will  not  damage  the  economy  in 
other ways?  
2. 
Turning  to  the  first  issue,  identifying  asset  bubbles  in  real  time  is  difficult.  However, 
identifying  variables  that  often  are  associated  with  asset  bubbles  –  especially  credit  asset 
bubbles  –  may  be  less  daunting.  To  take  one  recent  example,  there  was  a  tremendous 
increase in financial leverage in the U.S. financial system over the period from 2003 to 2007, 
particularly  in  the  nonbank  financial  sector.  This  sharp  rise  in  leverage  was  observable. 
Presumably,  this  rise  in  leverage  also  raised  the  risks  of  a  financial  asset  bubble  and  the 
impact of this bubble on housing certainly raised the stakes for the real economy if such a 
bubble were to burst. This suggests that limiting the overall increase in leverage throughout 
the system could have reduced the risk of a bubble and the consequences if the bubble were 
to burst.  
Turning to the second issue of how to limit and/or deflate bubbles in an orderly fashion, the 
fact  that  increases  in  leverage  are  often  associated  with  financial  asset  bubbles  suggests 
that limiting increases in leverage may help to prevent bubbles from being created in the first 
place. This again suggests that there is a role for supervision and regulation in the bubble 
prevention process. For example, it might be appropriate for the Federal Reserve – working 
with functional regulators such as the SEC (Securities Exchange Commission) – to monitor 
and limit the buildup in leverage at the major securities firms and the leverage extended from 
these firms to their clients and counterparties.  
Whether there is a role for monetary policy to limit asset bubbles is a more difficult question. 
On  the  one  hand,  monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  tool  for  use  in  preventing  bubbles  because 
monetary  policy  actions  also  have  important  consequences  for  real  economic  activity, 
employment  and  inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  evidence  that  monetary 
policy does have an impact on desired leverage through its impact on the shape of the yield 
curve.  A  tighter  monetary  policy,  by  flattening  the  yield  curve,  may  limit  the  buildup  in 
leverage.1 
Whether it would be more effective to limit leverage directly by regulatory and supervisory 
means or via monetary policy is still an open question. But it is becoming increasingly clear 
that a totally hands off approach is problematic.  
I also believe we could have done better in our supervision of the large complex commercial 
banking  organizations.  For  example,  the  recent  reports  issued  by  the  Senior  Supervisors 
Group (SSG), which is composed of regulators from five major countries, indicated that the 
banking regulators both here and abroad should have been tougher in the assessment of the 
quality  of  management,  of  governance,  and  in  terms  of  these  banks’  risk  management 
                                                 
1   There is a growing body of economics literature on this issue that links monetary policy to leverage. See, for 
example, Tobias Adrian and Hyun Shin, manuscript in preparation for the forthcoming Handbook of Monetary 
Economics,  volume  3,  currently  circulated  as  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Reports,  No.  398, 
October 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2009
capabilities.2  We  should  also  have  pushed  harder  for  better  management  information 
systems and more simplified corporate organizations and structures. We should have done 
more  to  identify  best  practices  in  terms  of  risk  management,  liquidity,  capital,  and 
compensation and pushed harder to force the laggards to move to best practice standards. 
We  are  learning  a  lot  about  how  to  do  supervision  better  and  are  working  aggressively  to 
apply those lessons to our current practices. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Process 
or  SCAP  is  an  important  example  of  the  value  of  broad,  horizontal  examinations.  In  the 
SCAP, the Federal Reserve worked in conjunction with other U.S. regulators to assess the 
impact  of  a  stress  economic  environment  on  the  19  largest  banking  organizations  in  the 
country  simultaneously.  This  approach  made  the  SCAP  a  particularly  powerful  exercise.  It 
allowed  supervisors  to  ensure  that  the  collective  results  of  the  individual  banks  were 
consistent  with  a  top-down  assessment  of  revenue  and  credit  losses  generated  from  an 
adverse stress scenario for the macroeconomy. We are incorporating these types of broad, 
horizontal reviews more deeply into our supervision process.  
So, what else are we doing going forward? There are a large number of initiatives under way 
to  make  our  financial  system  more  robust  to  shocks  and  more  resilient  to  the  inevitable 
swings  in  activity  and  sentiment.  These  initiatives  include  several  aimed  at  strengthening 
bank capital requirements. When these initiatives are fully implemented, they should prevent 
some of the practices we witnessed during the crisis – for example, a banking organization 
paying out dividends to demonstrate that it is strong when, in fact, by depleting capital, such 
an action is making it weaker.  
One important initiative in this regard is to better capture all the sources of risk in the capital 
assessment  process.  This,  for  example,  includes  the  trading  accounts  of  banks.  Some 
institutions  had  clearly  not  set  aside  adequate  levels  of  capital  given  the  risks  that  were 
embedded in their trading positions.  
We are also exploring the potential for contingent capital. The goal is to bolster the amount of 
common equity available to absorb losses in adverse economic environments. This might be 
done  by  allowing  the  issuance  of  debt  instruments  that  would  automatically  convert  into 
common  equity  in  stress  environments,  under  certain  pre-specified  conditions.  Such 
instruments might  have  proven  very  helpful  had  they  been  in  place  before  and  during  this 
crisis.  Investors  would  have  anticipated  that  common  equity  would  be  replenished 
automatically if a firm came under stress, and this knowledge might in turn have tempered 
anxieties about counterparty risk. At a minimum, contingent capital instruments might have 
enabled  common  equity  buffers  at  the  weaker  firms  to  be  replenished  earlier  and 
automatically, thereby reducing uncertainty and the risk of failure.  
There  are  many  details  that  still  need  to  be  worked  out  to  determine  the  potential  for 
contingent  capital  instruments  to  enhance  financial  stability.  For  example,  what  are  the 
circumstances  under  which  conversion  is  triggered?  How  much  common  equity  do  debt 
holders  receive  upon  conversion?  However,  our  early  work  on  this  issue  suggests  that 
contingent  capital  may  be  a  promising  mechanism  for  injecting  common  equity  into  the 
banking  system  in  times  of  stress  without  unduly  raising  intermediation  costs  or  pushing 
financial activity out of the banking sector into the unregulated sector.  
On  the  liquidity  front,  there  are  a  host  of  initiatives  underway.  For  starters,  the  Federal 
Reserve  is  now  supervising  most  of  the  holding  companies  of  the  systemically  important 
financial institutions. That was not true at the start of the crisis. So, for example, the holding 
companies of Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch, which is now a subsidiary 
                                                 
2   See, for example, Senior Supervisors Group, “Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 
2008,”  October  21,  2009,  and  “Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence,” March 6, 2008. 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 3
of  Bank  of  America,  are  now  under  our  direct  supervision.  We  are  making  sure  that  they 
have appropriate liquidity buffers and capital.  
Second,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  working  with  a  broad  range  of  private  sector  participants, 
including  dealers,  clearing  banks,  and  tri-party  repo  investors  to  dramatically  reduce  the 
structural instability of the financial system utilities, such as the tri party repo system.  
Third,  the  Basel  Committee  is  working  on  establishing  international  standards  for  liquidity 
requirements. There are two parts to this. The first is a requirement for a short-term liquidity 
buffer of sufficient size so that an institution that was shut out of the market for several weeks 
would  still  have  sufficient  liquidity  to  continue  its  operations  unimpaired.  The  second  is  a 
liquidity standard that limits the degree of permissible maturity transformation – that is, the 
amount of short-term borrowing allowed to be used in the funding of long-term illiquid assets. 
Under these standards, a firm’s holdings of illiquid long-term assets would need to be funded 
mainly by equity or long-term debt.3 
There is also work underway on the problem of how to ensure that financial institutions have 
compensation structures that curb rather than encourage excessive risk taking. This issue of 
compensation is obviously a hugely potent one, as there is a fundamental unfairness in what 
has happened over the past few years. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve and others 
to  stabilize  the  financial  system  had  the  effect  of  rescuing  many  of  the  same  financial 
institutions  that  contributed  to  this  crisis.  Many  of  those  financial  institutions  are  now 
prospering, and many of their employees will be highly compensated. This situation is unfair 
on its face. But it is even more galling in an environment in which the unemployment rate is 
10 percent and many people are struggling to make ends meet.  
Despite the fundamental unfairness of the situation, I don’t think it is feasible or practical for 
the  Federal  Reserve,  or  any  other  supervisory  entity,  to  attempt  to  determine  the  level  of 
compensation at individual firms on an ongoing basis. A better approach is for supervisors to 
ensure  that  a  firm’s  compensation  regime  is  consistent  with  an  institution’s  safety  and 
soundness  and  with  broader  financial  stability.  That  can  and  should  have  important 
implications  for  the  level  of  individual  compensation.  For  example,  a  trader  should  not  be 
paid  solely  on  the  basis  of  this  year’s  accounting  profits  if  those  profits  are  based  on  the 
valuation of illiquid assets held on the bank’s books that could easily go down considerably in 
value before they are liquidated.  
The  Fed  is  in  the  process  of  implementing  a  framework  that  will  embed  compensation 
practices  more  deeply  into  the  supervisory  process.  We  have  made  it  clear  to  the  major 
banks and dealers that 2009 compensation should be consistent with the recently developed 
Financial  Stability  Board  principles  on  compensation,  which  emphasize  the  importance  of 
appropriate incentives.  
Finally, there is considerable work underway on the “too big to fail” problem. On this front, 
there are two main strands of work. First, we must improve the resolution mechanisms for 
large  complex  bank  holding  companies  and  nonbank  financial  firms  that  become  troubled, 
and to complement that initiative with efforts to strengthen the financial market infrastructure. 
If regulators had at their disposal an effective resolution mechanism for large financial firms 
and the financial system was made more resilient to shocks, then the number of firms that 
were  indeed  “too  big  to  fail”  would  be  significantly  reduced.  Second,  after  building  such  a 
resolution mechanism,  we  must  still  act  to  ensure  that  no  special advantage  persists  from 
being perceived by creditors, counterparties and investors as “too big to fail.” After all, it will 
be hard to build a resolution mechanism that credibly ensures that any firm will be allowed to 
fail under any circumstance. If there is a chance that a firm may be too big to fail, then there 
                                                 
3   For more on liquidity issues see “More Lessons from the Crisis,” Remarks by William C. Dudley at the Center 
for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) Symposium, Princeton University, November 13, 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2009
should be an explicit quid pro quo for that status in the form of higher capital and liquidity 
requirements.  For  example,  contingent  capital  could  be  made  a  part  of  any  additional 
regulatory capital requirements for “too-big-to-fail” firms.  
As I have discussed, we are moving forcefully to make the system more robust and resilient. 
While at times, the criticism of the Federal Reserve and other regulators has been on target, 
at other times, I believe it has been off the mark. For example, the Federal Reserve has been 
singled  out  for  criticism  about  the  failures  of  supervision  even  though  it  did  not  have  any 
regulatory responsibility for many of the largest U.S. financial firms that collapsed during the 
crisis.4 
American International Group, Inc. (AIG) is an important case in point. The Federal Reserve 
learned about the significant liquidity problems AIG was experiencing only shortly before the 
Lehman  bankruptcy.  At  that  time,  we  were  assured  that  a  private-sector  consortium  was 
being  assembled  to  provide  AIG  with  liquidity  support  if  that  proved  to  be  necessary. 
Unfortunately, once Lehman filed its Chapter 11 petition on September 15th, the environment 
worsened and the lending consortium fell apart.  
A  recent  report  by  the  Special  Inspector  General  for  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program 
(SIGTARP) suggested that the Federal Reserve should have had a contingency plan in place 
for AIG. The reality is that, in fact, the Federal Reserve was the contingency plan. Once the 
private  sector  backed  away  from  AIG,  the  Fed,  with  the  full  support  of  the  Treasury,  was 
called  upon  to  do  something  extraordinary  and  lend  to  AIG.  The  Federal  Reserve  had  no 
oversight authority over this institution whatsoever, but it stepped into the breach and lent to 
AIG to prevent a catastrophic collapse of the financial system and to protect the public from 
the fallout that would have resulted.  
There has also been a lot of criticism – in the recent SIGTARP report and elsewhere – that 
the  Federal  Reserve  should  have  forced  AIG’s  major  counterparties  to  take  haircuts  in 
conjunction with setting up Maiden Lane III. The reasons for the Fed’s actions in this situation 
are straightforward. From the moment the U.S. government made it clear that its goal was to 
prevent  AIG’s  bankruptcy  in  order  to  stem  a  broader  collapse  of  the  financial  system,  this 
undercut the ability to obtain concessions from AIG’s counterparties. To put it starkly, power 
in  a  negotiation  comes  either  from  being  able  to  issue  a  credible  threat  or  from  coercion. 
Bankruptcy at that point for AIG was simply not credible in the context of the actions taken to 
rescue  the  firm  in  the  first  place,  and  threatening  bankruptcy  would  have  been  at  cross 
purposes to the broader goal of stabilizing the financial system. Using our supervisory power 
in a coercive manner would have been an abuse of that supervisory power.  
I  have  highlighted  this  example  because  it  provides  a  stark  illustration  of  two  critical 
shortcomings in our current regulatory system. The first is the fact that a large, systemically 
important institution like AIG was able to slip through the cracks in our regulatory structure 
and put our entire system at risk. The second is the lack of an effective resolution regime for 
large bank holding companies and nonbank financial institutions. Absent such a regime,  a 
commitment to support a failing firm inevitably results in the loss of leverage in negotiating 
with counterparties and creditors.  
Turning now to another difficult issue, it is deeply offensive to Americans, including me, and 
runs counter to basic notions of justice and fairness, that some of the very same individuals 
and  financial  firms  that  precipitated  this  crisis  have  also  benefited  so  directly  from  the 
response to the crisis. This has occurred at the same time that many Americans have lost 
                                                 
4   AIG  was  supervised  by  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  (OTS)  and  state  insurance  commissioners.  Bear 
Stearns and Lehman Brothers were supervised by the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), Fannie Mae 
and  Freddie  Mac  were  supervised  by  the  Office  of  Federal  Housing  Enterprise  Oversight  (OFHEO),  and 
Washington Mutual and Indy Mac were supervised by the OTS. The Fed's involvement with many of these 
firms came only through its lender of last resort role. 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 5
their  jobs  and  hard-earned  savings.  The  public  outrage  this  situation  has  produced  is 
understandable. In the context of actions taken to support the financial system, the Federal 
Reserve  and  other  government  agencies  have  provided  considerable  support  to  banking 
organizations  and  other  large  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  The  employees 
and executives of those institutions have benefitted from our intervention. In a perfect world 
we  would  be  able  to  prevent  those  individuals  and  institutions  from  benefitting;  we  would 
have a better way to penalize those who acted recklessly. But once the crisis was underway, 
one goal took precedence: keeping the financial system from collapsing in order to protect 
the nation from an even deeper and more protracted downturn that would have been more 
damaging to everyone.  
The  Great  Depression  represents  an  important  example  of  the  consequences  of  inaction. 
Recall  that  during  the  Great  Depression  the  unemployment  rate  rose  to  24  percent.  It  is 
generally  accepted  that  the  authorities  at  that  time,  by  not  responding  sooner  and  more 
forcefully,  contributed  greatly  to  the  severity  and  duration  of  the  Great  Depression.  In 
contrast,  during  this  crisis,  the  Fed  and  other  agencies  acted  much  more  aggressively  to 
ward off a total collapse of our financial system – liquidity was restored to markets and the 
banking system was recapitalized much more  quickly. These aggressive actions helped to 
prevent the type of deep and protracted crisis that occurred during the 1930s.  
Going  forward,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  regulators  need  to  move  aggressively  to 
change  the  system  so  we  don’t  ever  find  ourselves  in  this  position  again.  We  need  to 
improve our ability to identify catalysts for potential crises, whether those catalysts manifest 
themselves  in  the  form  of  asset  price  bubbles  or  reside  elsewhere.  Perhaps  most  critical 
among the challenges facing policymakers and lawmakers is how to ensure that we have a 
more effective regulatory structure going forward.  
This  is  a  complex  subject  that  I  do  not  have  time  to  do  justice  here  tonight.  However,  I 
believe it is important to explain why the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, lender of last 
resort and supervisory functions should remain in place. These functions are interrelated so 
that the execution of one of these responsibilities helps the Federal Reserve in its conduct of 
the others.  
For example, consider the Fed’s lender of last resort function. For the Fed to perform this 
role  effectively,  it  is  important  that  it  have  first-hand  knowledge  about  banks,  the  capital 
markets, and payment and settlement systems. To perform this role safely, it must know its 
borrowers, which is why a supervisory role is essential. Put simply, if supervisory and other 
financial oversight responsibilities were taken from the Fed, it would make it more difficult for 
us to perform our lender of last resort function. To do that well and safely, it is important that 
we understand banks, the financial system and all its interconnections.  
One  instructive  example  in  this  context  is  the  Northern  Rock  experience  in  the  United 
Kingdom, where banking supervision and the lender of last resort functions were separated. 
Many  have  concluded  that  this  separation  led  to  coordination  problems  that  delayed 
intervention and significantly exacerbated the crisis. The experience with Northern Rock is a 
cautionary lesson about the potential costs of separating banking oversight from the lender of 
last resort function.  
A  similar  argument  applies  to  monetary  policy.  In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  it  is 
important to understand how changes in the federal funds rate or the interest rate on excess 
reserves affect financial conditions. A detailed understanding of banks, capital markets and 
payment  and  settlement  systems  is  essential  to  properly  understand  the  linkage  between 
monetary policy, the financial system, and the real economy. In other words, if you take away 
the Fed’s oversight of the financial system, the ability of the Fed policymakers to understand 
how their actions are going to affect financial conditions and the economy will be impaired. 
The economy will suffer as a consequence.  
Shifting gears, let me talk a bit about the economic outlook. My views about the outlook have 
not  changed  much  recently  and  do  not  differ  much  from  the  consensus.  The  situation  is 
6 
 BIS Review 161/2009
slowly improving. We are having a recovery in terms of output and the pace of job losses has 
slowed  substantially.  In  the  second  half  of  this  year,  real  GDP  growth  will  likely  fall  in  a 
3 percent to 3.5 percent annualized range. 2010 will probably be slightly weaker than that, 
mostly because some of the current sources of strength are temporary. The inventory cycle 
is providing lots of support right now and the fiscal stimulus – which is very powerful right 
now – will abate as we go through 2010.  
2010 is also likely to be a more moderate growth period because we still face quite a few 
headwinds  generated  by  the  hangover  of  the  financial  crisis.  The  banks  are  still  under 
pressure  in  terms  of  credit  losses.  The  shadow  banking  system  is  still  impaired  and 
securitization  activity  is  recovering  very  slowly.  For  example,  last  month  we  saw  the  first 
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) deal in a year and a half. This means that 
the constraints on credit availability will take considerably more time to fully abate.  
If growth is subdued, this implies that the unemployment rate will stay high and inflation will 
stay low. If this outlook is broadly correct, this suggests that it will be appropriate to keep the 
federal funds rate target exceptionally low for an extended period. One risk in the outlook is 
that inflation expectations could become less well-anchored. This could conceivably occur for 
several  reasons.  First,  people  may  worry  that  the  expansion  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
balance sheet and the increase in the Federal debt will prove inflationary over time. Second, 
some may worry that the Congress could take actions that would call into question the Fed’s 
independence with respect to monetary policy and that this could cause the Fed to be less 
willing to tighten monetary policy in a timely way in the future.  
A rise in long-term inflation expectations above levels consistent with price stability would be 
a very unwelcome development because inflation expectations are an important determinant 
of actual inflation. In principle, if inflation expectations rose, this could push up actual inflation 
despite  the  high  unemployment  rate.  Obviously,  this  would  make  it  more  difficult  for  the 
Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve its dual objective of full employment and 
price stability.  
On the issue of the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, the worry among some is that the rapid 
growth  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet will  ultimately  lead  to  an  inflation  problem.  This  anxiety 
stems from the fact that periods of rapid growth of the monetary base (that is, currency plus 
bank reserves) in the past have typically been followed by rapid credit growth and inflation.  
While I understand the concerns, I do not believe they are well-founded. We have a new tool: 
the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  excess  reserves  and  that  should  enable  us  to  cut  the  link 
between  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet  and  credit  creation  and  inflation.  If  we  raise  the 
interest rate on excess reserves, we can incentivize banks to hold the excess reserves with 
us rather than lend them out.  
And  that  should  work,  because  the  price  of  credit  is  an  important  determinant  of  credit 
demand.  If  the  FOMC  were  to  raise  the  interest  rate  paid  on  excess  reserves,  this  would 
raise  the  price  of  credit.  That,  in  turn,  would  limit  the  demand  for  credit.  As  a  result,  the 
excess reserves wouldn’t be lent out; instead, the excess reserves would stay parked at the 
Fed.  
That  said,  the  Fed’s  exit  from  its  current  monetary  policy  stance  is  going  to  be  more 
complicated than normal. Normally, when we exit, we simply decide when we are going to 
raise the federal funds rate target. This time, we have a broader set of decisions to make. 
For  example,  do  we  drain  reserves  from  the  banking  system?  Is  it  better  for  the  banking 
system to operate with $500 billion of excess reserves or $1 trillion? This is an issue we have 
to explore further. In the meantime, we are testing our ability to drain reserves through the 
use of reverse repurchase agreements. It is important that this option be available to us in 
the event we want to use it.  
Although  it  is  going  to  be  more  complicated  in  the  sense  that  we  have  more  decisions  to 
make about how to manage our exit, I believe the process is manageable. The fact we have 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 7
more  levers  doesn’t  mean  that  we  will  have  trouble  exiting  when  the  time  comes,  it  just 
means that we will have more choices to make.  
Turning to the issue of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy independence, I believe this is 
a  critical  issue.  As  you  know,  the  Paul  amendment,  which  was  inserted  into  the  House 
Financial  Services  bill,  would  subject  the  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy  decisions  to 
audit by the General Accountability Office (GAO).  
We should think about how market participants will react to the potential politicization of the 
monetary  policy  process.  Knowing  that  a  decision  to  raise  interest  rates  today  might  be 
criticized  by  the  GAO  six  months  later,  market participants could  begin  to  worry  about  the 
Fed’s willingness to make tough choices in terms of tightening monetary policy. If that were 
the case, inflation expectations could become less well anchored. This, in turn, would make it 
more difficult to keep inflation under control, even if the fears of market participants about the 
Fed ultimately turned out to be unwarranted.  
Our monetary policy decisions are already public and a wide range of Fed officials explain 
the  rationale  for  our  actions.  It  has  been  well  established  around  the  world  that  monetary 
policy independence leads to better outcomes in terms of unemployment and inflation. In my 
view, any legislation that would cast doubts about the Fed’s independence in the conduct of 
monetary policy would not be beneficial to this country.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS Review 161/2009
