Thomas Jordan: Real estate, mortgages and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, 
at the IAZI, Schweizer Immobilienkongress 2009, Zurich, 10 November 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 There is a close interrelationship between real estate, mortgages and monetary policy. On 
the one hand, monetary policy impacts on the real estate and mortgage market. When the 
central  bank  reduces  interest  rates,  this  eases  the  burden  on  household  and  company 
budgets  and  fosters  the  demand  for  real  estate.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  also 
takes account of developments on the real estate market because these can affect economic 
growth, inflation and financial stability. 
Once again, the current financial crisis has thrown these interrelationships into sharp relief. 
Problems in a number of mortgage and real estate markets – in particular in the US and the 
UK  –  triggered  the  financial  crisis and  plunged  the  global  financial  system  into  a  systemic 
crisis. This impacted on Switzerland’s financial stability and made it necessary to create the 
StabilisationFund for the transfer of illiquid UBS assets.  
The  Swiss  real  estate  and  mortgage  market  played  a  positive  role  in  various  measures 
adopted by the SNB to handle the financial crisis. Swiss mortgages played a role in securing 
Swiss financial stability in the Limmat Pfandbrief transactions, whereby big banks improved 
their  refinancing  situation  by  issuing  covered  bonds.  Consequently,  Switzerland  –  unlike 
other  countries  –  was  able  to  avoid  introducing  state-guaranteed  bonds.  With  the  drastic 
reduction  in  key  rates  and  the  subsequent  decline  in  mortgage  rates,  the  burden  on 
households  and  companies  was  eased.  In  this  way,  the  severity  of  the  recession  was 
somewhat alleviated and the risks of deflation reduced.  
However, the interest rate is now at a historic low and this means medium-term risks for the 
Swiss real estate market and financial stability. Experience shows that periods of low interest 
rates provide scope for excesses on the mortgage and real estate market. Consequently, in 
the  current  environment  in  particular,  attention  should  be  given  to  ensuring  that  past 
mistakes are not repeated. Caution must remain the watchword when granting loans. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 1
