K C Chakrabarty: Furthering financial inclusion through financial literacy 
and credit counselling 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
launch of Federal Ashwas Trust, Kochi, 30 November 2009. 
 I am happy to be here this morning and feel privileged to launch the Federal Ashwas Trust 
for running the Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres (FLCC) of Federal Bank. At 
the outset, let me warmly congratulate my old friend and colleague Shri M. Venugopalan, MD 
and  CEO,  Federal  Bank,  and  his  team  for  bringing  the  FLCC  of  Federal  Bank  to  fruition. 
Even though Kerala has the highest literacy rate amongst all States in the country, I am sure 
that  centres  such  as  these  have  a  vital  role  to  play  in  providing  valuable  services  to  the 
people in the district. 
As our Hon’ble Finance Minister emphasized in his Budget speech, our approach to banking 
and  financial  sector  has  been  to  ensure  robust  oversight  and  regulation  while  expanding 
financial  access  and  deepening  markets.  The  merit  of  this  balanced  approach  has  been 
borne out in the recent experience as the turbulence in the world financial markets has left 
the  Indian  banking  and  financial  sector  relatively  unaffected.  The  recent  turmoil  which 
engulfed  the  western  world  and  its  financial  sector  brought  to  even  sharper  focus  the 
pressing need to protect the vulnerable from Ponzi schemes through safety nets of financial 
education, counselling and timely advice. 
The establishment of FLCCs is an important milestone in furthering financial inclusion. As I 
have  emphasised  time  and  again,  opening  a  no  frills  account  is  by  itself  not  financial 
inclusion. That is just the beginning. Financial inclusion is a much broader term which can be 
construed as the process of ensuring fair, timely and adequate access to financial services, 
namely,  saving,  credit,  payment  and  remittance  facilities,  and  insurance  services  at  an 
affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and  transparent  manner  by  the  mainstream  institutional  players. 
Educating  people  and  making  them  financially  literate  thus  becomes  integral  to  achieving 
financial inclusion, which is why centres such as these are needed. 
With the above perspective, I organize the rest of my remarks under the following sections. 
In  Section  1,  I  propose  to  talk  about  the  importance  of  financial  education.  In  Section  2,  I 
would  briefly  touch  upon  the  need  for  credit  counselling.  Section  3  discusses  the  specific 
objectives of setting up the FLCCs. Section 4 covers the role of RBI and, finally, I shall share 
some of my thoughts on issues and challenges that we need to address. 
Financial education 
I. 
Financial  education  can  broadly  be  defined  as  the  capacity  to  have  familiarity  with  and 
understanding of the financial market products, especially rewards and risks in order to make 
informed  choices.  Viewed  from  this  standpoint,  financial  education  primarily  relates  to 
personal financial education to enable individuals to take effective actions to improve overall 
well-being and avoid distress in financial matters. 
The  financial  markets  offer  a  variety  of  both  simple  and  complex  financial  products.  It  is 
difficult  for  the  common  person  to  grasp  the  downside  risks  associated  with  financial 
products especially if he or she is confronted by a blitz of clever advertising. Making wrong 
choices while choosing financial products becomes one of buying in haste and repenting at 
leisure. The focus of any discussion on financial education is thus primarily on the individual, 
who  usually  has  limited  resources  and  skills  to  appreciate  the  complexities  of  financial 
dealings with financial intermediaries on matters relating to personal finances on a day-today 
basis. 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 1
to 
the  coverage  of 
financial  services 
Lack  of  literacy  in  general  and  financial  literacy  in  particular,  are  the  main  hurdles  in 
expanding 
the  poorer  segments  of  society. 
Notwithstanding  the  initiatives  taken  so  far,  given  the  large  magnitude  of  the  problem, 
concerted efforts need to be made in this direction. Banks should, therefore, come forward to 
set up literacy centres and guide their clients about the features, benefits and risk of various 
financial  products.  With  no  well  established  banking  relationships,  the  un-banked  poor  are 
pushed towards expensive alternatives. These centres can educate the people about proper 
financial  management  tools,  inculcate  saving  habits  and  generate  demand  for  financial 
products and services which in turn will boost financial inclusion. This process of education 
could benefit the banks as the centres while interacting with customers would be in a much 
better position to understand their specific requirements, which could then be a critical input 
in appropriate product design. 
Financial education is also an integral component of customer protection. Despite concerted 
efforts,  the  current  levels  of  transparency  coupled  with  the  difficulty  of  consumers  in 
identifying and understanding the fine print from the large volume of information, leads to an 
information asymmetry between the financial intermediary and the customer. For example, 
customers are often penalised for minor violations in repayments, although they have limited 
redressal  mechanisms  to  rectify  deficiencies  in  service  by  banks.  In  this  context,  financial 
education can greatly help the consumers. 
Credit counselling 
II. 
Credit  Counselling  can  be  defined  as  “counselling  that  explores  the  possibility  of  repaying 
debts  outside  bankruptcy  and  educates  the  debtor  about  credit,  budgeting,  and  financial 
management”. It serves three purposes. First, it examines the ways to solve current financial 
problems. Second, by educating about the costs of misusing a credit, it improves financial 
management.  Third,  it  encourages  the  distressed  people  to  access  the  formal  financial 
system. 
As  per  the  All  India  Debt  and  Investment  Survey,  2003,  nearly  a  fourth  of  the  households 
were  indebted  in  2002.  The  per  cent  of  indebtedness  households in  rural  areas  increased 
sharply from 23 in 1991 to 27 in 2003; the corresponding figures for urban areas during the 
same  period  were  19  and  18,  respectively.  As  per  the  NSSO  survey  (2003),  out  of  89.35 
million  farmer  households,  43.42  million  (48.6%)  were  reported  to  be  indebted.  Farmer’s 
indebtedness  was  highest  in  Andhra  Pradesh  followed  by  Tamil  Nadu  and  Punjab.  The 
average outstanding loan per farmer household was highest in Punjab, followed by Kerala, 
Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. 
The report on the Situational Assessment of Farmers (NSS 59th round-2003) estimated that 
64.4% farmer households are indebted in Kerala as against the national average of 48.6%. 
The major reasons for arrears in repayment reported include high cost of cultivation, fall in 
prices of agricultural produce and crop failures. Opening of credit counselling centres such 
as these can certainly benefit the people. 
Earlier, there were reports of farmers committing suicides in some parts of the country due to 
their  financial  liabilities.  Through  the  provision  of  timely  and  professional  advice,  common 
people  can  be  helped  to  manage  their  debt,  improve  money  management  skills  and  gain 
access  to  the  structured  financial  system.  Counselling  can  help  solve  current  financial 
problems,  create  awareness  about  the  costs  of  misusing  a  credit,  can  improve  financial 
management and help develop realistic spending plans. Debt counselling/credit counselling 
can  be  both  preventive  and  curative.  In  case  of  preventive  counselling,  the  centres  could 
provide  awareness  regarding  cost  of  credit,  availability  of  backward  and  forward  linkages, 
where warranted, etc. The clients could be encouraged to avail of credit on the basis of their 
repaying  capacity.  Preventive  counselling  can  be  through  the  media,  workshops  and 
seminars.  In  the  case  of  curative  counselling,  the  clients  may  approach  the  counselling 
centres to work out individual debt management plans for resolving their unmanageable debt 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2009
portfolio.  Here,  the  centres  could  work  out  effective  debt  restructuring  plans  that  could 
include  repayment  of  debt  to  informal  sources,  if  necessary,  in  consultation  with  the  bank 
branch. 
Specific objectives of FLCCs 
III. 
With the above background, let me remark on the specific objectives of setting up FLCC. As 
you  are  aware,  while  the  broad  objective  of  the  FLCCs  will  be  to  provide  free  financial 
literacy/education and credit counselling, the specific objectives of the FLCCs would be: 
i. 
To provide financial counselling services through face-to-face interaction as well as 
through other available media like e-mail, fax, mobile, etc. as per convenience of the 
interested  persons,  including  education  on  responsible  borrowing,  proactive  and 
early savings, and offering debt counselling to individuals who are indebted to formal 
and/or informal financial sectors; 
To  educate  the  people  in  rural  and  urban  areas  with  regard  to  various  financial 
products and services available from the formal financial sector; 
To  make  the  people  aware  of  the  advantages  of  being  connected  with  the  formal 
financial sector; 
To formulate debt restructuring plans for borrowers in distress and recommend the 
same to formal financial institutions, including cooperatives, for consideration; 
To  take  up  any  such  activity  that  promotes  financial  literacy,  awareness  of  the 
banking services, financial planning and amelioration of debt-related distress of an 
individual;  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
FLCCs are not expected to act as investment advice centres /marketing centres for products 
of  any  particular  bank/banks.  Counsellors  may  refrain  from  marketing/providing  advice 
regarding  investment  in  insurance  policies,  investment  in  securities,  value  of  securities, 
purchase/ sale of securities, etc., or promoting investments only in bank’s own products. 
Role of the RBI 
IV. 
We,  at  the  RBI,  actively  encourage  these  initiatives  and  one  of  the  main  reasons  for  my 
coming  here  to  launch  the  trust  is  to  demonstrate  our  commitment  to  this  cause.  RBI  has 
completed  75  years  and  in  our  platinum  jubilee  year,  we  are  making  concerted  efforts  to 
expand  the  reach  of  formal  finance  through  outreach  initiatives.  All  the  stakeholders  are 
being  encouraged  to  push  aggressively  for  greater  financial  inclusion.  The  Banking  Codes 
and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) has recently brought out an updated code to ensure 
that  the  banks  formulate  and  adhere  to  their  own  comprehensive  code  of  conduct  for 
minimum standards of banking services, which individual customers can legitimately expect. 
And finally, the Banking Ombudsman Scheme has been instituted for redressal of grievances 
against deficient banking services, covering all the States and Union Territories. 
Issues and challenges 
V. 
Since  promoting  awareness  is  one  of  the  primary  objectives,  the  FLCCs  should  give  due 
emphasis  to  customers’  rights  under  fair  practices  code  and  act  as  watch  dogs.  Our 
institutions  must  provide  high  quality  public  services  to  all  citizens  with  transparency  and 
accountability.  To  achieve  this,  there  are  several  issues  and  challenges  that  come  to  my 
mind: 
i. 
The first issue is that of treating the customers fairly. Transparent pricing, terms and 
conditions  of  financial  products  including  interest  charges,  premia,  fees  and  user 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 3
friendly products made available in a form which is intelligible to borrowers would go 
a long way  in reducing the need for having financial education centres in the first 
place. There is a need to sensitise the bank staff to engineer an attitudinal shift with 
empathy for the poor, strengthen and streamline systems to improve the efficiency 
of our distribution and delivery mechanisms. 
The  second  issue  for  banks  is  to  expand  the  range  and  reach  of  counselling  and 
advisory  services  to  vulnerable  sections.  For  this  a  large  number  of  such  centres 
would be required. Up to end June 2009, banks have reported setting up 154 credit 
counselling  centres  in  various  States  of  the  country.  Obviously,  there  are  many 
districts which still do not have such centres and we need to strive towards setting 
up more centres. 
Third,  banks  need  to  facilitate  the  empowerment  of  credit  counselling  centres  for 
them to be effectively liaising and negotiating on behalf of their customers. It must 
be  understood  that  FLCCs  are  to  facilitate  responsible  behaviour  among  financial 
institutions serving customers at the base-of-pyramid as part of their focus on equity 
and efficiency. 
The  fourth  issue  is  that  of  enlisting  committed  and  well  trained  personnel  to  man 
these  centres.  As  quality  of  service  is  an  important  aspect,  it  is  desirable  to  have 
appropriately bench-marked quality standards for credit counsellors and counselling 
agencies.  A  related  issue  is  that  whether  there  should  be  accreditation  of  credit 
counselors? If so, who should do it, industry associations or individual banks? These 
could be considered in due course. 
The fifth issue that faces agencies is that of following a segmented approach vis-à-
vis  a  broad-based  generalized  one.  It  is  clear  that  banks  may  have  to  adopt  a 
segmented approach specific to different categories of borrowers and different credit 
segments. Similarly, in respect of urban and rural areas, different approaches would 
be  required.  For  instance,  the  centres  in  rural  and  semi  urban  areas  could 
concentrate on financial literacy and counselling for farming communities and those 
engaged  in  allied  activities.  The  centres  in  metro/urban  areas  could  focus  on 
individuals with overdues in credit cards, personal loans, housing loans, etc. Thus, 
the challenge is to tailor differential literacy and counselling mechanisms depending 
upon the need. 
Sixth,  an  important  issue  from  the  financial  literacy  perspective  is  that  of  content 
design  and appropriate delivery  medium  and  mechanism  suitable  to  the  particular 
target group. 
Lastly,  as  lack  of  awareness  is  major  stumbling  block  in  such  initiatives,  it  is 
necessary  to  give  wide  publicity  to  the  concept  of  credit  counselling  and  the  free 
availability  of  such  services.  Effectively  utilizing  the  various  mass  communication 
channels  and  leveraging  information  technology  would  assume  importance  in  this 
context.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Conclusion 
VI. 
I hope the FLCC of Federal Bank would bring “Ashwas” or relief to the common person. The 
bank, based on the experience gained, may like to consider opening more such centres in 
other districts of the State in due course as the benefits of such initiatives flow back to the 
banks.  We  need  to  collectively  strive  to  deepen  and  broaden  the  agenda  for  inclusive 
development; and to ensure that no individual, community or region is denied the opportunity 
to participate in, and benefit from the development process. 
I wish the Trust all the success. 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2009
