Durmuş Yılmaz: Turkey’s economy and the financial crisis  
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at The Society for Economic Dynamics Annual Meeting, Istanbul, 1 July 2009.  
 Distinguished Members of the World Economic Society, Esteemed Guests,  
I would like to welcome all the participants of the annual meeting of the Society for Economic 
Dynamics  to  Istanbul,  the  oldest  metropolis  of  the  world,  which  has  been  elected  as 
European capital of culture for 2010. 
The  global  financial  crisis,  which  has  deeply  depressed  global  economic  activity  and 
rendered  the  effectiveness  of  decision-making  and  supervision  mechanisms  questionable, 
still persists with its direct and indirect effects. Although recent weeks have accommodated 
signals  of  the  diminishing  effect  of  the  crisis  and  the  start  of  recovery;  these  signals  still 
remain weak. While recent data on economic activity indicate that the worst is over, problems 
in credit markets linger, and unemployment figures are still on the rise, suggesting that the 
recovery will be slow and gradual. 
Therefore, I believe that the expectation of “cautious optimism” should prevail not only for the 
Turkish economy, but also for the world economies as a whole. If you ask what is the most 
significant  factor  that  requires  us  to  be  cautious,  it  is  possible  to  answer  in  a  single  word: 
uncertainty. 
Due to growing uncertainty, error margins in forecasts may get wider in the near future. This 
is  because  the  main  reasons  underlying  the  outbreak  of  the  current  financial  crisis  are 
deficiencies and mistakes in the establishment of economic policies along with the fulfillment 
of regulatory and supervisory activities. Nevertheless, we all know that the reconstruction of 
economic  balances  under  normal  conditions  relies  on  the  proper  execution  of  these 
functions. 
Another  factor  leading  to  uncertainty  is  the  enforcement  of  global  financial  and  monetary 
measures  of  a  size,  speed  and  coordination  that  has  never  been  witnessed  before.  This 
raises ambiguity pertaining to the responses to these measures from financial markets and 
economies in the upcoming period. 
In the current conjuncture there is a consensus that the recovery in global economic activity 
will not be anytime soon and what worries the global community is what will follow the crisis. 
The  question  about  mechanisms  to  avert  any  future  global  financial  crisis  similar  to  the 
current one will completely occupy the agenda of academics and policy-makers in the near 
future.  Moreover,  the  extent  and  pace  of  the  reversion  for  financial  measures  and  non-
traditional monetary policy exercises against the financial crisis on the back of stabilization in 
economies will top agenda very soon. 
The global financial crisis has led to a significant slowdown in economic activity in Turkey as 
in other developing countries. A remarkable tightening in lending conditions and a surge in 
interest on loans were experienced during the worst period of the financial crisis. 
The easing of concerns over inflation has allowed the Central Bank of Turkey to focus on 
curbing the potential destruction of the crisis on the Turkish economy without conflicting with 
the primary goal of maintaining price stability. The majority of policy rate cuts to compensate 
the additional tightening in financial conditions was antedated. Subsequent data releases on 
inflation and economic activity have bolstered the credibility of the Central Bank. I would like 
to  underline  the  gradual  decline  in  interest  rates  on  commercial  loans  as  a  positive 
development in this period. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 1
The common denominator of the Central Bank’s policy preferences and the recent choices 
should  also  be  emphasized.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  achieve  and 
maintain price stability and this primary objective does not conflict with any other objective of 
the Bank. The policy stance we have recently adopted clearly reflects this. 
Although recent data releases indicate that the worst may be over, the recovery is expected 
to be protracted given credit market problems and rising unemployment rates. The tightness 
in financial conditions still persist to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of 
the  problems  across  financial  markets  on  the  real  economy  are  ongoing,  suggesting  that 
downside risks still remain. 
Although  downside  risks  are  still  more  significant,  recent  signs  of  partial  recovery  in 
economic activity should not be discarded. Nonetheless, we are of the opinion that most of 
the  recent  increases  in  economic  activity  were  attributable  to  the  short-term  effects  of  the 
global  fiscal  measures  implemented.  There  needs  to  be  a  robust  revival  in  consumer 
demand in order for the increases in the capacity utilization rate to be sustainable over the 
medium  term.  Uncertainties  regarding  aggregate  demand  and  lower  capacity  utilization 
continue to suppress fixed capital investments. The current trend in investment demand is far 
from signaling a robust economic recovery. 
Subsequent to the recent rate cuts and fiscal measures, we anticipate that domestic demand 
in  Turkey  might  gain  relative  stability  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009  and  growth  will  post 
positive  figures  from  the  last  quarter  onwards.  In  other  words,  the  recovery  in  the  Turkish 
economy might start earlier than that of the global economy. Our expectation is underpinned 
by two main factors. 
The first of these is the sound and stable structure of our financial system. The restructuring 
plans  along  with  regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms,  which  were  put  into  effect  in  the 
aftermath of the 2001 financial crisis at the cost of imposing a heavy burden on the public 
budget,  reinforced  the  Turkish  banking  system’s  resilience  to  shocks  compared  to  the 
banking systems of other countries. 
Another factor that will facilitate a relatively faster recovery for the Turkish economy is the 
household indebtedness ratio, which is lower than those of many other emerging economies. 
Households  have  been  affected  relatively  less  by  exchange  rate  shocks  owing  to  the 
significantly low share of FX loans in consumer loans. 
However,  I  would  like  to  underline  once  more  that  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  be 
gradual and slow as opposed to the rapid recovery in economic activity after the 1994 and 
2001 crises experienced in Turkey and that a significant vacceleration in aggregate demand 
is  not  expected  anytime  soon.  Persistent  tightness  in  external  financing  conditions,  the 
lagged and gradual recovery in our primary export markets and the large share of durables 
and capital goods exports, which are sensitive to foreign demand, indicate that recovery in 
the Turkish economy will be different from what we have experienced so far. 
Distinguished Members of the World Economic Society, Esteemed Guests,  
It  is  a  widely  accepted  fact  that  in  modern  economics,  decision-makers  act  rationally  and 
their  decisions  form  a  dynamic  system  in  the  field  of  economy.  While  measuring  the 
efficiency of policies, their response to such policies over time is examined within a dynamic 
framework. 
As  we  can  see  in  the  conference  program,  almost  every  single  topic  in  the  economic 
literature is addressed from a dynamic perspective. We are on the brink of starting a two-day 
conference  during  which  we  will  be  listening  to  pioneer  studies  covering  a  wide  range  of 
topics from game theory to the labor market, from education economics to the functioning of 
the real estate market. There is no doubt that this is an invaluable experience for economists 
to catch up with the global economic agenda and to follow recent developments. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2009
I  would  like  to  thank  everyone,  particularly  Bahçesehir  University  and  Koç  University,  who 
have  contributed  to  the  organization  of  this  conference.  I  hope  that  it  will  be  a  productive 
conference and I would also like to extend my regards to the contributors of this event, to the 
participants and all the guests. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 3
