Mark Carney: Summary Canada’s latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 22 October 2009.  
 Good  morning.  Paul  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which we published this morning. 
• 
Recent  indicators  point  to  the  start  of  a  global  recovery.  Economic  and  financial 
developments  have  been  somewhat  more  favourable  than  we  expected  in  July, 
although significant fragilities remain.  
In Canada, as expected, a recovery in economic activity is also under way, following 
three consecutive quarters of sharp contraction.  
This resumption of growth is supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, increased 
household  wealth,  improving  financial  conditions,  higher  commodity  prices,  and 
stronger business and consumer confidence.  
However,  heightened  volatility  and  persistent  strength  in  the  Canadian  dollar  are 
working to slow growth and subdue inflation pressures. The current strength in the 
dollar is expected, over time, to more than fully offset the favourable developments 
since July.  
Given all these factors, the Bank now projects that, relative to our July Report, the 
composition of aggregate demand will shift further towards final domestic demand 
and away from net exports. We now expect growth to average slightly lower over the 
balance of the projection period.  
The Bank projects that the Canadian economy will contract by 2.4 per cent this year 
and  then  grow  by  3.0  per  cent  in  2010  and  3.3  per  cent  in  2011.  This  projected 
recovery will be somewhat more modest than the average of previous cycles.  
Total CPI inflation declined to a trough of -0.9 per cent in the third quarter, reflecting 
large year-on-year drops in energy prices. Total CPI inflation should rise to 1.0 per 
cent this quarter, while the core rate of inflation is projected to reach its trough of 1.4 
per cent during the same period.  
Owing to the substantial excess supply that has emerged in the economy, the Bank 
expects  both  core  and  total  inflation  to  return  to  the  2  per  cent  target  in  the  third 
quarter of 2011, one quarter later than we projected in July.  
The  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  relate  to  the  possibility  of  a  stronger-than-
anticipated  recovery  in  the  global  economy  and  more  robust  Canadian  domestic 
demand.  
On  the  downside,  a  stronger-than-assumed  Canadian  dollar,  driven  by  global 
portfolio movements out of U.S.-dollar assets, could act as a significant further drag 
on  growth  and  put  additional  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  Another  important 
downside  risk  is  that  the  global  recovery  could  be  even  more  protracted  than 
projected.  
On Tuesday, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target 
for the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of 
June 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.  
The  Bank  retains  considerable  flexibility  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  at  low 
interest rates, consistent with the framework that we outlined in the April MPR.  
           BIS Review 132/2009 
 1
