Axel A Weber: The global economic crisis and the challenges it poses 
Introductory remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the  Morning  Plenary  Session  "The  Global  Economic  Crisis"  of  the  Israeli  Presidential 
Conference 2009, Jerusalem, 22 October 2009. 
 1  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Mr Chairman 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you here  on  the  global  economic  crisis  and  the 
challenges  it  poses.  These  issues  can  be  discussed  from  very  different  angles,  many  of 
which are equally interesting. 
However,  my  perspective  is  that  of  a  central  banker  within  the  Eurosystem  and  I  will 
therefore  focus  on  the  macroeconomic  dimension  of  the  two  main  topics  raised  in  the 
announcement  to  this  plenary  session.  They  are,  broadly  speaking,  a  stock-take  of  the 
economic  environment,  including  the  short-term  outlook,  and  the  long-term  implications  of 
the crisis for economic policy and the science of economics.  
However, I would like to add another point which I regard as a linchpin between these two 
areas. It is the question of how to get from the state we are currently in to a hopefully more 
stable  equilibrium,  in  which  the  lessons  from  the  crisis  have  been  learnt.  The  issues  that 
need to be discussed in this third, medium-term field are, in particular, exit strategies for the 
various  policy  measures  taken  during  the  crisis.  In  my  view,  the  way  we  tackle  these 
challenges  in  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  at  the  level  of  the  IMF  will  be  at  least  as 
important  for  future  growth  as  the  changes  in  the  architecture  of  the  financial  system, 
adjustments to monetary policy or improvements in economic theory. But let me start with the 
state of the world economy. 
Where does the global economy stand? 
2  
The  financial  crisis  caused  very  serious  disruptions  on  the  financial  markets  after  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and  only  far-reaching  interventions  by  governments  and 
central  banks  worldwide  prevented  a  collapse  of  the  whole  financial  system.  Despite  this 
coordinated action, we entered the deepest global recession since the Second World War. 
However,  after  an  economically  devastating  winter  half  year,  we  have  seen  a  remarkable 
stabilisation around the world in recent months. In the euro zone, the decline in GDP almost 
came to a standstill in the second quarter, and a slight increase quarter-on-quarter is likely in 
the  third  quarter.  Germany  even  delivered  a  positive  surprise  in  the second  quarter,  when 
GDP grew  by 0.3% on the quarter; the outlook for the third quarter is even better given a 
rebound in industrial activity and the levelling-out of the de-stocking cycle. 
• 
There are several factors, in the euro zone as well as in other major economies, that 
point to a fairly benign outlook and that make a double-dip recession very unlikely:  
An important part of economic policy stimuli is still in the pipeline for 2010.  
The  improvement  in  confidence,  not  the  least  on  the  financial  markets,  is 
increasingly being supported by hard facts. The task of monetary policy-makers has 
become  a  little  easier  because  deflationary  fears  as  a  result  of  the  massive 
correction on the commodities markets in combination with deteriorating economic 
conditions  have  all  but  disappeared  in  recent  months,  while  inflation  risks  are  still 
very limited or non-existent in the short run.  
 BIS Review 130/2009 
 1
However, forecast risks are still elevated, and there is no reason to be overly optimistic given 
the  fragility  of  the  recovery  and  the  existence  of  important  downside  risks  such  as  a 
foreseeable deterioration in labour market conditions and the second-round effects that the 
crisis  is  likely  to  have  on  bank  balance  sheets  due  to  the  recession.  Although  I  expect  a 
global recovery across the major world regions by 2010, the pace of growth should be much 
more moderate than in the past. In particular, it is not realistic to expect a speedy return to 
pre-crisis trend levels of output. 
On the financial markets, optimism seems to be even more widespread: Market conditions as 
measured  by  stock  prices,  spreads  and  bond  yields  have  improved  significantly  in  recent 
months,  in  fact  even  more  so  than  the  real  economy,  but  the  situation  is  still  fragile  and 
temporary backlashes are likely. This is because the stabilisation is due not only to better-
than-expected macroeconomic developments and a levelling-off of risk aversion, but also to 
unprecedented stabilisation measures by governments and central banks, which cannot be 
maintained forever.  
In  addition,  banks  are  still  exhibiting  some  weaknesses,  and  some  risks  to  corporate 
earnings are going to materialise over the coming months. This, combined with ongoing high 
levels  of  uncertainty  and  volatility  on  financial  markets,  also  make  exuberant  forecasts 
inadvisable. 
Lessons learnt and still to be learnt from the crisis 
3  
Still, it is safe to say that we have overcome the worst. This makes it all the more pressing to 
reach an international agreement on the reforms to be implemented in the financial sector to 
make the whole system more resilient to shocks and less prone to aberrations such as those 
that led to the current crisis. The dire consequences of the crisis have created a sense of 
urgency and a willingness to act that must now be put into action. We owe this to the public 
given  the  immense  cost  the  financial  crisis  has  imposed  on  public  finances  and  future 
generations, who will have to bear part of this burden. 
The  financial  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  banks  remain  the  primary  link  between  the 
financial system and the real economy. While it is true that regulation and oversight have to 
be extended to all systemically important financial institutions, better regulation of banks is 
therefore an even more important building block in a stable financial system. For this reason, 
it  is  essential  to  further  improve  banks’  risk  management  and  to  review  their  capital  and 
liquidity requirements. My co-panelist Baron de Rothschild will probably elaborate on these 
banking-related issues. 
In  addition,  supervision  has  to  be  taken  one  step  further  if  we  want  to  fully  address  the 
causes  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  each 
individual  bank;  instead,  systemic  risk  has  to  be  identified  and  combated.  And  obviously 
central banks must and will play an integral part in this macroprudential supervision.  
What  is  important  to  note  is  that  these  and  other  problems,  such  as  internationally 
comparable accounting standards, can only be resolved at an international level. Fortunately, 
the G20 have made a strong commitment to reaching such solutions. Now we must flesh out 
the general agreement made in Pittsburgh with more detail. Specific implementation is often 
very  intricate  and  requires  careful  analysis,  which  is  why  the  specialists  –  eg  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  regulators  and  legislators  at  the  national  level  – 
need time to formulate the new rules properly and to create a consistent framework. 
Another lesson from the crisis is that global imbalances must be reduced in order to achieve 
sustainable  long-term  growth.  This  has  led  some  to  propose  a  coordination  of  economic 
policies, where countries with current account surpluses actively prop up demand. 
To be frank, I am deeply sceptical about such a  strategy. Even persistent current account 
surpluses  are  not  per  se  an  indication  of  imbalances.  They  require  careful  analysis  to 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2009
determine whether they merely constitute a market outcome, such as a high external saving 
rate  in  an  aging  society,  or  are  due  to  policy  interventions  eg  on  the  foreign  exchange 
markets.  As  long  as  market  adjustment  mechanisms  work,  I  am  not  concerned  with 
rebalancing the sources of growth. Instead of trying to manage global demand, efforts should 
be concentrated on freeing up clogged adjustment channels. The euro area is certainly not at 
the forefront of the debate on impediments to more balanced growth. This is not to say that 
the  necessary  global  adjustment  process  will  not  have  repercussions  on  surplus  countries 
like  Germany.  But  these  processes  –  which  are  currently  going  on  to  a  significant  extent 
(Germany alone will nearly halve its net exports by roughly 80 bn euros) –should also remain 
market-driven.  Fine  tuning  regional  demand  with  pre-crisis  global  growth  rates  as  a 
benchmark will not prove successful in my view. 
From a political economy perspective, it seems that the debate about reigning in imbalances 
through more surveillance and policy coordination risks drawing political commitment away 
from the efforts to reform financial markets I have just outlined. If this were to happen, we 
would have cause to be truly concerned. 
Imminent challenges: exit from the rescue measures 
4  
Finally, I would like to make a few comments on the question of exit strategies. Given the 
macroeconomic outlook, there is surely no need to rush for the exit at the current juncture. 
However,  to  stabilise  expectations  and  to  safeguard  public  confidence  it  is  essential  to 
develop a credible exit framework now. The challenge in terms of communications will be to 
make clear the difference between developing and implementing an exit framework. 
As a central banker, I would like to stress first that maintaining price stability has always been 
and will continue to be the primary objective of monetary policy in the Eurosystem. Hence, 
the  monetary  policy  stance  is  determined  by  risks  to  price  stability,  which  are  fortunately 
currently not present at the policy relevant time horizon. Our non-standard instruments allow 
a flexible exit which takes into account any remaining fragility on financial markets, if needed. 
Therefore, I am fairly confident that monetary policy in the euro area will manage an orderly 
exit.  
Given the enormous rise in public deficits and the strain this will put on future budgets, the 
fiscal exit strategy will have to kick in as soon as the recovery has firmed up, which means 
no later than 2011. Reigning in deficits will require significant improvements in the structural 
balance ratio. Within the European Monetary Union, the Stability and Growth Pact will play 
an essential role in guiding fiscal consolidation. And even after correcting excessive deficits, 
rapid consolidation will have to continue to reach medium-term budgetary objectives and to 
substantially reduce debt ratios from their earlier extraordinarily high levels. 
We must not forget that early and decisive consolidation is not an end in itself: It will help to 
restore  and  maintain  confidence  in  financial  markets,  recreate  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre 
before the next downswing and help to prepare budgets for the foreseeable fiscal burdens 
associated with an aging population. 
Conclusions 
5  
Given  time  restrictions,  I  will  not  raise  the  issue  of  exit  strategies  for  the  IMF  or  for 
government  involvement  in  the  financial  sector.  We  may  discuss  these  in  more  detail 
afterwards, so I will leave it at that for the moment. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 3
