Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Monde 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted by 
Mr Pierre-Antoine Delhommais and Mr Arnaud Leparmentier, 17 November 2009. 
 The euro area economy grew by 0.4% in the third quarter. Is the crisis over?  
After  the  second  quarter  figures,  which  were  still  slightly  negative,  this  positive  growth 
confirms that we have indeed come out of the period of free fall which characterised the six 
months  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  The  figures  confirm  our  baseline 
scenario,  that  of  a  progressive  and  gradual  revival  of  the  economy.  What  we  are  now 
observing  is  more  favourable  than  we  projected  some  months  ago.  That  said,  we  must 
remain cautious. There is still a lot of uncertainty, as much at the global level as at the level 
of the euro area, particularly concerning next year’s growth. We cannot yet claim victory.  
Is there a risk of a relapse, like in 1937 after Roosevelt’s first stimulus plan? 
Uncertainty, as I said, is an important characteristic of the period that we find ourselves in. 
We have observed, in recent past, the eruption of events which were unforeseen in terms of 
their severity.  
We observed also during the six-month period of global economic free fall that the decision-
makers  could  not  rely  on  reliable  analytical  instruments.  In  particular  the  central  bankers 
noted during this period that economic reality was rendering obsolete, week after week, the 
analyses and projections of the most tried and tested models. Throughout this period we had 
to rely mainly on the wisdom and experience of our collegiate decision-making authorities. 
Today we have regained a reasonable level of confidence in our analytical tools. But a great 
deal of uncertainty remains. 
We are seeing differences in growth between the different countries of the euro area, 
for example between France and Germany, which is recovering more quickly. Is this 
not worrying? 
For the Governing Council of the ECB, what matters is the euro area as a whole. It is for this 
area that the Governing Council has responsibility for issuing the single currency; an area 
made up of sixteen countries inhabited by 330 million European citizens. What matters is the 
interest of an entire continent, in the same way as the US Federal Reserve disregards the 
differences  between  Massachusetts,  California  or  Missouri,  which  are  nonetheless 
significant.  The  quantitative  divergences  in  the  euro  area  are  no  different  in  nature  from 
those observed among the different states in the US. Furthermore, one should not read too 
much  into  the  differences  in  quarterly  growth,  but  rather  place  them  in  a  medium-term 
context.  
If  growth  is  back,  shouldn’t  the  exceptional  measures  taken  during  the  crisis  be 
withdrawn?  
We need to acknowledge that the speed, scope and boldness of the decisions taken by the 
central banks, on the one hand, and by the governments and parliaments, on the other, have 
allowed us to avoid a formidable depression. In particular, without this bold and swift reaction 
by central banks, and notably by the ECB as early as 9 August 2007, the systemic liquidity 
crisis would have spread across the industrialised countries, and then across the globe, and 
it would have been grave. I can say the same  thing about the actions taken by the public 
authorities.  
The budgetary positions are much more diverse than one may think. Some countries are in a 
relatively favourable position because their past management was wise and prudent, while 
others are already very close to losing their credibility. However, all countries must have a 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 1
budgetary  strategy  that  is  seen  as  being  credible  in  the  medium  term  by  households, 
businesses and investors. The success of the recovery in Europe rests on the confidence of 
households  and  businesses.  If  they  do  not  have  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances in the medium to long term, they will consume less and invest less. The success of 
the  recovery  in  Europe  depends  on  the  confidence  of  investors  in  the  creditworthiness  of 
sovereign issuers. If this confidence is lacking, investors will require higher market interest 
rates, which would penalise both the public and private sectors of the country concerned. 
Is  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  still  meaningful,  with  deficits  that  are  approaching 
10% of GDP?  
I  have  always  said  that  in  a  single  currency  area  which  is  not  a  political  federation,  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  essential  for  the  stability  of  Monetary  Union.  We  are  living  in 
difficult  times.  It  has  been  necessary  to  take  bold  measures  to  avoid  a  depression.  It  is 
essential to get on a credible path towards fiscal consolidation in 2011 at the latest, as has 
already  been  decided  by  the  European  governments.  We  say  loud  and  clear  to  all  the 
countries concerned: “Follow the Stability and Growth Pact to the letter. Be aware that if you 
are not credible in consolidating public finances in the medium term, you will hamper your 
recovery already from today.” 
You  advocate  policies  of  budgetary  consolidation,  but  at  the  same  time  France  is 
choosing to issue a large bond… 
The government deficit problem is not exclusive to France. It is a crucial topic for almost all 
countries. It is, of course, essential that the “Grand emprunt”/“special national bond” does not 
result  in  new  public  spending  in  the  sense  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  because  the 
situation is already extraordinarily difficult.  
Isn’t  there  a  danger  that  keeping  interest  rates  very  low  for  too  long  will  foster  the 
return of inflation and the creation of new bubbles, as seen after 11 September 2001? 
The Governing Council of the ECB – there are 22 of us, including Christian Noyer, Governor 
of the Banque de France – owes the citizens of the euro area price stability. This is what we 
have done throughout the almost 11 years of the euro. It is the mandate given to us by our 
political  democracies.  It  is  the  promise  made  to  our  330  million  fellow  citizens.  In  order  to 
deliver this, we have stood firm in the face of pressure. There were very vehement calls for 
us to lower our key interest rate at the beginning of 2004, and we refused; there was also 
strong criticism when we increased rates at the end of 2005. In both cases, given what has 
happened  since,  no-one  is  criticising  us  anymore.  I  am  proud  of  the  credibility  of  the 
Governing Council of the ECB with regard to stability. It is this credibility which has enabled 
us to solidly anchor inflation expectations. This has helped us to avoid inflation and, at the 
same time, has also protected us from the materialisation of the risk of deflation during the 
recent crisis period.  
At present, we consider our key rates to be appropriate for the euro area. Furthermore, we 
will  progressively  unwind  what  we  call  our  non-standard  measures:  they  were  designed 
precisely to permit a progressive unwinding when the time comes.  
Is the strength of the euro a threat to the recovery? According to the United States, “a 
strong dollar is in the interests of the United States”. We don’t hear you saying that “a 
strong euro is in the interests of Europe”. Does this asymmetry signify that you do not 
wish the euro to appreciate vis-à-vis the dollar?  
It is indeed important that the US authorities state that a strong dollar is in the interests of the 
United States. I totally agree with this analysis. I would add that I believe that the strength of 
the  dollar  within  the  set  of  convertible  floating  currencies  is  in  the  interests  not  just  of  the 
United States, but of the entire international community. I noted with great interest yesterday 
the comments of my colleague Ben Bernanke at the Economic Club of New York. I quote: 
“The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor these developments closely. We are attentive 
to the implications of changes in the value of the dollar and will continue to formulate policy 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2009
to guard against risks to our dual mandate to foster both maximum employment and price 
stability. Our commitment to our dual objectives, together with the underlying strengths of the 
US  economy,  will  help  ensure  that  the  dollar  is  strong  and  a  source  of  global  financial 
stability”.  This  is  a  very  important  statement  from  my  colleague,  with  whom  I  have  a  very 
good relationship. 
Is the euro set to replace the dollar as a reserve currency? 
The  euro  was  not  created  to  compete  with  the  US  dollar  or  to  replace  the  dollar  as 
international  reserve  currency.  It  was  created  in  order  to  complete  the  single  European 
market and to bring stability and prosperity to Europe. The success of the euro in deepening 
the single market for the past 11 years has been remarkable. Imagine what the single market 
of the United States would be like if there were different currencies in California, Florida and 
New York State. The ECB does not campaign for the international use of the euro. We let 
economic agents and investors make their own decisions.  
Were the root causes of the crisis economic or financial? 
The  trigger  was  clearly  financial.  The  financial  sphere  had  generally  underestimated  the 
risks. More than six months before the crisis erupted in August 2007, I myself, speaking on 
behalf  of  my  colleagues,  the  central  bank  governors,  warned  of  the  probability  of  a  major 
market  correction  owing  to  the  fact  that  risk  was  being  underestimated,  in  terms  of  both 
quantity and price. Given the extremely close links between the financial sphere and the real 
economy, the entire system was potentially unstable, as we have seen. The decision-makers 
at the global level have a fundamental responsibility: we must make the financial economy 
and the real economy at the global level much more resilient and much less vulnerable.  
Is the G20 the starting point for the response? 
In  historical  terms,  the  current  period  is  marked  by  a  very  profound  change  in  global 
governance. The fact that the G20 has become the leading authority for governance at the 
international  level  is  fundamental.  Do  not  forget  that  the  structure  of  the  G20  was  set  up 
following the Asian financial crisis. At that time the industrialised countries considered that if 
a  medium-sized  emerging  country  in  Asia  were  capable  of  triggering  an  extremely  severe 
international crisis, it was essential that all countries that represent a systemic risk should be 
involved  in  some  way  in  global  governance  and  the  reforms  contemplated  by  the  major 
industrialised countries. Now it was the industrialised countries that triggered a very severe 
international crisis. And the emerging countries are entitled to ensure that the industrialised 
nations  are  taking  all  measures  to  make  the  global  system  more  robust,  together  with  the 
emerging economies. There is a kind of reversal of the situation between the industrialised 
countries and the emerging countries.  
The  crisis  has  been  accompanied  by  great  ideological  confusion.  What  is  your 
stance?  
I  have  been  struck  to  see  at  the  global  level  some  degree  of  convergence  among 
economists, in particular concerning their analytical tools. We have seen the spread of new-
Keynesian general equilibrium models which can be interpreted as incorporating part of the 
Keynesian  “lesson”  and  neoclassical  analyses.  In  any  case,  when  one  refers  back  to  the 
seminal texts, it is very striking to see to what extent the major economists went into greater 
depth and were much more problematic than those who came after them! This is true of both 
Keynes and Friedman. And if I had to name two economists today who also provide keys to 
understanding the crisis, I would mention Minsky for his analyses of financial instability and 
Knight for his analyses of “risk” versus “uncertainty”. In any case, during a crisis one must be 
as humble as possible in the face of the reality which is evolving before our eyes and which 
is therefore, by definition, new. We must try to understand as best we can. We must strive to 
carry out research in order to better comprehend these potentially very unstable situations, 
like the one that we have seen, and not only situations that rest on the dynamic equilibrium 
paradigm.  We  must  better  understand  phenomena  of  phase  transition  in  financial  markets 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 3
and in the real economy – for example the transitions seen in August 2007 and September 
2008. 
Is there a risk of further crises?  
It is highly likely that we will be faced with several major shocks over the next few decades, 
and, in any case, there will be a constant need for adaptation in the global economy. Two 
examples: we are living in a period in which considerable strides are being made in the fields 
of  science  and  technology.  These  advances  are  unpredictable:  there  is  no  exact  science 
when it comes to scientific progress, according to Karl Popper. It is inevitable that these new 
technologies  will  transform  production  processes  themselves,  as  well  as  the  international 
division  of  labour.  Furthermore,  it  is  a  basic  fact  that  the  next  50  years  will  see  the  rapid 
economic  development  of  the  emerging  countries  –  large  and  medium-sized,  considering 
that  apart  from  China  and  India,  the  number  of  Asian  emerging  economies  in  the  ASEAN 
equals that of the entire European Union.  
Is it a question of refounding capitalism?  
When I started my career in international economics, there was still an “East” and a “West”, 
and a “North” and a “South”. Today, however, there is a remarkable conceptual unification at 
the  global  level.  Be  it  within  the  G20,  with  ministers  and  governments  or  with  the  central 
bankers  in  Basel,  we  work  on  the  basis  of  one  simple  principle:  namely,  that  a  market 
economy  is  still  the  most  appropriate  means  of  generating  wealth.  The  crisis  has not  only 
highlighted the importance of participating in a market economy, it has thrown it into stark 
relief.  This  is  something  that  has  not  been  challenged  by  the  emerging  countries,  which 
comes as no particular surprise, for example, to those who, like me, knew emerging Asia 30 
years ago and can see Asia today. The results of the introduction of the rules of the market 
economy in Asia are so evident that they are undeniable.  
At the same time, however, these same countries and the entire international community are 
saying that it is unacceptable to have a global market economy that is so lacking in strength, 
soundness and resilience. We need to systematically draw all the lessons we can from the 
current crisis – without exception and without taboos. In essence, I do not believe that our 
democracies would again jump to the aid of the financial and the real economy in the same 
way  that  they  have  this  time.  We  are  compelled  by  our  democracies  to  be  successful  in 
significantly improving the stability of the international economy.  
The public is shocked by banks’ return to profits, a situation sometimes compounded 
by behaviour deemed irresponsible or arrogant...  
I would say that those, particularly in the financial sector, who believe that the economy has 
picked  up  where  it  left  off,  as  though  nothing  has  happened,  are  deeply  mistaken.  If  the 
financial  system  is  functioning  again  today,  it  is  precisely  because  both  central  banks  and 
governments provided a considerable amount of support. From both sides of the Atlantic, a 
total amounting to between 25% and 30% of GDP has been made available at the taxpayer’s 
risk.  It  is  irresponsible  to  think  that  the  recovery  of  the  financial  sector  has  happened 
naturally. Bankers in Europe and the world over must behave responsibly, do their job, which 
is to finance the real economy, and work resolutely to establish a financial system that is a lot 
more stable.  
4 
 BIS Review 145/2009
2009 looks like being a record year for bonus payouts … 
What  matters  here  is  having  sensible  regulations  that  are  the  same  throughout  the  world, 
otherwise  we  will  witness  a  concurrent  shifting  of  jobs  and  risk-taking  activities  to  regions 
where  there  is  less  pressure.  The  regulations  that  were  drafted  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Council  and  adopted  by  the  G20  must  be  followed  to  the  letter  the  world  over,  under  the 
supervision of the prudential authorities. Moreover, I firmly believe that there is a problem of 
values in our societies. Some sectors of the economy and of society consider normal certain 
behaviours  that  do  not  fall  within  the  limits  of  acceptability  established  by  our  political 
democracies.  This  is  a  serious  flaw.  Some  things  cannot  depend  solely  on  legislation, 
controls, regulation and supervision. In addition to the regulations, there has to be an ethical 
convergence of the values governing behaviours in the large democracies. 
The  number  of  tax  havens  identified  by  the  OECD  is  falling  every  day,  as 
Liechtenstein,  Monaco  and  others  are  removed  from  its  “grey  list”.  Is  this  a  real 
success for the G20 or are we deluding ourselves? 
There  is  often  a  degree  of  confusion  concerning  the  use  of  the  term  “tax  haven”.  Since 
national tax systems vary and levels of government expenditure vary, many countries have 
lower  tax  pressures  than,  for  example,  France.  We  are  committed  to  combating  those 
situations in which countries refuse to cooperate in the campaign against “illegal money” – 
this includes tax fraud, money from criminal activities and organised crime, drug money and 
money for financing terrorism. The OECD has undertaken considerable work in this area and 
much progress has been made. 
What are your personal impressions after six years as President of the ECB?  
What  I  find  most  impressive  is  how  the  euro  has  gradually  proved  its  worth.  When  I  was 
negotiating  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  international  community  was  deeply  sceptical; 
sceptical not only about whether it was possible to have a credible currency but even about 
the possibility of creating the single currency. Today, the credibility of the euro is undisputed. 
Equally  remarkable  has  been  the  performance  of  the  Executive  Board,  the  Governing 
Council and Europe’s entire monetary team during these past years of crisis. We all kept our 
wits about us before and during the crisis. We made bold decisions swiftly, sometimes more 
swiftly than others, while maintaining our credibility in terms of medium-term price stability in 
line with our definition (less than, but close to, 2%) in the service of our 330 million fellow 
citizens. And I would say in the service of the confidence in the future that our fellow citizens 
can have. They know that they can count on us at all times. 
BIS Review 145/2009 
 5
