Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Legal issues in the Islamic financial services industry 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 4th IFSB 
Seminar  on  Legal  Issues  in  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Industry,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
28 September 2009. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  speak  at  this  4th  IFSB  Seminar  on  Legal  Issues  in  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Industry  that  has  brought  together  so  many  international  experts  and 
industry practitioners to discuss legal issues in Islamic Finance. Such dialogue is important to 
achieving  a  common  understanding  and  solutions  to  issues  in  Islamic  finance,  thus 
contributing to its overall development.  
Islamic finance has continued to expand and demonstrate its resilience in the current more 
challenging international financial environment. This advancement has been in terms of the 
increased range of Islamic financial products and services, the development of the Islamic 
financial infrastructure and institutions, the greater maturity of the Islamic financial markets 
and the more comprehensive supporting legal and regulatory framework. More recently, the 
international dimension of Islamic finance has gained significance with the move to further 
liberalise domestic Islamic financial system and the strengthening of the international Islamic 
financial architecture.  
In  Malaysia,  Islamic  banking  assets  at  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  now 
constitutes  close  to  19%  of  total  banking  assets.  Total  financing  now  amounts  to  RM118 
billion and accounts for 20.1% of the total financing portfolio of the banking industry. Net non-
performing  financing  remains  low  at  2.4%.  Islamic  securities  has  also  maintained  its 
dominance  in  the  Malaysian  bond  market,  accounting  for  58%  of  total  bond  market.  And 
almost two thirds of the equity market comprises Shariah compliant securities. Growth has 
also  been  experienced  in  the  takaful  sector  in  which  the  funds  asset  has  registered  an 
increase  by  8.2%.  This  recent  decade  has  also  seen  the  increase  in  number  of  Islamic 
financial  institutions  including  full-fledged  Islamic  banks,  development  financial  institutions 
that engage in Islamic banking, takaful, re-takaful and capital market intermediaries. Several 
of these players have strategic partnerships with foreign players. In April this year, as part of 
the  liberalization  initiatives  announced,  new  mega  Islamic  banking  licenses  and  up  to  two 
family takaful licenses will be issued this year. On the global front, Islamic financial assets 
are projected to grow to USD1.6 trillion by 2012 while the global sukuk outstanding valued 
to date at approximately USD152.8 billion.  
In  the  third  series  of  this  seminar  in  2007,  the  vital  role  of  a  strong  legal  and  Shariah 
framework in the sustainable development of Islamic finance was extensively discussed. It is 
key to providing certainty and predictability to financial transactions. The current international 
financial crisis has demonstrated the importance of recognizing that the rapid transformation 
of the functioning of the international financial system had to be accompanied by the need to 
ensure  that  regulatory  and  legal  framework  was  aligned  with  these  developments.  The 
relevance  of  legal  framework  is  essential  to  providing  certainty  and  predictability  to  the 
financial transactions and to the innovative products, thus promoting public confidence in the 
financial system. This is equally important for the Islamic financial services industry in which 
this recent decade has seen a rapid evolution in terms of the innovation and in terms of its 
expansion.  
Indeed, a robust legal framework in Islamic finance instills public confidence in the Islamic 
financial system, provides an enabling platform for practitioners to develop more innovative 
and complex financial products to meet the increasingly multifaceted consumer demands. In 
addition, it provides the mechanism for dispute settlement that takes into account the distinct 
features of Islamic financial transactions. This is where the legal services industry has a vital 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 1
role in providing sound legal solutions in Islamic finance. It therefore provides an important 
"bridge"  between  Shariah  and  legal  parameters,  thus  enabling  the  operationalisation  of 
Shariah principles into legally enforceable Islamic finance practices. In addition, by ensuring 
that the legal parameters are in compliance with Shariah parameters and the regulations, it 
also becomes a risk mitigator. 
The legal aspects in Islamic finance represents an important "bridge" between the governing 
Shariah principles and the practice of Islamic finance. The application of Shariah principles in 
the  light  of  the  governing  laws  and  regulations  in  each  Islamic  financial  transaction  are 
interpreted  through  legal  advice,  in  legal  documentation  of  the  financial  transactions,  and 
dealing  with  disputes.  In  documenting  financial  transactions  based  on  specific  Shariah 
principles  that  underlie  a  financial  product,  the  legal  documentation  reflects  the  tenets  of 
Shariah and that it is in full compliance with the laws and regulations governing the financial 
transactions. Varying interpretations of Shariah in particular between countries adds to the 
complexity when cross-border transactions are involved.  
From a domestic perspective, more jurisdictions are considering a central Shariah Council as 
the ultimate decision making body on Shariah matters. Across jurisdictions, there has been 
greater engagement thus bringing about increased convergence. Mutual recognition of the 
interpretation of Shariah principles across countries will contribute to the sustained growth of 
Islamic finance.  
To  promote  consistent  application  of  Islamic  financial  contracts  in  Malaysia,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  has  issued  "Shariah  Parameters"  aimed  at  promulgating  a  standard  point  of 
reference  on  Shariah  for  Islamic  finance  practitioners.  The  Shariah  Parameters  outline  the 
main Shariah requirements in the contracts and provides examples, methods and models for 
practical application of such contracts. The first Shariah Parameter on Murabahah that was 
recently issued aimed to promote consistent interpretation and application of Shariah views 
and opinions on Murabahah contracts.  
In  providing  legal  services,  the  industry  has  an  important  role  of  bridging  the  Shariah 
parameter  with  the  legal  parameters  of  the  Islamic  financial  contracts.  This  is  in  particular 
important in preparing the legal documentation of Islamic financial transactions so as to avoid 
ambiguity, inconsistency and to avoid the risk that the legal document be considered void by 
a court of law on the grounds of contravention with Shariah.  
Islamic  financial  transactions  have  their  own  unique  risk  characteristics  that  need  to  be 
managed. Risk areas that are unique to Islamic finance transactions include the legal risk of 
losses  due  in  the  event  of  lawsuits  and  non-compliance  with  relevant  laws,  the  risks 
associated  with  non-compliance  of  Shariah  principles  and  the  fiduciary  risk  arising  from 
failure  to  perform  contractual  obligations  based  on  the  underlying  Shariah  principles.  The 
introduction  of  new,  more  innovative  and  complex  products  and  financial  transactions 
enables  the  disaggregation  and  repackaging  of  risks  in  ways  that  has  not  been  explored. 
Shariah  advisors  would  require  the  collective  expertise  including  legal  practitioners,  to 
identify and understand the permissibility of a given structure. Islamic financial institutions in 
turn would need to address the attendant implications. 
In  view  of  the  importance  for  Islamic  finance  to  be  supported  by  a  robust  legislative 
framework, the new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 explicitly codifies the duality of the 
Malaysian  financial  system  which  shall  consist  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  and  the 
conventional financial system. This statement of law is supported by a comprehensive legal 
framework  already  put  in  place  for  the  regulation  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia, 
encompassing the banking, takaful (Islamic insurance) and Islamic capital market industries. 
The  legal  recognition  of  the  distinct  features  of  Islamic  financial  transactions  and  the 
availability of a dispute settlement mechanism capable of applying these distinctive features 
reduces the legal risks as well as risk of non-compliance with Shariah principles.  
Institutional structure that is determined by the legal and administrative framework is the first 
pillar  of  competitiveness.  The  ability  to  execute  financial  transactions  efficiently,  with 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2009
sufficient  certainty  and  enforceability,  and  a  clear  process  for  resolving  ambiguities  and 
possible breaches of the contract will enhance competitiveness, both at the institutional level 
as  well  as  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  Malaysia,  Islamic  finance  disputes  are 
adjudicated  in  civil  courts  and  not  the  Shariah  courts  where  the  jurisdiction  is  limited  to 
matters relating to Muslim individuals. If the dispute concerns a point on the ascertainment of 
Shariah,  the  courts  and  arbitrators  are  required  to  refer  to  the  Shariah  Council  at  Bank 
Negara Malaysia to facilitate the ruling. The Shariah Council’s authority is the ultimate body 
responsible for Shariah in banking and financial matters that is within the purview of Bank 
Negara  Malaysia.  This  referral  system  provides  an  enabling  platform  for  preserving 
consistency  and  predictability  in  interpretation  and  application  of  Shariah  principles  for 
financial transaction in Malaysia. 
Concluding remarks 
Allow me to now conclude my remarks. The inherent strengths of Islamic finance amid the 
global financial crisis has heightened interest in Islamic finance across the world. The level of 
innovation,  scale  and  complexity  of  Islamic  financial  transactions  is  also  increasing  at  a 
tremendous pace. Going forward, it is envisaged that the legal services in Islamic finance will 
become  even  more  significant  in  the  continued  advancement  and  efficiency  of  Islamic 
finance.  
In this regard, your thought leadership in addressing the legal issues embedded in Islamic 
finance  holds  important  element  in  the  continued  growth  of  the  Islamic  financial  services 
industry.  Here,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board for organizing this timely seminar. I trust it will continue to be a constructive 
platform  for  the  legal  and  industry  practitioners  to  deliberate  on  effective  and  pragmatic 
solutions to the legal issues in Islamic finance. On this note, I wish all of you a productive and 
successful seminar. 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 3
