José De Gregorio: Autonomy of the Central Bank of Chile, 20 years on 
Presentation  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
commemoration  of  the  20  years  of  autonomy  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  organised  by 
ICARE, Santiago, 29 October 2009. 
I thank Luis Felipe Céspedes and Jorge Restrepo for valuable comments and ideas in preparing this presentation. 
 The autonomy of the Central Bank of Chile is enshrined in the Constitution, specifically in the 
Basic  Constitutional  Act  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  enacted  in  October  1989  that 
constituted a fundamental change for the functioning of the Chilean economy. 
The  Law  stipulates  that  the  Central  Bank  is  an  autonomous  entity,  of  a  technical  nature, 
created in accordance with constitutional provisions, with full legal capacity, the full owner of 
its  assets  and  of  indefinite  duration.  Its  third  article  states  that  “the  Bank  shall  have  as  its 
purposes to look after the stability of the currency and the normal functioning of internal and 
external  payments.”  It  then  adds  that  “the  authority  of  the  Bank,  for  these  purposes,  shall 
include regulating the amount of currency and credit in circulation, the performance of credit 
transactions  and  foreign  exchange,  as  well  as  the  issuance  of  regulatory  provisions 
regarding monetary, credit, financing and foreign exchange matters.”  
In addition, it establishes that “no public expenditure or credit of any nature may be financed 
either  directly  or  indirectly  with  loans  granted  by  the  Bank.”  Finally,  article  six  states  that 
“when  passing  its  resolutions,  the  Board  shall  consider  the  general  orientation  of  the 
Government’s economic policies.” 
This is a clear mandate for the Central Bank of Chile, by which it establishes instruments and 
mechanisms  for  the  designation  and  removal  of  Board  members,  as  well  as  vehicles  for 
coordination with the Executive. 
In  addition,  its  autonomy  is  further  reinforced  and  legitimated  through  the  achievement  of 
said objectives and by the Bank’s communication and transparency policy, whose effects go 
far beyond the provisions in the law regarding the obligation to inform about its decisions.  
In this presentation I will address some of the main elements concerning the autonomy of 
central banks, as well as an evaluation of the principal accomplishments of the past twenty 
years.  
The reasons for pursuing autonomy 
High inflation is costly for society because it is associated with higher price volatility, which 
distorts resource allocation. Erroneous price signals lead to mistaken investment decisions, 
that is, to a less efficient use of resources, which reduces the economy’s productive capacity 
and, ultimately, its growth. 
There  is  abundant  evidence  of  the  harmful  effects  of  inflation  on  long-term  growth  (Barro, 
1995; De Gregorio, 1995). 
But, why does inflation tend to be higher when the central bank is not autonomous?  
To begin with, there is a need for public expenditure financing. There are various reasons 
why there is always pressure to increase public spending. Many of them are well-known and 
it is beyond the purpose of this presentation to discuss them. The truth that this tendency to 
raise public spending combined with the fact that the inflation tax is easy to collect, creates a 
natural pressure towards higher inflation. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 1
Numerous  episodes  where  fiscal  objectives  have  dominated  price  stability  goals  have 
resulted in significant inflationary spirals, which are very costly for society. This fact is well-
known in Chile and in the rest of our region.  
A  second  element  behind  the  inflationary  bias  has  to  do  with  the  so-called  dynamic 
inconsistency  problem.  In  parallel  with  the  tendency  of  the  government  to  increase  public 
spending comes the incentive to boost economic activity above sustainable levels. There are 
several reasons for this to occur. Potential market failures may result in a less than socially 
optimal  output  level,  or  political  cycle  motives  can  lead  the  central  bank  to  try  to  boost 
economic activity beyond the level believed to be sustainable in the medium term. How can 
the government (the central bank) generate a higher output level? By surprising economic 
agents  with  a  higher  than  expected  inflation  rate.  The  inflationary  surprise  increases 
aggregate demand and output. 
However the public fully understands this situation, so the final result will be higher inflation 
and  output  at  the  same  level  as  it  would  have  reached  without  the  inflationary  surprise. 
Inflation  cannot  generate  permanent  increases  in  output.  In  other  words,  more  inflation  is 
created but not more activity, which reduces welfare.  
Granting  autonomy  to  the  monetary  authority  has  been  a  way  to  establish  a  credible 
commitment with price stability while, at the same time, allowing it to implement a monetary 
policy that helps to smooth the business cycle.  
To the extent that the central bank is independent of the government’s financing needs, the 
inflationary bias that is attributable to financing a recurring public deficit will be eliminated.  
In  addition,  increasing  the  horizon  of  a  central  bank,  which  is  related  to  greater 
independence,  reduces  the  dynamic  inconsistency  problem  because  its  interaction  with 
economic agents is repeated over time. Within this context, the central bank’s reputation acts 
as a self-regulating mechanism for its behavior. Therefore, the longer the planning horizon of 
the  central  bank,  the  greater  the  probability  of  it  implementing  efficient  policies.  This 
significantly strengthens the capacity of the central bank to deal with external shocks.  
For an open economy like Chile, the credibility of its central bank can have important effects 
on competitiveness. A credible central bank, where inflation expectations are anchored, will 
experience a smaller pass-through coefficient from the exchange rate to inflation. This allows 
the  central  bank  to  respond  with  more  flexibility  to  shocks  requiring  a  real  exchange  rate 
depreciation. 
To summarize, if there is confidence in the central bank’s anti-inflationary commitment, the 
central bank can react more flexibly to various shocks and, in this way, minimize deviations 
of output from its potential level. 
The  central  bank  can  smooth  the  business  cycle  while  preserving  price  stability.  The  key 
element in this strategy is the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to price stability, 
for which communication and transparency are crucial. 
Autonomy and transparency 
Autonomy means that the State delegates to the central bank the administration of monetary 
policy, such that it be applied using technical criteria and with a medium-term horizon. Here 
is the first reason why central banks must be transparent: to preserve the legitimacy that an 
autonomous institution must have in a democratic regime, particularly one whose decisions 
have important implications on the nation’s well-being. Autonomous institutions must properly 
inform the country of their actions. 
In  Chile,  the  delivery  of  information  is  determined  in  the  Basic  Constitutional  Act,  which 
establishes that, once a year, the Bank must inform the President of the Republic and the 
Senate about the general policies and regulations it dictates in exercising its mandate. This is 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2009
done  every  September,  when  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  presents  its  Monetary  Policy 
Report (IPoM) before the full Senate. Nonetheless, the Bank has substantially enlarged its 
information disclosure function, taking important steps forward during this year. First, since 
March, the background minutes prepared by the Research Department are published on our 
website  the  day  before  the  monetary  policy  meeting.  This  way,  the  public  has  the  same 
background  information  as  the  Board  does  when  making  its  monthly  monetary  policy 
decisions.  Also,  the  Board  announced  that,  as  of  next  December,  it  will  increase  the 
frequency of the IPoM from three to four issues per year. 
Additionally, the Bank publishes the Financial Stability Report twice a year, in December and 
June, and publishes its yearly account on the administration of international reserves once a 
year as part of its Annual Report. 
But this is not enough. Legitimacy is strengthened through direct, open, and non-exclusive 
communication with the general public and, for that reason, the aforementioned documents 
are uploaded onto our website at the same time as they are being presented. In addition, the 
Bank  issues  other  reports,  communiqués,  minutes,  specialized  studies  and  statistical 
publications,  all  of  which  are  available  to  the  public.  These  are  complemented  by 
presentations by Board members or staff, which are also uploaded to the website. 
The times when central banks’ operations were complex and indecipherable are being left 
behind.  It  is  our  objective  –  although  it  is  difficult  to  accomplish  –  that  the  community 
understands our work, which is to provide the public good of stability that allows the country 
to  progress,  and  is  not  an  operation  carried  out  by  technocrats  with  incomprehensible 
criteria. 
There is another important reason why central banks need to be transparent: the efficacy of 
monetary policy. In the past few years, advances have been made towards consensus that a 
more  predictable  monetary  policy  is  better,  without  itself  being  a  source  of  noise  and 
instability.  To  that  end,  it  is  necessary  to  properly  communicate  our  vision  of  the  way  the 
economy works and how monetary policy decisions affect inflation. 
Results 
During  the  1990s  there  was  a  substantial  increase  in  the  number  of  autonomous  central 
banks; many countries enacted legal reforms favoring central bank independence (table 1).  
The  evidence  shows  that  the  increase  in  central  bank  independence  has  been  associated 
with  a  reduction  in  inflation  (Figure  1).  This  is  valid  for  both  developing  and  advanced 
economies, and confirms the findings of a large body of research that includes more rigorous 
statistical analysis to verify the robustness of the partial correlations. Also, higher degrees of 
independence have helped to reduce inflation volatility. Therefore, autonomy is the adequate 
strategy  to  correct  the  inflationary  bias.  In  summary,  the  evidence  indicates  that  higher 
degrees of independence are associated with lower, more stable inflation and, hence, with 
increased growth. 
In Chile, over the twenty years of central bank autonomy, inflation has averaged 7.5% per 
year.  In  the  last  decade,  where  inflation  has  been  3.2%  on  average,  output  volatility  has 
dropped markedly with respect to previous decades (Figure 2). These results suggest that 
the conduct of monetary policy by an autonomous central bank has had a first-order effect on 
our macroeconomic performance.  
As for the inflationary process, the research findings are encouraging. The greater credibility 
of  the  Central  Bank  regarding  its  inflationary  objective,  which  is  confirmed  directly  in  the 
market’s  inflationary  expectations  two  years  ahead,  has  reduced  the  well-known  tradeoff 
between inflation and growth.  
The  evidence  shows  that  today  inflation  is  better  anchored  in  future  inflation  expectations. 
Inflation looks less to the past and more to the target. This means that when shocks hit the 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 3
economy,  the  adjustments  entail  a  smaller  stabilization  cost  and,  therefore,  more  output 
stability, without jeopardizing the inflationary objective (Céspedes and Soto, 2007). 
Proof of the importance of the central bank’s autonomy and the associated gain in credibility 
has to do with the capacity to implement countercyclical policies. 
The stabilizing actions of an autonomous central bank allow it to confront negative shocks 
without  sacrificing  credibility.  A  good  example  is  the  recent  Chilean  experience.  The 
substantial injection of liquidity and the subsequent sharp cut in interest rates as a response 
to  the  international  financial  crisis  of  September  2008  occurred  within  a  context  where 
inflation expectations over the policy horizon remained in line with the inflation target.  
The  empirical  literature  on  the  Chilean  case  provides  evidence  of  a  negative  correlation 
between the pass-through coefficient of nominal depreciations to inflation and the credibility 
of  the  Central  Bank.  Said  credibility  is  fundamental  to  allowing  the  real  exchange  rate  to 
contribute in the adjustments of the economy. 
As for recent developments, the evidence shows that more autonomous central banks have 
implemented more aggressive monetary expansions (Figure 3).  
Conclusions 
Twenty years into the era of autonomy of the Central Bank of Chile, we can say that it has 
succeeded and it is consolidated.  
There  remain  challenges  ahead.  The  evolution  of  the  economy  in  the  past  few  years  has 
raised issues that need to be further analyzed to improve the policy framework.  
An objective look at reality – acknowledging the personal conflicts of interests I have in acting 
as  an  independent  referee  –  shows  that  our  country’s  current  monetary  policy  has 
succeeded as never before. 
The business cycle has been smoothed and low inflation has been consolidated. Inflationary 
expectations have stabilized and it is possible to implement a truly countercyclical monetary 
policy. Of great support has been the accountable and predictable fiscal policy. 
The  successes  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  owe  to  the  work  of  many  people.  Many 
from outside the Bank have stressed the importance of its autonomy and its macroeconomic 
achievements,  and  have  also  made  strong  contributions  to  improving  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. This enables the consolidation of the institution. 
Many from within the Central Bank have contributed decisively as well. Former Governors, 
former and  current Board members, as well as a great contingent of excellent economists 
and professionals have contributed to the design of monetary policy, a better understanding 
of our economy, and to administering an institution to which the country has entrusted great 
responsibility and to which we have an enormous obligation of excellence. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2009
Table 1
Evolution of the central banks' autonomy index and inflation (*)
I. Late 1980s
Economies
Advanced
Emerging
Developing
II. 2003
Average inflation 
(1989)
Autonomy index
Political
Economic
Total
5.3%
18.6%
22.5%
0.39
0.27
0.27
0.59
0.38
0.45
Average inflation 
(1989)
Autonomy index
Political
Economies
0.81
Advanced
0.75
Emerging
Developing
0.67
(*) Countries with annual inflation above 100% were deleted from the sample.
Sources: Arnone et al. (2007) and IMF.
2.1%
7.0%
8.4%
0.74
0.47
0.29
Economic
Total
0.48
0.32
0.35
0.77
0.61
0.48
 Figure 1
Drop in inflation and change in the autonomy of the central banks*
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
f
n
i
 
n
i
 
p
o
r
d
 
%
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-0.9
-1.1
Change in independence index 
(*) Drop in inflation corresponds to the percent variation of average inflation between 
periods 1980-1989 and 2000-2008. Change in the independence index corresponds to 
the change in Arnone et al.(2007)'s autonomy index between the late 1980s and 2003. 
Sources: IMF and Arnone et al. (2007)
BIS Review 156/2009 
  5
Figure 2
Growth volatility in Chile, 1911-2010 (*)
(Standard deviation of the growth rate)
18%
15%
12%
9%
6%
3%
0%
15.0%
11.5% 12.0%
7.3%
5.1%
2.9%
7.5%
6.9%
3.6%
2.2%
1911-
1920
1921-
1930
1931-
1940
1941-
1950
1951-
1960
1961-
1970
1971-
1980
1981-
1990
1991-
2000 
2001-
2010
(*) 2009-2010 based on the IPoM of September 2009.
Source: Central Bank of Chile. 
 Figure 3
Percentage drop in the MPR between September 2008 and September 
2009 and Central Bank independence
 
-
 
8
0
0
2
.
9
0
(
 
R
P
M
 
n
i
 
p
o
r
d
 
 )
9
0
0
2
 9
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
CBC independent index (Arnone et al., 2007)
Sources: Arnone et al. (2007) and Bloomberg.
1.0
 6 
 BIS Review 156/2009
References 
Arnone, M., B.J. Laurens, J.F. Segalotto, and M. Sommer (2007), “Central Bank Autonomy: 
Lessons from Global Trends,” Working Paper 07/88, International Monetary Fund. 
Barro, R. (1995), “Inflation and Economic Growth,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 35, 
pp. 166–176. 
Céspedes, L.F. and C. Soto (2007), “Credibility and Inflation Targeting in Chile,” in F. Mishkin 
and  K.  Schmidt-Hebbel,  eds.,  Monetary  Policy  under  Inflation  Targeting,  Vol.  XI,  Central 
Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policy series, Central Bank of Chile. 
De Gregorio, J. (1995), “Inflación, Crecimiento y los Bancos Centrales: Teoría y Evidencia,” 
in  M.  Aparacio  and  W.  Easterly,  eds.,  Crecimiento  Económico,  Teoría,  Instituciones  y 
Experiencia Internacional, World Bank and Banco de la República de Colombia. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 7
