Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 30 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am honored today to have an opportunity to speak and to exchange views with business 
leaders from the Chubu region. I take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude for your 
cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s Nagoya Branch. 
The last time I addressed you was in the beginning of September 2008. Immediately after 
that in mid-September, Lehman Brothers failed and a financial crisis broke out in the United 
States  and  Europe.  Triggered  by  that  event,  the  global  economy  deteriorated  rapidly  and 
simultaneously  and  economic  activity  in  Japan  deteriorated  substantially,  but  mainly  as  a 
result of various policy measures by the governments and central banks around the world 
and progress in inventory adjustments, the economies both at home and abroad have started 
to pick up. 
However,  the  outlook  remains  uncertain,  and  many  challenges  remain  for  the  global 
economy to shift to a sustainable growth path. Today, before exchanging views with you, I 
will first explain the economic developments and outlook at home and abroad as well as the 
thinking on the Bank of Japan’s conduct of policy. 
Developments in the global economy 
I. 
I will start with the global economy. While many factors were pointed out to be in the back of 
a sharp deterioration in the global economy since the autumn of last year, I summarize those 
based on the following two factors. 
First,  the  global  accumulation  of  excesses  up  to  the  mid-2000s  and  balance-sheet 
adjustments that occurred in the process of unwinding those excesses. Up to the mid-2000s, 
the global economy had enjoyed, in retrospect, extremely benign conditions of high growth, 
low  inflation  rates,  and  low  interest  rates  for  a  long  period.  In  such  an  environment,  the 
housing investment boom in the U.S. and European economies and the global increase in 
demand for durable consumer goods occurred. On the financial front, a rapid expansion in 
credit,  as  represented  by  the  subprime  mortgage  problem,  and  a  surge  in  leverage  took 
place.  While  various  excesses  in  economic  and  financial  activities  piled  up  during  such  a 
process, the excesses could not last for a long time. The essence of what we see now mainly 
in the United States and Europe is the process of solving the problems such as households’ 
excess debts, firms’ excess production capacity, and financial institutions’ impaired assets. 
That is, the process of restoring and adjusting balance sheets. During the process, economic 
entities will restrain spending activity and downward pressure would be persistently exerted 
on the global economy, especially the advanced economies. 
Second, the panicked financial contraction triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers and 
the  ensuing  plunge  in  economic  activity.  The  financial  intermediary  function  deteriorated 
significantly  around  the  world  and  the  funds  necessary  for  economic  activity  were  not 
provided sufficiently, causing a rapid contraction of economic activity not only in the United 
States and Europe, but also in the emerging countries. 
Following such a severe economic downturn, the global economy started to level out around 
this spring, but the developments thereafter vary among the regions. The projections of the 
International  Monetary  Fund  showed  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  would 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 1
increase  by  four  percentage  points,  to  3.1  percent  in  2010  from  –1.1  percent  in  2009. 
Something  striking  is  that  the  contribution  of  emerging  economies  to  the  growth  of  global 
economy  in  2010  became  larger  than  that  of  advanced  economies,  with  the  advanced 
economies accounting for 30 percent and emerging economies accounting for 70 percent. 
In the United States and Europe, while the panicked contraction of economic and financial 
activity  settled  down  mainly  due  to  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity  by  the  central  banks, 
public  capital  injections  to  financial  institutions,  and  large-scale  fiscal  expenditure,  chronic 
downward  pressure  on  the  economy  is  likely  to  continue  in  the  form  of  balance-sheet 
adjustments.  Therefore,  although  the  economies  are  picking  up,  the  pace  of  recovery  is 
generally moderate. 
In emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the underlying trend of domestic demand 
in many of them is generally strong, reflecting the buoyant consumption associated with an 
improvement  in  the  standard  of  living  and  the  need  for  improving  social  infrastructure. 
Moreover, as emerging  economies, unlike the U.S. and European economies, do not face 
large-scale  balance-sheet  adjustments,  the  increase  in  fiscal  expenditure  has  led  to  high 
multiplier effects in stimulating domestic demand. In addition, the funds raised in advanced 
economies,  where  interest  rates  have  remained  low,  have  been  flowing  into  emerging 
economies and has bolstered growth through, for example, an increase in bank lending and 
a rise in asset prices. However, the developments in those countries and regions have not 
been  even.  Careful  monitoring  is  warranted  according  to  the  respective  countries’  specific 
situations including the effects of the financial crisis to date, the developments in the outflow 
and inflow of funds between advanced economies, and conduct of macroeconomic policy. 
Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
II. 
Based  on  the  state  of  the  global  economy  I  have  just  mentioned,  I  will  next  explain  the 
current state of and the outlook for Japan’s economy. 
After the autumn of 2008, against a backdrop of the economic downturn in the United States 
and  Europe,  Japan’s  exports  and  production  plunged,  and  Japan’s  economy  suffered  an 
unprecedented  large  fall.  From  the  spring  of  2009,  Japan’s  exports  and  production  have 
been increasing due to the progress in inventory adjustments at home and abroad as well as 
the  effects  of  economic  stimulus  measures.  Moreover,  thanks  to  the  increase  in  public 
investment and recovery in private consumption, the flash estimate of Japan’s real GDP in 
the  July–September  quarter  increased  by  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  growth  rate  of 
4.8  percent,  which  was  an  increase  for  the  second  consecutive  quarter.  The  increase  in 
private demand was deemed being largely supported by various policy measures. Therefore, 
the Bank of Japan judges that the momentum for self-sustaining recovery in private demand 
remains weak while Japan’s economy is picking up. 
As for the outlook, the pace of improvement in Japan’s economy is likely to remain moderate 
until around the middle of fiscal 2010, as pressures for adjusting employment and wages are 
likely to remain. It is always a difficult task in terms of communication to decide what words 
are the most appropriate to express the current state and outlook for the economy in a short 
phrase.  The  expression  I  have  just  mentioned,  “moderate  improvement,”  is  used  to  also 
convey cautious judgments that, while the economy has gotten out of a deteriorating phase, 
the level of economic activity remains low and the pace of future recovery will not likely to be 
smooth. In fact, it cannot be denied that there is a possibility that the momentum for Japan’s 
economic  recovery  will  temporarily  slow  at  around  the  spring  of  2010,  when  the  effects  of 
economic stimulus measures will wane at home and abroad. 
Having said that, given that the advanced economies including Japan are firmly keeping a 
stance to support the economy and the growth of emerging economies is robust, a possibility 
that  the  momentum  for  economic  recovery  at  home  and  abroad  will  stall  seems  not  so 
significant.  Thereafter,  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2010  onward,  it  is  likely  that  the 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2009
improvements in the corporate sector originating from exports will spill over to the household 
sector and the growth rate of Japan’s economy will start to rise gradually. While the outlook 
for the global economy, which lies behind such a view, is basically similar with that of other 
central banks in advanced economies and not the Bank’s unique view, the Bank thoroughly 
recognizes that the outlook is associated with considerable uncertainty. In that  regard, the 
Bank pays due attention to the effects of the recent rapid appreciation of the yen on business 
sentiment  of  the  firms  that  are  on  the  road  to  recovery,  as  well  as  to  the  effects  of 
international  financial  developments  since  last  week  on  the  financial  markets.  It  would  be 
important, above all, for a central bank to examine the economy without prejudgment. 
Meanwhile, prices have been fluctuating substantially since 2008, like the United States and 
Europe, due to the effects of the changes in the prices of petroleum products. The year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) in Japan rose to 2.4 percent in the 
summer of 2008, but it became negative from the spring of 2009, and registered the largest-
ever decline of minus 2.4 percent in August 2009. The year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI 
somewhat moderated to minus 2.2 percent in October, and it is expected that the pace of 
decline  is  likely  to  moderate  to  approximately  minus  one  percent  toward  the  beginning  of 
next  year,  as  the  effects  of  the  previous  year’s  surge  in  the  crude  oil  prices  abate.  The 
question  is  beyond  that  point.  While  it  is  expected  that  the  pace  of  decline  will  gradually 
moderate as the economic slack dissipates, it is likely that downward pressure on prices will 
remain for an extended period reflecting a moderate improvement in the economy. 
Therefore, in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices issued at the end of October, the 
Bank released a grim outlook that the price decline will likely continue until fiscal 2011, albeit 
the pace of decline gradually moderating. While the Government expressed recently its view 
that the Japanese economy was in a mild deflationary phase in that the decline in prices was 
continuing, the Bank’s judgment on prices presented at the end of October is based on the 
same recognition with such Government’s view. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Based on the recent economic and financial developments, let me explain next the Bank’s 
monetary policy management. In terms of monetary easing, the Bank had reduced the policy 
interest  rate  to  0.1  percent  toward  the  end  of  2008,  in  order  to  steadily  support  economic 
activity on the interest rate front. As a result, short-term interest rates in Japan are now at the 
lowest levels in the world. While those low interest rates have power to support economic 
activity of firms and households, the potential economic stimulus effects of low interest rates 
tend  to  increase  as  the  economic  environment  improves.  In  October  this  year,  the  Bank 
expressed again its aim to maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment and 
provide steady support for Japan’s economy, and I will emphasize again today that the Bank 
firmly maintains such a stance. The Bank will thoroughly check the future developments in 
the  economy  and  prices  and  take  appropriate  policy  responses  to  bring  Japan’s  economy 
back to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
In terms of the effects of monetary easing, it is important to ensure the stability of financial 
markets. To ensure the stability of the financial markets is a responsibility as a central bank, 
and  I  will  reemphasize  that  the  Bank  is  always  prepared  to  act  promptly  and  decisively  if 
judged necessary to ensure the stability of financial markets.  
Responses to deflation 
IV. 
In relation to the policy management, I will now describe the basic thinking on coping with the 
issue of deflation. As previously mentioned, the Bank has been doing its utmost as a central 
bank to meet the challenge of getting out of the state of continued decline of prices, namely, 
deflation,  and  put  Japan’s  economy  back  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability, 
and made it clear to continue with such stance. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 3
To begin with, at the root of a continued decline in prices, there is a fundamental factor that 
demand is weak compared with the supply capacity of the economy as a whole. The starting 
point  of  the  current  price  decline  was  the  rapid  contraction  of  financial  and  economic 
activities  since  the  autumn  of  last  year,  and,  as  a  result,  the  supply  and  demand  balance 
deteriorated significantly. In order to deal with such situation, it is necessary to prepare an 
environment conducive to a sustainable expansion of final demand, such as business fixed 
investment and private consumption. In other words, on a policy front, it becomes critical to 
make households feel secure about their future and firms able to have expectations about 
the future growth. At the same time, as long as there will be no recurrence of the excessive 
booms  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  it  will  be  essential  also  for  firms  to  convert  their 
supply system into a new one that is in line with consumers’ needs in a new era. 
As such, steady efforts on the part of the policy authorities as well as the private economic 
entities are necessary for coping with the issue of deflation, and such a process necessarily 
takes  some  time.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  also  important  to  avoid  a  situation  in  which  the 
decline in prices induces adverse effects on economic activity, which in turn leads to a further 
decline  in  prices,  namely,  a  vicious  circle  between  economic  activity  and  prices.  History 
shows that most of the cases, in which a decline in prices induced contraction of economic 
activity  and  resulted  in  a  vicious  circle  between  economic  activity  and  prices,  took  place 
during the period when the financial system became extremely instable through bank failures 
and others, namely, during the period of financial contraction. In such a situation, firms that 
faced  funding  difficulties  made  fire-sales  of  their  own  products  to  meet  day-to-day  funding 
needs or could not maintain employment. That in turn led to a decline in prices and wages, 
resulting  in  further  deterioration  of  the  economy.  While  that  might  be  an  extreme  case,  a 
valuable lesson in history is that it is critical to ensure the stability of the financial system in 
preventing a vicious circle between the economy and prices. 
As  described,  in  coping  with  deflation,  what  becomes  a  key  is  first,  to  keep  improving  the 
supply and demand balance of the economy as a whole, and second, to prevent a vicious 
circle  between  economic  activity  and  prices,  especially  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. Based on such thinking, the Bank will do its utmost to overcome deflation 
both in terms of monetary easing and ensuring the stability of the financial markets. 
Toward sustainable growth 
V. 
I have been explaining the thinking on policy responses to deflation. Given that the essence 
of  the  issue  is  the  deterioration  in  the  supply  and  demand  balance  of  the  economy  as  a 
whole, efforts to overcome deflation overlap the efforts to strengthen the potential of Japan’s 
economy, namely, to strengthen the growth potential itself. To that end, I will next touch on 
the challenges toward a sustainable growth of Japan’s economy. 
Sustainable  growth  of  the  economy  is  achieved  through  a  sustained  expansion  in  final 
demand,  and  an  associated  expansion  in  the  supply  capacity.  In  the  economic  analysis, 
economic growth viewed from the supply side is often analyzed by looking into three factors, 
namely, growth in capital stock, growth in labor force, and growth in productivity. This is a 
method referred to as growth accounting. By using the method, I will review the source of 
growth  during  the  period  when  Japan’s  economy  was  growing  at  a  much  higher  rate  than 
now. Typical study in this regard is the analysis by Professor Masahiro Kuroda, the former 
President of the Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office. According to the 
analysis,  in  the  25  years  between  1960  and  1985,  Japan’s  annual  growth  rate  was  6.8 
percent on average, of which growth in capital stock, labor force, and productivity accounted 
for 3.7 percent, 0.9 percent, and 2.2 percent, respectively. While both expansions in demand 
and in supply capacity are of course necessary for achieving a sustainable economic growth, 
in  meeting  such  expansion  from  the  supply  side,  growth  in  labor  force  accounts  for  a 
surprisingly  small  degree,  and  an  increase  in  capital  stock  and  a  rise  in  productivity  are 
significant.  In  that  regard,  the  efforts  to  tackle  the  population  decline  and  the  associated 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2009
problems are without doubt important, and, similarly, we are left with two key factors. First, 
where  to  expect  a  source  of  demand  expansion.  And  second,  how  to  achieve  a  rise  in 
productivity. 
First,  in  terms  of  source  of  demand  expansion,  significant  challenges  are  to  foster 
households’ confidence about their future and prepare infrastructure conducive to expansion 
of  domestic  demand,  as  well  as,  given  a  future  decline  in  population,  how  to  take  in  the 
expanding demand of emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Having said that, I am 
not insisting that Japan should increase its dependence on merchandise exports to emerging 
economies.  Various  ways  can  be  considered  to  take  in  demand.  In  fact,  in  the  past  five 
years, the factors that account for Japan’s current account surplus have been changing, and 
more  than  70  percent  of  Japan’s  current  account  surplus  now  comes  from  the  receipt  of 
income from abroad associated with securities and direct investments. The important point 
is, in addition to merchandise exports, the efforts to strengthen the relationship with emerging 
economies in various forms, including vertical and horizontal specialization, are required. 
The efforts to raise productivity from the supply side are also critical. Corporate managers 
have been working on the establishment of global production bases and the development of 
high-value-added  products  meeting  the  needs  of  consumers.  Such  moves  will  lead  to 
exploring new demand. As is the case with the changes in demographic composition, new 
demand will surely be created as long as the economy and society consistently change. The 
challenge for firms is to make potential needs into actual demand. While the output gap has 
been often discussed in economic debates, the discussions have been done by comparing 
demand  for  products  based  on  the  existing  needs  with  the  supplying  capacity  of  products 
that meet such needs. Given that the unprecedented global bubble has burst, it cannot be 
expected that demand will be created to meet the supplying capacity of the same products in 
the  past.  In  that  context,  the  oft-discussed  output  gap  seems  to  have  an  aspect  of  an 
indicator of the mismatch between supply and demand. What is important is the corporate 
effort to make potential needs into actual demand. In addition, to support such firms’ efforts, 
the  systems  or  mechanisms  should  be  reviewed  so  as  to  ensure  the  flexibility  of  Japan’s 
economic  structure  according  to  the  changes  in  society  and  in  the  global  economy.  For 
example, the rate of establishment of new firms and the rate of closure of the existing firms in 
Japan  are  less  than  half  of  those  in  the  United  States,  suggesting  that  the  metabolism  of 
Japan’s economy is low. 
While  consideration  from  various  angles  would  be  necessary  in  order  to  improve  such  a 
situation and prepare a mechanism through which production resources transfer smoothly to 
areas with strong needs, from the standpoint of a central bank, I will emphasize the role of 
financial  markets,  financial  institutions,  and  institutional  investors.  The  financial  markets 
facilitate an efficient fund allocation according to profitability and potential of firms as well as 
risks, thereby play a role in enhancing the metabolism of the economy. In that regard, a more 
efficient fund allocation will be possible if versatile markets exist and various fund providers 
assess  the  profitability  of  firms  and  others.  Therefore,  to  develop  versatile  and  efficient 
financial  markets  is  likely  to  play  an  important  role  also  in  raising  the  productivity  of  the 
economy as a whole. 
Concluding remarks 
Needless to say, economic growth is eventually achieved by the power of human will. In that 
regard, in Nagoya, there are many firms that have taken various changes in the environment 
as  new  opportunities  and  have  achieved  high  growth  by  responding  to  the  changes. 
Recently, there have been moves to develop and expand the production of high-value-added 
products  including  energy  saving  automobiles,  which  is  reassuring.  If  such  efforts  are 
stepped  up,  it  would  pave  the  way  to  a  sustained  growth  path  for  Japan’s  economy.  The 
Bank  will  do  its  utmost  to  support your  such  efforts  from  the  standpoint  of  a central  bank. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 5
