José Manuel González-Páramo: The response of the Eurosystem to the 
financial crisis 
Keynote speech by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  European  Parliament’s  Special  Committee  on  the 
Financial, Economic and Social Crisis (CRIS), Brussels, 10 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am happy to have the opportunity to speak in front of the European Parliament’s Special 
Committee  on  the  Financial,  Economic  and  Social  Crisis  on  the  Eurosystem’s  various 
measures to address the crisis.  
The financial crisis created great uncertainty and presented a number of challenges from the 
policy-making perspective. It is generally recognised that from the start of the tensions, the 
Eurosystem’s response to the crisis has been effective. Indeed, when widespread tensions 
severely impaired the functioning of the money market in early August 2007, the Eurosystem 
rapidly  reacted  by  injecting  €95  billion  into  the  banking  sector  in  an  overnight  operation, 
followed by various additional liquidity injecting operations. When the crisis intensified again 
in  September  2008,  the  Eurosystem  swiftly  reacted  by  announcing  further  exceptional 
measures to enhance the provision of liquidity to banks. Similarly, the rapid and pronounced 
cuts  in  interest  rates  after  October  2008  represented  a  timely  response  to  contain  the 
spreading of the turmoil from the financial sector to the real economy, with significant risks to 
the outlook for price stability. 
In my speech today, I will first review the main steps taken by the Eurosystem in response to 
the crisis. Next I will elaborate on the effects that these non-standard measures had on the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet and on the provision of liquidity to the financial sector. Finally, I 
will report on our current thinking about the phasing out of some of these measures. 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy response 
Central banks around the world reacted to the financial crisis by both cutting policy interest 
rates  and  engaging  in  so-called  “non-standard”  measures  of  monetary  policy.  These  are 
called “non-standard” because they go beyond changes in the interest rate, which represents 
the traditional tool with which central banks steer monetary conditions in the economy.  
Between October 2008 and May 2009, the Eurosystem’s key policy rate – the interest rate on 
the main refinancing operations – was lowered by a cumulative 325 basis points. The speed 
and  extent  of  the  monetary  loosening  experienced  over  this  period  are  without  precedent 
since the Eurosystem took responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area. 
This is of course a rather short period, just over a decade. However, changes in interest rate 
of this magnitude remain exceptional even if we look at the much longer historical experience 
of the Deutsche Bundesbank and other major central banks in Europe. 
The  unconventional  policy  taken,  for  which  we  also  coined  the  term  “enhanced  credit 
support”, consisted of four main types of measures:  
1.  Full  allotment  and  increased  maturity  of  the  Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations. 
Already  in  2007,  the  number  and  allotment  volumes  of  3  month  operations  were 
increased,  compared  to  the  weekly  main  refinancing  operations.  In  April  2008,  we 
conducted  for  the  first  time  6  month  operations.  In  October  2008,  the  Eurosystem 
switched in all its refinancing operations to the so-called “fixed rate with full allotment” 
modality,  thereby  fully  accommodating  private  banks’  demand  for  central  bank 
liquidity  at  the  central  policy  rate.  In  addition,  in  May  2009,  an  announcement  was 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 1
made to conduct three 12-month operations at fixed rate with full allotment. The first 
such operation was allotted in June 2009 with an amount of €442 billion. The third 12-
month operation will be allotted in December 2009. 
2.  Provision of liquidity in foreign currencies. In December 2007, the Eurosystem started 
to  provide  US  dollar  against  our  standard  euro  collateral  set.  In  October  2008,  the 
Eurosystem  expanded  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  selected  foreign  currencies,  by 
offering in principle full allotment. In addition, we started to provide our counterparties 
with  Swiss  franc  denominated  liquidity.  The  provision  of  foreign  currency  was 
refinanced  through  FX  swap  agreements  between  the  major  central  banks.  Again, 
this appears to be unprecedented in central banking history and illustrates the very 
effective co-operation between major central banks over the past two years as well as 
the willingness to enter new modes of liquidity support to banks.  
3.  The expansion of the list of assets eligible as collateral. The Eurosystem expanded in 
October 2008 its already broad list of eligible collateral, against which counterparties 
are able to obtain liquidity in central bank refinancing operations. Ample availability of 
collateral is important in a financial crisis, as counterparties can only obtain liquidity in 
refinancing operations to the extent that they hold eligible collateral. It may be noted 
that  other  central  banks  widened  the  eligible  collateral  set  much  earlier  during  the 
turmoil. This however did not reflect a lack of pro-activeness of the Eurosystem, but 
the fact that it had always accepted a broad range of collateral. The steps taken by 
other  central  banks  during  the  first  year  of  the  financial  crisis  can  therefore  be 
considered  as  convergence  of  collateral  sets  in  the  direction  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
framework.  
4.  Outright  purchases  of  covered  bonds.  The  covered  bond  market,  which  has 
historically been an important source of funding for banks in large parts of the euro 
area, had suffered from the financial crisis, both in terms of primary and secondary 
market  activity.  The  total  sum  allocated  to  the  purchase  programme  –  €60  billion, 
representing  about  5%  of  the  outstanding  eligible  covered  bonds  –  is  deemed 
sufficient  to  significantly  support  activity  in  this  important  market,  ensuring  that  the 
ECB acts as a catalyst for re-activating this market rather than as a market maker of 
last resort. During the first four months, the Eurosystem bought over €20 billion worth 
of covered bonds, with the total of up to €60 billion being targeted for June 2010. 
Compared with measures taken by other central banks, the measures implemented by the 
Eurosystem were specifically targeted at the banking sector. The reason for concentrating on 
the banking sector stems from structural features of the euro area’s economy, particularly the 
fact that its financial system is predominantly bank-based. Indeed, bank loans account for a 
much larger share of financing to households and firms in the euro area than in the United 
Kingdom or in the United States, where non-bank financial institutions and capital markets 
provide important alternative sources of funds. For instance in 2007, the ratio of bank lending 
to the private sector relative to GDP amounted in the euro area to about 1.5, compared with 
a ratio of 2/3 in the United States. At the same time, the ratio of outstanding debt securities 
issued by the euro area private sector relative to GDP was just over 3/4 in the euro area, 
while it was above 1.5 in the United States.  
Accordingly,  the  set  of  measures  implemented  by  the  Eurosystem  –  our  enhanced  credit 
support programme – were designed with the objective of providing support to the banking 
sector by: (a) helping the functioning of the money market, (b) easing funding conditions for 
banks, and (c) improving market liquidity in segments of the private debt securities market 
(specifically, the market for covered bonds) that represent an important source of funding for 
euro area banks. Through these measures, the ECB aimed to mitigate the risk of systemic 
illiquidity in the euro area banking sector and to guarantee a steady flow of banking credit to 
euro area households and firms. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2009
Impact of measures implemented by the ECB 
Let me start with the impact of our measures on the Eurosystem balance sheet.  
As in the case of other central banks, the size and complexity of the  Eurosystem balance 
sheet has significantly increased. In June 2007, just before the start of the crisis, total assets 
of  the  Eurosystem  amounted  to  around  10%  of  area-wide  GDP  (€913  billion).  By  January 
2009,  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  had  almost  doubled,  reaching  19%  of  GDP  (€1,763 
billion). Subsequent improvements in money market conditions have led to a reduction in the 
amount of total assets, but they remain at a higher level (16% of GDP, or €1,454 billion) than 
in the pre-crisis period.  
The expansion of the Eurosystem balance sheet was driven both by changes in the so-called 
autonomous factors, as well as by the introduction of non-standard measures. On the liability 
side, banknotes and government deposits have steadily increased during the past two years: 
banknotes changed from around €600 billion at the beginning of 2007 to €768 billion at the 
end  of  October  2009,  while  government  deposits  over  the  same  time  period  went  from 
around €50 billion to €140 billion.  
On the asset side, three factors may be distinguished, reflecting the non-standard measures. 
First,  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  tended  to  demand  more  euro  liquidity  through 
refinancing operations with full allotment than actually needed to fulfil reserve requirements 
and liquidity needs from autonomous factors, and hence deposited the excess amounts back 
into  the  deposit  facility  of  the  Eurosystem.  Second,  the  composition  of  the  Eurosystem 
balance sheet is affected by the covered bond purchase programme, whereby the purchases 
mainly  imply  a  substitution  effect,  as  they  are  likely  to  lead  over  time  to  a  corresponding 
reduction of Eurosystem refinancing operations. The importance of these two factors for the 
overall expansion of the Eurosystem balance sheet can be measured very simply in the form 
of the recourse to the deposit facility. The daily recourse to the deposit facility peaked on 3 
July  2009  with  €316  billion,  reflecting  the  high  demand  in  the  first  12  month  long-term 
refinancing operation  (LTRO)  in  June  2009.  Recourse  to  the  deposit  facility  stood  at  €106 
billion on average during the last maintenance period ending on 13 October 2009. The third 
factor lengthening the balance sheet was the provision of liquidity in foreign currency, either 
via collateralised lending or via swaps.  
Let me also mention briefly the impact of the change of allotment procedure and increase of 
maturity  on  our  open  market  operations  volume.  The  outstanding  amount  of  long-term 
refinancing operations, i.e. operations with a maturity of between 1 and 6 months, increased 
from €150 billion in June 2007 to over €600 billion at the end of 2008. Over the same period 
the total amount of outstanding refinancing operations has almost doubled, peaking at €850 
billion  on  2 January  2009,  and currently  standing  at  €672 billion.  The January  2009  figure 
represented more than 9% of euro area GDP. The 12 month operations conducted in June 
2009 was with its €442 billion euro the largest single refinancing operations ever conducted 
by  a  central  bank.  It  attracted  a  widespread  participation  of  counterparties,  namely  1,100 
financial institutions, which may also have been a historical record. 
Turning to the impact of our measures on financial markets and the real economy at large, 
there are some clear signs that the measures are having positive effects. In particular, the 
spreads  between  unsecured  term  interest  rates  and  overnight  interest  rate  swaps  in  the 
money market have declined significantly since last autumn and are now back at levels last 
seen  before  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Related  to  that,  and  in  conjunction  with 
policy rate cuts, interest rates on loans to households and firms have declined substantially. 
At  the  same  time,  recent  data  indicates  that  growth  in  aggregate  lending  has  not  turned 
around.  Although  there  have  been  signs  that  the  slowdown  in  lending  to  households  has 
come  to  a  halt,  the  growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has  continued  to 
moderate. Seen in context, the recent developments in loans to firms appear to be broadly in 
line  with  past  regularities  in  bank  lending  behaviour,  particularly  at  turning-points  in  the 
business cycle. Indeed, loans to firms tend to lag GDP growth by about three quarters. This 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 3
may  be  related  to  the  fact  that  non-financial  corporations  usually  see  their  cash  flows 
improve  early  in  an  economic  upturn  and  thus  tend  to  finance  working  capital  and  fixed 
investment with internal funds first, and only later with external financing. In addition, when 
macroeconomic conditions are weak, the dynamics of bank loans are affected by demand-
side  factors.  Having  said  this,  it  is  important  to  closely  monitor  developments  in  credit  in 
order  to  assess  to  what  extent  supply-side  constraints  may  play  a  role  in  limiting  credit 
availability.  
Recent  data  suggests  that  the  global  economic  slowdown  may  be  bottoming  out,  and  the 
freefall  in  economic  activity  has  come  to  an  end.  Concomitant  positive  signs  are  the 
improvements in the funding situation of banks, the continued decline in lending rates and 
increasing indications of a turning point in bank lending conditions. However, uncertainty still 
remains high and the economic data remain volatile. In addition, we should acknowledge that 
the future, the evolution of lending will, most likely, depend more than in past episodes, on 
adjustments taking place within the banking sector. 
Preparation for phasing-out from non-standard measures 
Although the financial crisis is not yet over, we have carefully and thoroughly developed the 
set of principles and contingent courses of action that will govern the progressive exit from 
the set of non-standard measures currently in place. The ECB’s monetary policy continues to 
provide substantial support to the availability of liquidity and the recovery of the euro area 
economy. Looking ahead, as conditions in the financial markets normalise further, not all our 
liquidity  measures  will  be  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past.  Accordingly,  the 
Governing Council will make sure that the extraordinary liquidity measures taken are phased 
out  in  a  timely  and  gradual  fashion,  and  that  the  liquidity  is  absorbed  in  order  to  counter 
effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term.  
In so doing, the stance of monetary policy could be normalised through the change of key 
policy  rates  as  well  as  through  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  our  enhanced  credit  support 
measures,  or  through  a  combination  of  both.  The  precise  sequencing  will  depend  on  the 
circumstances prevailing at the time. 
With regard to the non-standard measures, it is useful to distinguish again between the four 
different types of measures.  
First, for the non-standard refinancing operations, there is an obvious built-in mechanism that 
facilitates  their  removal,  as  the  operations  mature  at  pre-specified  dates  and  can  then  be 
replaced by conventional refinancing operations, if needed.  
Second, as with non-standard euro refinancing operations, the provision of foreign currency 
liquidity does not need to be renewed when it is considered that it is no longer warranted. In 
this context, let me remind you that the exit from this specific measure has already started: 
owing  to  lack  of  demand,  we  have  already  discontinued  foreign  currency-providing 
operations with longer maturities. 
Third,  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the  widening  of  the  collateral  framework  is  temporary. 
More  precisely,  its  remaining  into  effect  is  linked  to  the  conduct  of  the  12  month  LTRO  in 
December 2009. Hence, the widening of the collateral framework will be naturally phased out 
in December 2010, unless otherwise decided.  
Finally, in relation to the covered bond portfolio, there is no particular need to dispose of the 
purchased bonds at any future moment in time, as it does not interfere with monetary policy 
implementation.  We  could  therefore  decide  to  hold  the  portfolio  until  maturity  and  let  it 
gradually  shrink  over  time  as  a  result  of  redemptions.  Alternatively,  the  portfolio  could  be 
disposed of in a gradual way that would make it possible to avoid market distortions. In any 
case,  the  alternative  options  can  be  considered  again  once  the  entire  portfolio  has  been 
established. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2009
Regardless of the specific modalities adopted for the exit strategy, let me stress again that 
the  key  principles  to  phase  out  existing  measures  should  in  any  case  be  timeliness  and 
gradualism.  Indeed,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  should  be  normalised  and  the  non-
standard  measures  withdrawn  in  parallel  with  the  gradual  improvement  in  economic  and 
financial conditions.  
Let  me  also  stress  that  there  are  no  technical  obstacles  to  the  implementation  of  our  exit 
strategy.  In  any  case,  we  have  the  instruments  to  allow  us  to  actively  withdraw  liquidity. 
Longer-term liquidity-absorbing operations could be envisaged in a scenario where it is clear 
that  the  need  to  absorb  persists  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  and  where  a  significant 
tightening in monetary policy is needed. In this case, long-term liquidity absorption could be 
used to quickly restore a deficit situation along with an increase in interest rates.  
In  this  context,  let  me  mention  that,  when  assessing  whether  or  not  the  non-conventional 
liquidity measures have achieved their objectives, we need to be aware that such measures 
have  been  introduced  for  systemic  purposes  and  not  to  address  problems  at  individual 
institutions, which fall within the sphere of competence of national governments. Therefore, 
concerns about the costs or difficulties faced by individual institutions, once the exceptional 
provision  of  liquidity  is  discontinued,  should  not  act  as  a  constraint  on  the  timely 
implementation of an exit strategy from non-conventional monetary policy. 
A final point must be made: the specific operational steps of an exit should not be interpreted 
as  signalling  imminent  changes  to  key  policy  rates.  The  exit  strategy  will  take  place  in  an 
orderly  fashion  with  a  well-designed  and  clearly  communicated  exit  framework.  The  long-
term success of non-standard measures is conditional upon achieving both an appropriate 
stimulus  to  the  economy  in  the  short-term  in  conjunction  with  keeping  long-term  private 
sector inflation expectations firmly anchored.  
Conclusion 
The  financial  crisis  has  presented  exceptional  challenges  to  central  banks  to  support  the 
functioning of money markets and the funding liquidity of banks, to stabilise economic activity 
and to preserve price stability. The ECB responded swiftly to these challenges by engaging 
in non-standard monetary policy and aggressively cutting policy interest rates. 
While the current economic environment continues to pose challenges, we have a strategy 
that will govern the progressive exit from the set of non-conventional measures currently in 
place.  Our  preparations  for  a  gradual  exit  from  these  measures,  however,  do  not  suggest 
that fundamental change in policy is imminent. Rather, the development, communication and 
eventual  timely  implementation  of  a  well-designed  exit  strategy  are  vital  in  terms  of  the 
preservation  of  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  gains  derived  from  the  non-
conventional measures. 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 5
