Jan F Qvigstad: On transparency 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi (The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters), Oslo, 
10 November 2009. 
Ida Wolden Bache, Amund Holmsen, Marie Norum Lerbak and Øistein Røisland provided valuable assistance in 
preparing this speech  
 Introduction 
Norges Bank’s Executive Board has decided that the key policy rate now should be 1.5 per 
cent.  If  economic  developments  are  broadly  in  line  with  projections,  the  appropriate  key 
policy rate will be 2.75 per cent around the end of next year.  
If  I  had  made  this  statement  ten  years  ago,  it  would  have  constituted  a  breach  of 
confidentiality.1 Norges Bank considered this to be highly sensitive information. Had I been 
deputy chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board twenty years ago, I would not even have 
been  entitled  to  reveal  the  latest  interest  rate  decision.2  Today,  this  sounds  rather  odd. 
Transparency is now taken for granted among central banks and in other areas of society.  
In  London  in  1780,  the  Bank  of  England  was  put  to  a  test.  In  Parliament,  Lord  Gorden 
attempted  to  stop  a  bill  to  restore  civil  rights  to  Catholics.3  He  drew  support  from  large 
numbers.  Rioting  led  to  the  destruction  of  several  public  buildings.  When  an  attack  was 
launched against the Bank of England, the building was secured like a fortress and withstood 
the onslaught, hence the phrase “as safe as the Bank of England”. Through the years, the 
phrase has been simplified into “as safe as the bank”. As banks and central banks store gold 
and money in their vaults, their edifices have always been solid, protected by thick walls. In a 
figurative sense, it might be said that a safe and credible national monetary value relied for a 
long time on thick central bank walls insulating its internal workings from the general public.  
Until  our  time,  central  banks  have  been  closed,  both  physically  and  figuratively.  Central 
banks  were  shrouded  in  an  aura  of  mystique,  which  they  probably  had  a  hand  in 
perpetuating. Central bank governors worldwide refrained from saying too much, and what 
they did say often sounded cryptic.  
2  
                                                 
1   The duty of confidentiality for Norges Bank employees is laid down in Section 12 of the Norges Bank 
Act.  Violation  of  the  duty  of  confidentiality  is  punishable  under  the  General  Civil  Penal  Code:  “Any 
person who wilfully or through gross negligence violates a duty of secrecy which in accordance with any 
statutory provision or valid directive is a consequence of his service or work for any state or municipal 
body  shall  be  liable  to  fines  or  imprisonment  for a  term  not  exceeding  six  months”  (Section  121,  first 
paragraph of the General Civil Penal Code). 
In  1975,  David  R.  Merrill,  a  law  student,  instigated  legal  proceedings  against  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) in the US, charging that the FOMC violated the Freedom of Information Act by deferring 
public  disclosure  of  its  interest  rate  decision  by  90  days.  The  case  was  eventually  heard  by  the  Supreme 
Court.  The  Supreme  Court  ruled  that  the  Federal  Reserve  could  continue  its  practice  if  it  could  provide  an 
adequate explanation showing that immediate disclosure would significantly harm the Government's monetary 
functions or commercial interests. The Supreme Court left the assessment of this explanation to the district 
court. The district court concluded that it lacked the expertise necessary to substitute its judgment for that of 
the FOMC and the Federal Reserve did not begin to release its monetary policy decisions on the same day 
until  1994. See Marvin Goodfriend (1986): “Monetary mystique: secrecy  and central  banking”, in Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 17, no. 1, pp. 63-92. 
3   The bill also enabled Catholics to serve in the British army. British military forces were involved in conflicts in 
many countries at the time and needed more manpower. See A. Andréadès (1966): History of the Bank of 
England 1640-1903, 4th edition, Frank Cass & co. Ltd. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 1
In Norway, monetary policy was probably also perceived by many as something mysterious 
and remote. In the Festschrift for former Norges Bank governor Hermod Skånland, Professor 
Preben Munthe writes the following:  
“There is a tradition that expects central bank governors to be parsimonious 
with  words.  This  built  up  the  aura  that  should  surround  a  man  in  that 
position. He possessed knowledge about the secret black box – monetary 
policy with a capital M – and how it functioned. Without asking others, he 
changed  the  discount  rate  and  thereby  intervened  in  the  economy  with 
authority and deep insight. On seldom occasions did he step down from his 
cloud of wisdom to impart life’s economic truths to a gaping public.”4  
A change in views and practices relating to transparency first occurred in recent years, both 
in  Norway  and  other  countries.5  It  can  safely  be  said  that  the  change  has  been  swift  and 
radical. Today, most central banks are open about (i) the objective of monetary policy, (ii) its 
strategy  for  reaching  the  objective  and  (iii)  the  background  for  and  the  process  behind 
interest rate decisions.  
Norges Bank is no exception in this respect. In some areas, Norges Bank has gone further 
than  others.  For  example,  Norges  Bank  is  one  of  the  few  central  banks  in  the  world  that 
publishes forecasts of its own interest rate decisions.6  
What  then  can  explain  this  tendency  towards  greater  transparency?  I  would  highlight  two 
main reasons. First, there has been a general trend in society towards greater transparency. 
Second,  economic  thinking  has  changed  considerably.  Simplifying  somewhat,  the  former 
view  was  that  monetary  policy  operated  effectively  by  surprising  economic  agents.  Today, 
economic theory posits that monetary policy works best if it is predictable.  
I will come back to the economic theory, but allow me to start by some changes in society at 
large. 
Transparency of economic policy 
The economic crisis in the 1930s shattered confidence in free market forces. Markets had to 
be  controlled.  The  British  economist  John  Maynard  Keynes  was  working  on  ways  of 
regulating and improving markets. Prominent Norwegian economists, with Ragnar Frisch at 
the fore, went even further. They advocated that the market economy must be replaced by a 
planned economy. Ambitions were high. One could almost say that transparency, in carefully 
selected portions, was a tactical tool.7 It reached a head in 1973 when a commission led by 
                                                 
4   Preben Munthe (1994): “Økonomen (The Economist)” in Jan. F Qvigstad, Sigbjørn Atle Berg and Kjell Storvik 
(eds.):  Stabilitet  og  langsiktighet:  festskrift  til  Hermod  Skånland  (Stability  and  a  long-term  perspective: 
Festschrift for Hermod Skånland), Aschehoug, p. 73. 
5   See for example Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan and David-Jan Jansen 
(2008): “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence”, in Journal of 
Economic Literature, 46, no. 4, pp. 910-945 and Petra M. Geraats (2002): “Central Bank Transparency”, in 
The Economic Journal, 112 (November), pp. F532-F556. 
7  
6   See for example Financial Times (Ralph Atkins), 2 March 2007, p.11: “Central bankers eye Norway’s clarity on 
rates”  and  Michael  Woodford  (2007):  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Strategy”,  in 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, no. 4, pp. 3-24. 
In 1959, Petter Jacob Bjerve, then director general of Statistics Norway, wrote that “Apparently, the question 
of whether national budgets should be published involved an optimum problem: considering both advantages 
and  disadvantages  of  publishing,  any  cabinet  will  probably  decide  what  to  publish  so  as  to  achieve  best 
possible  results  of  its  policy,  according  to  the  social  preferences  of  the  cabinet.”  See  Petter  Jacob  Bjerve 
(1959): Planning in Norway 1947-1956, North-Holland Publishing Company, p. 352. 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2009
Hermod  Skånland  proposed  the  establishment  of  an  incomes-policy  council  that  was  to 
decide the limits for wage growth in Norway.8  
But  the  proposal  was  not  in  tune  with  the  new  views  which  were  already  taking  root  in 
society. The council was never established. Domestic and international developments in the 
1970s weakened the conviction that the economy could be fine-tuned. While market failure 
was the main concern earlier, focus now shifted to regulatory failure. The political pendulum 
swung  away  from  government  control  and  towards  market  liberalisation.9  When  decision-
making was to be decentralised, it was important that the decision-makers acted in line with 
the  overriding  policy  objectives.  New  transparency  and  disclosure  requirements  were 
designed to this end. The requirements were largely set out in the Public Administration Act 
of 1967 and the Freedom of Information Act of 1970.  
Today,  transparency  and  disclosure  requirements  also  apply  to  Norwegian  enterprises, 
particularly to listed companies.10 The legislation is to ensure that all shareholders receive 
adequate, correct and timely information from the company. Companies must be open and 
assure equal treatment of all owners. Well-functioning equity markets rely on confidence that 
everyone has access to the same information about the company. 
Transparency is natural in a democracy  
Transparency  is  natural  in  a  democracy  and  is  important  to  ensure  accountability  among 
decision-makers. The Danish Nobel laureate in physics Niels Bohr supposedly once stated 
that  “The  best  weapon  of  a  dictatorship  is  secrecy,  but  the  best  weapon  of  a  democracy 
should be the weapon of openness”.  
Yesterday was the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall. This event has become 
a symbol of the fall of the iron curtain. We recall from those times the Russian word glasnost, 
which means openness. Mikhail Gorbachev sought to modernise the Soviet Union and used 
glasnost as a means of reducing corruption and abuse of power. In western democracies, 
the  term  glasnost  took  on  a  broader  meaning,  and  was  associated  with  détente  between 
East and West in the 1980s.11  
As mentioned, the shift towards a more decentralised economy both in Norway and abroad 
reflected the failure of centralised planning. Monetary policy is an important component of the 
economic policy framework.12 In my lecture here last year,13 I noted that it can be demanding 
for the political authorities to ensure price stability because low interest rates are often more 
popular than high interest rates. An appropriate interest rate may therefore be demanding to 
                                                 
8   See NOU (Official Norwegian Report) 1973:36 Om prisproblemene (On price problems). 
9   For an account of economic policy in Norway in the twentieth century, see Tore Jørgen Hanisch, Espen Søilen 
and  Gunhild  J.  Ecklund  (1999):  Norsk  økonomisk  politikk  i  det  20.  århundre.  Verdivalg  i  en  åpen  økonomi 
(Economic policy in Norway in the 20th century. Ethics in an open economy), Høyskoleforlaget. 
10   See i.e., chapter 5 in the Norwegian Act on Securities Trading. 
11   In Norway, the concept is also associated with Jahn Teigen’s contribution “Glasnost” in the national final of the 
Eurovision Song Contest 1988. 
12   During  the  financial  crisis  last  winter  the  Government  wrote:  “Monetary  policy  is  the  first  line  of  defence  in 
countering a setback in the economy”. See Report No. 37 (2008-09) to the Storting (Norwegian parliament) 
“Om  endringer  i  statsbudsjettet  2009  med  tiltak  for  arbeid  (On  changes  in  the  2009  Budget  and  labour 
measures), Ministry of Finance, p. 6. 
13   The  lecture  entitled  “On  keeping  promises”,  remarks  by  Endre  Stavang  and  Henrik  Syse  and  Francis 
Sejersted’s summary of the debate have been published in Nytt Norsk Tidsskrift 1/2009. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 3
set  in  government  corridors.14  Most  government  authorities  in  democratic  countries  have 
solved this problem by delegating interest rate setting to an independent central bank.  
But how can the conduct of monetary policy, which has such far-reaching consequences for 
so many, be delegated in a democratic country? How is one to ensure that decisions are in 
line  with  the  interests  of  society?  These  questions  become  more  relevant,  the  more  room 
there is for judgement in interest rate setting. 
When the operational objective was a fixed exchange rate, the room for judgment was very 
limited.  Norges  Bank’s task  was  to  maintain  a  fixed  krone  exchange  rate.  Monetary  policy 
was more or less on “autopilot”. In a narrow sense, this was a very open policy. The public 
could at all times observe the krone exchange rate and monitor that the Bank was performing 
its duty. Many of you perhaps remember the era when a dollar cost 7 kroner and 14 øre.15 
On  the  basis  of  purely  democratic  considerations,  there  was  little  need  for  transparency 
about the assessments underlying the use of instruments.  
The exchange rate was fixed, but occasionally the target value was adjusted. At those times 
the  cards  were  held  close  to  the  breast.  On  occasion  it  was  even  necessary  to  break  the 
eighth commandment (that is to lie). Around the end of 1986, journalists in the newspaper 
Nordlys were asked to take a retrospective look at the past year. One of them recalled an 
interview  with  the  state  secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Bjørn  Skogstad  Aamo.  In  the 
interview  Skogstad  Aamo  flatly  denied  rumours  of  a  krone  devaluation.  But  before  the 
interview was printed, the news agency NTB reported that the krone had been devalued by 
12 per cent.16 Perhaps the journalist was disappointed but Skogstad Aamo was not criticised 
for breaking the eighth commandment.  
Over the last decade, the objective of monetary policy has not been a fixed krone exchange 
rate, but price stability through low and stable inflation.17 According to the monetary policy 
regulation the objective is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. But how long is over 
time? And what is close to 2.5 per cent? With these formulations, it is no longer that easy to 
evaluate monetary policy. There are several reasons for this. First, it takes up to one to two 
years for a change in the interest rate to feed through to inflation. Second, inflation is not only 
influenced by the interest rate. For example, precipitation levels can have a strong impact on 
electricity prices. Third, we set interest rates also with the aim of promoting stability in output 
and employment. If the economy is exposed to severe shocks, we may at times seek to bring 
inflation rapidly back to target, while under other conditions we deliberately choose a longer 
horizon.  
An evaluation of monetary policy cannot therefore be based on the latest figures for inflation. 
Instead, one must check whether average inflation over a somewhat longer period has been 
                                                 
14   This is discussed by Finn Kydland who won the 2004 Nobel Prize in Economics with Edward Prescott for their 
analysis of the problems of economic planning. See Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1977): “Rules rather 
than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans”, in Journal of Political Economy, 85, no. 3, pp. 473-491. 
15   The  central  value  of  the  Norwegian  Krone  against  the  US  dollar  was  7.14  from  18  September  1949  to  15 
August  1971.  See  addendum,  prepared  by  Ragna  Alstadheim,  to  Jan  F.  Qvigstad  and  Arent  Skjæveland 
(1994):  “Valutakursregimer  –  historiske  erfaringer  og  fremtidige  utfordringer  (Exchange  rate  regimes  – 
historical experiences and future challenges)” in Jan. F Qvigstad, Sigbjørn Atle Berg and Kjell Storvik (eds.): 
Stabilitet og langsiktighet. Festskrift til Hermod Skånland (Stability and a long-term perspective: Festschrift for 
Hermod Skånland), Aschehoug. 
16   This  story  is  reported  in  the  article  “Borten  i  fokus  og  bestillingsverk  (Borten  in  focus  and  commissioned 
works)”, Aftenposten, 3 January 1987. 
17   See for example Report No. 29 (2000-2001) to the Storting from the Ministry of Finance and the Regulation on 
Monetary Policy from 29 March 2001. 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2009
close to 2.5 per cent. Measuring performance is possible, but can only be done with a time 
lag.18  
The combination of (i) delegated authority to conduct policy, (ii) room for discretion and (iii) 
difficulties  in  the  day-to-day  monitoring  of  results  imply  a  risk  of  a  democratic  deficit. 
Transparency and disclosure are the institutional solution to this problem. Even if a central 
bank  is  independent  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  it  must  be  accountable  to 
government. We must be measured on our performance, but also on our assessments and 
decisions. This requires transparency. The need for transparency therefore depends on the 
monetary policy regime. Internationally, there is also a tendency for inflation-targeting central 
banks to be more transparent than countries with a fixed exchange rate regime.19  
Transparency about Norges Bank’s activity is required by law. When the Storting (Norwegian 
parliament) amended §100 on the freedom of expression in the Constitution, the freedom of 
information principle was enshrined in the Constitution.20 This was the first time this article 
had  been  amended  since  1814.  The  legislative  amendments  were  partly  based  on  the 
proposals  of  the  Freedom  of  Expression  Commission,  which  was  headed  by  Professor 
Francis Sejersted.21 In addition, Norges Bank is subject to a transparency requirement in the 
Freedom of Information Act and the Act on Norges Bank and the Monetary System.22  
In some areas, we are even more transparent than what is required by law. Norges Bank’s 
Monetary  Policy  Report  includes  a  thorough  account  of  our  assessments  of  economic 
developments and interest rate setting. As mentioned in the introduction, we even publish a 
forecast for our future interest rate decisions. After each monetary policy meeting, a press 
conference is held where we explain the interest rate decision and answer questions from 
journalists. The press conference is webcast live and usually broadcast on TV. People can 
subscribe to receive an SMS message about interest rate decisions, and Norges Bank was 
apparently the first central bank to publish its interest rate decisions on Twitter.  
International  developments  have  made  it  prestigious  for  central  banks  to  be  as  open  as 
possible.  But  transparency  cannot  be  a  goal  in  itself.  Our  responsibility  is  to  conduct  an 
effective  monetary  policy  in  line  with  the  objectives  laid  down  by  the  political  authorities. 
Transparency beyond that necessary to ensure democratic accountability is a goal derived 
from the main goal of conducting an optimal monetary policy.  
                                                 
18   Lars  E.  O.  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  at  Sveriges  Riksbank,  has  argued  that  it  is  possible  to  evaluate 
monetary  policy  actions  ex  ante.  See  Lars  E.  O.  Svensson  (2009):  “Policy  Expectations  and  Policy 
Evaluations:  The  Role  of  Transparency  and  Communication”,  address  at  the  conference  “Tio  år  med 
självständig Riksbank (Ten years with an independent Riksbank)” 11 September 2009. 
19   See  Nergiz  Dincer  and  Barry  Eichengreen  (2009):  “Central  bank  transparency:  causes,  consequences  and 
updates”,  NBER  Working  Paper  14791  and  Petra  M.  Geraats  (2009):  “Trends  in  Monetary  Policy 
Transparency”, in International Finance, 12, no. 2, pp. 235-268. 
20   The new legal text establishes the so-called principle of free access to public records which provides public 
access to central and local government documents and the right to be present at sittings of the courts and of 
administrative bodies elected by the people. 
21   NOU  (Official  Norwegian  Report)  1999:  27  “Ytringsfrihed  bør  finde  Sted  (There  shall  be  freedom  of 
expression)”.  Sejersted  was  awarded  the  Ossietzky  Prize  for  his  contribution  to  freedom  of  expression  in 
2008. 
22   In the Norges Bank Act of 1985, Norges Bank is required to “inform the public of the assessments on which 
monetary policy decisions are based”. In October 2009, a new government communications policy was laid 
down  by  the  Ministry  of  Government  Administration  and  Reform,  promoting  transparency  as  an  important 
principle  of  good  communication.  The  government’s  communication  is  required  to  be  open,  clear  and 
accessible. The government is also required to ensure that relevant information reaches the relevant parties 
and that the information is adapted to the relevant target groups. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 5
Modern economic theory argues in favour of transparency 
I mentioned that the previous view was that monetary policy operated by surprising economic 
agents,  while  the  prevailing  view  is  that  it  works  best  by  being  predictable.  According  to 
modern economic theory, economic decisions are heavily influenced by expectations.23 This 
has  also  become  an  important  economic  policy  recognition.  Today’s  key  rate  is  important, 
but even more important is the expected key interest rate ahead. When the owner of a firm 
takes up a loan to build a new factory, the expected interest rate over the life of the loan is 
taken into account. When the key rate was reduced sharply in autumn last year, we sought to 
communicate that the interest rate would remain low for a period, and not be raised back to 
the former level already the following week or month.  
According  to  theory  monetary  policy  to  a  large  extent  seeks  to  affect  expectations.  We 
believe  that  by  being  transparent  about  our  own  interest  rate  forecasts,  it  is  easier  to 
influence expectations. This enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
But the interest rate forecast is a forecast, and not a promise. The future is uncertain. Actual 
interest  rate  developments  may  therefore  deviate  from  our  forecasts.  We  try  to  be  open 
about how we will react if new information implies a different interest rate path.  
Transparency about Norges Bank’s reaction pattern is a necessary element in the interaction 
with fiscal policy. It is important that the government and the Storting know the central bank’s 
response pattern when the size of government budgets is decided. It is also an advantage for 
the social partners take this into account.  
Our view on transparency and good communication is inspired by Wim Duisenberg, the first 
President of the European Central Bank. His definition of transparency was that “the external 
communication should reflect the internal deliberations”.24
We  have  all  experienced  that  memory  is  imperfect.  The  easiest  approach  is  therefore  to 
employ the same narrative everywhere. What we say in the Executive Board is also what we 
say  to  the  Minister  of  Finance,  at  press  conferences  and  in  speeches.  Earlier  we  asked 
ourselves:  Are  there  any  particular  reasons  to  release  this  information?  Now  we  ask 
ourselves whether there are any particular reasons not to be open. The Duisenberg principle 
is a practice guideline for us. 
Some studies show that transparency about the monetary policy target helps anchor inflation 
expectations.25 The more credible monetary policy is, the more effective the interest rate will 
be in stabilising output and employment.26  
Transparency provides good incentives. When we publish our analyses, we tend to make an 
even greater effort to ensure the quality of the analysis. Open external communication also 
                                                 
23   See for example Michael Woodford (2005): “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, in The 
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 399-474. 
24   Willem  F.  Duisenberg  (2001):  “The  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy  and  the  quantitative  definition  of  price 
stability”,  Letter  of  Dr.  W.  F.  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  ECB  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Committee  on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs, 13 December 2001. 
25   See  for  example  Georgios  Chortareas,  David  Stasavage  and  Gabriel  Sterne  (2002):  “Monetary  Policy 
Transparency, Inflation and the Sacrifice Ratio” in International Journal of Finance & Economics, 7, pp.141-
155,  and Nergiz Dincer  and  Barry Eichengreen (2009): “Central bank transparency: causes, consequences 
and updates”, NBER Working Paper 14791. 
26   Openness about how the interest rate is set also seems to generate less volatility in financial markets at the 
time of monetary policy meetings, resulting in more stable market rates. See for example Richild Moessner 
and  William  R.  Nelson  (2008):  “Central  bank  policy  rate  guidance  and  financial  market  functioning”,  in 
International Journal of Central Banking, 4, no. 4, pp. 193-226, and Amund Holmsen, Jan F. Qvigstad, Øistein 
Røisland  and  Kristin  Solberg-Johansen  (2008):  “Communicating  monetary  policy  intentions:  The  case  of 
Norges Bank”, Norges Bank Working Paper, 2008/20. 
6 
 BIS Review 140/2009
places demands on our communication skills. I am certain that many teachers and lecturers 
would agree that teaching is not only a means of conveying knowledge to students, but also 
provides the lecturer with a deeper understanding of the subject. The same applies to central 
bankers. External communication of our analyses has certainly not reduced our competence 
as economists.  
How transparent should the central bank be? 
How  open  should  we  be?  Maximum  transparency  about  Norges  Bank’s  decisions  would 
imply filming the Executive Board’s meetings and webcasting them live. In addition, we could 
perhaps have installed cameras and microphones in some of the offices and meeting rooms 
in  Norges  Bank  where  the  analyses  are  conducted  that  form  the  background  for  the 
Executive  Board’s  decisions.  Perhaps  I  am  old-fashioned, but  I  think  that  a  “reality  series” 
about  Norges  Bank  would  not  be  particularly  entertaining  and  would  not  foster  particularly 
good decision-making.  
Maximum  transparency  is  probably  not  optimal,  but  how  far  should  we  go?  There  is  no 
absolute answer to this. In the following, I will discuss several considerations that must be 
taken into account.  
Should we  publish voting records and the minutes of the Executive Board’s deliberations? 
Central  banks  have  chosen  different  solutions.  In  Sweden,  the  central  bank  publishes  the 
voting records and provides an extensive report with the views of members by name. The 
Bank of England publishes a similar report of the minutes, but members remain anonymous. 
Norges Bank does not publish a report of the minutes of the Executive Board’s deliberations, 
but instead publishes a detailed account explaining the Executive Board’s background for the 
interest rate decision. The interest rate decision is based on a strategy that is described in 
the Monetary Policy Report. The Report also presents the analyses underlying the strategy. 
The basis for interest rate decisions is thus available to the general public.  
The  difference  in  practices  partly  reflects  the  different  character  of  the  monetary  policy 
committees  in  the  three  countries.27  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  the  Bank  of  England  have 
committees that are referred to as “individualistic committees”. Each member is individually 
responsible  for  his/her  vote,  and  the  decision28  is  normally  decided  by  majority  voting.  In 
Norway,  the  Executive  Board  is  more  of  a  “collegial  committee”,  where  the  members  are 
unanimous in their decision. The ECB’s system is of the same type. One cannot have both a 
collegial committee and minutes with individual views.  
If all members publicly explain their own views, communication may become unclear. Alan 
Blinder,  former  vice  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  now  professor  at  Princeton 
University, argues that “a central bank that speaks with a cacophony of voices may, in effect, 
have no voice at all”.29  
There  is  also  another  argument  in  favour  of  unanimous  decisions.  Central  banks  are 
important social institutions, which should not be too closely linked to individuals but have a 
                                                 
27   See Alan S. Blinder (2007): “Monetary policy by committee: Why and how?”, in European Journal of Political 
Economy, 23, no. 1, pp. 106-127 and Alan S. Blinder (2008): “On the design of monetary policy committees”, 
Norges Bank Working Paper, 2008/6. 
28   The  Executive  Board  at  Norges  Bank  consists  of  seven  members,  appointed  by  the  King  in  Council.  The 
Governor and Deputy Governor serve as chairman and deputy chairman, respectively, of the Executive Board. 
They are appointed to full-time positions for a term of six years. The other five members are appointed for 
four-year terms and are not employees of Norges Bank. 
29   Alan  S.  Blinder  (2007):  “Monetary  policy  by  committee:  Why  and  how?”,  in  European  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 23, no. 1, p. 114. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 7
public identity. The institution and its mandate should take precedence over the individuals 
who occupy positions for limited periods.30  
There is no formula for deciding which system  is best. Each system has its strengths and 
weaknesses.  Detailed  meeting  minutes  ensure  accountability  among  committee  members. 
This may give rise to good incentives. On the other hand, such transparency may inhibit the 
actual discussion. Members may come to meetings with pre-drafted statements, impairing a 
constructive exchange of views.  
Researchers  have  compared  tapes  of  the  Fed’s  FOMC  meetings  before  and  after  it  was 
decided that the minutes should be published.31 The tapes show that the form of discussion 
changed. During the period following the decision to publish the minutes, there was a greater 
tendency for members to read prepared statements.  
Detailed minutes also entail a risk of moving the real discussion from the official meeting into 
closed rooms. In that case, a real increase in transparency has not been achieved. The US 
was  aware  of  this  risk  and  introduced  legislation  to  prevent  such  informal  meetings.  They 
called  this  law  the  “Government  in  the  Sunshine  Act”,32  where  the  name  symbolises  that 
important  decisions  should  be  taken  in  the  public  light.  The  law  defines  a  meeting  as  a 
consultation between a quorum of committee members. Stretching it somewhat, this means 
that if some members are chatting in the corridor, they must stop talking about the interest 
rate and start talking about the weather if the group grows to a certain size.  
The  notion  that  increased  transparency  can  hamper  a  free  exchange  of  views  is  not  new. 
The  delegates  to  the  Constitutional  Convention  in  Philadelphia  in  1787  decided  to  veil  the 
deliberations  in  secrecy.  According  to  the  Virginia  delegate  James  Madison,  who  later 
became the fourth US president, secrecy was crucial for succeeding in the work on the US 
Constitution.  He  argued  that  full  disclosure  would  fuel  reluctance  among  delegates  to 
express  their  true  opinions.  Jon  Elster  has  explored  various  aspects  of  transparency  and 
constitutions  in  his  research.  He  notes  that  that  even  if  secrecy  can  lead  to  a  freer 
discussion, it can also lead to negotiations based on vested interests.33 Threats and power 
struggles can be effective behind closed doors, but rarely tolerate public scrutiny.  
The  arguments  that  were  used  in  Philadelphia  can  be  found  in  the  debate  on  public 
disclosure of government papers and cabinet deliberations. In a supreme court ruling from 
1994,  the  first-voting  judge  Steinar  Tjomsland  writes:  “The  possibility  that  governments 
should  testify  before  the  court  (...)  could  inhibit  free  political  exchange  of  information  and 
debate (...)”.34  
If we today even know what Tjomsland wrote, it is because the Supreme Court’s doors were 
opened in 1863. The law on transparent voting in the Supreme Court was adopted after a 
nearly fifty-year conflict between the Storting and the other two branches of government.35 In 
1821,  Christian  Magnus  Falsen  put  forward  a  proposal  for  the  public  disclosure  of  voting 
                                                 
30   See for example Otmar Issing (2005): “Communication, Transparency, Accountability: Monetary Policy in the 
Twenty-First Century”, in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87, no. 2, p.73. 
31   Ellen E. Meade and David Stasavage (2008): “Publicity of debate and the incentive to dissent: evidence from 
the US Federal Reserve”, in The Economic Journal, 118, pp. 695-717. 
32   Government in the Sunshine Act (5 U.S.C. 552b). 
33   See Jon Elster (1995): “Forces and Mechanisms in the Constitution-Making Process”, in Duke Law Journal, 
45, no. 2, pp. 364-396. 
34   Norsk Retstidende (Norwegian journal of law) 1994-1036, p. 1044. 
35   The Storting had adopted a Bill on transparency in the voting process four times since 1818, but assent to the 
Bill was refused each time. 
8 
 BIS Review 140/2009
records  in  the  Supreme  Court.36  He  argued  that  public  disclosure  was  “the  most  effective 
means of ensuring confidence and respect for any government authority is by awakening a 
noble pride among senior civil servants and hence instilling in them respect for the voice of 
the people”.37 The Supreme Court had a different view and argued that it could undermine 
confidence  in  the  Court  if  the  public  discovered  doubt  or  a  lack  of  competence  among 
judges.38  Today,  there  seems  to  be  little  controversy  surrounding  the  disclosure  of  voting 
records in the Supreme Court.39,40
Norges  Bank  is  not  only  responsible  for  securing  price  stability,  but  also  has  a  duty  to 
promote  stability  in  the  banking  system  and  financial  markets.  In  principle,  the  same 
transparency considerations apply here, but with certain exceptions.41
Many of us were surprised and experienced associations with the interwar years when we 
saw  television  footage  of  depositors  queuing  at  the  doors  of  the  crisis-hit  British  bank 
Northern Rock in 2007. In a situation where a bank’s solvency comes into doubt, depositors 
may rush to withdraw their cash. It is easy to conceive of a situation where a bank that is in 
fact solid, but has payment problems, might collapse if the authorities expose the problems 
to the general public. Moreover, banks may take excessive risks if they know the authorities 
will  come  to  their  rescue.  It  can  be  argued  that  in  this  case  it  may  be  appropriate  for  the 
                                                 
36   Guthorm  Immanuel  Hallager  (1935):  Norges  høiesteret:  1815-1915  (The  Supreme  Court  of  Norway:  1815-
1915), 1 vol., H. Aschehoug & Co, p. 131. 
37   See parliamentary deliberations for August 1821, Part 5, Addendum, p. 119. 
38   The Supreme Court argued that if the citizens discern “svagheten af den menneskelige kundskab og viden 
netop  der,  hvor  han  ventede  at  finde  vished  da  er  det  meget  at  befrygte,  at  saadan  erfaring  heller  vil 
nedstemme den agtelse, han forhen følte for den samme domstole, saalænge han blot kjendte de for ham 
forstaaelige  resultater  af  stemmegivningen  og  deliberationerne.  (weaknesses  in  human  knowledge  and 
expertise notably where they expect to find certitude, there is a risk that such an experience will diminish the 
high esteem in which the court was previously held before their insight was confined to the comprehensible 
outcome  of  the  voting  and  deliberations.)”.  See  parliamentary  deliberations  for  August  1821,  Part  5, 
Addendum, p. 128. 
39   Professor  Peter  Lødrup  wrote  in  1998:  “Den  offentlige  voteringen  er  etter  nåtidens  rettsoppfatning  en 
selvfølge, og det må konstateres at Høyesteretts motstand mot den var et feilsyn. (Under today’s perception of 
the law, public access to voting records is a matter of course, and it must be recognised that the Supreme 
Court’s opposition was misguided.)” See Peter Lødrup (1998): “Høyesterett 1814-1996, noen historiske glimt 
(Norway’s Supreme Court 1814-1996 – some historical glimpses)”, in Norges Høyesterett (Norway’s Supreme 
Court), Stephan Tschudi-Madsen (ed.), Aschehoug, pp. 29-31. 
40   We find similar arguments in the debate between Deputy Governor at the Bank of England, Sir Ernest Harvey, 
and T. E. Gregory and J. M. Keynes, members of the so-called Macmillan-committee. The following excerpts 
from  the  committee’s  report  in  1931  is  reported  in  Otmar  Issing  (2005):  “Communication,  Transparency, 
Accountability: Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century”, in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87, 
no.  2,  p.  73:  “Committee  member  Gregory:  ‘I  should  like  to  ask  you,  Sir  Ernest,  whether  you  have  ever 
considered  the  possibility  of  the  Bank  issuing  an  Annual  Report  on  the  lines  of  the  Annual  Report  of  the 
Federal Reserve Board, for instance?’ Deputy Governor  Harvey: ‘I confess I am sometimes nervous at the 
thought of publication unless it is historical. The question is whether, when it is merely historical it is of any 
particular  value,  or  whether  from  the  fact  that  it  is  issued  from  the  central  bank  undue  importance  may  be 
attributed to certain things that are stated, more importance than perhaps they merit...’ Committee member 
Keynes: ‘Arising from Professor Gregory’s questions, is it a practice of the Bank of England never to explain 
what its policy is?’ Harvey: ‘Well, I think it has been our practice to leave our actions to explain our policy.’ 
Keynes: ‘Or the reasons for its policy?’ Harvey: ‘It is a dangerous thing to start to give reasons.’ Keynes: ‘Or to 
defend itself against criticism?’ Harvey: ‘As regards criticism, I am afraid, though the Committee may not all 
agree, we do not admit there is need for defence; to defend ourselves is somewhat akin to a lady starting to 
defend her virtue’.” 
41   For  a  discussion  of  central  bank  transparency  and  financial  stability,  see  for  example  Jakob  De  Haan  and 
Sander Oosterloo (2006): “Transparency and accountability of central banks in their role of financial stability 
supervisor in OECD countries”, in European Journal of Law and Economics, 22, no. 3, pp. 255-271. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 9
central  bank  to  engage  in  what  is  referred  to  in  diplomatic  parlance  as  “constructive 
ambiguity”.42,43
Striking  a  balance  between  transparency  and  financial  stability  can  be  difficult,  as  former 
prime minister Abraham Berge discovered. During the banking crisis in 1923, Berge provided 
in  secrecy  a  deposit  of  NOK  25  million 
largest  bank, 
Handelsbanken. The following year, Berge convinced the Storting to inject more capital into 
Handelsbanken, but failed to inform the Storting of the previous support. The secret deposit 
came  to  light  after  the  government  stepped  down  in  1924.  The  criticism  that  followed 
culminated  in  1926  in  an  impeachment  case  against  Berge  and  six  of  his  ministers.  A 
majority of the judges were of the opinion that the support provided in 1923 was punishable 
by law, but they were nevertheless acquitted on the ground of the statute of limitations.44,45  
to  support  Norway’s 
fifth 
information 
is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient 
The art of communication 
Public  disclosure  of 
Communication is also important, but is a difficult art. 
Good communication should satisfy three criteria.46 First, the communication should be clear. 
The information should not be subject to misinterpretation and should not be so imprecise 
that  it  is  not  given  weight.  Central  banks  have  not  always  been  associated  with  clear  and 
good  communication.  Alan  Greenspan  expressed  this  in  the  following  statement:  “Since 
becoming a central banker, I have learned to mumble with great incoherence. If I turn out to 
be particularly clear, you’ve probably misunderstood what I have said.”47  
Second, communication should be effective. It should not be time-consuming and demanding 
for the recipient to find and interpret the relevant information. It must be adapted to the target 
group.48,49
transparency. 
for 
                                                 
42   See E. Gerald Corrigan (1990): “Future Priorities in Banking and Finance”, Remarks given before the 62nd 
Annual  Mid-Winter  Meeting  of  the  New  York  State  Bankers’  Association,  25  January  1990.  Published  in 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Quarterly  Review/Winter  1989-90,  p.7.  See  also  p.  36  in  “Norske 
finansmarkeder  –  pengepolitikk  og  finansiell  stabilitet  (Norwegian  financial  markets  –  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability)”, Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers, no. 34 (2004). 
43   The  concept  of  “constructive  ambiguity”  refers  to  the  deliberate  use  of  ambiguous  language  in  order  to 
advance a political purpose. The concept has been particularly associated with Henry Kissinger, said to be the 
foremost exponent of constructive ambiguity as a negotiating tactic. 
44   See Riksrettstidende 1926/1927. 
45   On  7  November  2008,  Bloomberg  LP  (on  behalf  of  Bloomberg  News)  filed  a  federal  lawsuit  against  the 
Federal Reserve for violation of the Freedom of Information Act. The news agency had called on the central 
bank to identify the US banks funded by its emergency lending because the taxpayers should be aware of the 
risks involved in these investments. The Fed refused to name the borrowers, disclose the amounts of loans or 
the assets banks provided as collateral, arguing that doing so might “set off a run by depositors and unsettle 
shareholders”. See article “Fed makes taxpayers ‘involuntary investors’ in banks, suit says”, Bloomberg, 15 
April 2009. 
46   See for example Bernhard Winkler (2000): “Which kind of transparency? On the need for clarity in monetary 
policy-making”, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 26. 
47   As cited in Petra M. Geraats (2007): “The Mystique of Central Bank Speak”, in International Journal of Central 
Banking, March 2007, p. 37. 
48   Effective  communication  to  market  participants  is  particularly  important.  As  economists  with  a  university 
background, we often feel the need to build up a series of arguments and weigh various considerations before 
arriving  at  a  conclusion.  But  this  can  sometimes  render  communication  less  effective.  Financial  market 
participants prefer to be presented with the conclusion first so that they can respond to it quickly. 
10 
 BIS Review 140/2009
The third criterion for good communication is that it must be honest. I referred earlier to the 
principle  that  the  external  communication  should  reflect  the  internal  deliberations.  It  is  an 
honest  matter  to  communicate  that  decisions  are  difficult  and  often  made  on  an  uncertain 
basis. But it is just as important – and more challenging – to explain why it is difficult and 
which factors have been considered and given weight.  
Before  the  rebuilding  of  Bislett  Stadium  in  2004,  the  organisation  Bislett  Alliansen  was  to 
decide where the Bislett Games should be moved. The choice stood between Drammen and 
Bergen.  They  chose  Bergen.  The  head  of  the  organisation  said  to  the  Norwegian  news 
agency NTB:  
“I  have  participated  for  almost  20  years,  and  this  was  the  most  difficult 
decision I have been involved in. At the end of the day, the decision was 
made on the basis of an overall assessment.”50  
The way this was reported by the news agency did not make it easy to understand the actual 
background for the assessment.51
I  remember  listening  to  this  report  on  the  radio  while  driving.  It  made  me  think  about  the 
formulations  in  our  own  press  releases.  To  be  honest,  they  were  not  much  clearer.  I  saw 
room 
the 
communication  of  our  assessments.  We  have  nevertheless  experienced  that  it  can  be 
demanding to communicate why we arrive at one conclusion and not another.  
improvement,  and  we  have  subsequently  made  efforts 
improve 
for 
to 
Can we become more transparent? 
Views on transparency and communication are constantly changing. As mentioned, Norges 
Bank  has  become  more  transparent  in  recent  years.  But  is  there  room  for  even  more 
transparency? 
I readily admit that we were uncertain before taking new steps. When we first start publishing 
information, it is difficult to retreat. But the experience so far has been positive.52 In some 
areas, therefore, I believe there is room for increased transparency. Some observers have 
argued that Norges Bank and other central banks should provide information to the public 
about  the  models  we  use  and  how  we  use  them.53  I  agree  with  this.  It  is  difficult  from  a 
pedagogical viewpoint to explain how the models are used as a basis for economic policy. 
                                                                                                                                                         
49   As part of its project to disseminate information about the central bank to various target groups, the Reserve 
the  benefit  of  school  children.  See 
India  has  made  several  comic  strips 
for 
Bank  of 
http://www.rbi.org.in/financialeducation/Home.aspx. 
50   See article “Bergen fikk Bislett Games 2004 (The 2004 Bislett Games goes to Bergen)”, NTB, 6 October 2003. 
51   A more detailed explanation was probably available but was not included in the media coverage. 
52   My  predecessor,  Jarle  Bergo,  delivered  a  speech  a  few  years  ago  where  he  presented  a  mathematical 
equation that illustrated the assessments underlying our interest rate setting (see “Interest Rate Projections in 
Theory and Practice”, speech at Sanderstølen, 27 January 2007). I remember that we were uncertain about 
the reactions to this. My Swedish colleague Lars Svensson had recommended that such a target function be 
published in the interest of transparency, but no central bank had ever done this before. There was no first-
page  news  of  the  type  “this  equation  determines  the  interest  rate”.  Our  “bold  step”  proved  to  be  fairly 
undramatic.  It  would  seem  that  this  is  really  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  every  time  we  have  moved 
towards greater transparency. Bergo’s lecture was included in the curriculum of economics Professor Michael 
Woodford of Columbia University in New York. 
53   Norges  Bank  Watch  2008  writes:  “Norges  Bank  should  facilitate  a  more  open  discussion  regarding  the 
empirical  performance  of  their  (mechanical)  forecasting  models  by  communicating  the  role  played  by  the 
“judgment component” more clearly. This may encourage exploitation of the cumulative learning process in 
the  scientific  community  as  a  whole,  by  which  existing  empirical  models  are  improved  or  (eventually) 
overtaken  by  new  and  better  ones.”See  Steinar  Juel,  Krisztina  Molnaad  and  Knut  Røed  (2008)  “An 
Independent Review of Monetary Policymaking in Norway”, Centre for Monetary Economics BI, p. 44. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 11
Because models are rough simplifications of reality, we must exercise considerable judgment 
when we use them. This is not always easy to document and explain. But, even though it 
may be difficult, it is not impossible and our aim is to improve in this area.  
The  management  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  is  another  activity  of  Norges 
Bank  where  transparency  is  important.  Among  the  world’s  sovereign  pension  funds, 
Norway’s is one of the most transparent. International organisations refer to it as an example 
of  best  practice.  In  Norway,  the  Fund  has  been  both  applauded  and  criticised  for  its 
communication.  The  Fund’s  annual  report  was  one  among  six  others  nominated  for  the 
Farmand  award  for  best  annual  report  and  website.  However,  the  same  report  was  also 
strongly  criticised  by  the  Norwegian  journalist  Per  Egil  Hegge  for  its  impenetrable 
language.54  
We  are  working  towards  improving  our  communication  of  the  Fund’s  activity.  The  Fund’s 
ultimate owners are the Norwegian people and we must improve the communication of the 
main  management  principles  to  that  target  group.  We  are  making  continuous  efforts  to 
improve  our  quarterly  reports  and  our  annual  report.  We  are  also  working  to  improve  the 
Fund’s website, which will include a continuous update of the Fund’s value.  
Conclusion 
Transparency  is  important.  Transparency  contributes  to  strengthening  confidence,  and 
confidence  is  crucial  for  an  effective  monetary  policy  –  in  normal  times,  but  perhaps 
particularly  in  times  of  crisis.  According  to  Lars  Weisæth  and  Ragnar  Kjeserud,  two 
authorities  in  the  field  of  crisis  psychiatry,  to  be  successful  in  managing  a  crisis,  the 
responsible  authorities  must  be  perceived  as  competent  and  at  the  same  time  have  a 
reputation for openness and honesty.55  
I started this lecture by describing how the Bank of England managed the crisis during the 
1780  Gordon  riots.  A  military  defence  was  necessary  to  safeguard  society’s  values.  The 
event gave rise to the expression “as safe as the Bank of England” and later “as safe as the 
bank”.  
We have experienced a deep financial crisis. We are now hopeful that it is coming to an end. 
The  reputation  of  private  banks  has  not  been  left  untarnished.  Banks’  own  behaviour  was 
one  of  the  causes  of  the  crisis.  The  very  depth  of  the  banking  crisis  is  attributable  to  a 
collapse  of  trust  among  banks.  They  no  longer  considered  their  fellow  banks  as  “safe”. 
Financial  markets  stopped  functioning.  The  expression  “as  safe  as  the  bank”  became 
somewhat hollowed.  
We  have  seen  that  the  most  unexpected  places,  such  as  small  coastal  towns  and  the 
northern region of Norway, have been hard-hit by the financial crisis. The crisis has also left 
its mark on our language. In a tribute published in the newspaper Troms Folkeblad on the 
occasion of the 50th birthday of the manager of Troms football league, he is described as “as 
safe as Norges Bank” in his handling of protests and violations.56 With that, the expression 
was  brought  back  to  its  original  source.  And  perhaps  that  means  that  Norges  Bank’s 
reputation has survived the financial crisis – at least in Troms!  
                                                 
54   Per Egil Hegge noted in particular the following sentence in the annual report: “The expected tracking error 
increased  more  than  the  absolute  market  volatility,  primarily  reflecting  a  closer  correlation  between  returns 
from the different investment strategies.” See Hegge’s column in Aftenposten, 16 April 2009. 
55   Lars  Weisæth  and  Ragnar  Kjeserud  (2007):  Ledelse  ved  kriser:  en  praktisk  veileder  (Management  during 
crises: a practical guide), Gyldendal Akademisk, p. 71 (Norwegian only). 
56   See article “Mr. Fotballkretsen fyller 50! (Mr. Football League turns 50)”, Troms Folkeblad, 6 October 2009 
(Norwegian only). 
12 
 BIS Review 140/2009
When  the  Bank  of  England  came  under  attack,  many  citizens  had  already  volunteered  as 
soldiers  to defend  the  bank.  They  were  outnumbered,  but  the  very  sight  of  them  probably 
demoralised the mobs and led to their defeat.  
Expectations  and  confidence  were  as  important  then  as  now.  But  there  is  a  significant 
difference – that can summarise today’s lecture. While central banks at that time upheld the 
value of money with walls and thundering muskets, today the value of money is safeguarded 
by confidence rooted in disclosure and transparency.  
BIS Review 140/2009 
 13
