Duvvuri Subbarao: Emerging market concerns – an Indian perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  G-30 
International  Banking  Seminar,  organized  on  the  occasion  of  the  IMF-World  Bank  Annual 
Meetings 2009, Istanbul, 5 October 2009. 
 From  the  perspective  of  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  and  particularly  for  that  of 
India, I will highlight five concerns. These are: first, timing of exit from the accommodative 
monetary policy in the context of rising food price-led inflation but still weak growth; second, 
the possibility of another surge in capital flows, especially if we turn out to be an outlier in 
withdrawal of monetary stimulus; third, monetary transmission mechanism as it is evolving 
from the crisis period; fourth, return to fiscal consolidation and quality of fiscal adjustment; 
and finally, the implications of the efforts towards financial stability on financial inclusion and 
growth. 
Unique features of the Indian economy 
Before I turn to these issues, I want to indicate a few features unique to the Indian economy. 
These  features,  I  believe,  are  important  to  appreciate  my  comments  on  emerging  market 
concerns. 
What  are  the  unique  features  of  the  Indian  economy  that  distinguish  it  from  other  EMEs? 
First,  our  growth  is  driven  by  domestic  demand  –  both  consumption  and  investment. 
Consumption and saving are well balanced. In India, the share of private final consumption 
expenditure in GDP is around 55 per cent. Our savings rate is 37.7 per cent and investment 
rate is 39.1 per cent. 
Second, we have twin deficits – fiscal as well as current account deficit. We were on a path 
of  fiscal  consolidation  before  the  crisis,  but  got  off  track  because  of  the  counter  cyclical 
spending necessitated by the crisis. Unlike major EMEs, which are running current account 
surpluses,  we  have  recorded  deficits  on  the  current  account.  Although  current  account 
deficits have been modest, the deficit reached a high of 2.6 per cent of GDP in 2008-09 but 
is expected to moderate during 2009-10. 
Third, given the right balance between domestic consumption and saving on the one hand, 
and infrastructural bottlenecks in major areas (such as power, roads, urban infrastructure as 
also  social  infrastructure)  on  the  other,  India  is  essentially  a  supply-constrained  economy. 
Just before the crisis, such supply concerns led to a view that there might be overheating in 
the economy. Generally, weak external demand has led to some externally induced cyclical 
slowdown. However, as the global economy recovers, supply constraints are again expected 
to be binding. 
Against this backdrop of the unique features of our economy, let me turn to the five concerns 
that I want to raise.  
First Concern: exit from accommodative monetary policy: growth vs. inflation 
While  there  is  broad  agreement  that  we  need  to  exit  from  the  present  excessively 
accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, there is less agreement on when and how we 
should exit. There are incipient signs of recovery. Industrial production has picked up in the 
past  couple  of  months,  but  export  growth  remains  negative.  Business  confidence  surveys 
suggest recovery from the troughs touched a year ago although the confidence levels remain 
below the earlier peaks. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 1
Even as recovery remains weak, consumer price inflation (CPI) is running in double digits on 
the back of high food prices. While the headline wholesale price inflation remains low (0.84 
per cent for the week ended September 19, 2009) – it was even negative during June-August 
2009 – CPI inflation has been persistently high for almost a year. Higher food prices in our 
case  are  partly  a  result  of  the  structural  demand-supply  imbalances.  At  present,  cyclical 
factors are also at play. Monsoon in the current season, which ended on September 30, has 
been the weakest since 1972. Agricultural output is expected to suffer and this could keep 
upward pressure on food prices in the coming months. High food prices are, therefore, a mix 
of  structural  and  cyclical  factors.  While  the  buffer  stock  of  foodgrains  and  better  supply 
management  could  mitigate  the  adverse  effects  to  an  extent,  imports  are  not  an  easy 
solution given the requirement. 
Although  inflation  pressures  emanating  from  higher  food  prices  may  limit  the  scope  for 
monetary policy action, there are implications for inflation expectations. Furthermore, unlike 
the major advanced economies, growth remains positive. Real GDP growth was 6.7 per cent 
in  2008-09  and  is  expected  to  be  6.0  per  cent  (with  an  upward  bias)  as  per  the  Reserve 
Bank’s July 2009 projections. In view of the country specific features, we may need to exit 
from accommodative monetary policy earlier than advanced economies. This calls for careful 
management of trade-offs: growth concerns warrant a delayed exist, but inflation concerns 
call for an earlier exit. An early exit on inflation concerns runs the risk of derailing the fragile 
growth, while a delayed exit may engender inflation expectations. 
Second concern: management of large and volatile capital flows 
Major central banks – such as the US Fed, the ECB, the BoE – have flushed their financial 
systems  with  unprecedented  amount  of  liquidity.  Till  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  this  liquidity 
was finding its way back to the central banks as excess reserves because of risk aversion. 
Risk  appetite  is  now  returning.  There  are  signs  of  recovery  in  portfolio  investments  to  the 
EMEs. For instance, portfolio investments by FIIs in the Indian equity market amounted to 
US$ 13.6 billion in the period April 1 – September 18, 2009 as against outflows of US$ 5.2 
billion in the corresponding period of 2008 reflecting a turnaround of almost US$ 19 billion. 
Moreover, as noted above, in view of incipient inflationary pressures, policy rates in our case 
may  have  to  be  tightened  ahead  of  those  in  advanced  economies.  The  resultant  larger 
interest differential may  attract larger capital inflows. Will capital inflows be modest or turn 
into a flood as in 2007? The latter concern is particularly relevant in view of abundant liquidity 
in the major advanced economies. What will the implications be for exchange rates? In India, 
the  current  account  is  in  modest  deficit;  hence  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  can  impose 
macroeconomic costs. 
Emerging market central banks have three options in managing capital flows. The first option 
is for the central bank not to intervene in the forex market and let the exchange rate bear the 
burden of adjustment. Will undue exchange rate appreciation not further widen the current 
account  and  what  will  the  implications  be  for  future  sustainability?  Will  exchange  rate 
appreciation  help  to  contain  inflation?  These  are  the  questions  to  address  if  this  option  is 
adopted. 
Second,  the  central  bank  can  intervene  in  the  forex  market,  but  refrain  from  sterilisation. 
Such an approach runs the risk of excessive growth in monetary and credit aggregates which 
can  lead  to  higher  inflation  as  well  as  credit  and  investment  booms  and  create  financial 
fragility. 
The third option is to sterilise the interventions. Irrespective of the method of sterilisation, the 
financial cost of sterilisation in terms of national balance sheet is obviously ultimately borne 
by the government even though direct costs may be borne by separate agencies. Sterilised 
intervention  can  exacerbate  fiscal  pressures,  but  this  needs  to  be  assessed  against  the 
benefits of macro-financial stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2009
Third concern: de-clogging monetary transmission mechanism 
Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  global  economic  outlook  deteriorated 
sharply, and the Indian economy got impacted by the contagion through all the channels – 
the  financial  channel,  the  real  channel  and  the  confidence  channel.  The  Reserve  Bank’s 
crisis  response  included,  like  in  the  case  of  other  central  banks,  both  conventional  and 
unconventional measures. 
In  response  to  the  easing  of  policy  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity  made  available, 
market rates eased significantly. Yields on 10-year central government securities fell from 8.6 
per  cent  at  end-September  2008  to  5.3  per  cent  by  end-December  2008.  This  trend  has 
since reversed with yields hardening since the beginning of the current calendar year on the 
back of large and abrupt increase in the government borrowing programme. 
In contrast, interest rates on bank deposits and loans have exhibited stickiness. While the 
Reserve  Bank  cut  the  effective  policy  rate  by  575  basis  points,  banks’  Benchmark  Prime 
Lending Rates (BPLRs) have seen a reduction of only 100-275 basis points. This stickiness 
has impeded monetary transmission and blunted the intended impact of policy actions. What 
is the explanation for the stickiness in the interest rate structure of banks? 
There are several factors that cause this stickiness – the higher rates of interest offered by 
the small savings instruments which discourage banks from reducing deposit rates, the high 
cost of deposits raised by banks during earlier tighter monetary policy regime which raised 
their weighted average costs, and the large government borrowing programme which pushed 
up yields on government securities. 
These factors, which impeded monetary transmission, were in play even before the crisis. A 
definite task going forward will be to address the impediments to monetary transmission. 
Fourth concern: fiscal stimulus – withdrawal and quality of adjustment 
Like in other economies, fiscal stimulus measures and weakening of economic activity have 
led  to  substantial  increase  in  our  fiscal  deficits.  The  Central  Government’s  fiscal  deficit  is 
budgeted  to  jump  from  2.7  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2007-08  to  6.8  per  cent  in  2009-10;  the 
combined fiscal deficit of the Centre and the states is expected to increase from 4.2 per cent 
of GDP to 10.2 per cent over the same period. These deficits are large and need to be rolled 
back. What is the scope for adjustment? What lesson does our past experience offer? 
As a result of the discipline imposed by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
(FRBM) Act, the Centre’s fiscal deficit came down from 6.2 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 2.7 
per cent in 2007-08. Over the same period, the deficit of the state governments declined from 
4.1 per cent of GDP to 1.5 per cent. Thus, we saw a large adjustment over a relatively small 
period. This past experience with fiscal adjustment may raise hopes that we will be able to 
roll back the recent fiscal deficits. Such a simplistic approach may be misleading. A large part 
of our fiscal deficit is structural and not cyclical. Also, at least a part of fiscal consolidation 
resulted  from  high  growth,  not  the  other  way  round.  It  is  important  to  acknowledge  this  in 
order to define the problem and assess the enormity of the challenge. 
Three  issues  are  important  in  this  context.  First,  this  concept  of  “fiscal  adjustment  over  a 
cycle” is inadvisable for us. Adjustment over a cycle is for mature and advanced economies. 
Even there it does not work – the UK, for instance, was running its highest fiscal deficit at the 
peak of the economic cycle. We will be safest sticking to a single formula and tying ourselves 
down to annual, inflexible targets. This is a blunt but safe way of de-linking fiscal adjustment 
from democratic pressures. Second, we must focus on the quality of fiscal adjustment, not 
just chase a numerical target. The ratio of capital outlay to GDP for the Central Government 
has stagnated between 1 and 2 per cent of GDP since the early 1990s from around 2-3 per 
cent  in  the  preceding  decade.  Third,  we  cannot  sit  back  and  hope  that  tax  increase  will 
deliver fiscal consolidation on a platter. Revenue expenditure has increased from around 12 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 3
per  cent  of  GDP  during  the  period  2000-08  to  over  15  per  cent  now.  We  need  to  work 
seriously on expenditure compression. This is going to be politically challenging both at the 
Centre and in the States, but it needs to be done regardless. 
Fifth concern: financial stability, financial inclusion and growth 
The last concern I want to raise relates to the challenge of financial inclusion. 
Given the enormity of the crisis, financial sector regulation is being tightened under the aegis 
of international bodies such as the BCBS and FSB. There are proposals that would raise the 
reserve requirement of banks. New regulations for liquidity requirements are also going to be 
in place. There are also proposals to require banks to hold government securities. Many of 
these measures are necessary. But we need to recognise that all such proposals will have 
the  impact  of  increasing  the  banks’  funding  costs  which  will  translate  into  higher  lending 
rates. How will banks react to such higher costs? Will this lead to an erosion of banks’ social 
responsibility  towards  the  poorer  and  other  needy  segments  of  the  society?  In  economies 
such as India, a large part of population remains financially excluded. We will need to ensure 
that  efforts  at  financial  inclusion  do  not  get  negated  by  the  ongoing  tightening  of  the 
regulatory regime. 
In  order  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  we  have  traditionally  used  a  variety  of  prudential 
measures such as specifying exposure norms and pre-emptive tightening of risk weights and 
provisioning  requirements.  But  these  measures  are  not  always  costless.  For  instance, 
tightening  of  risk  weights  arguably  tempers  the  flow  of  credit  to  certain  sectors,  but 
excessive,  premature  or  unnecessary  tightening  could  blunt  growth.  Similarly,  exposure 
norms  offer  protection  against  concentration  risks;  however,  such  limits  could  restrict  the 
availability  of  credit  for  important  growth  sectors.  This  is  a  live  issue  in  our  country  in  the 
context  of  the  immense  needs  of  infrastructure  financing.  Thus,  as  in  the  case  of  price 
stability,  central  banks  face  the  challenge  of  managing  the  trade-off  between  financial 
stability and growth. 
It  needs  to  be  recognized  that  after  a  crisis,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  all  conservative 
policies  appear  justified.  But  excessive  conservatism  in  order  to  be  prepared  to  ride  out  a 
potential crisis could thwart growth and financial innovation. The question is what price are 
we willing to pay, in other words, what potential benefits are we willing to give up, in order to 
prevent  a  black  swan  event?  Experience  shows  that  managing  this  challenge,  that  is  to 
determine how much to tighten and when, is more a question of good judgement rather than 
analytical  skill.  This  judgement  skill  is  the  one  that  central  banks,  especially  in  developing 
countries such as India, need to hone as they simultaneously pursue the objectives of growth 
and financial stability. 
Conclusion 
Thank you very much for giving me this platform to speak about the concerns of emerging 
economies as we shift from managing the crisis to managing the recovery. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2009
