European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
3 December 2009. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  today.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on 5 November 2009, price developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-
relevant horizon. The latest information also confirms the expected improvement in economic 
activity in the second half of this year, with euro area real GDP growth returning to positive 
territory in the third quarter of 2009. However, some of the factors supporting the recovery at 
present are of a temporary nature. The Governing Council expects the euro area economy to 
grow  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010,  recognising  that  the  recovery  process  is  likely  to  be 
uneven  and  that  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  high  uncertainty.  The  outcome  of  the 
monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium 
term, as money and credit growth continues to slow down. All in all, we expect price stability 
to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro 
area households. Medium to longer-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line 
with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. 
At today’s meeting we also decided to continue conducting our main refinancing operations 
(MROs) as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long as is needed – and at 
least until the third maintenance period of 2010 ends on 13 April. We will continue to use this 
tender  procedure  in  our  special-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  one 
maintenance  period,  which  will  continue  for  at  least  the  first  three  maintenance  periods  of 
2010.  Moreover,  we  decided  that  the  rate  in  the  last  12-month  longer-term  refinancing 
operation, to be allotted on 16 December 2009, will be fixed at the average minimum bid rate 
of  the  MROs  over  the  life  of  this  operation.  Finally,  as  regards  longer-term  refinancing 
operations in the first quarter of 2010, we decided to carry out the last six-month longer-term 
refinancing  operation  on  31  March  2010.  This  operation  will  be  carried  out  using  a  full 
allotment  fixed  rate  tender  procedure,  as  will  the  regular  monthly  three-month  longer-term 
refinancing operations already announced for the first quarter of 2010.  
Further operational details on these decisions can be found in a press release that will be 
posted on our website after this press conference. 
The  improved  conditions  in  financial  markets  have  indicated  that  not  all  our  liquidity 
measures  are  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past.  With  these  decisions,  the 
Eurosystem continues to provide liquidity support to the banking system of the euro area for 
an extended period at very favourable conditions and to facilitate the provision of credit to the 
euro area economy.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  improved  further  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009,  with  real 
GDP growth returning to positive territory following five quarters of contraction. According to 
Eurostat’s first estimate, real GDP increased by 0.4% quarter on quarter. Available survey 
data suggest that the recovery is continuing during the fourth quarter of 2009. At present, the 
euro area is benefiting from the inventory cycle and a recovery in exports, as well as from the 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 1
significant  macroeconomic  stimulus  under  way  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system.  However,  a  number  of  the  supporting  factors  are  of  a 
temporary nature and activity is likely to be affected for some time to come by the ongoing 
process of balance sheet adjustment in the financial and the non-financial sector, both inside 
and outside the euro area. For this reason, the euro area economy is expected to grow only 
at a moderate pace in 2010, and the recovery process is likely to be uneven. 
Eurosystem  staff  project  annual  real  GDP  growth  of  between  –4.1%  and  –3.9%  in  2009, 
between +0.1% and +1.5% in 2010, and between +0.2% and +2.2% in 2011. The range for 
2010  has  been  revised  upwards  compared  with 
the  September  2009  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic projections. Forecasts by international organisations are broadly in line with 
the December 2009 Eurosystem staff projections. 
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may also improve further and foreign trade may recover more strongly than projected. On the 
downside, concerns remain relating to a stronger or more protracted than expected negative 
feedback loop between the real economy and the financial sector, renewed increases in oil 
and other commodity prices, the intensification of protectionist pressures and the possibility 
of disruptive market movements related to the correction of global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, as expected, euro area annual HICP inflation has turned 
positive again after five months of negative rates. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, it 
stood  at  +0.6%  in  November,  up  from  –0.1%  in  October.  The  rise  mainly  reflects  upward 
base  effects  stemming  from  the  drop  in  global  commodity  prices  a  year  ago.  Inflation  is 
expected to rise further in the near term, mainly owing to upward base effects in the energy 
and food components. Looking further ahead, inflation is expected to remain moderate over 
the policy-relevant horizon, with overall price, cost and wage developments staying subdued 
in line with a slow recovery in demand in the euro area and elsewhere. In this context, it is 
important to re-emphasise that inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain 
firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Consistent with this assessment, the December 2009 Eurosystem staff projections foresee 
annual HICP inflation of 0.3% in 2009, between 0.9% and 1.7% in 2010, and between 0.8% 
and 2.0% in 2011. Compared with the September 2009 ECB staff projections, the inflation 
projections  for  2010  remain  largely  unchanged.  Available  forecasts  from  international 
organisations provide a broadly similar picture. 
Risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. They relate, in particular, to the outlook for 
economic activity and the evolution of commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in indirect 
taxation and administered prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to the need 
for fiscal consolidation in the coming years.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the data for October confirm the ongoing decline in the 
annual growth rates of M3 and loans to the private sector, to 0.3% and –0.8% respectively. 
These  concurrent  declines  continue  to  support  the  assessment  of  a  moderate  underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion  and  low  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term.  At  the 
same time, the annual growth rate of M1 was 11.8% in October 2009, down from 12.8% in 
September, mainly reflecting a base effect. 
The  current  decline  in  the  annual  growth  rates  of  monetary  aggregates  is  influenced  by  a 
number of special factors and is thereby likely to overstate the deceleration in the underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion.  First,  base  effects  associated  with  the  intensification  of  the 
financial turmoil in autumn 2008 have had a downward effect on the annual growth rate of 
M3 in the past two months. Second, and more fundamentally, the steep slope of the yield 
curve provides an incentive to shift funds out of M3 into longer-term deposits and securities, 
thereby dampening M3 growth. The current constellation of interest rates also continues to 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2009
trigger shifts of funds within M3, as the narrow spread between the rates on different short-
term deposits reduces the opportunity costs of holding the most liquid assets contained in 
M1. 
The  annual growth  rate  of  bank  loans  to  the  non-financial private  sector  turned  somewhat 
more negative in October. In the case of loans to households, the latest data provide further 
confirmation  of  a  levelling-off  at  low  rates  of  growth.  As  regards  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations, it is worthwhile to note that the growth of loans to enterprises typically picks up 
with some lag compared with the cycle in economic activity. In this respect, the still subdued 
levels of production and trade, as well as the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the business 
outlook, are likely to dampen firms’ demand for bank financing also in the coming months, 
especially  for  short-term  loans.  At  the  same  time,  overall  financing  conditions  continue  to 
improve, which should support the demand for loans in the period ahead. Banks are currently 
faced with the challenge of managing the size and structure of their overall balance sheets, 
and at the same time ensuring the availability of credit to the non-financial sector. Against the 
background of their improved liquidity situation and access to market financing, banks should 
address  this  challenge  by  taking  appropriate  measures  to  strengthen  further  their  capital 
bases  and,  where  necessary,  take  full  advantage  of  government  support  measures  for 
recapitalisation. 
To sum up, the current rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the information and 
analyses  that  have  become  available  since  our  meeting  on  5  November  2009,  price 
developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-relevant horizon. The latest 
information also confirms the expected improvement in economic activity in the second half 
of this year, with euro area real GDP growth returning to positive territory in the third quarter 
of 2009. However, some of the factors supporting the recovery at present are of a temporary 
nature. The Governing Council expects the euro area economy to grow at a moderate pace 
in  2010,  recognising  that  the  recovery  process  is  likely  to  be  uneven  and  that  the  outlook 
remains subject to high uncertainty. Cross-checking the outcome of the economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure over 
the medium term, as money and credit growth continues to slow down. All in all, we expect 
price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing 
power of euro area households.  
With all the measures we have taken in response to the intensification of the financial crisis, 
we have supported both the availability of liquidity to the banking sector and the recovery of 
the euro area economy. As the transmission of monetary policy works with lags, we expect 
that  our  policy  action  will  continue  to  progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy.  We  will 
continue our enhanced credit support to the banking system, while taking into account the 
ongoing improvement in financial market conditions and avoiding distortions associated with 
maintaining non-standard measures for too long. Looking ahead, the Governing Council will 
gradually phase out, at the appropriate time, the extraordinary liquidity measures that are not 
needed to the same extent as in the past. In order to counter effectively any threat to price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  the  liquidity  provided  will  be  absorbed  when 
necessary.  In  this  way,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  ensure  a  firm  anchoring  of 
medium-term 
to  supporting 
sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributing  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we 
will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
As regards fiscal policies, we re-emphasise how important it is for governments to develop, 
communicate  and  implement  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  strategies  in  a  timely  manner. 
These  strategies  must  be  based  on  realistic  output  growth  assumptions  and  focus  on 
structural  expenditure  reforms,  not  least  with  a  view  to  coping  with  the  budgetary  burden 
associated  with  an  ageing  population.  As  agreed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  on  2  December 
2009, governments need to set out concrete and quantifiable adjustment measures that will 
lead  to  a  sustainable  correction  of  fiscal  imbalances.  Several  countries  will  have  to  start 
consolidation in 2010, and all others in 2011 at the latest.  
inflation  expectations.  Such  anchoring 
indispensable 
is 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 3
With  regard  to  structural  reforms,  most  estimates  indicate  that  the  financial  crisis  has 
reduced the productive capacity of our economies, and will continue to do so for some time 
to  come.  In  order  to  support  sustainable  growth  and  employment,  labour  market  flexibility 
and  more  effective  incentives  to  work  will  be  needed.  Furthermore,  policies  that  enhance 
competition  and  innovation  are  also  urgently  needed  to  speed  up  restructuring  and 
investment  and  to  create  new  business  opportunities.  An  appropriate  restructuring  of  the 
banking  sector  should  also  play  an  important  role.  Sound  balance  sheets,  effective  risk 
management, and transparent as well as robust business models are key to strengthening 
banks’ resilience to shocks, thereby laying the foundations for sustainable economic growth 
and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2009
