Ewart S Williams: The global financial crisis – institutional management 
and regional opportunities 
Remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad & Tobago, at the 
Caribbean  Law  Institute  Inaugural  Symposium  on  Current  Developments  in  Caribbean 
Community Law, Port-of-Spain, 10 November 2009. 
 The global credit and financial crisis has been the subject of much debate and analysis and 
not unexpectedly, several factors have been identified as the main culprits. 
Analysts  have  pointed  to:  the  sub-prime  mortgage  debacle;  over-expansive  monetary 
policies  leading  to  a  property  and  share-price  bubbles  in  many  developed  countries;  the 
proliferation of complex investment instruments based on high levels of leverage; the failure 
of  large  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  measure  and  manage  risks  and  lax  financial 
regulation and supervision, which failed to require banks to hold adequate levels of capital, 
and failed to detect serious liquidity exposures in wholesale funding markets. 
As you know, at first the crisis was considered a payment for the sins of developed countries; 
it was half expected that the large emerging markets would have been affected but it was felt 
that developing countries would have gone unscathed because of their limited integration in 
the international financial system. 
Of  course,  it  is  now  history  that  the  international  financial  crisis  morphed  into  a  global 
recession  which  has  spared  almost  no  one,  certainly  not  us  here  in  the  Caribbean.  The 
international  recession  also  coincided  with  the  collapse  of  two  regional  financial 
institutions – the Stanford Bank and the CL Financial conglomerate. 
These financial setbacks have created serious hardships for the large numbers of depositors 
and policy-holders of these institutions, though they have not had systemic implications for 
the regional financial system. 
The latest data from the IMF projects negative growth for all of the thirteen Caricom countries 
with the exception, perhaps of Guyana, Suriname and Dominica. As a consequence, most, if 
not all the Caricom countries are facing double-digit unemployment levels. 
The transmission mechanism from the global recession to the region has involved two main 
channels  viz:  the  sharp  decline  in  tourism  and  workers’  remittances  and  the  slump  in 
commodity prices. A few countries have been further affected by the decline in direct foreign 
investment and the unavailability or higher costs of external borrowing. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  affected  the  tourism-dependent  regional  economies  firstly 
through  the  drop  in  tourist  arrivals  ranging  from  around  10  per  cent  for  the  Bahamas, 
Barbuda  and  Antigua  and  Barbados  to  around  20  per  cent  for  St.  Vincent  and  the 
Grenadines,  and  St.  Kitts  and  Nevis.  Jamaica  is  reported  to  have  had  a  reduction  of  only 
about 3 per cent. 
The  fall  in  workers’  remittances  faced  by  the  region  as  a  whole  has  been  estimated  at 
between  15  to  20  per  cent.  This  is  very  significant  since,  in  some  cases,  like  Jamaica, 
remittances  are  estimated  to  account  for  between  50  and  60  percent  of  current  foreign 
exchange receipts. 
The impact of the global recession has also been transmitted through the decline in 
commodity  prices.  Jamaica,  Suriname  and  Guyana  have  had  to  face  a  decline  of  about 
one-half in aluminum prices, while Trinidad and Tobago saw oil prices plunge from US$147 
per  barrel  to  US$40  per  barrel  and  gas  prices  from  US$8  per  mmbtu  to  under  US$3  per 
mmbtu. 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 1
In the case of Trinidad and Tobago, concerns about the sharp economic downturn and rising 
unemployment,  after  close  to  a  decade  of  buoyant  economic  conditions,  have  created 
significant uncertainties and put a damper on private consumption and investment spending. 
Fortunately the Government was able to provide some fiscal stimulus to compensate for the 
decline  in  private  expenditures  and  this  has  helped  to  contain  the  reduction  in  output  and 
employment. 
Unfortunately, most of the other countries in the region do not have the fiscal space (or have 
limited fiscal space) because, in the first case, they were running fiscal deficits even before 
the crisis and secondly because of their high debt burdens, averaging about 90 per cent of 
GDP and for some countries running well in excess of 100 per cent of GDP. 
Accordingly many in the region have decided to seek financial assistance from the IMF and 
from other multilateral institutions. 
And there is no hope of relief soon … 
The  latest  indicators  suggest  that  economic  growth  in  the  US  and  in  most  advanced 
economies has resumed though the consensus is that the recovery would be sluggish and 
even more importantly that employment conditions in these countries could get worse 
before they start to improve. 
That is not very good news for the regional economies that depend heavily on tourism 
and  workers’  remittances.  (Reports  about  advanced  bookings 
for  most  Caribbean 
destinations also paint a pretty dismal picture for the tourism sector in 2010). The likelihood 
therefore  is  for  continued  economic  decline  or  stagnation  in  the  tourism-dependent 
economies in 2010. 
A word about the Clico, British American and BAICO collapse. While, as I have said before, it 
has not had systemic consequences, it is likely to be a rather costly failure. The Trinidad and 
Tobago government has approved a sum of TT$5 billion to meet the statutory deficit of Clico. 
The  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  as  well  as,  the  Barbados  governments  has  also  contributed  to 
meeting 
this 
notwithstanding,  when  the  dust  settles  there  could  be  some  losses  to  pensioners  and 
policyholders,  and  additional  burdens  on  the  already  stretched  budgets  of  regional 
governments. 
There are plans afoot for a new company to take over the liabilities of BAICO. However, it is 
estimated that this would require around US$400 million. 
As you may be aware, the international crisis has again raised concerns about the adequacy 
of  the  international  financial  infrastructure,  and  whether  it  is  sensitive  to  the  needs  of 
emerging market and developing countries. In fact, over the past few months, there has been 
more progress on an international reform agenda than had occurred in the past five years. 
Some of the achievements have been: 
• 
the  statutory  deficits  of 
the  BAICO  subsidiaries 
the  OECS.  All 
in 
Restructuring the main body that sets the international financial agenda, to provide 
for  broader  representation  of  the  fast-growing  emerging  market  economies.  Thus, 
the  G7  has  given  way  to  the  G20  in  which  are  represented  China,  India,  Brazil, 
Argentina  and  South  Africa.  This  is  certainly  an  improvement  in  voice  and 
representation, though as I would come back to later, there is a question as to 
whether it has gone far enough. 
Reform of the IMF has gathered new momentum. This reform has included so far, 
an increase in resources available for lending to emerging market and developing 
countries;  greater  access  to  IMF  resources  by  countries  needing  support;  a 
modest relaxation of IMF conditionality and a new SDR allocation (which is in fact 
a  one-time  gift  of  foreign  exchange  and  which  has  been  very  helpful  for 
countries in balance of payments). Unfortunately, the SDR allocations are based 
BIS Review 142/2009
 2 
   on  quotas  so  the  benefit  does  not  go  to  those  most  in  need  e.g.  Dominica  got 
US$11 million and T&T – US$426 million. 
Mindful that the international financial crisis emanated from the developed countries, 
there is now a very active discussion on how regulation could be reformed to 
avoid another major financial crisis. This discussion has raised issues about the 
risks of having institutions that are “too big to fall”, the salary incentive structure in 
the  banking  industry  and  the  need  for  a  counter-cyclical  approach  to  financial 
regulation. 
Unfortunately, as part of the reform agenda the OECD has begun a new assault on 
“off-shore”  financial  centres.  If  this  is  successful  it  could  have  widespread 
negative effects on several regional economies. 
Small size; 
Susceptibility to natural disasters and the impact of climate change; and 
The very high public debt ratio. 
At  the  last  IMF/World  Bank  Meeting  in  Turkey,  the  Caribbean  made  a  strong  pitch  for 
changes  in  the  operating  framework  of  the  multilateral  financial  institutions.  This 
framework puts per capita income as the defining parameter for the assistance from the IFI’s. 
On  that  basis,  the  Caribbean,  where  per  capita  income  is  high  by  developing-country 
standards, is not eligible for special concessionary assistance. The essence of the Caribbean 
case is that notwithstanding our high per capita incomes, the Caribbean faces specific 
vulnerabilities arriving from: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The World Bank indicated that it would consider the Caribbean’s case. 
So, what are the lessons that this crisis holds for the region? 
If there is any lesson that the last few months should forcefully bring to us, it should be that, 
in this new global environment, deeper regional integration is absolutely critical for the 
survival  of  all  the  Caribbean  economies.  It  is  clearly  a  case  of  “we  swim  together  or  we 
sink together – admittedly some faster than others”. 
For years, we have talked closer integration. However, the journey towards the CSME has 
been slow indeed. This would seem to be the time to accelerate our efforts. 
We need to seriously consider and expedite several things: 
• 
• 
One, to bring regional production structures into better alignment. 
Two, the region needs to develop a policy agenda to improve its resilience in future 
crises. 
Three,  we  need  to  quickly  upgrade  and  harmonize  regulatory  and  supervisory 
systems and put in place mechanisms for regional regulatory coordination. 
Four,  as  the  EU  has  shown,  the  creation  of  a  more  cohesive  regional  economic 
(and  political)  bloc  will  strengthen  our  capacity  to  bargain  collectively  with 
international financial institutions like the IMF, World Bank and WTO and the OECD. 
  And finally, Clico… 
There are many lessons to be drawn from the Clico crisis and there must be, given the 
size of Clico and its vast reach. There are in the first instance: 
• 
questions about the failure of regulation legitimate questions … If Clico was too big 
to fail, it should have been subject to more up to date legislation; 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 3
  questions  of  the  role  of  the  auditors  in  all  this  …  Clico  has  always  been  given  a 
clean  bill  of  health  by  the  auditors.  Unqualified  audit  reports:  even  AM  Best  rated 
Clico BBB in 2007, a slight downgrade from its previous A-rating; and 
there are questions about market discipline ... if you were being offered these high 
rates of interest something must have been wrong; 
I prefer, however, to focus on the governance issues because, without doubt, the failure of 
Clico was a failure of Governance … it was absence of controls from the Board of Directors. 
Clico shows what damage could occur when prudence is clouded by unbridled ambition. 
Clico shows what can happen in the virtual absence of a risk management framework and 
the absence of internal controls. 
Clico  shows  that  we  need  to  rethink  corporate  governance  …  not  only  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago but in the region as a whole. 
Conferences like this could help enormously. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2009
