Nout Wellink: Core principles for effective deposit insurance systems – 
where do we stand? 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Conference on The Core Principles for Effective 
Deposit Insurance Systems, Basel, 23 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  address  this  joint  conference.  As  you  know,  the  Core  Principles  for 
Effective  Deposit  Insurance  Systems  were  developed  jointly  by  IADI,  the  International 
Association of Deposit Insurers, under the excellent leadership of Marty Gruenberg, and the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  These  two  bodies,  together  with  the  Financial 
Stability Institute, organised this conference in order to promote the Core Principles and to 
contribute to their implementation and further development. 
Last  July,  the  world  commemorated  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  man-on-the-moon.  When 
Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon 40 years ago, he spoke the famous words “That’s one 
small step for man, one giant leap for mankind”. Last June, the Core Principles for Effective 
Deposit  Insurance  Systems  were  published.  Admittedly,  these  are  different  works  and  I 
would  not  dare  to  put  the  Core  Principles  on  par  with  the  moon  landing  and  the  various 
countries’  space  programs.  Nevertheless,  the  Core  Principles  are  a  milestone  in  regaining 
financial stability after the current crisis. The question is: where do we stand? 
Recent events 
The  recent  crisis  that  started  in  Summer  2007  reminded  the  wider  public  once  again  that 
banks are susceptible to problems of insolvency or illiquidity. Northern Rock was one of the 
first victims, following problems in the mortgage credit markets. Once its problems became 
publicly known, a classical bank run occurred with many customers queuing outside Northern 
Rock’s branches to withdraw their savings. After the Northern Rock episode, the consensus 
emerged that deposit insurance systems with low levels of coverage, partial insurance and 
likely delays in repayment, are not effective in preventing a bank run. 
One year later, in September and October 2008, this insight became topical once again. The 
financial  turbulence,  it  was  feared,  could  develop  into  an  international  financial  crisis  as 
severe as the Great Depression in the 1930s. In several jurisdictions, bank customers were 
reportedly shifting their deposits to the perceived safety of other banks or instruments. Policy 
makers had no choice but to respond. Some authorities stated publicly that all bank deposits 
would  be  safe  or  that  deposit  insurance  coverage  would  be  unlimited.  Elsewhere,  the 
maximum  level  of  deposit  insurance  coverage  was  raised,  at  least  temporarily,  or  co-
insurance  arrangements  were  withdrawn.  In  some  countries  without  explicit  deposit 
insurance  arrangements,  these  were  introduced.  All  measures  were  taken  to  regain  and 
rebuild the public confidence in individual banks and the banking system. In the end, these 
actions  were  successful  and  retail  bank  runs  were  mostly  avoided.  These  steps  ultimately 
resulted  in  an  enhanced  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  effective  systems  of  deposit 
insurance in maintaining financial stability. 
However, deposit insurance can not be seen in isolation. Deposit insurance systems are part 
of a wider financial safety net, together with the regulatory and supervisory framework and 
liquidity or capital support measures. Indeed, wholesale funding guarantees, capital injection 
plans  and  asset  relief  schemes  for  banks  were  also  necessary  as  short  term  crisis 
management measures in the fight for financial stability. In the longer term, bank regulation 
and  supervision  will  need  to  be  –  and  are  being  –  strengthened  to  restore  stability.  Yet 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 1
another  qualification  regarding  the  policy  actions  on  deposit  insurance  during  the  crisis,  is 
that they were not always well co-ordinated across borders. One minister of finance clearly 
summarized  the  situation  by  saying  that  “One  country’s  solution  is  another  country’s 
problem”. I will come back to this shortly. 
Supervisory policy responses 
Let me first explain how the regulatory and supervisory framework will be strengthened. In 
this process, the Basel Committee plays a pivotal role. The Committee’s strategic objective is 
to establish a clear road map for a future regulatory system that will reduce the probability 
and severity of a crisis like the current one. By developing a broad range of measures, we 
want to improve the resilience of banks and banking systems over time to future shocks. By 
phasing  in  these  reforms  over  an  appropriate  time  horizon,  we  seek  to  ensure  that  these 
measures  will  not  impede  the  recovery  of  the  real  economy.  The  Basel  Committee’s 
oversight  body  –  central  bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  supervision  from  27  countries  – 
recently agreed on quite a substantial package of reforms. These include: 
• 
• 
Raising the quality, consistency and transparency of the Tier 1 capital base;  
Introducing a leverage ratio as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk-based 
framework;  
Implementing a minimum global standard for funding liquidity, and  
Creating a framework for countercyclical capital buffers.  
• 
• 
In addition, the Committee’s oversight body agreed to introduce a macro-prudential approach 
to bank supervision, which is aimed at the stability of the financial system. In this context, the 
Committee  intends  to  reduce  pro-cyclicality,  for  instance  through  countercyclical  buffers  in 
capital frameworks and more robust provisioning practices. Last week, the Basel Committee 
issued recommendations aimed at strengthening cross-border bank resolution frameworks.  
Taken together, the recent and planned initiatives of the Basel Committee in response to the 
crisis, once implemented should promote a more robust banking sector and limit the risk that 
weaknesses  in  banks  amplify  shocks  between  the  financial  and  real  sectors.  The  Basel 
Committee’s work is consistent with and supported by the initiatives of the Financial Stability 
Board and the G20, which will meet tomorrow and the day after tomorrow in Pittsburgh. 
Core Principles 
Another distinct response to the crisis is the Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance 
Systems,  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  IADI.  The  basic  idea  behind  the  Core 
Principles is that they are universally applicable. On the one hand, “they are reflective of, and 
designed  to  be  adaptable  to  a  broad  range  of  country  circumstances,  settings  and 
structures”, as the Executive Summary notes. On the other hand, they “are not designed to 
cover  all  the  needs  and  circumstances  of  every  banking  system”,  which  would  be  very 
difficult indeed. “The Principles are intended to be a voluntary framework for effective deposit 
insurance practices.” National authorities can adjust them and “put in place supplementary 
measures  that  they  deem  necessary  to  achieve  effective  deposit  insurance  in  their 
jurisdictions”. 
Taking a closer look at the Principles themselves, they are intended as a basic reference for 
public  authorities  internationally.  National  authorities  can  use  these  Principles,  either  as  a 
benchmark against which they can assess their own deposit insurance schemes or as a tool 
to implement or reform their deposit insurance systems. A comprehensive self-assessment 
should identify strengths and weaknesses in the existing deposit insurance system and form 
a basis for remedial measures, where needed. The Principles will also be used by the IMF 
and the World Bank in the context of Financial Sector Assessment Programs to assess the 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2009
quality of deposit insurance. In order to facilitate such assessments, IADI with the support of 
the Basel Committee is currently developing a Core Principles Methodology. As part of these 
assessments, specific country circumstances can be more appropriately considered, in close 
dialogue  with  national  authorities.  Any  assessment  should  aid  the  deposit  insurer  and 
policymakers in improving the deposit insurance system, as necessary. In short, the Basel 
Committee  believes  that  the  use  and  implementation  of  the  Core  Principles  will  provide  a 
starting  point  for  more  advanced  deposit  insurance  systems  and  contribute  to  enhancing 
financial stability. We have set off on this journey with this conference! 
Future challenges 
The more difficult question is how deposit insurance systems will develop. Unfortunately, the 
answer is still “up to the stars” – and I am not an astrologist. The events during the recent 
crisis, however, may indicate which issues may need to be addressed. 
The  first  one  is  the  optimal  level  of  coverage,  which  comes  down  to  the  right  balance 
between consumer protection and moral hazard. Clearly, the recent increases in the level of 
coverage  during  the  crisis  were  necessary  in  order  to  protect  consumers  and  to  restore 
financial stability. But these measures have given rise to moral hazard, particularly when the 
coverage became unlimited. The perception may be that higher government guarantees will 
be available in future crises as well. The risk of moral hazard is explicitly recognised by the 
Core  Principles,  as  well  as  the  need  to  strike  a  balance  in  setting  the  coverage  level. 
Meanwhile,  many  countries  that  increased  their  depositor  protection  during  the  crisis  have 
announced  or  have  planned  to  unwind  the  temporary  protection  measures.  A  notable 
exception is the EU, where the level of coverage was raised in October last year and will, 
most likely, soon be further increased. One might argue that the EU levels of coverage were 
too low previously. However, to the extent that the great majority of retail deposits in the EU 
will be fully covered, depositors will lose the incentives to critically assess banks’ soundness 
and market discipline will be eroded. As this would be unfortunate from a prudential point of 
view, I invite the European Commission to substantiate the need for further increases. 
Another important challenge to the Core Principles will be to better arrange the cross-border 
relationships  between  deposit  insurance  systems.  Many  banks  increasingly  operate 
internationally, but the safety nets are still organised along national lines. In a crisis affecting 
such banks, cross-border cooperation is necessary. However, there is very little experience 
of  cooperation  between  deposit  insurers.  Similarly,  there  is  little  evidence  that  deposit 
insurance  authorities  have  mutually  well-understood  plans  for  handling  the  failure  of 
internationally  active  banks.  In  such  cases,  controversial  issues  are  the  distribution  of 
responsibilities between the deposit insurance schemes, differences in legal arrangements, 
such as insolvency laws, as well as large cross-border liabilities. 
Allow me, by way of illustration, to refer to the EU system once again. Clearly, in terms of 
market integration the EU’s Internal Market is most advanced and may serve as an example 
worldwide.  Under  the  home  country  control  framework,  the  deposits  of  a  bank  and  its 
branches  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  are  covered  by  the  deposit  insurance 
scheme of the home country. The political reality is different, though. When a few Icelandic 
banks failed last Fall, the funds to cover deposits at these banks’ foreign branches were not 
available  and  many  host  country  authorities  had  to  intervene,  not  only  because  of  the  so-
called topping-up arrangement, whereby the host country provides additional cover. Although 
the latter will, practically speaking, soon disappear, the current European system of deposit 
insurance  needs  to  be  fundamentally  reconsidered.  A  situation  in  which  regular  retail 
deposits in a country are not adequately covered should be avoided, not only in the EU, but 
worldwide.  
In terms of the Core Principles, this means that further attention needs to be given to deposit 
insurance  coverage  for  internationally  active  banks,  as  well  as  to  the  operational 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 3
arrangements  which  should  support  it.  The  first  issue  in  particular  is  a  great  challenge, 
indeed, even when banks are just doing well. 
A final theme is the role of deposit insurance systems in the financial safety net and in crisis 
resolution.  As  we  all  know,  the  roles  of  deposit  insurers  may  vary,  but  the  key  question, 
whether or not there is in fact a single “best” approach to safety net design, including one 
ideal model for deposit insurance and bank resolution, has not been resolved. Since banking 
systems  differ,  the  role  played  by  deposit  insurance  in  ensuring  financial  stability,  and  the 
design  of  that  and  other  elements  of  the  safety  net  may  differ.  This  institutional  variety  is 
allowed by the Core Principles, but the issue will remain on the agenda. 
Summing up 
Let  me  sum  up.  One  of  the  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  is  that  deposit  insurance  is 
instrumental  in  recovering  and  maintaining  financial  stability.  The  Core  Principles  were  a 
timely  response  to  the  crisis.  They  will  act  as  a  basic  reference  for  countries  to  use  in 
establishing or reforming their deposit insurance system. However, our experience with the 
Core  Principles  on  Banking  Supervision,  as  well  as  Basel  II,  is  that  truly  effective  Core 
Principles  are  not  a  static  document,  but  a  dynamic  framework.  It  is  not  the  document  as 
such, but the process – of implementation, assessment and improvements – that counts. The 
Basel Committee – and, I am sure, IADI as well – stand ready to contribute to implementing 
these principles and improving deposit insurance systems everywhere. 
When  I  started,  I  called  the  Core  Principles  a  milestone.  Milestones  were  a  simple  but 
effective  device  by  which  the  Romans  orientated  themselves.  But  the  Core  Principles  are 
more than that. I would rather consider them to be a Global Positioning System. They are not 
a product of rocket science, but they are useful and valuable, all over the world! I wish all of 
you a stimulating conference! 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2009
