Shyamala Gopinath: Emerging blueprint for prudential regulation – 
assessment and challenges 
Address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at 
“Confluence  2009”,  organized  by 
Institute  of  Management  Ahmedabad, 
Ahmedabad, 27 November 2009. 
Indian 
the 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  the  Confluence  2009  at  one  of  the  premier  management 
institutes of the world. It has largely been the symbiotic relationship between the academia 
and  financial  sector  that  has  spurred  the  revolution  in  finance  over  the  past  few  decades. 
Starting from 1973, when the Black Scholes option formula moved almost immediately from 
paper  to  practice  (the  seminal  paper  was  published  in  the  same  year,  followed  by  the 
opening of the world’s first modern options market, the Chicago Board Options Exchange) it 
has been a series of discrete jumps from one innovation after another in the financial sector 
aided  primarily  by  the  highly  technical  support  provided  by  multidisciplinary  research. 
Somewhere  along  the  way,  however,  the  real  marketplace  got  misaligned  with  the 
assumptive world of financial theory. 
What the present crisis has done is to put a serious poser to the “legitimatory” cloak around 
the  way  financial  markets  function  and  are  regulated.  The  real  problem  with  the  reigning 
doctrinaire was that it institutionalized a certain market philosophy which never in the past 
came  for  a  mid-course  correction  in  spite  of  opportunities  provided  by  crises  of  relatively 
smaller  intensity.  More  importantly,  it  greatly  influenced  the  philosophy  of  regulation  of 
financial markets and put market prices at the centre of the prudential regimes. Even the field 
of  accounting  over  the  years  has  gradually  gravitated  towards  a  market-based  system 
instead  of  a  prudence  based  system.  With  both  the  prudential  regimes  and  accounting 
regimes reinforcing the primacy of market based frameworks, there was actually no systemic 
mechanism to appreciate and address the underlying infirmities. The downsides of such an 
approach were clearly evident during the crisis – a clear illustration being that of international 
banks  during  the  crisis  accounting  for  large  gains  on  fair  valuation  of  liabilities  due  to 
widening of credit spreads. I do not know if this crisis will prove to be an inflexion point but it 
has certainly succeeded in pushing the policy makers to at least attempt to address some of 
the fundamental issues.  
In the aftermath of the crisis, policy makers around the world are contending with five major 
challenges – known commonly as the five Rs, i.e. “Recovery” (from recession or slowdown), 
“Rescue” (of failing or vulnerable banks and financial institutions), “Retreat” (or exit at some 
stage  from  the  large  policy  stimulus  delivered  so  far),  “Regulation”  (to  strengthen  crisis 
prevention)  and  “Restructuring”  (particularly  international  architecture  to  preserve  and 
promote financial stability in a globalised world). Today I will focus on one of the five “Rs”, 
i.e., “regulation” as a catalyst to minimize the probability and intensity of systemic crises in 
future, and also share with you the Indian experience and approach to regulation.  
Regulation and crisis 
The high impact and unprecedented complexity of the crisis has opened several issues on 
the regulation of financial entities and markets to vigorous debate and diverse perspectives. 
In particular, “Soft Touch” regulation, widely perceived as a key factor that allowed excesses 
to  grow  in  financial  systems  is  now  considered  ineffective  and  one  that  needs  to  be 
approached  with  considerable  caution.  In  the  post-crisis  scenario,  a  counter  viewpoint  is 
emerging, which though not in favour of excessive regulation does emphasise that regulation 
needs  to  be  more  encompassing  and  should  include  a  macro  perspective.  Going  forward, 
regulation  has  to  balance  the  focus  on  systemic  aspects  with  promoting  efficient  and 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 1
competitive  financial  systems  and  healthy  institutions  to  support  growth  and  economic 
development.  
In the pre-crisis framework for financial stability – the three pillars of Basel-II, namely capital 
adequacy, supervisory review and market discipline were generally seen as adequate and 
appropriate. However, the crisis revealed that many international banks needed higher and 
better quality capital, because there was pervasive underestimation of risk, which created the 
impression  that  banking  systems  around  the  world  were  adequately  capitalized  before  the 
crisis.  The  supervisory  review  process  for  assessing  capital  adequacy,  and  the  overall 
supervisory  frameworks  for  early  identification  of  vulnerabilities  also  failed  because  of 
complex interconnectedness between financial institutions and markets which was difficult to 
understand without robust macro-prudential supervision. The disclosures envisaged in Pillar 
3 also proved to be insufficient in the light of the complexity of financial instruments and the 
information asymmetries generated. It is not surprising therefore that in the post-crisis period, 
the  emerging  global  consensus  is  increasingly  supporting  regulatory  actions  that  will 
strengthen  prudential  regulation  both  at  the  macro  and  micro  level  that  will  need  to  be 
integrated  appropriately  into  the  national  regulatory  regimes  over  time.  Today,  I  will  touch 
upon  some  important  international  initiatives  underway  that  aim  to  develop  a  macro 
prudential  orientation  towards  regulation  while  strengthening  the  micro  prudential  aspect.  I 
will then also talk about some aspects of the regulatory framework in India. 
Macro-prudential regulation 
Financial regulation was founded on the assumption that making each bank safe makes the 
system  safe.  This  fallacy  of  composition  probably  explains  lack  of  regulatory  action  even 
while  the  risks  of  underpricing,  high  systemic  leverage  and  rapid  credit  expansion  were 
evident.  In  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  costs  of  systemic  crisis  can  become  excessive, 
significant  work  is  ongoing  at  the  international  level  in  making  prudential  regulation  more 
macro oriented and system focused. In this current context, the deliberations at various fora 
are  taking  on  board  a  specific  connotation  of  macro-prudential  regulation  –  buffering  the 
system  from  the  vagaries  of  the  boom-bust  cycles  through  countercyclical  tools. The  tools 
being  examined  are  broadly  two:  first,  reducing  the  risk  of  system  wide  spillovers  and 
second,  addressing  the  negative  feedback  loops  induced  by  pro-cyclical  interactions 
between individual institutions and the system as a whole. 
Addressing systemic risk 
Systemic risk is defined as a risk of disruption in the financial system that is caused by an 
impairment of all parts of the financial system and has the potential to have serious negative 
consequences  for  the  real  economy.  The  objective  of  the  overlay  of  the  macroprudential 
framework is to contain the risk of systemic contagion.  
Systemically important entities: The identification of systemically important institutions can 
be  on  the  basis  of  their  size,  connectedness  to  the  system  or  even  the  business  model 
followed.  The  objective  is  to  identify  the  negative  externalities  such  institutions  might 
generate.  Both  qualitative  and  quantitative  criteria  will  be  relevant;  whether  the  bank  is 
largely a domestic focused bank or multinational, complex or a constellation of subsidiaries 
and  interconnectedness  with  the  system.  On  interconnectedness,  an  institution  is  clearly 
systemic if it is a dominant player in the inter-bank market or other funding and derivatives 
markets. 
Systemic  capital  surcharge:  On  account  of  the  interconnected  nature  of  the  financial 
system, supervision of individual institutions may not help in proper assessment of risk at the 
system level. System-wide risks may be much larger than the sum total of risks identified at 
individual  institution  levels,  which  could  be  on  account  of  institutions  that  are  systemically 
important and that generate negative externalities or risks for the system. There is therefore 
a proposal to levy a “systemic capital charge” on banks and institutions which pose potential 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2009
systemic  risks.  This  would,  however,  require  identification  of  systemically  important 
institutions and  an  assessment  of  the  contribution  of  a  systemically  important  institution  to 
overall systemic risk. 
There is also another issue – that of determining the extent of the systemic risk surcharge. 
This  is  as  yet  an  issue  of  debate  though  there  are  calls  to  measure  in  a  rigorous  and 
scientific  way  relating  it  to  the  downside  risk  of  the  financial  system.  The  systemic  risk 
assessment  would  require  macro-prudential  analysis  to  examine  the  dynamically  changing 
interactions  between  financial  institutions,  the  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy,  as 
well as risks from unregulated or less regulated entities for the banking systems. Regulated 
entities  may  have  tendency  to  escape  or  circumvent  regulation  by  using  structures  and 
subsidiaries, which could be alternative sources of extra return during normal times but could 
as  well  be  potential  sources  of  risk.  If  a  special  “capital  charge”  has  to  be  imposed  in 
proportion  to  the  risk  posed  by  a  systemically  important  financial  institution  to  the  entire 
financial system, then developing the matrix for institution specific capital charge would be a 
real challenge for the regulators.  
Orderly Bank Resolution: Existing legal and regulatory arrangements across jurisdictions 
are  not  generally  designed  to  resolve  problems  in  a  financial  group  operating  through 
multiple,  separate  legal  entities.  This  is  true  of  both  cross-border  and  domestic  financial 
groups.  While  the  regulatory  framework  has  been  harmonized  across  jurisdictions,  the 
resolution framework has remained jurisdiction specific. There is no international insolvency 
framework for financial firms and a limited prospect of one being created in the near future.  
To prevent  weakness in one institution affecting the entire financial system, a pre-planned 
resolution mechanism should ensure winding down of the problem in an orderly manner, only 
affecting  the  shareholders  or  at  best  the  creditors,  but  not  tax  payers  in  general.  Different 
proposals  in  this  regard  include  “living  wills”  prepared  by  institution,  particularly  large  and 
systemically important institutions during normal times approved by their respective boards, 
or  resorting  to  “narrow  banking”  that  could  limit  the  activities  of  a  bank  once  its  problems 
exceed  some  threshold.  Another  suggestion,  that  I  referred  to  earlier  in  the  context  of 
systemic institutions is to segregate “utility banking” from “casino banking”, thereby making 
access to lender of last resort support only to “utility banking” and allowing “casino banking” 
to fail without any support from the authorities. While these suggestions are being discussed 
and  debated,  the  Basel  Committee  is  working  on  developing  a  bank  resolution  framework 
that would facilitate the orderly resolution of cross-border banks. This of course would involve 
significant cross-border cooperation and information sharing between home and host country 
supervisors. 
Leverage ratio: Excessive leverage particularly in off balance sheet transactions could go 
unnoticed because of the emphasis on risk weighted capital adequacy requirement. Assets 
created through leverage may not appear risky during a boom phase, and bubbles could be 
fuelled by growing leverage without the need for higher capital. Recognising the risks in over 
leverage and in view of the fact that risk models cannot capture risks with absolute precision, 
the  risk  based  capital  adequacy  is  proposed  to  be  underpinned  by  an  internationally 
harmonized leverage ratio. The design of a leverage ratio requires a definition of capital (the 
capital measure) and a definition of total exposure (the total exposure or assets measure). 
The specification of both the numerator and the denominator is a complex issue and it will be 
a  challenge  to  arrive  at  an  internationally  homogeneous  definition.  The  capital  measure 
should  ideally  be  the  pure  loss  absorbing  component.  The  exposure  must  include  all  on-
balance sheet items, with some arguing for exclusion of cash and cash like instruments. For 
off balance sheet items, there could be several options based on conversion factors, notional 
principal values etc. Currently all options are being examined. In normal times it may not be 
binding – the acid test is whether a bank otherwise complying with Basel II will be limited by 
this  ratio  in  good  times,  so  that  it  does  not  leverage  excessively  and  result  in  shortage  of 
capital in bad times. It would put a floor under the build up of excessive leverage. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 3
Regulation of OTC derivatives market: There is a move to transfer all standardized OTC 
derivatives  particularly  credit  default  swaps  onto  trading  platforms/exchanges  or  a  clearing 
house.  However  the  specific  proposals  being  discussed  in  various  countries  do  envisage 
continuance of non-standardised OTC contracts albeit with a stricter bilateral collateralisation 
requirement  and  higher  capital  charge.  Also,  the  end-users  that  use  derivatives  to  hedge 
commercial risks are proposed to be exempt from the clearing requirement. This was one of 
the  major  concerns  expressed  against  the  move  to  transfer  all  OTC  transactions  onto 
exchanges  that  it  will  increase  the  cost  of  hedging  for  the  real  sector.  The  issues  going 
forward  would  be:  (i)  balance  the  trade-off  between  bringing  all  major  market  participants 
onto  exchanges  and  giving  relief  for  hedging  by  end-users;  (ii)  identifying  the  specific 
contracts  that  can  be  traded  on  the  exchange  (iii)  strengthening  prudential  framework  for 
residual non-standardised OTC contracts.  
It would be imperative for the CCPs to be treated as “too big to fail” systemic entities and 
regulated/supervised within a globally harmonized set of standards.  
Containing pro-cyclicality  
Both prudential regulations and accounting standards have increased pro-cyclical behavior 
among  banks.  Regulators  need  to  recognize  pro-cyclicality  as  a  very  natural  unavoidable 
behavior. As noted by Kindleberger (2005), “…the cycle of manias and panics results from 
the pro-cyclical changes in the supply of credit; the credit supply increases rapidly in good 
times,  and  then  when  economic  growth  slackens,  the  rate  of  growth  of  credit  has  often 
declined sharply… Minsky believed that pro-cyclical increases in the supply of credit in good 
times and the decline in the supply of credit in less buoyant economic times led to fragility in 
financial arrangements and increased the likelihood of financial crisis.” 
The Basel Committee broadly defines pro-cyclicality as the adverse feedback mechanisms 
through which the financial system can amplify business fluctuations and possibly cause or 
exacerbate financial instability. The Committee is working on various proposals intended to 
contain procyclical elements in regulation.  
Building countercyclical capital buffers: Given the fact that pro-cyclicality is unavoidable, 
building capital buffers during good times over and above the risk weighted capital levels is 
necessary.  Such  counter-cyclical  capital  prescription  could  theoretically  be  influenced 
through  any  of  the  elements  of  the  capital  equation:  the  percentage  number  which  could 
oscillate  between  a  point  measure  and  a  range  measure,  the  risk  weights  applicable  to 
different  asset  classes,  individual  constituents  of  capital  etc.  There  is  a  consensus  on  the 
establishment of a capital buffer above the minimum that is met or exceeded in good times. 
There are several technical issues to be addressed including whether these should be linked 
to broad measure of credit aggregates or earnings.  
Dynamic provisioning: The fundamental principle underpinning dynamic provisioning is that 
provisions are made against all outstanding loans based on an estimate of forward looking 
expected loss instead of incurred losses. The benefit is that such provisioning would make 
the balance sheets less vulnerable to cyclical fluctuations. The foremost critique of the above 
approach  has  come  from  the  accounting  fraternity  which  interprets  this  as  an  instrument 
which can be potentially misused for profit smoothing. However, post crisis there is greater 
appreciation  of  the  prudential  benefits  of  dynamic  provisioning  even  from  accounting 
standard setters. It should be possible to have inbuilt checks and balances to ensure that the 
potential misuse is minimized.  
Additional technical work in necessary for studying business cycle patterns, and determining 
adequacy of provisions considering experience over the economic cycle. This would involve 
factoring in historical loss experience and qualitative factors such as underwriting standards 
and economic conditions.  
4 
 BIS Review 156/2009
the  current  policy  emphasis  on  economic 
Micro prudential regulation 
From  the  micro  perspective,  the  focus  is  on  strengthening  the  resilience  of  individual 
institutions. I will discuss some important initiatives being debated in this regard. 
Improvements in capital – level and quality: Before the global crisis, based on quantitative 
impact analyses, it was perceived that many global banks may require lower capital after the 
migration to Basel-II. The crisis though revealed the deficiency of capital, which precipitated 
a  severe  global  credit  squeeze.  In  addition  to  increasing  the  minimum  level  of  capital,  the 
regulatory  capital  requirement  would  now  also  emphasise:  (a)  extending  the  coverage  to 
include  securitization  activities  and  complex  financial  instruments,  all  off-balance  sheet 
activities and trading book exposures –thereby making the coverage as comprehensive as 
possible,  (b)  enhancing  the  quality  of  capital  buffer  by  including  only  common  equity  and 
reserves under Tier 1 capital. 
Given 
recovery,  however,  any  actual 
implementation of stronger capital requirement may have to wait till the recovery becomes 
durable, since a tighter capital requirement in the midst of economic slowdown could impede 
recovery. 
Liquidity: The original notion that high capital strengthens confidence in the bank and thus 
reduces liquidity risk as also that a single capital ratio is an adequate measure of financial 
soundness has been dispelled. Adequate capital cannot save a bank from illiquidity spirals in 
the  markets.  Illiquidity  could  also  lead  to  insolvency  if  markets  abruptly  stop  supplying 
funding liquidity and some of the apparently liquid assets in the banks’ portfolios turn out to 
be illiquid (i.e. could be sold at significant loss only) under a condition of generalized market 
stress. Banking by nature depends on liquid funds and deposits to create assets which are 
less liquid, and if assured access to liquidity under a condition of market stress is not planned 
as part of the liquidity management strategy, then banks would remain vulnerable to illiquidity 
shocks in the markets.  
The  Basel  Committee’s  Principles  of  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and  Supervision 
(September  2008)  provides  a  robust 
liquidity  risk  measurement,  management  and 
supervision  approach,  which  needs  to  be  effectively  implemented.  The  Committee  is 
currently engaged in developing a global liquidity standard comprising of: i) a short-term core 
funding ratio to address liquidity needs in a one month acute stress scenario. For this, banks 
will  need  to  maintain  on  an  ongoing  basis  a  stock  of  truly  high  quality  liquid  assets  that 
should  be  no  less  than  the  cumulative  net  cash  outflows  over  the  one  month  period.  ii)  a 
longer term structural liquidity ratio, which intends to address structural liquidity issues and 
core funding over longer-term horizons. 
Accounting standards 
The  Pittsburg  communique  issued  by  the  G20  Leaders  has  exhorted  the  “international 
accounting  bodies  to  redouble  their  efforts  to  achieve  a  single  set  of  high  quality,  global 
accounting  standards…..  and  complete  their  convergence  project  by  June  9,  2011.”  The 
IASB  and  FASB  have  since  issued  a  joint  statement  reaffirming  their  commitment  to  work 
towards convergence to a single set of high quality global standards.  
As  things  stand,  there  are  multiple  areas  where  the  approaches  of  IASB  and  FASB  differ 
fundamentally.  
• 
Financial  instruments  accounting:  FASB  is  more  inclined  towards  continuing  fair 
value  measurement  for  most  financial  instruments,  which  would  be  proposed  by 
early 2010, while the IASB has proposed a mixed model of historical cost and fair 
value, to be available for use in 2009 year-end financial statements. The November 
5th Joint Statement however mentions that the boards agreed to a goal of making 
US  GAAP  and  IFRS  fair  value  measurement  requirements  the  same  other  than 
minor necessary differences in wording or style  
BIS Review 156/2009 
 5
  Provisioning and impairment: The IASB published on 5 November 2009 a proposed 
impairment model for those financial assets measured at amortised cost, based on 
the expected cash flows approach. The FASB is developing a model for accounting 
for credit losses for financial assets that the FASB has tentatively decided should be 
measured at fair value through other comprehensive income. This has been an area 
of contention between accountants and prudential regulators and some agreement 
here  would  be  critical  for  using  provisioning  requirements  as  a  tool  to  address 
balance sheet procyclicality.  
Accounting requirements of the IASB and FASB for netting/offsetting of assets and 
liabilities,  particularly  derivatives,  results  in  significant  differences  in  banks’  total 
assets,  posing  problems  for  framing  an  international  leverage  ratio:  while  the  US 
GAAP  allows  derivatives  to  be  offset  against  each  other,  the  IFRS  only  allows 
offsetting  if  the  institution  has  both  the  ability  and  the  intention  to  net  settle.  This 
results in significant differences between the size of balance sheet assets prepared 
as per the two standards. From a prudential perspective, this poses a challenge for 
prescribing a uniform method to calculate leverage.  
The IASB has recently issued the IFRS 9 Financial Instruments pertaining to classification 
and measurement of financial assets in replacement of IAS 39. Essentially, the number of 
classification and measurement categories has been reduced along with the removal of the 
tainting clause. The objective is to measure, on the basis of this classification, at fair value 
those instruments for which current values are more informative and at amortised cost those 
instruments for which contractual flows are more informative.  
Indian experience 
The  Indian  financial  system  avoided  any  major  stress  on  account  of  contagion  from  the 
global financial crisis, even though the real economy later exhibited slowdown in activity as 
the  synchronised  global  recession  affected  all  countries  around  the  world.  Our  overall 
regulatory  framework  and  the  specific  regulatory  measures  played  an  important  role  in 
preventing  instability  in  the  Indian  banking  system  during  the  global  financial  crisis  in 
particular, and in avoiding any banking crisis in general in the past.  
Macroprudential framework 
Macro  variables  such  as  aggregate  credit  growth,  sectoral  credit  growth  and  incremental 
credit-deposit  ratio  of  banks  have  historically  been  integral  components  of  macro  policy 
framework.  Much  before  the  crisis,  these  variables  were  dovetailed  into  the  prudential 
regulatory  framework  for  banks.  Counter  cyclical  measures  in  respect  of  capital  and 
provisioning were first taken on board in 2005 when risk weights and provisioning on certain 
segments  were  increased  on  account  of  rapid  credit  growth  in  these  segments  leading  to 
concerns  about  potential  impact  of  asset  price  bubbles  and  impact  on  credit  quality. 
However,  the  important  difference  was  that  Indian  approach  entailed  sector-specific 
prescriptions.  In  the  Indian  context  it  was  imperative  to  ensure  that  flow  of  credit  to 
productive sectors was not affected since the rapid credit growth was a matter of concern 
only in certain sectors.  
In  India,  we  have  identified  about  a  few  financial  conglomerates  perceived  as  being 
systemically significant based primarily on size. There is a mechanism in place involving all 
regulators for monitoring intra-group transactions and exposures, and large exposures of the 
groups  to  outside  counterparties.  The  challenge  going  forward  will  be  to  ensure  that  the 
monitoring mechanism and regulatory coordination is strengthened further in the interest of 
financial stability, in particular with regard to any recommendations made by standard setters 
and keeping in view the Indian context.  
6 
 BIS Review 156/2009
The issue of regulatory perimeter being raised internationally in the post crisis scenario had 
also confronted us in the context of growing systemic significance of non-deposit taking non-
banking financial companies. The focus of regulation in India used to be on deposit taking 
non-bank institutions. Since the non-deposit taking financial institutions were growing rapidly 
in view of regulatory arbitrage and the liability side dynamics was closely linked to the public 
funding  markets,  the  systemically  important  non-bank  financial  institutions  were  brought 
within the regulatory framework. This included capital adequacy and exposure norms. Banks 
exposures to these entities are also subject to prudential regulation.  
To address liquidity risks at the very short-end for individual banks and also for the system as 
a  whole,  there  is  a  well  laid  down  framework  in  place.  The  overnight  unsecured 
(uncollateralised)  market  for  funds  is  restricted  to  banks  and  primary  dealers  (PDs),  with 
specified limits. There are prudential limits on banks on their purchased inter-bank liabilities 
as a proportion of their net worth to encourage greater reliance on stable sources of funding. 
The SLR regime is now viewed by some as a potential solvency as well as liquidity buffer. 
For short-term liquidity requirements, only the excess over SLR is considered.  
We  already  have  a  CCP  mechanism  for  clearing  and  settling  all  interbank  spot  forex 
transactions and all outright and repo transactions in government securities. Non-guaranteed 
settlement of OTC trades in interest rate swaps has also commenced in 2008. Guaranteed 
settlement of IRS and forex forwards is a work in progress at advanced stage. 
Few random concluding thoughts 
A real concern going forward is that the urgency and momentum for reform of the financial 
system is gradually waning. The easing conditions have provided the comfort and space for 
dissenting voices. There are now much more vociferous voices from the market participants, 
having  been  bailed  out  either  implicitly  through  system  wide  guarantees  and  liquidity  or 
specific bailouts against some of the crucial reform measures. As in the past, there are two 
key levers being employed by this group: first, the risk of short term economic growth being 
adversely impacted and second, the fear of an unlevel playing field among major financial 
centres resulting in loss of business opportunities and competitiveness for the first movers. In 
conclusion  I  would  like  to  flag  a  few  challenges  on  the  road  ahead  for  both  national  and 
international policy makers: 
i. 
Increasing  minimum  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  will  bring  out  a  balance 
between  financial  innovation  efficiency  and  growth.  The  BCBS  will  carry  out  a 
comprehensive  impact  assessment  to  calibrate  the  new  capital  and  liquidity 
standards  to  ensure  that  they  are  proportionate  to  the  risks.  They  will  assess  the 
overall  effect  of  the  package  and  there  will  be  no  piecemeal  layering  of  the 
requirements.  Moreover  these  will  be  introduced  over  a  time  frame  that  does  not 
impact  eco  recovery.  The  G20  Principals  have  in  the  November  7,  2009 
communique  emphasized  “the  need  for  the  Basel  Committee  to  develop  stronger 
standards  by  end-2010  to  be  phased  in  as  financial  conditions  improve  and  the 
economic recovery is assured, with the aim of implementation by end-2012”. 
From a financial stability perspective it would be useful not to restrict the scope of 
macroprudential  regulation  and  interpret  it  as  an  institutionalized  mechanism  for 
aligning  the  regulatory  framework  for  institutions  and  markets  with  a  systemic 
perspective.  For  instance,  the  systemic  problems  faced  by  many  countries  on 
account  of  excessive  foreign  currency  liabilities  need  to  be  effectively  addressed 
through the use of prudential tools or other instruments, though from an individual 
institution’s perspective no action may be warranted.  
Excessive dependence of entities on wholesale funding markets such as repo is an 
issue of systemic concern since one, it accentuates systemic procyclicality through 
haircuts/margins  and  two,  the  leverage  loop  that  builds  through  these  markets  in 
ii. 
iii. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 7
high  liquidity  periods  induces  rigidity  and  gets  entrenched  into  funding  models  of 
entities.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to  bring  the  repo  markets  within  the  regulatory 
perimeter,  particularly  since  many  entities  participating  in  these  markets  are 
unregulated/lightly  regulated.  There  is  need  for  a  cautious  approach  when  the 
securities  that  are  repoed  carry  credit  risk  and  are  illiquid.  The  RBI  guidelines  on 
repo of corporate bonds, which will be issued shortly, will take the above issues on 
board.  
One issue with the macro-prudential approach being pursued would be to find the 
appropriate  balance  between  a  rule-based,  formulaic  approach  and  the  regulatory 
discretion  for  determining  the  course  of  action.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  sense 
coming  out  of  the  macro  analysis  or  stress  tests  will  be  in  the  nature  of  potential 
leads  without  any  conclusive  evidence  and  therefore  not  amenable  to  rule  based 
approach.  However,  this  should  not  lead  to  inaction  if  there  are  overriding 
considerations of financial stability.   
iv. 
Assuming that the above work program unfolds as intended and is fully implemented, would 
it be sufficient to prevent the next crisis? Perhaps not. But what it will undoubtedly achieve is 
to give sufficient room for regulators to act. The origins of next crisis may come from as yet 
unidentified exogenous sources or the macroeconomic framework or macro-imbalances but 
the emerging blueprint for prudential regulation is aimed at preparing the system to adjust 
itself in a non-disruptive manner. This will need timely judgement and effective action by the 
regulators even as the music continues to play. 
8 
 BIS Review 156/2009
