Caleb M Fundanga: Employing African resources for African 
development  
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  2009  Africa 
Investment Forum, Istanbul, 5 October 2009. 
 Introduction 
I  feel  particularly  honoured  and  grateful  to  be a  discussant  at  this  important  forum,  whose 
theme is “Employing African Resources for Africa’s Development”. This forum could not have 
come  at  a  more  opportune  time  than  now  when  all  our  economies  are  faced  with  the 
challenges  emanating  from  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis.  This 
seminar  is  also  timely  in  that  the  fiscal  policy  response  is  going  to  play  a  large  role  in 
determining  how  well  African  economies  emerge  from  the  financial  crisis.  This  is  because 
Africa  must  sustain  and  enhance  investment  flows  in  infrastructure,  energy,  health  and 
education  if  it  is  to  accelerate  the  growth  momentum  achieved  prior  to  the  crisis.  The 
question of resource mobilisation for development, whether this is at a national, regional or 
international level, is thus something that policy makers in Africa are grappling with.  
Global financial crisis and Africa’s development 
For  most  of  the  current  decade,  several  African  countries  have  been  registering  positive 
economic growth rates averaging 5.3 percent between 1999 and 2008, with growth in Sub-
Sahara Africa slightly higher at an average of 5.6 percent over the same period.1 This growth 
has  contributed  to  rising  income  levels  in  several  African  countries  leading  increased 
investments  in  education,  health,  water  sanitation  and  general  infrastructure  development. 
However,  despite  improvements  in  growth  witnessed  since  1999,  significant  reductions  in 
poverty  will  not  occur  without  a  significant  increase  in  growth  rates  to  above  7%  on  a 
sustained  basis.  One  of  the  ways  in  which  growth  can  be  scaled  up  is  through  the 
employment of the vast African resources for the development of the continent.  
Prior to the global financial and economic crisis, the African continent experienced a surge in 
investment  flows  in  many  sectors  including  mining,  manufacturing,  tourism,  transport  and 
construction. This inflow of foreign  capital helped to finance the development registered in 
Africa  over  the  past  decade.  The  inflow  of  foreign  capital  coupled  with  high  prices  of 
commodities  on  the  global  market  led  to  high  international  reserve  accumulation  in  most 
commodity  exporting  countries,  including  those  in  Africa.  However,  following  the  global 
financial  and  economic  crisis  the  accumulation  of  international  reserves  declined  as 
commodity  prices  plunged  and  foreign  capital  inflows,  both  private  and  public  slowed 
significantly or were reversed. This has had a negative impact on the availability of resources 
to finance Africa’s development.  
The challenge going forward is recovering, maintaining and sustaining the economic gains 
and macroeconomic stability that African countries experienced before the crisis hit. In view 
of the anticipated reduction in aid flows and foreign direct investment, African countries need 
to  give  domestic  savings  mobilisation  as  much  attention  as  the  other  foreign  sources  of 
development finance. In this respect, African countries may have to consider the utilisation of 
domestically generated resources such as international reserves’, pension funds as well as 
the  enhanced  use  of  stock  markets  in  raising  financial  resources  required  to  finance 
development  in  Africa.  However,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  the  effective  utilisation  of 
                                                 
1  
IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2009. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 1
resources  will  be  dependent  on  the  credibility  of  the  institutional  frameworks  within  which 
these  resources  are  deployed  and  the  quality  of  the  projects  themselves  in  terms  of  their 
economic and social returns. 
Sources of development finance 
International reserves 
(a) 
The  global  economy  has  witnessed  an  unprecedented  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves  in  the  last  ten  years,  particularly  in  developing  countries  and  Africa  has  been  no 
exception. According to the IMFs currency composition of official foreign exchange reserves 
(COFER), between 2001 and 2008 total world reserves increased by 227 percent from US$ 
2,049.6 billion to US$6,702.3 billion while emerging and developing country foreign reserves 
grew by 418 percent from US$ 818.1 billion in 2001 to US$ 4,237.7 billion in 2008. The rapid 
build  up  in  foreign  reserves  resulted  mainly  from  high  commodity  prices  and  increased 
portfolio and foreign direct investments in emerging and developing countries.  
Most developing country central banks approach foreign reserve asset allocation with a view 
of preserving capital and liquidity. This normally means that central banks invest in low risk, 
highly liquid assets with short-term investment horizons. It is noteworthy that the majority of 
the foreign reserves, which are held outside the African continent, entail an opportunity cost 
for  developing  countries  as  these  resources  are  not  used  to  finance  development.  In 
addition,  the  global  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore  the  inherent  risks  in  the  placement  of 
reserves with international fund managers with the collapse or near collapse of some of the 
worlds’  leading  asset  managers  such  as  Lehmann  Brothers,  Bear  Stearns  and  Fortis, 
threatening the safety of the continent’s international reserves. Further, with the reduction in 
interest  rates  in  developed  economies  where  most  of  the  foreign  reserves  are  held,  the 
returns  on  these  investments  have  declined  drastically,  thereby  increasing  the  opportunity 
cost of these reserves.  
These  developments  present  an  opportunity  for  African  countries  to  consider  foreign 
exchange reserves as a possible source of  development finance for the continent. Such a 
strategy could make a significant amount of additional resources available for investment in 
infrastructure  development  and  the  provision  of  trade  finance  to  stimulate  expansion  and 
diversification  of  African  economies.  In  addition,  African  countries  could  consider  investing 
part of their reserves in African multilateral financial institutions like the African Development 
Bank,  the  PTA  bank,  AFREXIM  Bank  as  well  as  local  development  banks,  which  play  an 
important  role  in  the  provision  of  development  finance  in  Africa.  The  investment  of  part  of 
Africa’s foreign reserves in credible financial institutions can augment the resources available 
to  these  institutions,  thereby  enabling  them  to  provide  more  financial  resources  for  the 
development of the African continent.  
For instance, in 2007 total foreign reserves held by African countries amounted to US$371.4 
billion translating into an average of 9.2 months of import cover for each country. In the same 
year the African Development Bank (AfDB) raised funding from international capital markets 
amounting to UA724 million (US$1,144 million) at a weighted average cost of 6-month US 
Dollar LIBOR minus 32 basis points.2 The amount raised by the AfDB accounted for a mere 
0.3% of the total reserves for African countries as at 2007.  
Hence,  an  allocation  of  some  of  African  countries’  foreign  reserves  to  fund  African 
development institutions in which most of the countries are members would greatly enhance 
                                                 
2   African Development Bank Annual Report, 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2009
the capacity of these institutions in the provision of development finance, thereby assist the 
continent’s development programmes and poverty reduction efforts.  
In summary, it is important for African countries to consider alternative ways of making use of 
foreign reserves in the financing of development using resources that are already available, 
including the direct use of foreign reserves in financing development and making available 
part of the reserves to African multilateral development institutions to augment the resources 
available in the financing of African development. 
Pension funds 
(b) 
African countries need stable sources of development finance and as long-term investment 
vehicles,  pension  funds  seem  intuitively  to  be  one  potentially  good  source  of  domestically 
generated  financial  resources.  Cognisant  of  the  important  role  this  resource  can  play,  it  is 
noteworthy  that  African  countries  embarked  on  financing  economic  development  using 
US$300  billion  held  by  domestic  pension  funds  in  2007  in  an  effort  to  reduce  reliance  on 
foreign aid and foreign direct investment.3 The report indicates that pension funds in South 
Africa, Ghana and Nigeria have already invested around US$625 million to fund pan-African 
infrastructure projects.  
In Zambia, a study by FinMark Trust in 2007 indicated that pension and provident funds are a 
major potential source of capital. As regards the total amount of funds available in pension 
funds, the capacity of public and private sector funds is estimated to be greater than K2.5 
trillion (about US$651.5 million). This is a considerable amount of resources which could be 
used  in  infrastructure  development  and  other  economic  activity  without  resorting  to 
expensive external financing from international financial institutions.  
Currently,  most  pension  funds  in  Zambia  make  short-term  investments  in  highly  liquid 
securities  when  they  have  the  potential  to  do  much  more.  It  is  imperative  upon  African 
Governments with the collaboration of cooperating partners to devote as much attention and 
energy  to  domestic  savings  mobilisation  for  investment  purposes.  In  Zambia,  for  example, 
part of the reform process in the financial sector has been to establish investment guidelines 
for  the  public  pension  funds  and  the  aspect  of  investment  in  infrastructure  and  other 
economic activity can be part of the guidelines to enhance the use of domestically generated 
savings in financing development in Africa.  
Pension  reforms  if  correctly  done  can  also  have  a  significant  impact  on  financial  market 
development when pension funds are encouraged to act as institutional investors involved on 
the capital market. Participation of pension funds in the capital market can lead to improved 
clearing and settlement on the one hand, as well as provide more sensitive price information 
– resulting in better resource allocation, and increasing the availability of capital for financing 
development. In some developing countries such as Chile, pension funds facilitated internal 
resource  transfers,  enabling  the  government  to  service  its  international  debts  without 
extreme fiscal adjustment and avoided the drainage of resources that emanates from foreign 
debt  payments.  In  addition,  the  funds  provided  a  source  of  borrowing  that  did  not  require 
excessively high interest payments. Africa can learn from such experiences and undertake 
necessary reforms to unlock this kind of resource. Pension funds can therefore offer African 
countries an alternative source of development finance, provide an avenue for restructuring 
public finances and for the promotion as well as development of the capital markets. 
                                                 
3   Harvey Morris, ‘African states tap pension funds’, in the Financial Times, 24 October 2007. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 3
Stock markets 
 (c) 
Another important avenue for harnessing resources for the financing of development on the 
continent is the stock market. Stock markets have grown in number across the globe over 
the past two decades and emerging and developing country markets have accounted for a 
significant  share  of  this  growth.  In  Africa,  new  stock  markets  have  been  established  in 
countries  such  as  Ghana,  Malawi,  Swaziland,  Uganda,  and  Zambia.  Stock  market 
development has assumed a developmental role in global economics and finance following 
the  impact  stock  markets  have  exerted  in  corporate  finance  and  economic  activity.  Stock 
markets  enable  firms  to  acquire  much  needed  capital  at  relatively  lower  cost,  hence 
facilitating capital allocation, investment and growth. The stock market also plays a resource 
mobilisation  role  by  encouraging  savings  through  the  purchase  of  equities  that  meet 
investors risk preferences and liquidity needs. 
On the important role of stock markets in financing development, it is noteworthy that some 
studies undertaken by the IMF have shown that the stock markets have contributed to the 
financing of the growth of large corporation in certain African countries such as Ghana, South 
Africa, Zimbabwe and Mauritius. It is therefore imperative for African countries to develop this 
avenue  of  financing  development  to  enable  companies  to  raise  capital  at  relatively  lower 
cost. Furthermore, the development of a well functioning stock and capital market can help 
Africa access long-term debt in local currency thereby providing much-needed financing for 
the constantly growing infrastructure needs in the African continent. Developing national and 
regional bond markets and secondary capital markets in general can also help in channelling 
excess banking sector liquidity into productive sectors.  
Natural resources 
(d) 
There is little doubt that natural resources in Africa will continue to play a significant role in 
Africa’s  development  efforts.  However,  African  countries  must  learn  from  the  past  on  how 
well  to  manage  commodity  booms  and  ensure  the  productive  use  of  financial  resources 
generated from natural resources. African countries need to invest the resources arising from 
the  exploitation  of  natural  resources  in  domestic  capital  formation  in  order  to  generate  a 
higher  sustainable  income  that  compensates  for  the  depletion  of  a  wasting  asset.  In  this 
regard, it is important that commodity booms are managed in a manner that benefits African 
economies through careful planning and the deployment of appropriate strategies.  
Commodity swaps or barter system have been suggested in some quarters as an innovative 
way  for  Africa  to  get  development  finance  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  most  African 
countries  are  not  able  to  borrow  from  the  international  financial  institutions  and  are  just 
coming out of heavy indebtedness. For this option of financing to be viable and profitable, 
there  is  need  for  commodity  swaps  to  have  a  long-term  positive  impact  of  export 
diversification and economic growth for Africa. In this regard, commodities could be swapped 
for infrastructure development to address the large infrastructure gap that is inhibiting further 
growth and diversification, technology transfer and market access for manufactured goods. 
These commodity swaps would have to be carefully crafted so that future generations are not 
disadvantaged from the resources.  
Currently, China has entered into such deals with countries like the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Sudan and Angola and it would be interesting to see how these work and then other 
countries  can  learn  from  these  countries  experiences.  The  discovery  of  resources  on  the 
shores of the Continent should be carefully handled so that the funds that are realised as 
much as possible are used in the development of the African continent. Exploitation of the 
natural resources by foreign investors should ideally involve value addition on the continent. 
This is one way through which Africa would benefit from its rich resource base. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2009
Conclusion  
The challenges of mobilizing domestic resources for the medium-to-long term development 
require  higher  levels  of  domestic  resource  mobilization.  Africa  needs  a  paradigm  shift  in 
terms  of  sources  of  development  finance.  This  is  because  the  resources  that  it  has 
domestically  in  terms  of  official  international  reserves  and  pension  funds  can  be  used  to 
finance  infrastructural  development  and  investments  in  other  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy.  Capital  markets  can  also  be  a  source  of  finance  for  private  and  public  sector 
investment projects. Africa needs to maintain the sound macroeconomic policies which led to 
the  positive  growth  that  the  continent  has  witnessed in  the  last  decade,  and continue  with 
policy reforms aimed at reducing the cost of doing business. This is the best way to ensure 
that domestic resources as well as foreign resources have a positive and long lasting impact 
on the African continent’s economic growth and poverty reduction outcomes. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 5
