Rasheed M Al-Maraj: Islamic finance amid the global financial turmoil 
Address by HE Rasheed M Al-Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at the Islamic 
Finance  Symposium  “Islamic  finance  amid  the  global  financial  turmoil  –  its  implication  for 
Japan”, Tokyo, 11 November 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It is a pleasure to be with you here today and to have the opportunity to participate in this 
important and timely Symposium on the subject of “Islamic finance amid the global financial 
turmoil  –  its  implication  for  Japan.”  The  Symposium  is  timely  because,  in  the  wake  of  the 
global financial crisis, there has been a great upsurge in interest in the principles of Islamic 
finance and the opportunities that the industry presents both inside and outside the Muslim 
world. 
Many industry participants, regulators, and policy-makers have begun to ask whether there 
are lessons to be learnt from the principles of Islamic finance which might help avoid future 
crises.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  growing  recognition  that  Islamic  finance  offers  a 
variety of financing structures that are viable alternatives to conventional finance. Issuers and 
investors have begun to explore these opportunities in a serious way. 
While obviously the greatest upsurge of interest in Islamic finance has been within Muslim 
majority countries, and within those non-Muslim countries with significant Muslim populations 
(such as the UK), there is still plenty of scope for you here in Japan to consider the potential 
of Islamic finance. This is what makes this Symposium so significant. 
Let  me  begin  with  briefly  outlining  the  main  principles  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  potential 
relevance  to  Japanese  financial  institutions.  I  will  then  turn  to  give  some  background  on 
Bahrain’s role in developing Islamic finance and on the part played by the Central Bank of 
Bahrain (CBB) in particular. 
The  basic  principle  behind  Islamic  finance  can  be  stated  quite  simply.  The  operations  of 
Islamic  financial  institutions  are  primarily  based  on  a  profit  and  loss  sharing  principle.  An 
Islamic bank does not charge interest but rather participates in the yield resulting from the 
use  of  the  funds.  Its  account  holders  also  share  in  the  profits  of  the  bank  according  to  a 
predetermined ratio. There is thus a partnership between the Islamic bank and its account 
holders, on the one side, and between the bank and its investment clients, on the other. This 
is in contrast with a conventional bank, which mainly borrows funds paying interest on one 
side of the balance sheet, and lends funds charging interest, on the other. 
To  avoid  using  the  interest  rate  instrument  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  devised  a 
variety of different types of financial contracts which have, as their common characteristic, 
the concept that risks and rewards are shared between the institution and its customers. In 
the  past  decade  an  important  innovation  has  been  the  development  of  an  Islamic  “bond” 
market.  These  tradable  securities  –  known  as  “Sukuk”  –  differ  from  conventional  bonds  in 
that the coupon payments on them represent profits on real economic activities rather than 
the payment of interest. Sukuk are flexible financing instruments that have attracted a wide 
range of investors and issuers, both Muslim and non-Muslim. These structures have been 
used by the Governments of the Gulf Cooperation Council, as well as by Indonesia, Malaysia 
and Pakistan, the German State of Saxony-Anhalt, the World Bank and other governments 
and corporations. 
Because  Japan  does  not  have  a  significant  Muslim  population  of  its  own,  it  would  be 
tempting to assume that Islamic finance is therefore of no interest – if you will excuse the pun 
–  to  Japanese  financial  institutions.  But  this  would  be  to  take  too  narrow  a  view  of  the 
subject. In global terms Islamic finance may still be a relatively small part of the international 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 1
financial  system,  but  it  is  one  that  is  rapidly  growing.  It  also  provides  an  opportunity  to 
engage with a very broad investor and issuer base. For example, financial instruments that 
are structured in a Sharia-compliant manner appeal not only to Muslim investors, for example 
those  based  in  the  countries  of  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council,  but  also  to  non-Muslim 
investors as well. The potential investor base for Sharia-compliant instruments is therefore 
very broad. 
From the point of view of Japanese financial institutions, therefore, Islamic finance should be 
viewed as an important financial innovation comparable to earlier innovations in conventional 
finance  such  as  the  euromarkets  or  the  derivatives  markets.  Moreover,  given  the  large 
Muslim population in South East Asia, a focus on Islamic finance could also form part of your 
strategies for the region. In summary, there is a strong business case for you to develop the 
capacity to originate Sharia-compliant financial products. 
Let me turn now to consider the experience of the Kingdom of Bahrain as a centre for Islamic 
finance. 
In Bahrain, the birth of the Islamic financial sector dates back to 1978 when Bahrain Islamic 
Bank was established. Islamic banking in Bahrain gained momentum in the early 1980s, with 
the issue of four new licenses, one of which was an offshore banking unit license, with the 
remainder  being  investment  banking  licenses.  During  the  1990’s,  a  total  of  eight  licenses 
were issued to institutions seeking to pursue Islamic banking services. In the past decade the 
sector  has  grown  strongly  along  with  the  number  of  licensees.  Total  assets  jumped  from 
US$1.9 billion in 2000 to US$26.3 billion by June 2009, an increase of over 12 times. The 
market share of Islamic banks correspondingly increased from 1.8% of total banking assets 
in 2000 to 11.1% in June 2009. There are now 26 Islamic banks and 19 Islamic insurance 
companies (takaful) operating in the Kingdom. 
Given  the  large  regional  share  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  which  are  based  in  the 
Kingdom of Bahrain, it is clearly essential to create an appropriate framework for regulating 
and supervising the Islamic banking sector. This is an important function of the CBB. 
The CBB is the single regulator for the financial services sector in Bahrain. We are the only 
central bank in the region with responsibility for regulating all banking, capital markets, fund 
management  and  insurance  business  under  one  roof.  We  have  a  policy  of  following 
international  standards  very  closely,  and  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance,  we  have  been  a 
pioneer in developing prudential standards.  
We apply the same principles of sound regulation and supervision to Islamic banks as are 
applied  to  conventional  banking.  We  pursue  a  duel  banking  system,  where  Islamic  banks 
operate side by side with their conventional counterparts. In fact, the emergence of Islamic 
banks in Bahrain drew on the same environment that led to the development of Bahrain as 
an  international  financial  centre.  The  CBB  affords  equal  opportunities  and  treatment  for 
Islamic banks as for conventional banks. 
The CBB prides itself, in fulfilling its regulatory responsibilities, on the innovative approach it 
has  taken,  applying  international  best  practices  and  ensuring  transparency  throughout  the 
whole regulatory process. The CBB has introduced the first comprehensive prudential and 
reporting framework that is industry-specific to the concept of Islamic banking and finance. 
In addition to the application of rigorous regulatory standards, the CBB has also pioneered a 
range  of  innovations  designed  to  broaden  the  depth  of  the Islamic  financial  market  and  to 
provide Islamic institutions with wider opportunities to manage their liquidity. To ensure that 
these  objectives  are  achieved,  Bahrain  hosts  the  recently  created  Liquidity  Management 
Centre (LMC) and the International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM). 
The  CBB  also  acts  as  the  agent  of  the  Government  of  the  Kingdom  of  Bahrain  in 
implementing  a  regular  issuance  programme  of  Shari’a  compliant  short-term  Government 
securities.  A  series  of  Government  long-term  leasing  Sukuk  have  also  recently  been 
launched. The leasing Sukuk are the first of their kind to be issued by a central bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2009
Let me turn now to the future prospects for Islamic finance. The global economic crisis has 
forced the financial industry as a whole to reassess its growth prospects for the years ahead. 
The Islamic financial industry has not been exempted from this reassessment, although there 
are  those  who  argue  that  the  prospects  for  Shari’a  compliant  finance  have  improved  as  a 
result of the crisis. 
It has been pointed out that Islamic financial institutions have escaped relatively unscathed 
from  the  severe  downturn  which  is  affecting  most  conventional  financial  institutions.  This 
certainly presents the industry with an opportunity to continue its rapid and successful growth 
of recent decades. 
Because  interest-based  transactions  are  prohibited,  Islamic  finance  encourages  business 
and  trade  activities  that  generate  fair  and  legitimate  profit.  The  prohibition  on  speculative 
activity also helps to ensure that there is a close link between financial flows and productive 
activities. These intrinsic properties of Islamic finance have contributed towards insulating it 
from  the  potential  risks  resulting  from  excess  leverage  and  speculative  financial  activities. 
For example, Shari’a compliant financial institutions were unable to invest in the CDOs and 
other structured financial products – the “toxic assets” – which have been at the centre of the 
current crisis. 
This  is  not  to  pretend  that  the  Islamic  financial  industry  does  not  face  some  important 
challenges. Some of them are specific to global economic conditions, as the clients of Islamic 
financial  institutions  are  no  more  immune  to  the  global  recession  that  are  the  clients  of 
conventional banks. However, some of them are more specific to Islamic finance. 
First, Islamic finance in its modern form is a relatively young industry. The first Islamic banks 
were licensed little more than 30 years ago. Of the 26 Islamic finance entities operating in 
Bahrain, nearly half have been licensed within the past 5 years, and nearly three quarters 
have been licensed in the past 10 years.  
This  has  several  consequences:  few  Shari’a  compliant  financial  institutions  have  yet  been 
able  to  achieve  significant  economies  of  scale.  Many  remain  comparatively  small  and 
focused on niche markets. Newer entrants to the industry have also exhibited a tendency to 
copy  the  business  models  they  see  being  successfully  pursued  by  their  more  established 
competitors.  As  a  result  we  have  an  industry  which  comprises  many  small-scale  firms 
engaged in very similar activities and with comparatively high concentrations of risk. For the 
long-term health of the industry it will be important to generate greater scale and diversity. 
Secondly,  one  of  the  major  constraints  on  generating  scale  economies  is  the  difficulty  in 
conducting  cross-border  transactions.  This  is  because  there  is  still  considerable  variation 
from  country  to  country  on  judgements  of  Shari’a  compliance  and  therefore  variations  in 
financing structures and documentation. The International Islamic Financial Market, which is 
based in Bahrain, has made important contributions to document standardisation, including 
in collaboration with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association. However, the lack 
of portability of Shari’a judgements remains a major obstacle to the industry’s growth. 
Thirdly, although considerable progress has been made in building a regulatory infrastructure 
for Shari’a compliant finance in recent years, there are still gaps to be filled. A particular area 
to be addressed remains liquidity management, an issue that the regulators of conventional 
finance  are  now  beginning  to  given  greater  prominence.  I  am  sure  that  the  regulators  of 
Islamic finance can learn much from these developments and we also need to consider what 
more we can do to help to foster the development of a Shari’a compliant money market. 
In  conclusion,  although  the  Islamic  financial  industry  has  escaped  the  worst  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis,  there  are  a  number  of  important  issues  still  to  be  resolved  to  ensure  its 
continued success. Along with the rest of the financial industry the path ahead in the next few 
years may not be smooth. But, as I hope I have explained, the Islamic financial industry is 
one that has enormous potential for future growth. At the CBB we would be glad to share 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 3
with you our experience and expertise, built up over an entire generation, as you explore the 
opportunities in this important field of finance. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2009
