Lars Nyberg: Towards a new European supervisory structure  
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at SIFMA's annual 
meeting, New York, 27 October 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
Let me start by saying that I consider it a great honour to have been invited to speak to you 
today.  We  work  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  but  I  think  that  the  crisis  that  we  are  now 
struggling to get out of has shown, for good and bad, that the financial system has brought 
us closer together than ever before.  
Over the course of last year, there is one sentence that has really burnt into my brain. It was 
delivered by Mervyn King, the governor of the Bank of England, who has a great talent for 
one-liners. He concluded on one occasion, somewhat disillusioned after having dealt with the 
failure of a number of cross-border institutions, that “global banks are international in life but 
national in death”. And indeed he is right. We have banks and other financial institutions that 
work all across the globe. But when they get into trouble the instruments for safeguarding 
financial stability essentially remain fragmented along national borders.  
This geographical mismatch is something that the regulators will have to deal with, one way 
or the other. And to put it bluntly, from a policy perspective it basically boils down to a choice 
between  two  paths.  On  the  one  hand  we  can  choose  a  path  towards  fully-integrated 
international regulatory and supervisory structures, in order to achieve a better match with 
the global format of the financial system. On the other hand, we can choose a path towards 
shrinking the financial system back inside national borders, within the perimeters of current 
regulatory and supervisory arrangements. Obviously, reality will not be as black and white as 
to  make  a  simple  choice  between  these  two  paths  possible.  Future  regulatory  reform  will 
probably take some kind of middle road. But if someone asked me for directions my answer 
would be clear. The benefits of financial globalisation are too great for us to afford to close 
national borders and to roll back financial integration.  
A new European supervisory structure – the de Larosière proposals  
As you all know, the European Union chose its path already some time ago. Based on the 
belief  that  integrated  markets  contribute  to  economic  growth  (and  also  to  other  important 
policy objectives) the European Union has established a legal and institutional framework for 
the supervision and regulation of financial markets. However, even though we have come a 
long  way  towards  establishing  a  single  European  market,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
structures  are  still  very  much  fragmented  along  national  lines  –  a  fact  that  we  have  been 
painfully re-minded of during the current crisis. The problems experienced with the Icelandic 
banks and the Benelux-based conglomerate Fortis are just a couple of examples.  
To  address  these  problems  the  European  Commission  last  fall  initiated  a  fundamental 
overhaul of the EU supervisory structure. A group chaired by the former head of the IMF, Mr. 
Jaques  de  Larosière,  was  mandated  to  come  up  with  proposals  for  needed  reform.  The 
recommendations made by the group were broadly embraced by the EU member states and 
we are now at that stage in the process where final details are being negotiated. The new 
supervisory structure will rest on two pillars.  
The first pillar – micro prudential supervision  
The first pillar consists of several initiatives to strengthen micro prudential supervision in the 
EU.  Regulatory  measures  at  the  EU  level  shall  ensure  strengthened  and  more  consistent 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 1
supervisory powers at the national level. Supervisory colleges will be mandatory for all the 
major  cross-border  firms  in  the  EU.  Differences  in  national  laws  will  be  indentified  and 
removed. All these reforms will take place within the new European supervisory network, the 
European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS). The main element of this reform is the 
transformation  of  the  three  existing  EU  supervisory  committees  into  independent  EU 
authorities. These authorities will form a central hub of the European supervisory community 
and will be equipped with both regulatory and supervisory powers.  
The  day-to-day  supervision  will  still  be  a  national  responsibility  and  carried  out  on  a 
decentralised basis. The new authorities are therefore primarily to be seen as a complement 
to the national regulators and supervisors and not as a replacement. However, in a few areas 
the  EU  authorities  will  be  able  to  make  binding  decisions  which  have  a  direct  effect  on 
national regulations and supervision:  
• 
First,  in  the  area  of  regulation,  the  authorities  will  develop  binding  technical 
standards to promote uniformity in the implementation and application of EU-law.  
Second,  the  EU  authorities  will  be  equipped  with  powers  to  address  national 
supervisors  that  are  considered  to  be  diverging  from  the  existing  community 
legislation. If it is deemed that the supervisor concerned is not in compliance with 
EU law, then the authorities will be able – as a last resort option – to adopt decisions 
directly applicable to the supervised financial institutions.  
Third, in areas where EU law requires coordinated decision making between home 
and host supervisors the authorities will be able to make binding decisions directly 
applicable to individual institutions if supervisors cannot reach a joint decision (for 
example on the validation of Basel II internal models).  
Fourth, in the event of a crisis situation the authorities will be able to make certain 
emergency decisions requiring national supervisors to jointly take specific action.  
Finally, the EU authorities will be awarded full and direct supervisory powers over 
credit rating agencies.  
    Besides  these  binding  powers  the  authorities  will  also  have  other  “soft”  instruments  to 
promote and strengthen harmonisation and co-operation. For example, the authorities will be 
able  to  participate  as  observers  in  all  supervisory  colleges.  They  will  also  conduct  peer 
reviews of national supervisors and issue recommendations on the basis of the outcomes. In 
the regulatory area, they will be able to issue non-binding guidelines on the implementation 
of EU law.  
The second pillar – macro prudential supervision  
The  second  pillar  is  the  establishment  of  a  new  European  body  responsible  for  macro 
prudential  supervision.  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  will  be  mandated  to 
identify and assess systemic risks on a European-wide basis. Having a common body that 
provides a “birds-eye view” of financial system risks will help to avoid repeating the mistakes 
made during the current crisis, where both regulation and supervision focused too much on 
individual  institutions  and  markets.  Also,  by  looking  at  risks  arising  from  macro  economic 
trends,  as  well  as  from  developments  within  the  financial  system,  the  ESRB  can  identify 
threats to financial stability coming from both endogenous and exogenous factors.  
On  the  basis  of  its  analysis,  the  ESRB  will  issue  specific  risk  warnings  as  well  as 
recommendations for policy action to address the identified risks. These will be directed to 
those institutions that have the power to take corrective action. This could include member-
state governments or authorities, the European Commission or other EU bodies. Warnings 
and  recommendations  will  not  be  binding.  Instead  they  are  expected  to  be  followed  on  a 
“comply  or  explain”  basis.  On  a  case-by-case  basis  the  ESRB  will  decide  if  warnings  and 
recommendations should be disclosed to the public.  
2 
 BIS Review 134/2009
In terms of composition the ESRB’s decision-making body will consist of the governors of all 
the EU central banks, including the President of the ECB, as well as representatives from the 
European Commission and the three new EU supervisory authorities. National supervisors 
will be represented in the ESRB, but not have any voting powers.  
Taken together these pillars imply quite substantial changes in the EU supervisory structure. 
And even if there is broad agreement among member states on the overall concept, some 
parts  remain  highly  controversial.  The  issue  of  handing  over  power  to  the  EU  supervisory 
authorities  is  particularly  sensitive.  Some  member  states  argue  that  this  cannot  be  done 
unless  guarantees  are  in  place  that  it  will  not  impinge  on  national  fiscal  responsibilities. 
Hopefully,  the  Swedish  Presidency  will  be  able  to  sort  out  these  issues  and  make  its 
ambitious implementation plan a reality. If so, an agreement will be reached by the end of 
this year and the new supervisory structure will be up and running already during the course 
of next year.  
Supervisory reforms need to be complemented by robust and harmonised frameworks 
for crisis management and resolution  
After going through this list of reforms you may ask to what extent they will actually work in 
practice to promote and maintain financial stability within the EU? A number of questions can 
be raised, of course, but overall I would say that it looks very promising. However, I would 
like to point to one very important piece that needs to be put in place to make this system 
effective,  namely  a  common  framework  for  dealing  with  troubled  cross-border  financial 
institutions. Here, I would like to raise the perspective from the EU to speak more broadly on 
the need for action at a global level.  
The reason why I propose that supervisory reforms need to go hand in hand with reforms in 
the  area  of  crisis  management  is  quite  simple.  Supervisory  and  regulatory  incentives  are 
largely driven by what will happen once a crisis occurs. Essentially, it all comes down to the 
questions of who will suffer and who will pay. As is currently the case with crisis management 
arrangements  fragmented  along  national  lines,  the  answers  to  these  questions  are  highly 
uncertain. The best guess is that countries, in the absence of a common framework to tackle 
the problems, will try to minimize their own losses and costs without giving due consideration 
to the impact on other countries. And if regulators and supervisors suspect that costs will be 
pushed unfairly to their side of the border in a crisis, this suspicion will no doubt influence 
their view of cross-border banking.  
Basically, what I am saying is that if we cannot find a way to improve and clarify the way we 
deal with troubled cross-border banks then not very much will be gained by strengthening the 
harmonisation and co-ordination of regulation and supervision. In the worst case, this may 
even  lead  to  a  situation  with  a  more  fragmented  and  nationally-oriented  regulatory  and 
supervisory system. To paraphrase the quote from Mervin King: global banks would still be 
national in death, but less international in life. That would, in my view, be a step backwards.  
I do of course realise that it is unrealistic to ask for the creation of an international institution 
with supranational powers to deal with distressed cross-border banks. So, in the absence of 
a  common  global  regime  the  best  we  can  do  is  to  try  to  develop  a  common  international 
approach to crisis management and resolution. If we cannot do it as one, at least we need to 
make sure that we can do it similarly and in a coordinated fashion.  
So  we  need  to  embark  on  an  even  bolder  agenda  than  the  present  supervisory  reforms. 
Here, we may draw some inspiration from the last century. After the war we created the IMF 
to  provide  some  basic  rules  for  the  monetary  system,  recognising  that  the  system  is 
interlinked  and  that  problems  in  one  country  may  also  create  problems  in  others.  In  the 
1980s  we  agreed  on  the  Basle  Accord  with  joint  supervisory  rules  for  the  internationally-
active banks. Recognising now that supervisory convergence hinges on agreement on crisis 
management and resolution, I think that it is time to address this issue in a serious way. I see 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 3
this as a necessary step for Europe, given our single market. But in a broader context too, it 
will be a natural step towards strengthening the global financial system.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 134/2009
