Caleb M Fundanga: The global economic crisis – Zambia’s strategy to 
maintain stability 
Remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 4th Eastern and 
Southern  African  Management 
(ESAMI)  Summer  School  Event,  Arusha,  
29–30 November 2009. 
Institute 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great honour and privilege to be invited by ESAMI to discuss Zambia’s experiences in 
the global economic crisis and the strategies that have been chosen to deal with its effects 
and  to  bring  economic  recovery.  In  discussing  this  topic,  I  will  begin  by  highlighting  the 
effects  of  the  crisis  on  the  Zambian  economy.  I  will  also  highlight  the  strategies  used  to 
maintain  stability,  indicate  the  current  state  of  the  economy,  the  challenges  and  then 
conclude. 
Origins of the crisis 
II. 
As you may already be aware, the beginning of the global economic crisis has been traced to 
the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market which started between 2002 and 2006. This 
was  when  lending  to  the  household  sector  in  the  United  States  of  America  (USA)  was 
growing at a rate far beyond that of the broader economy (i.e. growth in GDP). The rising 
delinquencies  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  triggered  turbulences  in  the  subprime 
mortgage-backed securities market leading to a financial crisis in October 2008, first, in the 
USA,  and  which  later  quickly  spread  to  financial  institutions  in  Europe.  Subsequently,  the 
financial  crisis  created  a  recessionary  economic  environment  in  which  global  trade,  stock 
market indices, and commodity prices, such as copper and cobalt, declined significantly. 
The global financial and economic crises thus negatively impacted on economies around the 
world  through  falling  export  demand  and  tourist  receipts,  declining  commodity  prices, 
reductions  in  the  availability  of  credit  and  trade  finance,  and  less  inflow  of  remittances, 
foreign portfolio, direct investment and other capital flows. 
In response to this crisis, several actions were taken at global level by the major economies 
to address the root causes and the effects of the global financial and economic crises. These 
were  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimulus  measures  aimed  at  boosting  global  consumption 
and  investment  demand  in  an  effort  to  avoid  a  much  sharper  global  contraction  than  that 
which has already occurred. Measures typically ranged from reduction of interest rates, tax 
cuts and increased Government spending in form of bail-outs of strategic institutions and in 
some cases virtual nationalisation. Concrete steps were also taken to reform the regulatory 
and  supervisory  frameworks  governing  the  financial  sector.  Further,  increased  resources 
were provided to key multi-lateral institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank. These 
institutions were also given the mandate to play a central role in leading the global response 
to the crisis and evaluating the efficacy of the various measures that had been implemented. 
Impact of the global economic crisis on Zambia 
III. 
The Zambian financial sector did not immediately or directly become adversely affected by 
the credit crunch as was reflected in the continued stability of the banking sector, with most 
banks being adequately capitalised and the inter-bank market operating normally. This was 
mainly due to the sector’s limited integration into the international financial markets. Further, 
our financial sector had no exposure to toxic assets, which led to the credit crunch in most 
developed  markets.  However,  the  ensuing  global  financial  crisis,  with  the  global  economic 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 1
recession  that  followed,  adversely  affected  Zambia,  like  most  global  economies,  mainly 
through:  reduced  revenue  earnings  from  mineral  resources;  job  losses,  particularly  in  the 
extractive  industry;  lower  foreign  capital  inflow  (both  foreign  portfolio  investment  (FPI)  and 
foreign direct investment (FDI)); loss of foreign exchange reserves; rising domestic inflation 
driven  by  pass-through  effects  of  the  depreciation  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha 
against major currencies; and declining number of foreign tourists. 
Reduced revenue earnings from mineral resources 
As you may already know, Zambia, like many African countries, relies heavily on commodity 
exports. This made the country more vulnerable to the global downturn. The global financial 
crisis and the plummeting commodity prices on the international market negatively affected 
Government  revenue.  The  global  economic  recession  resulted  in  a  reduction  in  world 
demand for copper, which in turn, led to the precipitous fall in copper prices. Copper prices at 
the London Metal Exchange (LME) fell from highs of US$8,980 per tonne in July 2008 to as 
low as US $2,812 per tonne in December 2008. The dramatic decline in the price of copper 
led  to  reduced  earnings  from  copper  exports  by  mining  companies  and  subsequently 
reduced earnings for the Government from mineral royalties and corporate taxes from this 
source as well as falling income taxes from employees in the mining and related sectors. The 
reduced  export  earnings  for  the  mining  sector  also  translated  into  lower  investments  and 
production.  Further,  some  mining  companies,  which  were  carrying  out  exploration  works, 
discontinued these activities. Ultimately, all this led to job losses in the country’s extractive 
industry, leading to lower income tax revenue. In addition, the downturn caused a reduction 
in the Government’s capacity to develop the much needed infrastructure as it had to scale-
down its capital expenditure in line with lower revenue. 
Loss of employment 
In the real sector of the economy, the impact of the crisis was reflected in the scaling down of 
production or the closing down of some mining operations due to low copper prices. This had 
the inevitable consequence of loss of jobs. However, the reopening of some closed mines 
which has followed the recovery in metal prices has since led to a slight improvement in the 
situation. 
External position weakened 
The  declining  earnings  from  copper  exports  adversely  affected  Zambia’s  balance  of 
payments  position.  For  instance,  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  the  overall  balance  of 
payments deficit widened to US $177.6 million from US $120.6 million recorded the previous 
quarter. Merchandise export earnings declined to US $910.0 million from US $1,206.7 million 
realised  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008  following  a  sharp  reduction  in  metal  export  earnings. 
Metal export earnings declined by 23.1% to US $712.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2008 
from US $925.6 million the previous quarter. Metal export earnings at US $543.5 million in 
the  first  quarter  of  2009  were  52.6%  lower  than  the  US  $1,147.2  million  recorded  in  the 
similar  period  last  year.  A  slide  in  both  copper  and  cobalt  export  earnings  owing  to  lower 
prices accounted for this outturn. Nonetheless, it should be noted that commodity prices on 
the international markets have since recovered considerably and have thus started to bring 
improvement in Zambia’s external position. 
Foreign capital inflow reduced 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  global  financial  crisis  led  to  a  decline  in  the  foreign  portfolio 
investment  inflows  as  investors  generally  reduced  their  exposure  to  financial  instruments 
from emerging markets. The risk aversion towards emerging markets thus led to a reduction 
in foreign portfolio inflows and holdings in Zambia’s Government securities. This resulted in a 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2009
net outflow of foreign portfolio investment since funds that matured were not rolled over and 
new  funds  coming  in  were  being  scaled  down.  For  example,  the  foreign  investor’s  total 
holding of Government securities reduced from K1,054.7 billion in the third quarter of 2008 to 
K446.2 billion by the second quarter of 2009. Similarly, the flow of foreign investments at the 
Lusaka  Stock  Exchange  switched  from  a  net  inflow  of  US$2.5  million  during  the  period 
January to May 2008 to a net outflow of US$8.5 million in the similar period this year. 
Exchange rate volatility and domestic inflation 
The global financial meltdown caused a contagion effect to our foreign exchange market and 
led  to  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  currencies.  This 
unfavourable  development  was  partly  a  consequence  of  reduced  earnings  from  copper 
exports  arising  from  the  fall  in  copper  prices  as  reflected  in  the  lower  supply  of  foreign 
exchange on the market by mining companies. For instance, the supply of foreign exchange 
to  the  market  by  mining  companies  declined  by  35.7%  to  a  monthly  average  of 
US $62.4 million in the first half of this year from an average of US $97.0 million in the last 
half of 2008. 
In  addition,  the  weakness  of  the  local  currency  was  a  consequence  of  increased  risk 
aversion to emerging and developing economy financial assets, as stated earlier, attributed 
to  the  deepening  global  financial  crisis.  In  this  regard,  the  supply  of  foreign  exchange  by 
foreign portfolio investors for the purchases of Kwacha financial assets, such as Government 
securities  and  domestic  company  equities,  declined  significantly,  with  most  non-residents 
preferring to liquidate their investments and externalising the foreign exchange. The result of 
this is the volatility in the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major foreign currencies. In 
the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  Kwacha  depreciated  by  26.9%  to  trade  at  an  average  of 
K4,394.76/US  $  (BoZ  mid-rate)  from  an  average  of  K3,462.00/US  $  in  the  third  quarter.  It 
should  also  be  noted  that  the  depreciation  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  currencies  partly 
contributed  to  higher  inflation,  particularly  as  Zambia  remains  dependent  on  imports  for  a 
wide  variety  of  consumer  goods  as  well  as  inputs  for  domestic  production.  Further,  this 
unfavourable development had a strong role in shaping inflation expectations. 
In  Q4,  2008  BoZ  made  net  sales  of  foreign  exchange  to  the  market  of  US  $127.6  million, 
whilst in Q1, 2009 BoZ made net sales of US $208.5 million, in a continued effort to minimize 
exchange  rate  volatility.  This  meant  utilizing  international  reserves  to  calm  the  foreign 
exchange market. 
Tourism sector contracted 
Apart  from  mining  and  related  companies  that  were  affected  by  the  effects  of  the  global 
recession,  tourism  was  also  negatively  impacted.  The  number  of  foreign  tourists  visiting 
Zambia declined owing to financial problems and the credit crunch in their countries of origin. 
Availability of credit 
Perhaps the most challenging effect of the global financial crisis, especially for developing 
countries like Zambia, was its impact on private sector investment. Between 2006 and 2008 
credit to the private sector grew strongly (at an average of 45.6% per annum), largely driven 
by  the  expansion  of  consumer  credit  and  the  strong  growth  in  the  domestic  economy.  An 
immediate consequence of the financial and economic crisis was limitation of credit lines and 
a  slow-down  in  FDI  flows.  In  2009,  domestic  credit  is  expected  to  slow  down  as  financial 
institutions adopt more conservative lending practices and tighten their lending standards. In 
addition,  the  deterioration  in  corporate  and  household  balance  sheets  has  now  been 
translated  into  higher  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  as  a  percentage  of  total  assets  in  the 
banking  sector  (from  6%  in  mid-2008  to  13.1%  in  September  2009).  The  deterioration  in 
NPLs entails more vigilance for the bank supervision function of the Bank of Zambia. 
BIS Review 161/2009 
 3
Strategies to maintain stability 
IV. 
In responding to the crisis, the Government has taken steps to maintain macroeconomic 
stability and continue encouraging investments that will lead to diversification of the economy 
and  safeguard  vital  social  services.  Further,  the  Government  found  new  investors  to  take 
over  the  running  of  the  closed  mining  operations  and  negotiated  with  the  owners  of  the 
bigger mines on modalities of continuing with operations at the mines to forestall further job 
losses.  The  2009  Budget  prioritised  infrastructure  development  with  the  view  to  opening 
investment  opportunities 
tourism,  and 
manufacturing sectors. 
Some specific measures include the following: 
(i)  
for  diversification,  particularly 
in  agriculture, 
Agricultural  sector:  –  Increased  allocation  of  funds  to  the  sector  for  livestock 
development and creation of at least one disease-free livestock zone, Farm Block 
infrastructural development and irrigation projects. Further, the value added tax on 
selected agricultural equipment and spares, was zero rated as incentive to increase 
agricultural production and productivity. 
Tourism  sector:  –  In  order  to  diversify  the  economy  and  attain  broad  based 
economic  growth,  Government  increased  the  allocation  to  the  sector  to  improve 
access  to  the  Northern  Tourism  Circuit  (infrastructural  development  in  Mbala  and 
Kasaba Bay). 
Further, Government will embark on the development of a new world class tourism 
area  in  Livingstone,  and  step-up  the  development  of  road  infrastructure  in  key 
national parks namely, Luangwa and Kafue. 
Manufacturing:  –  In  order  to  expand  the  manufacturing  base,  Government  is 
promoting  the  establishment  of  Multi-Facility  Economic  Zones  (MFEZ)  on  the 
Copperbelt  (Chambishi),  and  Lusaka  (Lusaka  south  and  east)  provinces  by 
providing for fiscal incentives and quality infrastructure development in the budget. 
Operations at the Chambishi MFEZ have already commenced. Further, the budget 
reclassified  and  re-categorised  certain  manufacturing  materials  with  the  aim  of 
lowering customs duty rates. 
Mining sector: – In light of the adverse impact of the global economic crisis on the 
mining sector and with the view of easing these effects, the Zambian Government 
introduced tax concessions, which included removal of the windfall tax, increasing 
capital  allowance  to  100  percent  as  an  investment  incentive,  and  reduction  of 
customs duty on Heavy Fuel Oils. 
in 
the 
the  exchange 
As the Central Bank, we have continued to monitor and review developments in the foreign 
exchange  market  and  provide  prudent  support  when  necessary  in  order  to  dampen 
excessive  volatility 
recently  achieved 
macroeconomic stability. To this end, the Bank has been a net seller of foreign exchange to 
banks.  However,  the  Bank’s  interventions  were  limited,  given  the  global  extent  and 
magnitude of the crisis.  
Some of the specific measures the Bank of Zambia implemented include the following: 
• 
rate  and  safeguard 
Improving  information  flows:  The  Bank  of  Zambia  has  enhanced  its  vigilance  and 
interaction with the domestic financial system to ensure adherence to its supervisory 
guidelines  and  to  enhance  information  flows.  The  BOZ  is  continuously  interacting 
with  banks  to  ensure  that  detailed  information  regarding  foreign  exchange 
transactions  is  provided  and  has  also  engaged  major  business  entities  to 
understand  their  expected  foreign  exchange  requirements.  This  is  necessary  to 
ensure market constraints are addressed expeditiously. 
Sale of foreign exchange: Increased the supply of foreign exchange to the market 
with the primary purpose of smoothening short-term volatility in the exchange rate 
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
 4 
 BIS Review 161/2009
  and  the  foreign  exchange  market  generally.  Since  September  2008  to  date,  the 
Bank has sold US $364.5 million to the market against purchases of US $9.5 million; 
Issuance of directives: On March 2, 2009, the Bank of Zambia issued directives to 
commercial  banks  prohibiting  the  extension  of  loans  and/or  credits  and  providing 
other  sources  of  Kwacha  funding  to  non-residents  for  any  maturity  period  of  less 
than one year. The Government is in the process of issuing a statutory instrument, 
which will clarify this position, in order to protect the integrity of the financial market. 
Collaboration  with  regulators:  Engaged  other  regulatory  authorities  regarding 
measures to stem the growing trend of dollarisation, including some consideration to 
legislate  and  provide  stringent  regulations  against  this  practice,  which  erodes  the 
effectiveness of domestic monetary policy. In this regard, the Government is in the 
process  of  issuing  a  Statutory  Instrument  to  ban  quoting,  invoicing  and  settling  in 
foreign currency of domestic transactions for goods and services in Zambia. 
In addition, the Bank has enhanced its vigilance and interaction with the domestic financial 
system to ensure adherence to its supervisory guidelines and to enhance information flows 
between  banks  and  the  Central  Bank.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  also  introduced  measures  to 
ensure  that  financial  market  players  under  its  supervision  provide  detailed  information  on 
their  foreign  exchange  transactions.  Further,  the  Bank  has  continued  to  reinforce  the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  sector.  Effective  surveillance  of  the  financial 
market has entailed adoption of appropriate risk management policies and procedures meant 
to ensure that financial institutions do not undertake excessive risks that may increase the 
vulnerability of the country to external shocks. 
Current state of the economy 
V. 
Mainly  due  to  the  policies  pursued  the  Zambian  Authorities,  the  economy  has  shown 
appreciable resilience in the wake of the global economic crisis. Positive economic recovery 
trends have already started to be witnessed within 2009. 
(i)  
Mining growing by 21.4% 
Construction by 15.5% 
Agriculture by 7.1% 
According to the Central Statistical Office, GDP growth is now forecast at 6.3% for 
2009, up from 5.7% recorded on 2008, primarily driven by increased output in the 
mining, construction and agriculture sectors: 
• 
• 
• 
Although inflation rose to 16.6% at end-December 2008 from 8.9% in 2007, much of 
this  increase  was  driven  by  the  rise  in  food  and  energy  prices.  By  October  2009, 
annual inflation had fallen to 12.3%. 
The  exchange  rate  has  also  stabilised  with  the  weighted  inter-bank  rate  moving 
within a range of K4,600 and K4,750 per US dollar in the third quarter of 2009. 
The external sector adjusted strongly with the strong rebound in copper prices, to 
above US $6,400 per metric tonne, and increased output (primarily through a new 
mine, Lumwana Copper Mine). The merchandise trade balance recorded a surplus 
of  US  $415.0  million  (f.o.b.)  in  the  third  quarter  2009  compared  to  a  deficit  of 
US $183.9  million  in  2008.  Similarly,  owing  to  favourable  performance  of  the 
external sector, international reserves have increased to US $1,788.9 million in 2009 
(end-Sept) from US $247.7 million in December 2003. 
Equity markets have begun to reverse their large losses and FDI and portfolio flows 
are returning to Zambia’s financial sector. 
(ii)  
(iii) 
(iv)  
(v)  
BIS Review 161/2009 
 5
(vi)  
Zambia’s  financial  sector  remains  strong  and  stable  largely  due  to  banks  being 
adequately  capitalised,  as  confirmed  by  a  recent  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme (FSAP) Survey by the IMF and World Bank. 
Challenges 
VI. 
The  unfavourable  effects  arising  from  the  recent  global  financial  and  economic  crises  are 
huge but surmountable. To this end, we need  to do more  than what  we have done in the 
past.  One  of  the  key  challenges  relates  to  need  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability. 
Macroeconomic  managers  in  less  developed  countries  have  to  be  careful  not  to  use  the 
global economic crisis as a reason to slip back to unsustainable macroeconomic policies of 
the past.  
In  addition, the  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore, once  again,  the  ever  important  challenge  of 
accelerating  the  diversification  process.  Our  reliance  on  export  of  primary  commodities, 
copper in the case of Zambia, exposes our countries to external risks such as the ones we 
are currently experiencing. 
Conclusion 
VII. 
The Bank of Zambia and the Government will continue with efforts to deal with challenges 
from the global economic and financial crisis, which still remain significant and continue to 
threaten  macroeconomic  stability  and  the  long  term  growth  path  of  the  economy.  In  this 
regard, focus will be on attainment of the following objectives: 
• 
• 
Maintaining macroeconomic stability; 
Maintaining  fiscal  prudence  to  ensure  that  it  does  not  become  the  source  of 
instability; 
Increasing or consolidating public and private sector investment in infrastructure that 
builds the long term productive capacity of the economy and helps to diversify the 
economic base; 
Improving the business climate by lowering the cost of doing business; and 
Harnessing regional markets as an alternative source of demand for exports as well 
as source of supply for goods and services, including energy. 
  6 
 BIS Review 161/2009
