Ben S Bernanke: Frequently asked questions 
Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the Economic Club of Washington DC, Washington DC, 7 December 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 It is a pleasure to speak once again before the Economic Club of Washington. Having faced 
the  most  serious  financial  crisis  and  the  worst  recession  since  the  Great  Depression,  our 
economy has made important progress during the past year. Although the economic stress 
faced by many families and businesses remains intense, with job openings scarce and credit 
still hard to come by, the financial system and the economy have moved back from the brink 
of  collapse,  economic  growth  has  returned,  and  the  signs  of  recovery  have  become  more 
widespread.  
Understandably,  in  a  situation  as  complicated  as  this  one,  people  have  many  questions 
about  the  current  situation  and  the  path  forward.  Accordingly,  taking  inspiration  from  the 
ubiquitous  frequently-asked-questions  lists,  or  FAQs,  on  Internet  websites,  in  my  remarks 
today I’d like to address four important FAQs about the economy and the Federal Reserve. 
They are:  
1. 
2. 
Where is the economy headed?  
What has the Federal Reserve been doing to support the economy and the financial 
system?  
Will the Federal Reserve’s actions lead to higher inflation down the road?  
How can we avoid a similar crisis in the future?  
3. 
4. 
Where is the economy headed? 
First, to understand where the economy might be headed, we should take a look at where it 
has been recently.1 A year ago, our economy – indeed, all of the world’s major economies – 
were reeling from the effects of a devastating financial crisis. Policymakers here and abroad 
had undertaken an extraordinary series of actions aimed at stabilizing the financial system 
and  cushioning  the  economic  impact  of  the  crisis.  Critically,  these  policy  interventions 
succeeded in averting a global financial meltdown that could have plunged the world into a 
second Great Depression. But although a global economic cataclysm was avoided, the crisis 
nevertheless  had  widespread  and  severe  economic  consequences, 
including  deep 
recessions in most of the world’s major economies. In the United States, the unemployment 
rate, which was as low as 4.4 percent in March 2007, currently stands at 10 percent.  
Recently we have seen some pickup in economic activity, reflecting, in part, the waning of 
some forces that had been restraining the economy during the preceding several quarters. 
The collapse of final demand that accelerated in the latter part of 2008 left many firms with 
excessive  inventories  of  unsold  goods,  which  in  turn  led  them  to  cut  production  and 
employment  aggressively.  This  phenomenon  was  especially  evident  in  the  motor  vehicle 
industry,  where  automakers,  a  number  of  whom  were  facing  severe  financial  pressures, 
temporarily  suspended  production  at  many  plants.  By  the  middle  of  this  year,  however, 
                                                 
1   For  more  discussion,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  “On  the  Outlook  for  the  Economy  and  Policy”,  speech 
delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, N.Y., November 16.  
BIS Review 162/2009 
 1
inventories had been sufficiently reduced to encourage firms in a wide range of industries to 
begin increasing output again, contributing to the recent upturn in the nation’s gross domestic 
product (GDP).2  
Although the working down of inventories has encouraged production, a sustainable recovery 
requires renewed growth in final sales. It is encouraging that we have begun to see some 
evidence of stronger demand for homes and consumer goods and services. In the housing 
sector, sales of new and existing homes have moved up appreciably over the course of this 
year, and prices have firmed a bit. Meanwhile, the inventory of unsold new homes has been 
shrinking. Reflecting these developments, homebuilders have somewhat increased the rate 
of new construction – a marked change from the steep declines that have characterized the 
past few years.  
Consumer  spending  also  has  been  rising  since  midyear.  Part  of  this  increase  reflected  a 
temporary surge in auto purchases that resulted from the “cash for clunkers” program, but 
spending  in  categories  other  than  motor  vehicles  has  increased  as  well.  In  the  business 
sector,  outlays  for  new  equipment  and  software  are  showing  tentative  signs  of  stabilizing, 
and improving economic conditions abroad have buoyed the demand for U.S. exports.  
Though we have begun to see some improvement in economic activity, we still have some 
way to go before we can be assured that the recovery will be self-sustaining. Also at issue is 
whether the recovery will be strong enough to create the large number of jobs that will be 
needed to materially bring down the unemployment rate. Economic forecasts are subject to 
great  uncertainty,  but  my  best  guess  at  this  point  is  that  we  will  continue  to  see  modest 
economic growth next year – sufficient to bring down the unemployment rate, but at a pace 
slower than we would like.  
A number of factors support the view that the recovery will continue next year. Importantly, 
financial  conditions  continue  to  improve:  Corporations  are  having  relatively  little  difficulty 
raising  funds  in  the  bond  and  stock  markets,  stock  prices  and  other  asset  values  have 
recovered  significantly  from  their  lows,  and  a  variety  of  indicators  suggest  that  fears  of 
systemic  collapse  have  receded  substantially.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  supportive. 
And I have already mentioned what appear to be improving conditions in housing, consumer 
expenditure, business investment, and global economic activity.  
On the other hand, the economy confronts some formidable headwinds that seem likely to 
keep  the  pace  of  expansion  moderate.  Despite  the  general  improvement  in  financial 
conditions, credit  remains  tight  for many  borrowers,  particularly  bank-dependent borrowers 
such as households and small businesses. And the job market, though no longer contracting 
at  the  pace  we  saw  in  2008  and  earlier  this  year,  remains  weak.  Household  spending  is 
unlikely  to  grow  rapidly  when  people  remain  worried  about  job  security  and  have  limited 
access to credit.  
Inflation  is  affected  by  a  number  of  crosscurrents.  High  rates  of  resource  slack  are 
contributing  to  a  slowing  in  underlying  wage  and  price  trends,  and  longer-run  inflation 
expectations are stable. Commodities prices have risen lately, likely reflecting the pickup in 
global  economic  activity  and  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar.  Although  we  will  continue  to 
monitor inflation closely, on net it appears likely to remain subdued for some time.  
                                                 
2   The three-month diffusion index for manufacturing – a measure of the breadth of production changes across 
industry categories – stood at 63.8 percent in September. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System  (2009),  Statistical  Release  G.17,  “Industrial  Production  and  Capacity  Utilization”,  Table  6:  Diffusion 
Indexes of Industrial Production (November 17). 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2009
What has the Federal Reserve been doing to support the economy and the financial 
system? 
The discussion of where the economy is headed brings us to our second question: What has 
the Federal Reserve been doing to support the economy and the financial system?  
The Federal Reserve has been, and still is, doing a great deal to foster financial stability and 
to  spur  recovery  in  jobs  and  economic  activity.3  Notably,  we  began  the  process  of  easing 
monetary policy in September 2007, shortly after the crisis began. By mid-December 2008, 
our  target  rate  was  effectively  as  low  as  it  could  go  –  within  a  range  of  0  to  1/4  percent, 
compared with 5-1/4 percent before the crisis – and we have maintained that very low rate 
for the past year.  
Our  efforts  to  support  the  economy  have  gone  well  beyond  conventional  monetary  policy, 
however.  I  have  already  alluded  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  close  cooperation  with  the 
Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and other domestic and foreign 
authorities  in  a  concerted  and  ultimately  successful  effort  to  stabilize  the  global  banking 
system,  which  verged  on  collapse  following  the  extraordinary  events  of  September  and 
October 2008. We subsequently took strong measures, independently or in conjunction with 
other agencies, to help normalize key financial institutions and credit markets disrupted by 
the  crisis.  Among  these  were  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry,  in  which  large 
numbers  of  American  households,  businesses,  and  municipalities  make  short-term 
investments; and the commercial paper market, which many firms tap to finance their day-to-
day operations. We also established and subsequently expanded special arrangements with 
other central banks to provide dollars to global funding markets, as we found that disruptions 
in dollar-based markets abroad were spilling over to our own markets.  
More recently, we have played an important part in helping to re-start the markets for asset-
backed  securities  that  finance  auto  loans,  credit  card  loans,  small  business  loans,  student 
loans, loans to finance commercial real estate, and other types of credit. By working to revive 
these  markets,  which  allow  banks  to  tap  the  broader  securities  markets  to  finance  their 
lending,  we  have  helped  banks  make  room  on  their  balance  sheets  for  new  credit  to 
households and businesses. In addition, we have supported the overall functioning of private 
credit markets and helped to lower interest rates on bonds, mortgages, and other loans by 
purchasing unprecedented volumes of mortgage-related securities and Treasury debt.  
In all of these efforts, our objective has not been to support specific financial institutions or 
markets  for  their  own  sake.  Rather,  recognizing  that  a  healthy  economy  requires  well-
functioning  financial  markets,  we  have  moved  always  with  the  single  aim  of  promoting 
economic  recovery  and  economic  opportunity.  In  that  respect,  our  means  and  goals  have 
been  fully  consistent  with  the  traditional  functions  of  a  central  bank  and  with  the  mandate 
given  to  the  Federal  Reserve  by  the  Congress  to  promote  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment.  
In  addition  to  easing  monetary  policy  and  acting  to  stabilize  financial  markets,  we  have 
worked in our role as a bank supervisor to encourage bank lending. In November 2008 we 
joined  with  other  banking  regulators  to  urge  banks  to  continue  lending  to  creditworthy 
borrowers  –  to  the  benefit  of  both  the  economy  and  the  banks  –  and  we  have  recently 
provided guidelines to banks for working constructively with troubled commercial real estate 
loans.4 This spring, we led a coordinated, comprehensive examination of 19 of the country’s 
                                                 
3   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), “Reflections on a Year of Crisis”, speech delivered at ”Financial Stability and 
Macroeconomic  Policy”,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  held  in 
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 20–22. 
4   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), “Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers”, joint press release, November 12, ; and Board of Governors of the Federal 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 3
largest banks, an exercise formally known as the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, 
or SCAP, but more informally as the “stress test”. This assessment was designed to ensure 
that  these  banks,  which  collectively  hold  about  two-thirds  of  the  assets  of  the  banking 
system,  would  remain  well  capitalized  and  able  to  lend  to  creditworthy  borrowers  even  if 
economic  conditions  turned  out  to  be  even  worse  than  expected.  The  release  of  the 
assessment  results  in  May  provided  sorely  needed  clarity  about  the  banks’  condition  and 
marked a turning point in the restoration of confidence in our banking system.5 In the months 
since then, and with the strong encouragement of the federal banking supervisors, many of 
these largest institutions have raised billions of dollars in new capital, improving their ability 
to  withstand  possible  future  losses  and  to  extend  loans  as  demand  for  credit  recovers. 
Meanwhile, we have also continued our efforts to ensure fair treatment for the customers of 
financial  firms.  During  the  past  year  and  a  half,  we  have  comprehensively  overhauled  the 
regulations  protecting  mortgage  borrowers,  credit  card  holders,  and  users  of  overdraft 
protection plans, among others.  
In navigating through the crisis, the Federal Reserve has been greatly aided by the regional 
structure  established  by  the  Congress  when  it  created  the  Federal  Reserve  in  1913.  The 
more than 270 business people, bankers, nonprofit executives, academics, and community, 
agricultural, and labor leaders who serve on the boards of the 12 Reserve Banks and their 
24 Branches  provide  valuable  insights  into  current  economic  and  financial  conditions  that 
statistics  alone  cannot.  Thus,  the  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  ensures  that  our 
policymaking is informed not just by a Washington perspective, or a Wall Street perspective, 
but  also  a  Main  Street  perspective.  Indeed,  our  Reserve  Banks  and  Branches  have  deep 
roots in the nation’s communities and do much good work there. They have, to give just a 
couple of examples, assisted organizations specializing in foreclosure mitigation and worked 
with nonprofit groups to help stabilize neighborhoods hit by high rates of foreclosure. They 
(as well as the Board) are also much involved in financial and economic education, helping 
people to make better financial decisions and to better understand how the economy works.  
All told, the Federal Reserve’s actions – in combination with those of other policymakers here 
and  abroad  –  have  helped  restore  financial  stability  and  pull  the  economy  back  from  the 
brink.  Because  of  our  programs,  auto  buyers  have  obtained  loans  they  would  not  have 
otherwise  obtained,  college  students  are  financing  their  educations  through  credit  they 
otherwise  likely  would  not  have  received,  and  home  buyers  have  secured  mortgages  on 
more  affordable  and  sustainable 
they  would  have  otherwise.  These 
improvements in credit conditions in turn are supporting a broader economic recovery.  
terms 
than 
Will the Federal Reserve’s actions lead to higher inflation down the road? 
The scope and scale of our actions, however, while necessary and helpful in my view, have 
left  some  uneasy.  In  all,  our  asset  purchases  and  lending  have  caused  the  Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet to more than double, from less than $900 billion before the crisis 
began  to  about  $2.2  trillion  today. Unprecedented  balance  sheet  expansion  and near-zero 
overnight interest rates raise our third frequently asked question: Will the Federal Reserve’s 
actions to combat the crisis lead to higher inflation down the road?  
The answer is no; the Federal Reserve is committed to keeping inflation low and will be able 
to do so. In the near term, elevated unemployment and stable inflation expectations should 
                                                                                                                                                      
Reserve  System  (2009),  “Federal  Reserve  Adopts  Policy  Statement  Supporting  Prudent  Commercial  Real 
Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts”, press release, October 30. 
5   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), “Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release 
Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program”, press release, May 7; and Board of Governors of 
the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  “Federal  Reserve  Board  Makes  Announcement  Regarding  the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP)”, press release, November 9. 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2009
keep inflation subdued, and indeed, inflation could move lower from here. However, as the 
recovery  strengthens,  the  time  will  come  when  it  is  appropriate  to  begin  withdrawing  the 
unprecedented  monetary  stimulus  that  is  helping  to  support  economic  activity.  For  that 
reason, we have been giving careful thought to our exit strategy. We are confident that we 
have all the tools necessary to withdraw monetary stimulus in a timely and effective way.6  
Indeed,  our  balance  sheet  is  already  beginning  to  adjust,  because  improving  financial 
conditions  are  leading  to  substantially  reduced  use  of  our  lending  facilities.  The  balance 
sheet will also shrink over time as the mortgage-backed securities and other assets we hold 
mature or are prepaid. However, even if our balance sheet stays large for a while, we will be 
able  to  raise  our  target  short-term  interest  rate  –  which  is the  rate  at  which  banks  lend  to 
each other overnight – and thus tighten financial conditions appropriately.  
Operationally,  an  important  tool  for  adjusting  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  will  be  the 
authority, granted to us by the Congress last year, to pay banks interest on balances they 
hold  at  the  Federal  Reserve.  When  the  time  comes  to  raise  short-term  interest  rates  and 
thereby tighten policy, we can do so by raising the rate that we offer banks on their balances 
with us. Banks will be unwilling to make overnight loans to each other at a rate lower than the 
rate  that  they  can  earn  risk-free  from  the  Fed,  and  so  the  interest  rate  we  pay  on  banks’ 
balances  will  tend  to  set  a  floor  below  our  target  overnight  loan  rate  and  other  short-term 
interest rates.  
Additional  upward  pressure  on  short-term  interest  rates  can  be  achieved  by  measures  to 
reduce  the  supply  of  funds  that  banks  have  available  to  lend  to  each  other.  We  have  a 
number  of  tools  to  accomplish  this.  For  example,  through  the  use  of  a  short-term  funding 
method known as reverse repurchase agreements, we can act directly to reduce the quantity 
of reserves held by the banking system. By paying a slightly higher rate of interest, we could 
induce  banks  to  lock  up  their  balances  in  longer-term  accounts  with  us,  making  those 
balances unavailable for lending in the overnight market. And, if necessary, we always have 
the option of reducing the size of our balance sheet by selling some of our securities holdings 
on the open market.  
As always, the most difficult challenge for the Federal Open Market Committee will not be 
devising the technical means of unwinding monetary stimulus. Rather, it will be the challenge 
that faces central banks in every economic recovery, which is correctly judging the best time 
to tighten policy. Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, we will need to 
base  our  decision  on  our  best  forecast  of  how  the  economy  will  develop.  As  I  said  a  few 
moments  ago,  we  currently  expect  inflation  to  remain  subdued  for  some  time.  It  is  also 
reassuring that longer-term inflation expectations appear stable. Nevertheless, we will keep a 
close eye on inflation risks and will do whatever is necessary to meet our mandate to foster 
both price stability and maximum employment.  
How can we avoid a similar crisis in the future? 
As we at the Federal Reserve and others work to build on the progress already made toward 
securing  a  sustained  economic  recovery  with  price  stability,  we  must  also  continue  to 
address the weaknesses that led to the current crisis. Thus, our final question this afternoon 
is: How can we avoid a similar crisis in the future?7  
                                                 
6   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), “The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet: An Update”, speech delivered at the 
Federal Reserve Board Conference on Key Developments in Monetary Policy, Washington, October 8; and 
Ben S. Bernanke (2009), “The Fed's Exit Strategy”, Opinion, Wall Street Journal, July 21. 
7   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), “Financial Regulation and Supervision after the Crisis: The Role of the Federal 
Reserve”,  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  54th  Economic  Conference,  held  in 
Chatham, Mass., October 23. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 5
Although  the  sources  of  the  crisis  were  extraordinarily  complex  and  numerous,  a 
fundamental  cause  was  that  many  financial  firms  simply  did  not  appreciate  the  risks  they 
were taking. Their risk-management systems were inadequate and their capital and liquidity 
buffers insufficient. Unfortunately, neither the firms nor the regulators identified and remedied 
many of the weaknesses soon enough. Thus, all financial regulators, including the Federal 
Reserve,  must  undertake  unsparing  self-assessments.  At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  have 
extensively  reviewed  our  performance  and  moved  to  strengthen  our  oversight  of  banks. 
Working  cooperatively  with  other  agencies,  we  are  toughening  our  banking  regulations  to 
help constrain excessive risk-taking and enhance the ability of banks to withstand financial 
stress.  For  example,  we  have  been  among  the  leaders  of  international  efforts,  through 
organizations such as the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision, to increase the quantities 
of capital and liquidity that banks must hold. At home, we are implementing standards that 
require banking organizations to adopt compensation policies that link pay to the institutions’ 
long-term performance and avoid encouraging excessive risk-taking.  
I  mentioned  the  SCAP,  otherwise known  as  the  stress  tests.  We  are  applying  the  lessons 
learned in that exercise to reorient our approach to the supervision of large, interconnected 
banking organizations that are critical to the stability of the financial system. In particular, we 
are taking a more “macroprudential” approach, one that goes beyond supervisors’ traditional 
focus  on  the  health  of  individual  institutions  and  scrutinizes  the  interrelationships  among 
firms  and  markets  to  better  anticipate  sources  of  financial  contagion.  To  do  that,  we  are 
expanding our use of the kind of simultaneous and comparative cross-firm examinations that 
we used to such good effect in the SCAP. The Federal Reserve’s ability to draw on a range 
of disciplines – using economists, market experts, accountants, and lawyers, in addition to 
bank  examiners  –  was  essential  to  the  success  of  the  SCAP,  and  a  multidisciplinary 
approach  will  be  a  central  feature  of  our  supervision  in  the  future.  For  example,  we  are 
complementing  our  traditional  onsite  examinations  with  enhanced  off-site  surveillance 
programs,  under  which  multidisciplinary  teams  will  combine  supervisory  information,  firm-
specific data analysis, and market-based indicators to identify problems that may affect one 
or more banking institutions.  
Although  regulators  can  do  a  great  deal  on  their  own  to  improve  financial  oversight,  the 
Congress also must act to fix gaps and weaknesses in the structure of the regulatory system 
and, in so doing, address the very serious problem posed by firms perceived as “too big to 
fail”. No firm, by virtue of its size and complexity, should be permitted to hold the financial 
system,  the  economy,  or  the  American  taxpayer  hostage.  To  eliminate  that  possibility,  a 
number of steps are required.  
First,  all  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  not  only  banks,  should  be  subject  to 
strong  and  comprehensive  supervision  on  a  consolidated,  or  firmwide,  basis.  Such 
institutions should be subject to tougher capital, liquidity, and risk-management requirements 
than other firms – both to reduce their chance of failing and to remove their incentive to grow 
simply in order to be perceived as too big to fail. Neither AIG, an insurance company, nor 
Bear  Stearns,  an  investment  firm,  was  subject  to  strong  consolidated  supervision.  The 
Federal Reserve, as the regulator of bank holding companies, already supervises many of 
the  largest  and  most  complex  institutions  in  the  world.  That  experience,  together  with  our 
broad knowledge of the financial markets, makes us well suited to serve as the consolidated 
supervisor  for  systemically  important  nonbank  institutions  as  well.  In  addition,  our 
involvement  in  supervision  is  critical  for  ensuring  that  we  have  the  necessary  expertise, 
information, and authorities to carry out our essential functions of promoting financial stability 
and making monetary policy.  
Second,  when  a  systemically  important  institution  does  approach  failure,  government 
policymakers must have an option other than a bailout or a disorderly, confidence-shattering 
bankruptcy. The Congress should create a new resolution regime, analogous to the regime 
currently used by the FDIC for failing banks, that would permit the government to wind down 
a troubled systemically important firm in a way that protects financial stability but that also 
6 
 BIS Review 162/2009
imposes  losses  on  shareholders  and  creditors  of  the  failed  firm,  without  costs  to  the 
taxpayer.  Imposing  losses  on  creditors  of  troubled,  systemically  critical  firms  would  help 
address  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  by  restoring  market  discipline  and  leveling  the  playing 
field  for  smaller  firms,  while  minimizing  the  disruptive  effects  of  a  failure  on  the  financial 
system and the economy.  
Third,  our  regulatory  structure  requires  a  better  mechanism  for  monitoring  and  addressing 
emerging  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Because  of  the  size,  diversity,  and 
complexity  of  our  financial  system,  that  task  may  exceed  the  capacity  of  any  individual 
agency. The Federal Reserve therefore supports the creation of a systemic oversight council, 
made  up  of  the  principal  financial  regulators,  to  identify  developments  that  may  pose 
systemic risks, recommend approaches for dealing with them, and coordinate the responses 
of its member agencies.  
Conclusion 
In closing, I will again note that in the fall of last year, the United States, indeed the world, 
confronted a financial crisis of a magnitude unseen for generations. Concerted actions by the 
Federal Reserve and other policymakers here and abroad helped avoid the worst outcomes. 
Nevertheless,  the  turmoil  dealt  a  severe  blow  to  our  economy  from  which  we  have  only 
recently  begun  to  recover.  The  improvement  in  financial  conditions  this  year  and  the 
resumption of growth over the summer offer the hope and expectation of continued recovery 
in the new year. However, significant headwinds remain, including tight credit conditions and 
a weak job market.  
The Federal Reserve has been aggressive in its efforts to stabilize our financial system and 
to  support  economic  activity.  At  some  point,  however,  we  will  need  to  unwind  our 
accommodative  policies  in  order  to  avoid  higher  inflation  in  the  future.  I  am  confident  we 
have both the tools and the commitment to make that adjustment when it is needed and in a 
manner consistent with our mandate to foster employment and price stability.  
In the meantime, financial firms must do a better job of managing the risks of their business, 
regulators – the Federal Reserve included – must complete a thoroughgoing overhaul of their 
approach to supervision, and the Congress should move forward in making needed changes 
to our system of financial regulation to avoid a similar crisis in the future. In particular, we 
must solve the problem of “too big to fail”.  
In sum, we have come a long way from the darkest period of the crisis, but we have some 
distance yet to go. In the midst of some of the toughest days, in October 2008, I said in a 
speech that I was confident that the American economy, with its great intrinsic vitality, would 
emerge from that period with renewed vigor.8 I remain equally confident today.  
                                                 
8   See Ben S. Bernanke (2008), “Stabilizing the Financial Markets and the Economy”, speech delivered at the 
Economic Club of New York, New York, N.Y., October 15. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 7
