Tarisa Watanagase: Future regulatory challenges for emerging markets – 
a case for Thailand 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Association of 
International Banks (AIB) Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 19 October 2009. 
 Chairman,  Board  members  and  members  of  the  Association  of  International  Banks, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
First of all, I would like to thank you for inviting me to join you today. I welcome the honour 
and look forward to the opportunity of meeting you, especially at this important juncture in the 
history of global financial system development. In the past two years, we witnessed one of 
the  most  severe  financial  crises  in modern  time,  and  with  it,  a  sharp  impact  on  the  global 
economy,  especially  after  the  demise  of  Lehman.  Today,  the  global  financial  market  has 
stabilized, albeit not having returned to normal, with many major parts still in retrenchment 
such as securtisation market.  
Today,  an  almost  one  year  anniversary  of  the  global  fallout,  the  Dow  Jones  once  again 
retraced its step, and touched 10,000 points. There are increasing positive signs of global 
economic  recovery.  Nevertheless,  there  are  still  significant  uncertainty  and  downside  risk, 
going  forward.  These  include  uncertainty  on  the  exit  policy  of  stabilization  measures  of 
various countries, the differential speed of adjustment of various regional economies, and not 
least, the impending challenge of regulatory reform demanded by the public at large.  
Throughout  this  turbulent  period,  Thailand’s  financial  system  has  remained  resilient  and 
stable. Significant credit is, of course, due to your part, especially your ability and willingness 
to  uphold  normal  service  for  your  clients  here,  as  well  as  your  cooperation  with  your 
supervisors  in  ensuring  strong  risk-management.  Going  forward,  we  look  forward  to  this 
strong  and  beneficial  relationship,  to  help  us  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  the  global 
economic and financial developments.  
Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity today to convey our appreciation, as well as to 
share with you the key challenges we see going forward, and to outline the reforms which in 
our views are key for Thailand and emerging markets in this context. 
My talk today will be divided into two parts. 
First, I will look at the current debate on regulatory reform, focusing on the measures being 
discussed  at  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision.  I  will  highlight  the  key 
proposals, the timeline, and the process being discussed. 
Secondly, I will share with you our input on the debate at global forums, and the reform 
that we consider to be our priority, going forward. I believe our reform agenda will be 
useful  for  you  as  practitioners,  as  the  global  reform  covers  a  very  expansive  and 
comprehensive  set  of  policy,  and  for  banks  operating  in  many  jurisdictions,  the  required 
adjustment  to  ensure  compliance  can  be  significant.  This  process  can  be  facilitated  by 
setting a clear and transparent priority.  
Let me now turn to the first part of my talk, the update on global debate on regulatory 
reform. 
While the current precept of risk-based supervision, as implemented by many, is still a robust 
and  valid  concept,  there  are  many  weaknesses  when  it  comes  to  putting  the  precept  into 
practice, as shown by the lesson of this crisis. These weaknesses include the inability to deal 
with complexity arising from such mechanism as securtisation, OTC derivatives, as well as 
the  problem  of  procyclicality  and  systemic  risk  associated  with  valuation  and  performance 
management issues. Nevertheless, risk-base principle remains the key  anchor to coherent 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 1
risk  management  and  supervision,  even  more  so  given  the  increasing  complexity  of  the 
financial market. So, we must remain anchored to its principles. 
What  then  needs  to  be  done  is  to  strengthen  risk  measurement,  management,  and 
supervision,  so  that  we  can  truly  capture  risk  of  individual  institutions,  overtime,  and  risk 
arising  from  interconnectedness  of  key  components  of  the  system,  to  safeguard  financial 
stability. In short, we need to strengthen both micro- and macro-prudential regulations.  
The  shift  in  policy  paradigm  from  this  crisis  has  been  the  increasing  acceptance  of  the 
concept  of  macroprudential  policy,  which  takes  into  account  the  interconnectedness  within 
the financial systems as well as between the financial system and the real economy, that is, 
the issue of systemic risk and procyclicality.  
The proposals by G20, the BCBS, as well as international accounting standards are in line 
with  the  risk-based  principle.  While  the  range  of  policy  is  extensive,  the  key  thrusts  are 
strengthening  of  risk-based  microprudential  regulation,  and  emergence  of  the  explicit 
importance given to macroprudential supervision to tackle the problem of procyclicality and 
systemic risk.  
As  we  can  see,  there  will  be  a  new  paradigm  and  context  to  international  supervisory 
standard. While the macro orientation is in fact not new, and has always been in the classic 
tool-kit  of  central  bank  in  ensuring  financial  stability,  the  current  explicit  articulation  and 
specification of such tool as global standard is.  
The  key  macroprudential  policy  framework  that  has  received  wide  support  to  deal  with 
procyclicality problems includes the followings. 
First, there is a proposal on the build-up of capital buffer in the good times to be run down in 
the  bad  times  and  to  prevent  excessive  credit  growth.  Second,  as  being  discussed  with 
accounting  standard  setters,  provisioning  should  be  linked  with  expected  loss  rather  than 
incurred loss, which is the prevailing practice. Finally, the primarily simple and transparent 
“leverage ratio” should be applied as a complement to risk-based capital requirement under 
Basel II.  
Implementation of many such policies is still subjected to significant work on calibration as 
well  as  qualitative  issues  such  as  consistency  with  risk-sensitive  capital  framework,  and 
international  level-playing  field.  Such  problems  magnify  in  the  case  of  emerging  markets, 
which face constraint on data and institutional capacity. Moreover, much of the work done on 
calibration would tend to serve the need of IRB rather than SA banks that are the core in 
emerging  market.  Thus,  the  reform  agenda  will  need  to  pay  proper  attention  to  capacity 
building of banks and regulators. Nevertheless, there are warranted rationales for its use in 
financial stability tool kit in an appropriate manner, given national context.  
In terms of measures to address systemic risk, the proposed ideas include systemic capital 
charge, capital for OTC derivatives, and cross-border bank resolution framework. Again, the 
same emerging market issue and dimension should be properly recognized. 
Turning  to  the  key  microprudential  policy  framework  currently  being  discussed  at  the 
international  forums  to  ensure  individual  financial  institution’s  stability,  the  BCBS  has 
proposed a package to address previous shortcomings in risk-based supervision as follows. 
For Pillar I, regulatory capital for securitisation exposure is enhanced. In addition, the quality 
and  transparency  of  capital  is  strengthened  especially  Tier  I  capital,  which  would  consist 
mainly of common equity and retained earnings.  
For  Pillar  II,  supplemental  guidelines  are  issued  by  requiring  banks  to  manage  firm-wide, 
concentration and reputational risks more effectively. Valuation and stress-testing practices 
are also improved. Moreover, compensation and bonus scheme should be aligned with long-
term risk taking behaviour and performance.  
Turning  to  Pillar  III,  focus  is  given  to  disclosure  requirements  to  reduce  uncertainties 
associating  with  securitization  exposures.  Additional  requirements  include,  for  example, 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2009
sponsorship of off-balance sheet vehicles, and resecuritisation exposures. On top of these, a 
new  regulation  on  liquidity  risk  management,  namely  the  so-called  liquidity  coverage  ratio 
could  be  introduced,  going  forward,  subjected  to  further  work.  This  new  regulation  is 
designed  to  ensure  that  banks,  particularly  global  banks,  maintain  adequate  liquidity  at  all 
times,  underpinned  by  longer-tern  structural  liquidity  ratio.  In  this  regard,  liquidity  stress 
scenarios would be determined by supervisors.  
The  BCBS  will  issue concrete  proposals  on  these  measures  by  the  end  of  this  year,  after 
which,  an  impact  assessment  and  calibration  exercise  would  be  completed  by  the  end  of 
next year. For Thailand, implementation of these new international standards would depend 
on needs and appropriateness, based on our context. 
Let me now turn to the second part of my talk, the Bank of Thailand’s input on these 
ongoing regulatory debates. 
It is true that many reforms being discussed are in the context of complex financial markets 
and  institutions,  much  more  complex  than  our  markets,  and  that  emerging  markets  were 
affected by indirect rather than direct impact of the financial crisis. But, market failures in key 
market  structure,  such  as  securitization,  will  in  the  future  be  our  issues.  Moreover,  global 
standards  will  have  an  impact  on  risk  management  culture,  as  well  as  level  playing  field 
issue,  globally.  Thus,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  gives  high  priority  to  the  global  debate  and 
participates actively.  
Through  our  involvement  in  various  international  forums,  such  as  the  bi-monthly  BIS 
Governor Meetings, as well as Standard Implementation Group of BCBS, of which we are a 
member,  the  BOT  has  proposed  that  developing  countries  be  invited  to  participate  in  the 
development process of these new standards right at the beginning rather than be informed 
of them at the very end. Moreover, the BOT has also voiced our concern over the use of a 
simple leverage ratio, which does not take into account inherent risk because this would tend 
to  penalize  banks  in  developing  countries  since  they  generally  hold  less  risky  assets 
compared to developed countries. 
Recently, the BOT was invited to take part in the newly created Basel Consultative Group 
(BCG), which will meet for the first time during 28 to 29 October this year. The BCG’s main 
agenda is to be a discussion platform for ongoing Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s 
prudential standards and their implementation issues, such as those mentioned earlier. 
In  this  regard,  our  stance  on  the  implementation  of  any  new  regulatory  and  supervisory 
change includes the following points. 
First,  regarding  microprudential  policy  framework,  the  BOT  already  has  the  process  to 
enhance understanding and adjustment of banks for the implementation of related standards, 
for example, through hearings. Macroprudential policy framework is a more challenging area, 
particularly in terms of data limitations and policy calibration. Despite this challenge, the BOT 
remains  committed  to  maintain  overall  stability  of  the  financial  system.  As  such,  we  stand 
ready to guard against any build up of bubble and imbalance within the system.  
Let me now share with you what I believe are our priorities, going forward. 
Amongst these, Basel II implementation, especially adequacy of capital, ICAAP and stress 
testing practices is on top of our list.  
The principles stipulated in Pillar II, which came into effect in September this year, are in line 
with the existing risk-based supervision used by the BOT,  but places greater focus on the 
qualitative  aspect  of  risk  management  and  assessment  of  capital  adequacy.  For  example, 
the role of the Board of directors and senior management in the assessment and formulation 
of strategy on capital management for the current and future periods, has been stressed. 
In this regard, we hope that banks would ensure they have a good risk management system, 
with an ICAAP that covers all significant risks, including those stipulated under Pillar I as well 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 3
as other risks. These other risks should at least include credit concentration risk, interest rate 
risk in banking book, liquidity risk, strategic risk and reputational risk.  
Moreover,  it  is  desirable  that  banks  maintain  capital  above  the  minimum  regulatory 
requirement to withstand future losses both in normal and stress situations. To achieve this, 
banks should conduct stress tests and formulate capital plan in accordance with the stress 
test results, in a systematic and continuous manner. 
We expect banks to be able to finalize and start using their ICAAP by the end of December 
2010, with the first ICAAP Report submitted to the BOT within the first quarter of the following 
year. The BOT would then begin reviewing banks’ ICAAP during bank examination that year. 
In assuring adequacy of capital over the business cycle, we believe it is very important to 
focus  on  countering  procyclicality  by  ensuring  capital  and  provision  buffer,  as  well  as  to 
introduce  IAS  39  which  incorporates  correction  from  problem  or  procyclicality  as  being 
considered  by  international  standard  setters  and  BCBS.  Importantly,  we  emphasise  the 
importance of consolidated supervision to ensure adequacy not only in capital but also risk-
management of the entire banking group, particularly liquidity risk. In this regard, with respect 
to  foreign  banks,  an  important  issue  to  push  forward,  in  our  view,  is  that  of  crossborder 
supervisory  coordination,  particularly  better 
information  sharing  between  home-host 
supervisors  should  be  warranted.  This  is  particularly  important  as  the  current  crisis  shows 
that  there  is  a  need  for  home  supervisor  of  global  financial  conglomerate  and  banks  to 
recognizing  that  global  bank’s  local  operations  may  be  systemically  important  for  the  host 
economies. 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  what  I  believe  are  the  key  changes  in  our 
financial landscape, resulting from this global crisis. 
First, bank business model would likely become more conservative, placing less reliance on 
wholesale  financing  and  use  of  leverage,  while  focusing  more  on  risk  management  and 
higher liquidity buffer. Consumers themselves would be more risk averse and prefer to stick 
with simple transactions and products. As mentioned already, regulatory framework would be 
strengthened, especially the use of macroprudential oversight that focuses on system-wide 
stability. As such, closer supervision of systemically important financial institutions, including 
non-banks,  would  be  required.  Finally,  the  microprudential  oversight  would  also  be 
strengthened to rectify previously identified shortcomings, particularly the Basel II framework, 
corporate governance, and incentive misalignment.  
Though it looks as if we could be in the process of creating a “new world order”, given what 
we  have  done  so  far  in  strengthening  our  financial  sector  resilience,  I  believe  that  this 
transition would be a smooth one and add further strength to our financial system. Needless 
to say, a strong financial system is the backbone of sustainable economic growth in the long-
term. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2009
