Fabrizio Saccomanni: Fact-finding for the examination of the 
Communication of the European Commission on European financial 
supervision 
Testimony  of  Mr  Fabrizio  Saccomanni,  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  before  the 
Finance Committee of the Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 15 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  the  need  to  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision  and  to 
intensify cooperation between national authorities worldwide. In Europe, this effort must be 
supported  by  a  revision  of  the  institutional  arrangements  for  supervision:  markets  have 
become considerably more integrated and an important role is played by large and complex 
intermediaries  with  important  interests  in  a  number  of  different  countries;  financial  stability 
cannot be preserved exclusively by the exercise of powers and responsibilities assigned at 
the national level. 
In  the  last  decade  there  has  been  a  serious  effort  to  harmonize  community  legislation. 
Between 2001 and 2004 the establishment of three so-called “level 3” committees to provide 
technical support to the Commission and to collaborate with national authorities in the area of 
banking  (CEBS),  insurance  (CEIOPS)  and  securities  (CESR)  has  brought  about  closer 
cooperation  between  the  authorities  and  has  enhanced  the  convergence  of  supervisory 
practices. 
During  their  first  few  years  the  Committees  drew  up  numerous  guidelines  for  the  uniform 
application  of  community  regulations  in  their  respective  fields;  they  introduced  their  own 
internal procedures to monitor compliance with common standards in the member states and 
to  resolve  disputes  between  national  authorities;  they  supported  the  establishment  of 
colleges  of  supervisors  and  developed  common  practices  to  encourage  the  efficient 
organization of controls on cross-border banking groups. 
Although substantial, the results achieved are not enough. The rules still vary considerably 
from  country  to  country.  The  directives  contain  too  many  options  and  national  discretions; 
even  in  the  absence  of  explicit  discretionary  powers,  transposition  into  national  law  has 
allowed  the  regulations  to  be  interpreted  in  many  different  ways.  The  result  is  that  the 
rulebook  according  to  which  a  cross-border  group  must  operate  is  a  collection  of  national 
texts  that  differ  significantly  from  one  another  even  in  the  harmonized  areas.  National 
supervisory practices reflect the institutional arrangements and the different traditions of the 
local  authorities.  The  common  rules  are  filtered  through  very  different  approaches  to  their 
application.  For  example,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  harmonized  rules  on  the  definition  of 
capital,  on  securitization  and  on  the  consolidation  of  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs) 
have been applied in very different ways by different countries – in Italy the approach has 
been  rigorous  and  prudent,  but  attitudes  in  other  countries  are  much  less  restrictive.  The 
colleges of supervisors, which bring together the authorities responsible for the supervision 
of cross-border groups, have not played a pivotal role during the crisis and have basically 
remained simple centres for exchanging information; only in a few cases has there been a 
real coordination of the risk assessments and of the joint definitions of the priority areas for 
supervisory interventions. Discrepancies in the nature and powers of the authorities as well 
as in the instruments for resolving crises have in practice prevented any real coordination of 
the actions taken by the single authorities. The tendency to resort to national solutions has 
been further accentuated by the absence of principles agreed at the European level on the 
distribution among the member states of the financial costs associated with supporting banks 
in difficulties. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 1
The reform of the European supervisory system 
2. 
The European Commission has recognized that a supervisory system divided along national 
lines would find it difficult to prevent and manage crises of a systemic nature. As a result, in 
October 2008 it mandated a group of high-level independent experts, chaired by Jacques de 
Larosière, to present some proposals for reform. 
In particular, the group was asked to consider how to strengthen European cooperation in 
monitoring risks to the financial stability of the entire system i.e. macroprudential supervision. 
In effect, the financial crisis has shown that the soundness of individual institutions is not, by 
itself, sufficient to ensure the stability of the financial system. It is also fundamental to take 
account of the influence that common risks may have on the system overall; to assess the 
interactions between the behaviour of single institutions, between the different markets and 
between  finance  and  the  real  economy;  and  to  identify  the  channels  through  which  crises 
could be propagated. 
For years numerous central banks, including the ECB, have performed analyses on financial 
stability conditions. Often, they have identified risks that subsequently materialized, but they 
have lacked the instruments for translating their findings into concrete intervention policies. 
The mandate of the de Larosière group was to study how best to organize micro-prudential 
supervision  of  European  financial  institutions  in  order  to  overcome  the  limitations  of  an 
approach that relies solely on voluntary cooperation among national regulators.  
The de Larosière Report proposes a reform resting on two main pillars. The first relates to 
macro-prudential  supervision,  which  would  be  entrusted  to  a  new  body,  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board, or ESRB. The second pillar concerns micro-prudential supervision, to 
be governed by a European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS) consisting of three new 
European  authorities  in  charge  of  separate  areas  of  financial  intermediation  (banking, 
insurance,  and  securities),  the  colleges  of  supervisors  and  the  national  supervisory 
authorities.  The  Report’s  recommendations  were  adopted  by  the  European  Commission, 
which issued a Communication on 27 May this year outlining the main points of the reform 
and setting out a plan of action to make the new architecture operational by the end of 2010. 
The Commission’s proposals were broadly endorsed by the Ecofin Council of 9 June and by 
the Council of Heads of State and Government of 19 June. The Commission will put forward 
its legislative proposals at the end of September, the texts of which should be approved in 
time to make sure that the new system is up and running in 2010. 
In the plan approved by the Council, the ESRB will be assigned to carry out studies on the 
European financial system in order to issue warnings concerning particular areas of risk and 
vulnerabilities in the financial structures requiring the authorities’ attention. It will then draw 
up non-binding recommendations for corrective action at European or national level, which 
will  be  channelled  through  the  ESFS  and  the  Ecofin  Council.  Lastly,  it  will  monitor  the 
effective implementation of its recommendations. 
As regards organization and functioning, the ESRB will not be an independent legal entity; it 
will be composed of the governors of the national central banks of the 27 member states, the 
chairpersons of the three new European Supervisory Authorities, and a representative of the 
European Commission. 
A  representative  of  the  national  supervisory  authority  of  each  member  state  and  the 
President of the Economic and Financial Committee of the European Union will participate as 
non-voting observers. The ESRB will be chaired by the governor elected by the members of 
the General Council of the ECB; the ECB will provide analytical, logistics and administrative 
support to the ESRB, which will have a Steering Committee comprising the chairperson and 
vice-chairperson, the governors of two national central banks (one from the euro area and 
one  from  a  non-euro  country),  the  Commission  representative,  and  the  President  of  the 
Economic and Financial Committee. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2009
For micro-prudential supervision the reform will institute the European System of  Financial 
Supervisors  (ESFS),  in  which  the  CEBS,  CEIOPS  and  CESR  will  be  transformed  into 
European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) with legal personality under Community law. The 
new  system  will  continue  to  envisage  the  decentralization  of  supervisory  powers,  which 
remain with the national authorities and the colleges of supervisors set up for cross-border 
groups, while a number of important functions will be centralized within the ESAs. 
More specifically, the ESAs 1) can issue binding technical standards to ensure that national 
supervisory  authorities  follow  uniform  and  consistent  approaches  and  develop  a  common 
rulebook applicable to all financial institutions in the European Union; 2) will be empowered 
to adopt binding resolutions to settle disagreements between national authorities on issues 
concerning  cross-border  supervision;  3)  will  perform  tasks  of  coordination  of  supervisory 
activities,  including  within  the  colleges  of  supervisors;  4)  will  be  directly  responsible  for 
overseeing  the  rating  agencies;  and  5)  will  set  up  and  manage  common  databases  for 
information exchanges with the ESRB for purposes of macro-prudential supervision. 
As  regards  organization,  the  Commission’s  Communication  states  that  the  Board  of 
Supervisors  of  each  ESA  should  be  comprised  of  high-level  representatives  of  the 
supervisory  authorities  of  the  EU  member  states.  Representatives  from  the  ESBR,  the 
Commission and the relevant supervisory authorities from EEA countries will take part in the 
Board as observers but would not be able to attend any discussions of confidential matters 
pertaining to individual institutions. The chairpersons and executive directors of the European 
Supervisory  Authorities  should  be 
than 
representatives of the national supervisors as was the case with the Level 3 committees. The 
European  Commission  has  proposed  that  a  Management  Board  also  be  set  up,  where 
appropriate, which would be composed of a small number of representatives of the national 
supervisors and a representative of the Commission. 
independent  professionals 
full-time 
rather 
Issues in implementing the reform 
3. 
The  institutional  framework  outlined  in  the  reform  proposals  boasts  several  merits.  It  is 
important, however, to take an ambitious and unambiguous approach to putting this reform 
into practice. I would like to consider six aspects that I believe are crucial to success: (1) the 
ESRB’s structure and tools; (2) the independence of the new bodies; (3) the creation of a 
single rulebook and the establishment of common supervisory approaches; (4) the gathering 
and sharing of confidential data; (5) the colleges of supervisors; and (6) the legislation and 
agreements on crisis management. 
3.1 
Structure, powers and tools of the ESRB 
An institutional framework centred on the central banks.  
(i)  
The  national  central  banks  are  generally  assigned  a  leading  role  in  ensuring  national 
financial stability. 
In  pursuing  the  goal  of  monetary  stability  the  central  banks  necessarily  also  consider  the 
aspects  relating  to  financial  stability;  in  the  case  of  the  ECB  this  is  recognized  in  specific 
provisions  of  the  European  Treaty  (e.g.  Article  105(5)).  In  view  of  their  institutional 
competences  the  NCBs  have  developed  the  capabilities,  skills  and  toolkits  needed  to 
analyze the stability of the financial system. 
The new Board must, from its inception, be firmly anchored to the ECB in order to benefit 
from  the  latter’s  well-established  reputation  and  the  direct  contribution  of  the  specialist 
technical and operational know-how needed to monitor the financial stability of the EU area. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 3
Appointing the President of the ECB as chairperson of the ESRB would help to guarantee 
the  adoption  of  a  consistent  approach  in  pursuing  monetary  stability  and  safeguarding  the 
stability of the system. 
The legal basis for the ESRB  will be Article 95 of the Treaty, but it would be advisable to 
consider  appealing  also  to  Article  105(6),  under  which  the  ECB  can  be  assigned  specific 
tasks in respect of prudential supervision, so that the institutional nature of the link between it 
and the ESRB and the modalities of the ECB’s involvement in the latter’s activities may be 
established clearly and with the appropriate guarantees. 
Linkage with micro-prudential supervision.  
(ii)  
Macro-prudential  supervision  by  the  ESRB  can  be  effective  only  if  the  analyses  and 
assessments of the risks to financial stability serve to orient the priorities of micro-prudential 
supervision  on  intermediaries  and  financial  markets.  Coordination  between  the  ESRB  and 
the ESAs needs to be very strong even in the analysis phase, so as to ensure a sharing of 
approaches and speedy and efficient exchange of information. 
In  particular,  risk  assessment  should  be  based  on  the  extensive  direct  involvement  of  the 
colleges of supervisors. If the aim is to have the results of macro-prudential analyses used in 
the  supervision  of  financial  groups,  the  colleges  must  be  able  to  contribute  actively  to 
identifying the main risk factors and the policy options. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  ESRB  must  be  in  a  position  to  acquire  the  micro-prudential 
information necessary for analysis of the risks, with a special focus on large banks. 
The exchange of information between the European Supervisory Authorities and the ESRB 
should be governed by a protocol of cooperation, so as to ensure observance of the rules on 
the  confidentiality  of  supervisory  data.  When  highly  confidential  information  is  involved,  it 
could be sent in anonymous form. 
Effective macro-prudential instruments.  
(iii)  
The ESRB’s main instrument will be the power to send recommendations to the competent 
authorities.  Separation  between  the  entity  that  identifies  the  risks  and  issues  the 
recommendations  and  those  that  control  the  policy  instruments  bearing  on  financial 
institutions and markets could give rise to confusion in the assignment of responsibilities and 
to  misalignment  of  incentives.  On  the  one  hand,  the  ESRB’s  recommendations  should  be 
formulated at EU-wide level or possibly refer to specific categories of intermediary or groups 
of countries but not to individual institutions, in order to avoid confusion of competences with 
the national authorities that supervise those institutions. On the other hand, the mechanisms 
for 
the  recommendations  must  be  particularly  stringent.  The 
Communication  of  the  Commission  envisages  that  if  the  national  authorities  decide  not  to 
follow a recommendation or to follow it only in part, they must give a public explanation for 
their  reasons  (“act  or  explain”).  This  also  implies  that  the  recommendations  of  the  ESRB 
should normally be given adequate publicity. The direct assignment of some instruments to 
the ESRB could also be considered. 
For  example,  in  the  international  discussion  there  is  agreement  on  the  need  to  introduce 
countercyclical  prudential  instruments  that  encourage  the  formation  during  expansions  of 
buffers  to  be  used  in  recessions  or  market  crises,  when  the  risks  materialize.  The  ESRB 
could have a direct role in the design and maintenance of these instruments. 
the  enforcement  of 
3.2 
Independence, governance and accountability 
Independence of the ESRB and involvement of the political authorities.  
(i) 
Anchoring  the  ESRB  to  the  ECB  should  provide  sufficient  guarantees  of  the  institutional 
independence of the macro-prudential supervisory function. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2009
Indeed,  it  has  been  argued  that  this  independence  might  be  excessive,  given  the 
responsibilities  that  governments  also  have  regarding  financial  stability.  However,  the 
institutional  arrangement  proposed  by  the  Commission  strikes  an  appropriate  balance 
between the different interests. 
The  involvement  of  the  political  authorities  is  ensured  through  the  participation  of  the 
chairman  of  the  EU  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  in  the  ESRB  as  an  observer.  In 
addition,  the  fact  that  the  ESRB  submits  its  recommendations  to  the  Ecofin  Council  will 
ensure the governmental involvement and commitment essential to their implementation. 
Independence of the ESFS.  
(ii)  
By comparison, the safeguards for the independence of the ESFS appear less sturdy. The 
de  Larosière  Report,  the  Communication  of  the  Commission  and  the  Conclusions  of  the 
Council underscore that its independence is essential to the success of the reform, but the 
legal  basis  for  the  new  authorities  will  consist  solely  in  Article  95  of  the  Treaty,  which 
according to the practice followed to date assigns the Commission strong influence over the 
functioning of European agencies. 
The  implementing  texts  must  give  the  ESAs  sufficient  autonomy  in  issuing  supervisory 
standards  and  prevent  these  from  being  operationally  dependent  on  the  Services  of  the 
Commission. 
Without  amendments  to  the  Treaty,  regulatory  powers  cannot  be  assigned  directly  to  the 
ESAs. But the process of approval by the Commission of the standards issued by the ESAs 
must  not  actually  diminish  the  authorities’  role  and  their  responsibility  regarding  rules  of  a 
more technical nature. In particular, the Commission should not be allowed to approve the 
texts proposed by the ESAs only in part or to modify them; otherwise, the Commission would 
become  the  supervisory  standard  setter  and  the  ESAs  would  be  relegated  to  a  role  of 
technical assistance. 
The Lisbon Treaty provides for two categories of secondary legislation at Community level: 
delegated regulations and implementing measures. For the latter, which are inherently more 
technical, there could be a further delegation to the ESAs. The Commission could approve 
by the “non-opposition” formula, similar to the mechanism used to introduce the accounting 
standards  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  into  Community 
legislation.  Under  the  Treaty,  in  the  cases  where  the  ESAs  are  considered  to  have 
overstepped their bounds in interpreting the delegation or have issued rules inconsistent with 
the first-order principles, the Commission and the co-legislators, the European Council and 
Parliament, can revoke the regulations issued by the ESAs and legislate at a higher level – 
either  with  primary  legislation  or  with  a  delegated  regulation,  assigned  to  the  Commission 
with the support of high-level committees of member states. 
Governance of the ESAs.  
(iii)  
The chairpersons and executive directors of the ESAs must be selected through appointment 
procedures  that  safeguard  their  independence,  for  example  with  “confirmation”  by  the 
European institutions. The Commission should participate in the authorities’ decision-making 
as an observer.  
The Commission should be excluded from the management boards and – in contrast with 
what is proposed in the Commission’s Communication – also from the Steering Committee 
that is to coordinate the actions of the three ESAs. This would also ensure compliance with 
the  requirement  of  confidentiality  in  the  exchange  of  supervisory  information  between  the 
authorities. 
The  authorities  should  have  an  autonomous  budget,  but,  in  the  light  of  the  important 
standard-setting tasks delegated by the Commission, provision could be made for substantial 
resources drawn on the EU or Commission budget. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 5
It  will  be  necessary,  lastly,  to  establish  appropriate  procedures  for  the  authorities’ 
accountability to the European institutions and to clarify the mechanisms for the enforcement 
of the agencies’ decisions and the procedures for appeals. 
3.3 
Single rulebook and uniform supervisory approaches 
Truly homogeneous supervisory rules and standards in the single market. 
(i)  
The Communication of the Commission and the Conclusions of the Council leave room for 
highly disparate interpretations of the notion of single rulebook. 
In a minimalist reading, the main step could be held to lie in the elimination of options and 
national discretions from the directives. Instead, it is fundamental to significantly expand the 
scope  of  the  supervisory  rules  and  standards  issued  at  European  level  and  directly 
applicable  to  financial  institutions  by  reducing  to  a  minimum  the  margins  for  introducing 
differences through the process of transposition into national legislation. 
Ideally, the set of rules that apply to a financial institution authorized in the European Union 
should consist largely of directly applicable European rules and only residually of measures 
adopted at national level in order to take account of the specificities of local markets. 
However, there is no blinking the fact that the single rulebook will be drafted starting from a 
multiplicity of legal orders and supervisory systems, with divergent characteristics. 
On  financial  regulation,  in  some  EU  countries  a  good  part  of  the  rules  are  laid  down  by 
sectoral authorities, while in others the national rulebook consists largely in legislation. Italy is 
somewhere in between: although we have opted for a significant narrowing of the scope of 
legislation,  the  regulatory  functions  are  exercised  by  Italian  supervisory  authorities  under 
principles  and  criteria  set  by  law  or  ministerial  decree.  As  for  controls,  there  are  radical 
differences from country to country in the relative importance of off-site analysis and on-site 
inspection and in powers of access and verification at intermediaries. 
The drafting of the single rulebook will therefore take time. But it is a good thing to specify the 
stages of the process from the very outset.  
limitation  of 
risk  concentration, 
Ample use of binding standards in all the more technical matters.  
(ii)  
Going by the Ecofin Council conclusions, the ESAs can lay down standards for the matters to 
be specified in Community legislation. From the first stage of implementation of the reform, 
Community  legislation  could  assign  the  new  European  authorities  the  task  of  setting 
standards in the areas with the greatest technical content. In banking, for instance, the new 
authority could be empowered to issue binding standards on the definition of capital, capital 
requirements, 
reporting, 
methodologies and procedures for prudential controls, and the practical operation of colleges 
of  supervisors.  These  are  areas  that  have  little  impact  on  the  fundamental  principles  and 
rules  of  national  law,  and  in  which  current  divergences  often  stem  from  the  difficulty  of 
abandoning established practices. 
However, there are other sectors in which convergence is less apt to proceed by means of 
standards  laid  down  by  the  newly  constituted  European  authorities.  Such  aspects  as  the 
powers of supervisory authorities over market entry and exit, intermediaries’ governance and 
internal controls, and sanctions affect each nation’s normative and institutional arrangements 
more substantially and so require specific national rules for implementation. These parts of 
the  rulebook  may  well  continue  to  be  governed  at  Community  level  by  the  traditional 
instrument of the directive, albeit one for maximum harmonization. 
risk,  prudential 
liquidity 
6 
 BIS Review 119/2009
Convergence on a high level of prudential rigour in standards and application.  
(iii)  
Finally, turning to the substance of the single rulebook, it is important that convergence not 
be pursued at the expense of the efficacy of rules and controls. 
We  must  prevent  the  difficulties  of  reaching  agreement  among  such  different  approaches 
from  resulting  in  the  adoption  of  accommodating  standards  and  supervisory  practices  –  a 
sort of lowest common denominator. 
Rather,  the  European  rulebook  should  look  to  the  rules  and  supervisory  models  of  the 
countries  whose  financial  systems  have  proven  most  robust  –  those  least  exposed  to  the 
causes  and  consequences  of  the  crisis,  thanks  to  strict  and  particularly  risk-sensitive 
supervisory  practices.  In  our  view,  this  crisis  shows  that  the  Italian  supervisory  model  can 
provide a useful point of reference for the process of convergence. 
It will be just as important to develop strict, common approaches to the enforcement of the 
European standards. 
The  vulnerability  of  the  European  financial  system  is  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that  in  some 
countries the harmonized rules have been applied less strictly, in keeping with a “light touch” 
supervisory model too fearful of interfering with intermediaries’ decisions.  
The ESAs must clearly define the procedures for applying the rulebook and verify that the 
national  authorities  ensure  high  quality  supervision.  Financial  innovations  and  new  market 
practices  must  be  brought  before  a  European  forum  to  decide  on  common  supervisory 
policies.  This  is  the  only  way  to  prevent  some  countries  from  adopting  a  more 
accommodating  stance  so  as  to  give  their  own  intermediaries  a  competitive  edge,  at  the 
expense of area-wide financial stability.  
Collection and exchange of information 
3.4 
The ESAs will play a major role in determining the supervisory data that are to be shared and 
organizing their collection and aggregation in central databases. The main users will be the 
national  supervisory  authorities,  above  all  for  evaluating  the  risks  of  cross-border  groups 
within  the  colleges  of  supervisors.  Accordingly,  in  this  area  the  ESAs  should  involve  the 
colleges closely, taking their cue from the structures developed in the last few years. 
The  information  centralized  in  databases  operated  by  ESAs  should  enable  supervisors  to 
conduct effective peer group analyses. 
In  addition  to  basic  supervisory  data,  it  could  be  most  useful  for  supervisors  to  share  the 
results of stress tests on the main banking groups and their consequent risk assessments. 
The  best  way  to  achieve  this  is  to  have  the  ESAs  themselves  conduct  the  stress  tests  at 
European level, using common scenarios and methodologies and providing for mechanisms 
to  determine  the  sources  of  differences  between  single  financial  groups.  To  make  this 
possible,  access  to  the  data  must  be  restricted  to  a  small  group  of  supervisors  and  strict 
rules must be enacted to safeguard the confidentiality of such sensitive data. 
Colleges of supervisors 
3.5 
With  the  reform,  the  ESAs  are  given  a  central  role  in  coordinating  the  activities  of  the 
colleges of supervisors. The first step should be setting standards for the functioning of the 
colleges based on today’s best practices, to enhance consistency within the Union. In this 
regard,  the  two  colleges  instituted  by  Banca  d’Italia  for  the  top  two  Italian  banking  groups 
represent  an  especially  positive  experience.  Rules  are  already  in  course  of  application 
establishing  the  legal  basis  for  the  colleges,  broadening  their  tasks  –  including  in  crisis 
situations – and creating joint decision-making processes for supervisory controls, which may 
eventually  result  in  specific  capital  requirements  for  the  groups  and  for  their  individual 
components. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 7
So far, the colleges have worked well where the law is sufficiently stringent in defining their 
tasks,  as  for  instance  in  the  validation  of  the  intermediaries’  internal  risk  measurement 
models. The results have been less satisfactory where the functioning of colleges is based 
on voluntary commitments. 
To  achieve  a  truly  integrated  system  of  controls  on  cross-border  groups,  in  which  the 
colleges can act as promptly and as effectively as national supervisors now do, it would be 
necessary to create the conditions for expanding the scope for concerted decision-making by 
the supervisory authorities. Consideration should be given to enacting Community legislation 
on banking groups patterned after the Italian law, which recognizes the coordinating role of 
the parent company and institutes a clear framework for the proper attribution of rights and 
responsibilities  to  all  the  components  of  the  group.  The  parent  company  could  be  made 
responsible for interacting with the college of supervisors and making sure that the latter’s 
indications are complied with by all group members. 
Legislation and agreements on the management of crises 
3.6 
In line with the recommendations of the de Larosière Report, the Ecofin Council has charged 
the  Commission  to  reinforce  the  so-called  “infrastructure  legislation”  referring  to  the 
procedures for the prevention and resolution of crises of cross-border groups. The Economic 
and Financial Committee has been asked to develop proposals to improve the cooperation 
mechanisms for managing crises at these intermediaries. 
The instruments for managing crises. 
(i) 
In  the  first  place  significantly  increased  harmonization  of  legislation  on  the  instruments  for 
managing crises is necessary. 
In  fact  the  large  disparities  between  member  states  with  regard  to  national  authorities’ 
powers  and  responsibilities  in  early  interventions  and  the  procedures  for  resolving  crises 
prevent the coordinated management of interventions involving cross-border groups. 
The Commission has undertaken to present proposals for European legislation in this field 
shortly.  The  procedures  laid  down  in  the  Italian  legislation on  the  management  of  banking 
crises,  which  include  preventive  measures,  have  proved  effective  and  could  be  a  useful 
model for guiding the work carried out at the European level. The possibility of introducing a 
common procedure for the management of the crises of cross-border banking groups should 
also be weighed. 
If this were not feasible, at least the application of the Directive on the winding up of credit 
institutions could be extended to the subsidiaries of foreign banks, as a first step towards a 
greater degree of harmonization in this field. 
The removal of obstacles to the transfer of assets within the European Union. 
(ii)  
Progress  is  needed  in  the  harmonization  of  company  and  bankruptcy  law  to  remove  the 
obstacles that prevent the transfer of assets and liquidity between the various components of 
cross-border banking groups. The possibility of ring-fencing assets held in a country leads in 
fact  to  solutions  that  are  rational  from  the  standpoint  of  individual  member  states  but 
inefficient in terms of enhancing the value of the group’s assets; in some cases ring-fencing 
may even accelerate insolvency and complicate the management of the crisis.  
Deposit insurance schemes. 
(iii)  
The  Commission  is  also  working  to  reduce  the  disparities  still  present  in  the  working  of 
deposit insurance schemes. The recent revision of the directive raised the levels of coverage 
and  shortened  reimbursement  times,  but  it  did  not  reduce  the  wide  margins  of  discretion 
member  states  enjoy  regarding  the  funding  of  the  schemes,  or  the  conditions  for  and  the 
characteristics of the interventions. In promoting a greater degree of harmonization of these 
8 
 BIS Review 119/2009
aspects,  it  should  also  be  possible  to  consider  a  common  deposit  guarantee  scheme  at 
European level, which could interact with national deposit protection schemes and make an 
invaluable contribution to the coordinated intervention of national authorities in the event of 
crises of cross-border groups. 
Cooperation agreements and sharing the burden of crises. 
(iv)  
Lastly, it appears desirable to develop mechanisms for coordinated intervention in crises to 
minimize  the  impact  on  markets  and,  ultimately,  on  taxpayers.  In  line  with  the  indications 
contained in the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the ministries of finance, central 
banks  and  supervisory  authorities  of  the  European  Union  in  2008,  the  Economic  and 
Financial  Committee  is  preparing  general  recommendations  for  agreements  under  which 
each  national  authority  undertakes  a  clear  commitment  with  regard  to  the  support  it  could 
provide in the event of the crisis of a cross-border group. 
The  details  of  these  burden-sharing  agreements  should  be  left  to  the  structures  for 
coordination  among  supervisory  authorities,  central  banks  and  finance  ministries  (cross-
border stability groups) that will be set up for each banking group. 
 Conclusions 
In the coming months it will be necessary to monitor the implementation of the reform closely 
and  make  sure  that  an  ambitious  and  rigorous  approach  is  adopted,  as  indicated  by  the 
Minister  for  the  Economy  and  Finance  in  the  note  accompanying  the  transmission  to 
Parliament of Consob’s Annual Report. Ambiguous solutions risk creating confusion of roles 
and  conflicts  between  authorities;  compromises  that  in  reality  maintain  the  status  quo  as 
regards national authorities’ powers or encourage lax controls do not solve the problems that 
the crisis has brought out. 
In my remarks I have tried to outline the points that can determine the success of the reform: 
in  the  first  place  it  is  necessary  to  provide  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
• 
(ESRB) with effective operational instruments and a solid institutional basis, possibly 
by activating Article 105(6) of the Treaty, which provides for the ECB to be entrusted 
with specific supervisory tasks; 
then it is necessary to guarantee the independence of the new European authorities: 
the  political  authorities  can  be 
the  process  of 
macroprudential  supervision  and  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  the  ESRB’s 
recommendations;  the  European  Securities  Authorities  (ESAs)  will  have  to  be 
exclusively  responsible  for  defining  the  technical  standards  of  supervision  for  the 
European Union, with appropriate accountability mechanisms; 
it is also necessary to take determined steps towards effectively uniform rules, with 
greater recourse to European regulations instead of directives and with the technical 
standards  of  the  new  authorities  directly  applicable  throughout  the  entire  single 
market without their having to be transposed. Moreover, the uniformity of the rules 
will  have  to  be  accompanied  by  equal  degrees  of  rigour  in  the  supervisory 
approaches to implementing controls and adopting corrective measures; 
confidentiality  mechanisms  and  rules  will  have  to  be  introduced  to  ensure  that 
confidential  information  is  shared  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  today,  thereby 
facilitating the creation of common databases; 
colleges of supervisors must be put in a position to function with the same efficacy in 
relation  to  cross-border  groups  as  national  supervisors;  this  must  be  ensured 
through new Community legislation on banking groups; 
involved  as  observers 
in 
   BIS Review 119/2009 
 9
 new  legislation  must  be  adopted  on  crisis  management  procedures  and  deposit 
insurance  schemes,  together  with  agreements  among  authorities  with  clear 
commitments on support for specific cross-border groups. 
I hope these suggestions may be of help to the Committee in defining its stance with regard 
to  the  proposals  of  the  Commission  and  the  recommendations  of  the  Council  and  in 
providing indications to the Government on the position to take in this important institutional 
reorganization. 
10 
 BIS Review 119/2009
