Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asia’s new development strategy – where now? 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  ASEM 
Conference  "Asia's  New  Development  Strategy:  Where  Now?",  Kuala  Lumpur,  19  October 
2009. 
 Introduction 
The  experience  of  economic  development  in  Asia  -  home  to  more  than  half  of  the  world 
population  and  one  of  the  most  diverse  regions  -  for  more  than  half  a  century  has  been 
remarkable. Despite being interrupted by turbulence from time to time, Asia has, in general, 
attained  and  sustained  high  growth  rates  during  this  period,  experienced  rapid  structural 
economic  transformation  and  shifted  from  economies  based  on  agriculture  to  capital-
intensive production of modern goods and services. From a mix of poor and less developed 
economies  after  the  Second  World  War,  Asia  today  features  five  of  the  twenty  largest 
economies  in  the  world and  several  of  the  fastest-growing economies, contributing  around 
one-third of global output and world trade.  
The objective of economic development is, however, not solely based on trade, finance or 
even  wealth.  Economic  development  is  fundamentally  about  the  welfare  of  people,  where 
growth is but a means to achieve continued improvements in the standards of living. Viewed 
within this context, Asia has achieved significant progress too. Asia's rapid development has 
led  to  a  more  than  four  fold  increase  in  average  per  capita  income,  lifting  more  than  500 
million people out of poverty and destitution since the 1980s. The poverty rate in Asia has 
markedly  declined  from  80%  in  1981  to  16%  of  the  total  population  in  2005.  Beyond 
dramatically improving basic social conditions, significant strides have also been made in the 
provision and access to quality healthcare and education. Whilst Asia's urban population has 
increased by more than six fold, average life expectancy has risen by 25 years to 72 years 
and  average  literacy  rate  to  above  90%.  What  makes  these  considerable  improvements 
remarkable  is  that  they  were  all  achieved  in  a  relatively  short  span  of  less  than  two 
generations. 
This  paper  consists  of  two  parts.  The  first  explores  the  development  strategies  that  have 
contributed  to  Asia's  successful  economic  transformation  in  the  post-World  War  II  period, 
with particular emphasis on the recent decade after the Asian financial crisis. The paper then 
discusses  broadly  how  Asia's  development  strategies  needs  to  be  adapted  going  forward, 
especially  in  light  of  the  current  global  crisis  which  has  brought  significant  changes  to  the 
global economic and financial environment. 
Asia’s development strategy over the last 50 years  
Asia in the post-World War II period 
What  is  exceptional  about  the  performance  of  Asia  is  the  relatively  high  growth  rates 
achieved  by  the  best  performing  Asian  economies  when  compared  to  the  champions  of 
earlier  eras  (Figure  1).  The  rapid  transformation  of  Asia  was  led  by  three  global  growth 
leaders over the past 50 years, beginning with Japan in the 1950-70s, South Korea from the 
1970s  and  currently,  China.  Their  average  annual  per  capita  growth  rates  of  6-8%  are 
historically  unprecedented  and  greatly  exceed  those  attained  by  the  present  advanced 
economies at their earlier stage of economic development by at least three folds. Similarly, 
ASEAN-5 experienced growth rates of more than doubled that of world average during the 
past two decades. Nevertheless, Asia's growth path is no different from those of the other 
economies. Asia too follows a similar industrialisation process of moving from traditional to 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 1
modern activity, from the production of low value-added goods to incrementally higher value-
added products to eventually the services sector. What makes Asia different, however, is that 
this process has been considerably accelerated. 
 
 The success of Asia has not been a result of one single factor, but instead, a confluence of 
factors that has promoted, facilitated and driven economic development. Given the immense 
diversity of the continent, it would not be possible to draw on exact and specific development 
strategies  that  have  contributed  to  the  rapid  economic  progress  and  transformation. 
Nevertheless,  four  general  but  salient  features  have  been  critical  in  the  development 
strategies of most of the Asian economies.  
First,  sustained  economic  growth  has  always  been  given  a  steadfast  priority  in  the  Asian 
economies.  The  governments  in  most  South-East  Asian  and  East  Asian  countries  have 
focused  on  institution-building  and  promoting  industrialisation.  Institutions  have  been 
established  to  plan,  drive  and  monitor  the  laying  of  necessary  economic  foundations, 
including enabling infrastructure, in the broader economy, while potential impediments have 
been addressed. These institutions in effect aim to promote an environment that is conducive 
for growth. Equally vital are the institutions to maintain macroeconomic and financial stability 
stability,  as  well  as  to  promote  inclusion  and  socio-economic  stability.  To  accelerate  the 
movement  of  resources  from  traditional  to  modern  activity  in  the  new  industrialised 
economies  in  Asia  (South  Korea,  Chinese  Taipei,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore),  industrial 
policies have been targeted at enhancing efficiency, higher-productivity and competitiveness. 
Incentives and some domestic protectionism had an important role at the initial stage of the 
industrialisation  process  to  advance  the  industrialisation  process.  These  features  are 
exemplified  in  the  experiences  of  Japan  and  the  newly  industrialised  Asian  economies 
(South  Korea,  Chinese  Taipei,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore),  as  well  as  later,  in  the  other 
Asian economies such as ASEAN and China.  
2 
 BIS Review 130/2009
Although the Asian Governments participate directly in economic development, the emphasis 
is  on  the  private  sector  leading  growth,  particularly  after  industrial  and  infrastructure 
foundations  have  been  laid.  The  role  of  the  Government  has  been  to  support  the  private 
sector  through  developing  an  environment  for  the  private  sector  to  undertake  higher 
productivity activity, with the actual production of goods and services is ultimately driven by 
the private sector. Governments, together with the established institutions, draw up industrial 
plans and set targets to guide the industrialisation process for the private sector to embark to 
realise these goals. 
The second salient feature is Asia's high rate of savings, exceeding 30% of gross national 
product (GNP) in most Asian economies, which have enabled the private and public sectors 
to  fund  capital  accumulation  from  domestic  sources.  While  the  private  sector  focuses  on 
investing  in  physical  capital  and  adopting  new  technologies  to  raise  productive  efficiency, 
governments across Asia place commensurate emphasis on developing infrastructure, such 
as  roads,  ports  and  utilities,  as  well  as  on  healthcare  and  education.  The  combination  of 
efficient  capital  and  productive  labour  in  turn  generates  more  higher-value-added  activity, 
thereby accelerating economic growth. 
Third,  the  Asian  economies  have  adopted  an  outward-oriented  development  path,  rather 
than depended only on domestic demand, to expand industrial production. Just five decades 
ago,  Asia  was  amongst  the  world's  poorest  regions.  Asia  recognised  that  its  development 
process would be slow and marginal should low-income-driven domestic demand be relied 
upon to incrementally stimulate industrial activity. It accelerated the movement of resources 
from  low-productivity  traditional  activity  to  high-productivity  modern  activity.  Most  of  Asia, 
early  among  the  developing  economies,  has  been  very  open  to  international  trade  and 
foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  resulting  in  Asia  to  be  rapidly  integrated  with  the  global 
economy. The trade volume of Asia as a share of total world trade increased from 14% in 
1970 to 22% in 1990, and subsequently to 28% in 2008. Furthermore, Asia has also been a 
major recipient of FDI, with FDI flows into Asia increasing from 7% of total global FDI to 20% 
in 2007. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
  3
 4 
   BIS Review 130/2009
Fourth, the immense heterogeneity and diversity of the Asian economies have not been a 
restraint  on  progress,  but  have  complemented  and  facilitated  the  region's  economic 
development. The vast differences in the stage of development of the individual economies, 
such as from the advanced Japan to emerging China to developing Vietnam, together with 
the rich variety of natural resources and endowments throughout the region, have enabled 
Asia  to  capitalise  on  a  multitude  of  strengths  and  comparative  advantages.  In  particular, 
there are the region's different development levels and consequent technological capabilities, 
known commonly as the “Flying Geese Model”. Such specialised division of labour is evident 
in the 1970s when Japan relocated the more labour-intensive stages of production processes 
to  the  newly  industrialised  Asian  economies,  such  as  South  Korea  and  Singapore,  and 
subsequently  in  the  1980s,  to  emerging  Asia,  including  Malaysia,  Indonesia  and  Thailand. 
The emergence of China in the recent decade has further provided significant impetus to this 
pattern  of  vertical  specialisation,  which  has  effectively  resulted  in  a  globalisation  of  the 
production  chain  across  the  network  of  regional  economies.  Whilst  Asia's  fragmented 
industrialisation has led to a considerable strengthening of trade links within the region, the 
transfer  of  capital,  knowledge  and  technologies  that  are  crucial  for strengthening industrial 
capabilities have also been enhanced. 
Asia after the Asian financial crisis 
The 1997-98 Asian financial crisis represents a significant juncture in the history of Asia. The 
crisis exposed several structural weaknesses both in the domestic economies of Asia and in 
the global financial architecture. Recognising the growing interlinkages and risks, a range of 
new initiatives both nationally and regionally, together with the parallel development of sound 
institutions and good governance, were introduced post-crisis to strengthen the resilience of 
the  Asian  economies  and  minimise  regional  systemic  risks  in  order  to  ensure  a  more 
sustainable economic development. In retrospect, the Asian crisis marked not a halt, but the 
start of an even greater presence of Asia in the global landscape. 
Following  the  crisis,  Asia  has  undertaken  wide-ranging  financial  reforms,  aimed  at 
developing more stable, resilient and efficient financial systems. This included restructuring 
as  well  as  institutional  development  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector. 
Amongst  others,  sound  regulatory  regimes  have  been  established,  prudential  regulations 
strengthened,  corporate  governance  and  financial  disclosure  improved,  and  deposit 
insurance introduced. As the domestic financial systems strengthened, the environment for 
the banking sector has become increasingly more competitive through gradual deregulation 
and  liberalisation.  In  addition,  efforts  have  also  been  focused  on  developing  the  capital 
markets, in particular the bond market, which has also reduced over-reliance on the banking 
sector as a source of financing for large businesses. This has prompted the banking sector to 
broaden access to credit to other economic agents. Overall, what were once bank-dominated 
financial  systems  has  become  more  diversified  and  competitive  with  strengthened 
governance, disclosure and regulation. Asian financial deepening has been faster than in the 
EU  or  US,  while  it  starts  from  a  lower  base.  The  Asian  bond  market  today,  as  a  share  of 
GDP, is higher than the EU. 
 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 5
 On  the  regional  level,  several  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  to  promote  intra-regional 
trade and investment since as early as the 1990s. For example, in 1992, an ASEAN Free 
Trade Area (AFTA) was launched for intra-ASEAN tariffs to be lowered to 0-5% under the 
Common  Effective  Preferential  Tariff  (CEPT),  with  a  target  of  establishing  a  tariff-free  free 
trade area by 2015. Also, an ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services (AFAS) was signed 
in 1995 to eliminate intra-ASEAN restrictions to trade in services and facilitate free flow of 
services by 2015. Furthermore, in 1998, an ASEAN Investment Area (AIA) was adopted to 
promote greater flows of capital, skilled labour, professional expertise and technology within 
the  region.  These  various  initiatives  have  been  further  accelerated  post-Asian  crisis,  with 
various free trade agreements (FTA) rapidly emerging between ASEAN and the North East 
Asian  economies,  namely  China,  Japan  and  South  Korea.  Recently  in  April  this  year,  the 
FTA between ASEAN and China was broadened to encompass the removal of investment 
barriers  from  just  restrictions  in  trade-in-goods  since  2004  and  in  services  since  2007, 
thereby creating the world's largest free trade area with a population of 1.8 billion and gross 
domestic product of USD2 trillion. In addition, negotiations on an FTA between ASEAN and 
Japan, South Korea, as well as India, Australia and New Zealand have been initiated. 
Given  these  regional  initiatives  in  trade  and  investment,  Asia's  export  market  has  become 
increasingly diversified with intra-regional trade gaining a greater importance. Intra-regional 
trade in South, East and South-East Asia as a share of total trade of all three regions has 
risen from 25% in 1980 to 44% in 2006. More specifically, growth in intra-regional trade of 
East Asia-9 (EA-9) has been higher at 17% than that of total regional trade (15%) and world 
trade  (12%)  for  the  period  of  1999-2008.  Whilst  EA-9's  trade  to  the  US  as  a  share  of  the 
region's total trade has declined from 17% in 1990 to 11% in 2008, intra-regional trade rose 
from  28%  to  39%  during  the  same  period.  Overall,  intra-regional  trade  in  South-East  Asia 
and East Asia has about the same volume as intra-regional trade in Europe and North, which 
is  significantly  more  than  either  regions  at  the  outset  of  their  integration  efforts.  These 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2009
developments  reflect  the  deeper  and  considerably  strengthened  trade  and  investment 
linkages within the Asian region. 
 these 
Of greater significance in this recent decade is that regional efforts have transcended trade 
and  investment  areas  toward  an  intensification of  financial cooperation.  The  importance  of 
regional  financial  collaboration  was  recognised,  not  only  to  provide  a  platform  for  regional 
development through channelling part of the high savings in Asia to be invested in Asia, but 
also as a safeguard against the vagaries of global markets. Extensive efforts have now been 
put in place in the areas of surveillance, liquidity support arrangements, crisis management 
framework,  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  other  financial  infrastructure,  capital 
account liberalisation, financial services liberalisation, development of regional payment and 
settlement systems, as well as training and capacity-building.  
Broadly, economic and financial surveillance, aimed at identifying regional risk sources and 
vulnerabilities have been undertaken to enhance vigilance as prevention to potential financial 
crises  and  enable  prompt  corrective  actions.  Several  forums,  including  the  Executives' 
Meeting of East Asia and Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), ASEAN and ASEAN+3, undertake 
extensive  discussions  on 
integrated  regional  crisis  containment, 
management  and  resolution 
is  also 
complemented with mutual support arrangements and liquidity support mechanisms, such as 
the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  (CMI)  launched  2000.  The  CMI,  comprising  of  the  ASEAN  Swap 
Arrangement and a network of bilateral swap arrangements among the ASEAN+3 countries, 
makes  available  financial  resources  in  a  timely  manner  to  members  facing  temporary 
balance of payments and short-term liquidity constraints. It was first agreed in 2005 that the 
CMI would be multilateralised in all main components of the arrangement, and more recently 
in 2009, the total size of the facility has been increased to USD120 billion. 
Considerable  efforts  have  also  been  placed  in  regional  financial  market  development, 
especially  for  a  deeper  and  more  liquid  secondary  bond  market.  On  the  supply  side,  the 
Asian  Bond  Market  Initiatives  (ABMI)  seeks  to  develop  deeper  and  more  liquid  capital 
markets  that  facilitate  the  channelling  of  the  large  pool  of  savings  in  the  region  to  fund 
productive investments, thereby enabling further regional economic development. Recently, 
the establishment of a Credit Guarantee and Investment Mechanism by ASEAN+3 to support 
the  issuance  of  local  currency-denominated  corporate  bonds,  with  an  initial  capital  of 
USD500 million, was announced. Meanwhile, the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) Initiative focuses 
on  addressing  demand-side  issues  by  broadening  and  deepening  domestic  and  regional 
framework  has  also  been  established,  which 
issues.  An 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 7
bond  markets  through  pooling  reserves  for  investments  into  regional  bond  markets.  Two 
funds, totalling USD3 billion, have been established to catalyse market development. 
Regional  financial  integration  has  accelerated  in  this  decade.  A  more  diversified  financial 
system, together with strengthened financial infrastructure and capital account liberalisation, 
have seen the share of intra-regional portfolio investment, in both debt and equity, as a share 
of total portfolio investment has increased to 24% in 2007 from 15% in 2001. Mergers and 
acquisitions (M&A) have also been growing, with intra-regional M&A as a share of total M&A 
in the region rising to 47% in 2006 from 32% in 2004. Most of the investments were into the 
services  sector,  such  as  financial  services  and  real  estate.  However,  despite  the 
considerable progress in financial integration in Asia, it is still low compared to the European 
Union-16 (2007: 56% as a share of total portfolio investment). 
Asia going forward 
The current global crisis, considered to be the most severe in the post-World War II period, 
has  revealed  weaknesses  to  the  current  global  system.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  the 
global economic and financial landscapes are expected to change significantly. While signs 
of  stabilisation  are  now  emerging,  prospects  for  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies  are 
expected to be gradual. The general consensus is that the emerging economies in Asia, in 
particular China and India, will lead the global recovery moving forward. Several structural 
factors  will  support  growth  in  Asia,  including  the  growth-enhancing  reforms  and  greater 
regional  integration  that  have  been  undertaken  in  the  recent  decade.  In  addition,  Asia's 
relatively strong and resilient financial systems, which have remained relatively unaffected in 
this  current  global  financial  crisis,  are  in  a  sound  position  to  provide  financing  to  support 
domestic  economic  activity.  Indeed,  this  trend  will  accelerate  the  formation  of  more  multi-
polar global landscape in the future.  
For  continued  progress  and  development,  the  strategies  for  Asia  are  adapting  to  the 
changing  landscape;  leveraging  on  regional  strengths  and  addressing  current  weaknesses 
and future risks. Two key principles have contributed to Asia's earlier success, namely the 
regional and global integration of the economy and inclusive development. Asia has always 
embraced openness. While greater integration beyond national borders will likely continue, 
the pattern of integration will change. It will become increasingly diversified among emerging 
economies, in particular within Asia. Similarly, to ensure sustainability of economic growth, it 
requires consideration of inclusion. 
 
8 
 BIS Review 130/2009
 Three key strategies for Asia 
Going forward, three areas are critical for Asia. The current crisis demonstrated the effects of 
Asia's  reliance  on  trade  and  final  demand  from  the  advanced  economies.  While  domestic 
demand and intra-regional trade has started to increased, it still shows the region's continued 
close  trade  connections  with  the  global  community.  Exports  performance  in  the  Asian 
economies  was  dramatically  adversely  affected,  causing  the  more  open  economies  in  the 
region  to  slip  into  recession,  while  other  Asian  economies  experienced  slowing  economic 
growth.  The  decline  in  world  trade  followed  the  reduced  final  demand  from  the  advanced 
economies. The outward-oriented policy across Asia and the internationalisation and vertical 
integration  of  manufacturing  supply  chains  amplified  the  magnitude  and  speed  of  trade 
contraction  in  the  Asian  economies.  An  important  strategy  for  Asia  going  forward  is, 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 9
therefore, to intensify the balance of the outward-oriented development strategy with 
efforts to promote the greater role of domestic demand. This economic diversification will 
provide  increased  resilience  in  the  face  of  external  shocks  and  will  enhance  the  overall 
growth prospects for Asia.  
Several  preconditions  are  already  in  place  to  support  domestic  demand  in  Asia  going 
forward.  The  first  is  the  favourable  demographic  structures,  fast-rising  income  levels, 
broadening  affluence  and  the  growing  middle  income  class  across  most  of  the  Asian 
economies. Estimates suggest that both China and India have large and growing domestic 
middle-class markets - estimated to be about USD1 trillion per year in China and USD250 
billion  annually  in  India.  This  trend  is  expected  to  continue  given  an  increasing  young 
population in Asia with new spending patterns, threreby leading to the rise of a modern retail 
sector across the region. In China, organised retail trade as a share of total retail trade has 
increased from 5% a decade ago to an estimated 17%, while in India, the retail market is 
growing  by  7%  per  annum.  The  second  factor  is  the  relatively  sound  financial  position  of 
households in Asia, with high saving rates that exceed 30% of GNP in most countries and 
relatively low debt levels, thus providing the potential for rising consumption to be sustained. 
This is further supported by the ability of the financial sector to provide financing to support 
consumption. In this regard, Malaysia is an example, with household debt at 66.8% of GDP 
as  at  end-July  2009,  while  the  growth  of  credit  to  the  household  sector  has  continued  to 
increase in this recent decade. Of significance is the quality of these assets, measured by 
the level of non-performing loans, remains low.  
The second strategy is the further diversification of the external markets, in particular, 
to accelerate the efforts to foster greater regional trade ties, for Asia. It would also shift 
the composition of intra-regional trade from intermediate inputs for the production of goods 
for final demand to the traditional markets, to a more balanced composition with increased 
share to meet final demand within Asia. First, as the emerging economies, in particular Asia, 
gain importance as growth centres, the cumulative markets of Asia as export destinations will 
expand over time. The rapidly rising Asian middle income class will increase final demand for 
goods  and  services.  Second,  Asia  can  leverage  on  its  immense  diversity  as  a  source  of 
economic complementarities. The “Flying Geese Model” illustrates how Asia had, in the past, 
harness the diversity of the. Going forward, similar emphasis can be adapted beyond merely 
for  the  production  of  goods  for  final  demand  outside  Asia,  and  draw  on  the  different 
comparative advantages of the Asian economies.  
Financial integration as a third strategy 
The third strategy is the promotion of deeper financial integration. This is important for 
further advancing the economic development of the region. Financial integration is generally 
associated  with  capital  mobility  and  refers  to  the  extent  to  which  an  economy's  financial 
system is interconnected with other financial markets. A fully integrated financial system will 
be  one  in  which  potential  market  participants,  both  in  the  banking  sector  and  financial 
markets, adopt a single set of rules, have equal access and are treated equally. This would 
in  turn  be  reflected  in  an  international  convergence  in  the  prices  of  financial  products  and 
assets,  with  low  transaction  costs  that  encourage  the  institutions,  issuers  and  investors  to 
venture  beyond  the  domestic  markets  into  foreign  markets.  Essentially,  the  end  goal  of 
financial integration is to establish a free flow of finance and capital, akin to trade integration 
which aims for the unrestricted mobility of goods and services. Deeper financial integration 
would further enhance the competitiveness and dynamism of Asia. 
Broadly,  greater  financial  integration  would  bring  about  three  key  benefits.  First,  financial 
integration  fosters  greater  competition  and  economies  of  scale  in  the  financial  system, 
thereby  improving  the  efficiency  in  the  allocation  of  capital  within  the  region  and  thus 
increase the capacity of the financial system to meet the differentiated and growing demands 
of investors. While the individual Asian financial markets, on their own, are small in size and 
fragmented,  an  integrated  market  would  raise  Asia's  attractiveness  to  both  regional  and 
10 
 BIS Review 130/2009
global  investors.  Second,  financial  integration  would  facilitate  a  more  efficient  transfer  of 
surplus  funds  for  investments  within  the  region,  with  lower  intermediation  costs  and  thus 
more  optimal  returns.  Through  the  greater  opportunity  for  risk-sharing  and  diversification 
across a wider geographical area, country-specific shocks and financial vulnerabilities would 
be  reduced,  thus  contributing  towards  enhanced  regional  financial  stability.  Third,  financial 
integration  enables  countries  to  build  on  the  complementarities  between  countries. 
Individually, different financial systems can leverage on the comparative advantages of the 
different markets that exist in the region. Thus, with greater integration, countries in the Asian 
region can expand on financial products and services. 
Regional  financial  integration  is  particularly  important  at  this  stage  of  Asia's  economic 
development. Indeed, a more integrated financial market within the region would lead Asia to 
a  higher  stage  of  economic  development.  First,  while  many  of  the  Asian  economies  have 
large surplus funds, there also exists many development needs across the Asian economies, 
including more advanced infrastructure development including transportation, healthcare and 
education, which require substantial financing. However, cases of mismatched funding needs 
are not uncommon. In this regard, a more integrated regional financial system would enable 
for  a  better  matching  of  saving  and  investment  in  the  region,  thus  effectively 
channelling  Asia's  large  pool  of  savings  into  productive  uses  within  the  region  that 
would support growth and development in the region. 
Second,  the  large  and  growing  trade  sector  in  Asia  provides  an  expanding  market  for 
financial  services.  The  ease  of  obtaining  access  to  credit  through  financial  integration, 
specialisation and exploitation of economies of scale would support the increasing trade and 
investment  activities.  Furthermore,  the  regional  development  of  capital  markets,  both  in 
bonds and equities, provides greater opportunity for firms to raise capital needed for future 
industrial  expansion.  More  importantly,  higher  value-added  goods  and  services  tend  to 
require more credit for more advanced production equipment and technology. As a result, the 
role of external finance becomes increasingly more important to facilitate regional trade and 
investment  as  economies  move  towards  higher  stages  of  development.  Thus,  deeper 
regional  financial  integration  would  facilitate  Asia's  growing  intra-regional  trade  and 
investment  trends.  Third,  Asia  is  home  to  more  than  half  of  the  world  population,  with  a 
growing  middle  income  and  young  population  in  the  region.  This  represents  a  massive 
potential  market  for  financial  products  and  services.  The  high  rate  of  savings  also 
provides a large local investor base.  
Whilst extensive regional cooperation have been initiated and undertaken in the liberalisation 
of the Asian financial systems and in the development of financial infrastructure, there still 
exist  several  areas  where  efforts  needs  to  be  further  strengthened  to  deepen  financial 
integration  in  Asia.  The  important  four  areas  include  financial  sector  liberalisation,  capital 
account liberalisation, regional payments and settlements systems, and cooperation among 
regulators and central banks. These priorities would, however, need to take into account the 
diversity  of  the  various  economies  within  the  Asian  region,  in  terms  of  the  level  of 
development both the financial system and broader economy. Therefore, reforms need to be 
sequenced and aligned to the heterogeneities of the various economies. 
First  is  the  further  liberalisation  of  financial  services  undertaken  to  allow  for  the  greater 
presence  of  regional  institutions  in  the  individual  domestic  markets,  which  would  further 
facilitate  trade  and  investment  flows  within  the  region.  Beyond  the  General  Agreement  on 
Trade  in  Services  (GATS)  commitments,  limits  on  licenses,  branch  networks,  ownership 
share and voting rights still remain in most Asian financial sectors today. Gradually removing 
these restrictions to facilitate a greater presence of Asian financial institutions and investors 
in each other's economies would facilitate the integration process.  
Second, the policies of gradually liberalising the capital account of the balance of payments 
would  facilitate  greater cross-border  investment  and  capital  flows.  This  would  enable  firms 
and investors to better tap the regional financial markets to find the lowest cost of funding 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 11
and highest risk-adjusted return. Equally important is the appropriate prudential safeguards 
to manage short-term flows and for the liberalisation process to be appropriately sequenced 
and based on a well-functioning, well-regulated and adequately developed domestic financial 
systems.  
Third, as payment and settlement systems are relatively well-developed in most of the Asian 
markets,  the  increased  linkages  of  the  national  payments  systems  would  enhance  the 
efficiency and reduce the cost of financial transactions within the region. Several efforts have 
been initiated in this area. The Executive' Meeting of the East Asia and Pacific Central Banks 
(EMEAP) Working Group on Payment and Settlement Systems (WGPSS) - Working Group 
on  Financial  Markets  (WGFM)  Joint  Taskforce  has  embarked  on  a  cross-border  collateral 
arrangement  initiative  to  support  and  improve  the  liquidity  management  of  internationally 
active financial institutions in the region. Second, the AseanPay Initiative of 2004 has led to a 
link-up  of  ATM  networks  across  the  region,  allowing  for  convenient  cash  withdrawal  to 
support  Asia's  increasing  tourism  activity.  With  wide  participation  by  banking  institutions  in 
Malaysia,  Indonesia,  Thailand  and  Singapore,  such  infrastructure  can  be  extended  to 
enhance the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of intra-region card electronic payments and 
remittances.  The  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  systems  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
(RENTAS) and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, have been linked to facilitate faster and 
more  efficient  forms  of  payments.  Further  linkages  could  be  pursued  among  the  broader 
Asian community to link more RTGS systems, thereby facilitating faster and more efficient 
form of payments. 
Fourth,  while  greater  financial  integration  brings  about  many  benefits,  its  associated  risks 
have  to  be  anticipated  and  managed.  In  relation  to  this,  cooperation  among  the  region's 
financial  regulators  and  central  banks  need  to  be  further  strengthened.  There  is  already 
extensive  cooperation  and  collaborative  mechanisms  in  place.  More  specifically,  there  is 
improved regional surveillance that facilitates early detection of emerging risks and potential 
contagion at the regional level. In addition, institutional arrangements and a framework for 
financial  crisis  containment,  management  and  resolution  is  now  being  put  in  place.  These 
infrastructure  have  been  reinforced  by  infrastructure  development  in  the  areas  of  financial 
markets,  payments  systems,  and  regulatory  framework.  With  significant  strides  already 
accomplished,  a  key  challenge  for  Asia  will  be  in  intensifying  this  positive  momentum  for 
cooperation  and  collaboration.  Over  the  next  few  years,  the  focus  will  be  on  the 
implementation of the next set of recommendations that are embodied in the region's road 
map produced in 2006 , which outlines the strategic direction of regional cooperation. These 
include  the development  of  a  vibrant  and  efficient  foreign exchange  market,  a  deeper  and 
more  liquid  secondary  bond  market,  the  further  strengthening  of  the  mutual  support 
arrangements  and  liquidity  support  mechanisms  to  deal  with  crises,  as  well  as  the 
intensification  of  capacity  and  capability  in  reserve  management  and  the  overall  capacity 
building.  The  institutional  arrangements  that  are  now  established  to  deal  with  financial 
stresses and crises must be complemented with collaborative arrangements and frameworks 
to  deal  with  an  economic  crisis  within  and  of  the  region.  Given  the  growing  depth  and 
magnitude of economic and trade interlinkages within Asia, this will be fundamental towards 
preserving the overall macroeconomic, financial and social stability of the region. 
Deeper  financial  integration  within  Asia  will  also  facilitate  in  advancing  the  strategic 
positioning of the region in the global financial landscape. In addition, Asia is now having a 
voice  in  shaping  the  direction  of  international  financial  reforms  and  setting  of  international 
standards.  This  represents  a  positive  development  and  presents  the  opportunity  for  the 
interests  of  emerging  economies, 
that  more  balanced  and 
comprehensive  solutions  that  will  strengthen  global  financial  stability  will  be  achieved.  The 
expanded Asian membership in the international financial institutions would open doors for a 
more inclusive process in international standard setting and decision making. To support this 
process,  the  role  of  existing  Asian  collaborative  platforms  has  been  strengthened  to 
in  particular  Asia,  so 
12 
 BIS Review 130/2009
consolidate  Asia's  position  in  providing  responses  to  global  issues  that  reflect  Asia's 
concerns and perspectives.  
Conclusion 
In a short span of just fifty years, Asia, with its vast diversity in population, ethnicity, social 
structure and political regime, has made remarkable progress throughout the region. Despite 
broad  and different  challenges  from  urbanisation  and  rising  income  inequality  to economic 
crises  and  social  instabilities,  Asia  has  time  and  time  again  risen  to  the  occasion  and 
resumed the economic progress. The “Asian miracle” was achieved not by chance, but by 
pragmatic policies, ensuring sound economic fundamentals and strong institutions. 
Today, a global shift, triggered by a severe global economic and financial crisis is resulting in 
an  increasingly  multi-polar  world.  In  this  new  phase  of  globalisation,  the  concentration  of 
economic power in the global economy will become more dispersed. Asia will very much be 
a  part  of  this  new  emerging  future.  With  growth  in  the  advanced  economies  expected  to 
remain slow and with the emerging economies increasingly becoming the growth centres in 
the global economy,  Asia must review and accordingly change its existing development in 
this  new  environment.  Of  significance,  strengthening  of  the  domestic  Asian  economies 
supported by the necessary institutions, the further development of the financial markets, and 
greater regional financial integration that is reinforced with overall regional cooperation. As 
these trends become more pronounced, it will not only contribute towards unlocking Asia's 
full  potential,  but  it  will  also  contribute  towards  a  more  balanced  growth  in  the  global 
economy. 
References 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  2008,  "Emerging  Asian  Regionalism:  A  Partnership  for 
Shared Prosperity". 
Asian Institute of International Financial Law, 2009, "Assessing Asian Financial Cooperation 
and Integration", Working Paper No. 5, March. 
Aziz, Zeti A., 2007, "Asia is Moving Forward: Ten Years after the Crisis", Prepared for the 
ADB International Symposium in Manila.  
Aziz,  Zeti  A.,  2009,  "Lessons  Learned  from  the  Asian  Crisis  and  the  Resilience  of  Asia's 
Financial System during Current Crisis", Speech delivered at the Wrap-up Conference of the 
BIS Asian Research Programme on the "International Financial Crisis and Policy Challenges 
in Asia and the Pacific" in Shanghai, China. 
Baele,  L,  A  Ferrando,  P  Hordahl,  E  Krylova  and  C  Monnet,  2004,  "Measuring  Financial 
Integration in the Euro Area", ECB Occasional Papers, No. 14, April. 
Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (CEPR),  1999,  "Financial  Integration  and  Asset 
Returns", Discussion Paper No. 2282, November. 
CLSA, 2002, "The Real Pacific Century - Asia's Billion Boomers", September. 
Downer,  Alexander,  2003,  "Population  Change  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific:  Implications  for 
Development  Policy",  Speech  delivered  at  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  2002, 
"Chapter 3: Trade and Financial Integration", World Economic Outlook: Trade and Finance, 
September. 
Kwan,  C.  H.,  2002,  "The  Rise  of  China  and  Asia's  Flying-Geese  Pattern  of  Economic 
Development:  An  Empirical  Analysis  Based  on  US  Import  Statistics",  REITI  Discussion 
Series 02-E-009. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 13
Maddison,  Angus,  2001,  "The  World  Economy:  A  Millennial  Perspective",  Organisation  for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
Ohno,  Kenichi,  2002,  "The  East  Asian  Experience  of  Economic  Development  and 
Cooperation", Prepared for the World Bank Summit on Sustainable Development. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2008, "Shaping Policy 
Reform and Peer Review in Southeast Asia: Integrating Economies Amid Diversity". 
Pangestu, Mari, 2006, "Visions of East Asia: Three Engines for a Way Forward", Chapter 13 
in the World Bank publication "East Asian Visions: Perspectives on Economic Development". 
Rodrik, Dani, 1994, "Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich", 
NBER Working Paper No. 4964, November. 
Rodrik,  Dani,  2006,  "What's  So  Special  about  China's  Exports?",  China  &  The  World 
Economy, Vol. 14, No. 5, September-October. 
Rodrik, Dani, 2009, "Growth after the Crisis", Prepared for the Commission on Growth and 
Development. 
World Bank, 2006, "Dancing with Giants. China, India and the Global Economy", By Eds, L., 
Alan Winters and Shahid Yusuf. 
In this paper, Asia generally refers to the entire geographical region of Asia, but with specific 
emphasis on East Asia and South-East Asia. However, when the latter two are referred to in 
the paper, it is explicitly stated. 
Refers to Japan (rank: 2), P. R. China (3), India (12), Korea (15) and Indonesia (19) based 
on 2008 nominal GDP in USD terms. 
Rodrik, Dani, 2009, "Growth after the Crisis", Prepared for the Commission on Growth and 
Development. 
ASEAN-5 refers to Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam. 
For  example,  for  the  newly  industrialised  Asian  economies,  private  sector-driven  growth 
began  in  earnest  since  the  1980s  (Rodrik,  Dani,  1994,  "Getting  Interventions  Right:  How 
South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich", NBER Working Paper No. 4964, November).  
It is common to argue that the emergence of China has significantly changed the functioning 
of  the  “Flying  Geese  Model”,  such  that  vertical  specialisation  now  occurs  within  China  as 
opposed  to  the  earlier  experience  of  Asia  where  specialisation  was  across  the  network  of 
various Asian economies. However, it is important to note that given the immense size and 
diversity  within  China  itself,  together  with  the  openness  of  the  Chinese  economy,  this 
development is not inconsistent with the “Flying Geese Model”, in which the key central idea 
is  that  vertical  specialisation  based  on  different  comparative  advantages  can  result  from 
diversity in different stages of development. For example, Kwan, C. H., 2002, "The Rise of 
China  and  Asia's  Flying-Geese  Pattern  of  Economic  Development:  An  Empirical  Analysis 
Based  on  US  Import  Statistics",  REITI  Discussion  Series  02-E-009  provides  further 
discussion on this debate. 
For more detailed evidence of strengthened financial systems, refer to Aziz, Zeti A., 2007, 
"Asia  is  Moving  Forward:  Ten  Years  after  the  Crisis",  prepared  for  the  ADB  International 
Symposium in Manila. 
The ASEAN countries have agreed to enact zero tariff rates on virtually all imports by 2010 
for  the  original  six  AFTA  signatories,  and  2015  for  the  four  newer  ASEAN  members 
(Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia). 
EA-9 refers to EA-10 excluding Japan. 
World Bank, 2006, "Dancing with Giants. China, India and the Global Economy", Eds, L, Alan 
Winters and Shahid Yusuf. 
14 
 BIS Review 130/2009
For example, in the latest World Bank's Doing Business in 2010, Malaysia ranks first in the 
category of ease of getting credit. 
Baele,  L,  A  Ferrando,  P  Hordahl,  E  Krylova  and  C  Monnet,  2004,  "Measuring  Financial 
Integration in the Euro Area", ECB Occasional Papers, No. 14, April. 
Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (CEPR),  1999,  "Financial  Integration  and  Asset 
Returns", Discussion Paper No. 2282, November. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2002, "Chapter 3: Trade and Financial Integration", World 
Economic Outlook: Trade and Finance, September.  
EMEAP Task Force Report on Regional Financial Cooperation in Asia (2006). 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 15
