Michael C Bonello: Achieving sustainable growth after the recession 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  annual 
dinner of the Institute of Financial Services – Malta, Saint Julian’s, 27 November 2009. 
 I would first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, and your Council for inviting me once again 
to address your members and their guests. Before I do so, however, I must commend the 
Institute’s  growing  contribution  to  the  financial  services  industry.  An  initiative  deserving 
special  mention  is  the  Foundation  Degree  programme  with  the  University  of  Kent  and  the 
MCAST. Equally important for their role in bridging existing skills gaps are the seminars on 
specialized  subjects  such  as  Fund  Administration  and  Hedge  Funds.  The  Institute’s  joint 
initiative with a leading law firm to produce a series of books on “Maltese Financial Services 
Laws”  should  likewise  satisfy  a  felt  need  in  promoting  a  better  understanding  of  financial 
legislation. Finally, I would like to mention the Institute’s cooperation with the European Bank 
Training Network (EBTN), whose representatives are with us this evening. 
An improving external environment … 
At this time last year the global economy was entering a severe recession as a result of the 
shock waves transmitted from the financial markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 
September.  It  was  only  the  resolute  and  timely  interventions  by  governments  and  central 
banks  that  prevented  a  repeat  of  the  catastrophic  consequences  of  a  1930s-style 
depression. 
The  worst  of  the  recession  now  thankfully  appears  to  be  behind  us.  Financial  conditions 
worldwide have improved. Risk premia in money and credit markets have dropped to pre-
crisis  levels  and  equity  markets  have  registered  strong  gains.  Although  at  a  slow  pace, 
growth has resumed, boosted by the strong performance of Asian economies and a degree 
of stabilization in industrialized countries.  
The euro area economy, too, has been improving, and finally emerged from recession in the 
third  quarter  on  the  back  of  stronger  external  demand.  A  word  of  caution  is  warranted, 
however, because the experience of recessions that followed financial crises suggests that 
the recovery will only be gradual. Both the IMF and the European Commission expect the 
world economy to expand by only about 3 per cent next year, compared with an average of 
5 per  cent  in  2004-2007.1  This  expansion,  moreover,  is  expected  to  be  led  by  emerging 
economies, especially in Asia, because growth in the industrialised economies is forecast to 
average below 2 per cent. 
The recovery in the euro area is similarly expected to be modest. The Commission forecasts 
growth rates of 0.7 per cent in 2010 and 1.5 per cent in 2011. Foreign demand is seen as the 
main  engine  of  growth,  while  the  required  de-leveraging  of  balance  sheets  in  the  financial 
sector,  along  with  excess  capacity  and  unemployment  heading  for  double  digit  levels  will 
continue to weigh on domestic demand. 
In  short,  a  recovery  that  will  be  both  weak  and  protracted  by  historical  standards,  and 
characterised  by  credit  constraints  and  reduced  levels  of  consumption  and  investment,  as 
both consumers and firms seek to repair balance sheets. In the process, export markets will 
become more competitive. 
                                                 
1   The IMF’s forecasts, published in the World Economic Outlook (October  2009), cover 2009 and  2010. The 
forecasts in the European Commission’s Autumn 2009 Economic Forecasts extend to 2011. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 1
… could benefit the Maltese economy 
Although  euro  area  membership  cushioned  the  domestic  impact  of  the  global  crisis,  the 
economy’s resilience has come under strain. As expected in an open economy, the shock 
was transmitted primarily through the trade channel as external demand shrank. Following 
average annual growth of almost 4 per cent in 2005-2007, the pace slowed to 2.1 per cent 
last  year.  The  contraction  was  particularly  pronounced  in  the  manufacturing  and  tourism 
sectors, though ongoing expansion in the services sector mitigated the overall decline. The 
government measures targeted to support affected companies, moreover, served to contain 
job losses, such that the unemployment rate has remained below that of the euro area. Until 
very recently, inflation, however, has failed to drop as fast as in the euro area, acting as a 
drag on purchasing power. These trends produced a sharp drop in output in the first half of 
the year and the Bank expects annual real GDP to shrink by about 2.2 per cent. 
Looking ahead, we expect economic activity to pick up over the next two years, but growth, 
while  positive,  will  likely  remain  below  trend.  Exports  will  be  conditioned  by  weak  growth 
prospects  abroad  and  by  unfavourable  cost  trends  in  the  price-sensitive  electronics  and 
tourism  sectors.  Private  consumption  should  remain  relatively  subdued  on  account  of 
continuing high unemployment and slow income growth. 
In this scenario, the risks to the domestic macroeconomic outlook could tilt to the downside if 
the expected revival abroad fails to materialize and if investment falters. So while the impact 
of the recession has not been severe and seemingly effective counter measures have been, 
and continue to be, taken, there is clearly no room for complacency. Today more than ever, 
Malta’s  heavy  reliance  on  external  demand  underscores  the  importance  of  strengthening 
competitiveness.  Sustainable  growth  will  not  be  possible  unless  we  consistently  produce 
goods and services that meet the test of competitive and increasingly sophisticated markets.  
This  represents  a  major  challenge,  particularly  for  an  economy  that  is  burdened  by  both 
internal  and  external  imbalances.  I  shall  return  to  the  former,  and  specifically  to  the  fiscal 
imbalance,  later  on.  On  the  external  front,  the  current  account  has,  with  the  exception  of 
2002, been in deficit since the mid-1990s. This could be a sign of structural weaknesses that 
limit the economy’s ability to expand its productive capacity and exports. In other words, the 
external deficit may reflect an insufficient degree of international competitiveness.  
A  medium-term  analysis  of  the  relationship  between  productivity,  wages  and  unit  labour 
costs suggests that this is indeed the case. Between 2000 and 2008, productivity grew by 3.6 
per cent but nominal wages increased seven times faster, by almost 28 per cent. As a result, 
unit labour costs rose by more than 23 per cent during this period, compared with 15 per cent 
in the euro area. Thus, despite the more moderate pace of relative cost growth during the 
last few years, Malta must still recover the ground lost in the early years of this decade. In 
the absence of relevant data, a sectoral diagnosis is not possible, but given that the export 
sector is a price taker and continues to attract investment, it is likely that the greatest effort 
must be made by other, mainly non-traded, sectors, including the public sector. 
To a large extent, Malta’s weak productivity record explains why per capita GDP in relation to 
the euro area average has stagnated at around 70 per cent since 2003. It is true that this 
subdued productivity performance was partly offset by higher labour utilisation in the past two 
years, but the latter is still some 88 per cent of the euro area level. This analysis suggests 
that the economy’s growth potential can indeed be raised. This should be a key objective. As 
things  stand,  for  example,  should  the  Commission’s  growth  projections  prove  accurate,  in 
2011 Malta’s real GDP would only have recovered to its 2008 level.  
It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  as  the  economy  responds  to  a  gradual  improvement  in 
external demand, it may still be constrained by its own rigidities. Removing these obstacles 
and correcting the resultant imbalances is, therefore, a precondition for achieving more rapid 
growth, which in turn is the key to accelerating convergence with euro area income levels. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2009
Faster growth is achievable but depends on … 
The Roman writer Ovid said that times change and we change with them. That may be so, 
but what really matters in today’s circumstances is how rapidly we read the signs of the times 
and adapt to them. I will focus on three directions of necessary change. The first is towards 
greater  competitiveness.  The  second,  and  related  thrust,  would  be  to  promote  higher 
productivity.  The  third  focuses  on  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  pursuit  of  sound  public 
finances.  Before  proceeding,  however,  I  should  stress  that  none  of  these  objectives  is 
attainable without further structural reforms, debunking the popular notion that the State has 
an unlimited capacity to satisfy demands for free goods and services and an end to inefficient 
practices that involve subsidies.  
… greater cost competitiveness … 
First  of  all,  in  Malta’s  case  sustained  economic  growth  depends  largely  on  our  ability  to 
attract  export-oriented  foreign  direct  investment.  Given  the  past  increases  in  unit  labour 
costs, the only way of maintaining a competitive edge is by ensuring that these costs rise by 
less than those of our competitors. The magnitude of the task is compounded by the fact that 
a high proportion of Malta’s exports go to non-euro area countries whose currencies have 
tended to depreciate against the euro. 
In this regard, the example of Germany is significant. Despite the appreciation of the euro, 
the real effective exchange rate based on unit labour costs actually declined by almost 2 per 
cent  in  2000-2008,  primarily  because  wage  growth  was  moderate  and  was,  in  any  case, 
accompanied  by  productivity  gains.  The  resulting  strong  competitive  position  enabled 
Germany to take full advantage of the global rebound, becoming one of the first, and few, 
countries to register positive growth in the second quarter of this year. 
There  is  a  clear  message  implied  here,  that  wage  adjustments  not  accompanied  by  more 
efficient  production  methods  result  in  a  gradual  erosion  of  a  country’s  competitiveness, 
especially when inflation is driven by internal cost pressures as in Malta today. A priority task, 
therefore, should be to change market structures and practices that tend to distort prices. A 
parallel  endeavour  should  be  to  foster  a  culture  where  wage  increases  reflect  higher 
productivity.  
The  first  challenge  then  is  inflation.  We  cannot  compete  successfully  in  export  markets  if 
prices rise faster here than abroad. For instance, despite the downward correction in global 
food commodity prices since mid-2008, prices in Malta have continued to rise. Last year, a 
similar  movement  in  restaurant  prices  reinforced  the  upward  inflation  trend.  This  suggests 
that some markets do not function efficiently. In this regard, the recent decision to scrutinise 
the  operations  of  the  wholesale  fruit  and  vegetable  market  is  most  welcome.  The  relevant 
authority should also ensure, however, that the lower cost of imports from outside the euro 
area resulting from the appreciation of the euro is passed on to the consumer.  
Another  factor  contributing  to  domestic  cost  pressures  is  the  mechanism  for  the  partial 
indexation of wages, or COLA. It is estimated that the COLA accounted for one-half of the 
increase in the average wage in 2004-2008. While its impact on public sector pay is limited 
up to 2010 by the terms of the collective agreement, this is not necessarily the case in the 
private sector. Any benefit that this mechanism may be perceived to have in terms of stable 
industrial relations must be weighed against its potential to ratchet price levels upwards, so 
that  the  initial  improvement  in  earnings  may  prove  to  be  short  lived.  This  is  because  the 
higher wage costs that employers incur tend to be passed on in higher end prices, with the 
resulting inflationary impact feeding into the following year’s indexed wage adjustment. Thus, 
an attempt to restore consumers’ purchasing power feeds a wage-price spiral in which there 
are no winners, only a possible loss of competitiveness. 
Experience shows that in a currency union it is only if accompanied by productivity gains that 
wages  can  increase  without  being  harmful  in  the  long  run.  Furthermore,  recent  studies 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 3
indicate that wage indexation is a major factor amplifying the transmission of oil shocks to the 
prices of non-energy products.2 Considerable welfare gains could be achieved, therefore, if 
agreement were reached by the social partners to gradually phase out COLA and replace it 
with a productivity-linked wage mechanism negotiated at enterprise level. 
… higher productivity … 
Competitiveness  is  not  only  about  keeping  costs  down.  It  is  also  about  higher  productive 
efficiency and increasing the value added content of exports. Encouraging progress in this 
direction has been made, especially since Malta joined the EU. One need only mention the 
expanding  pharmaceuticals  and  aircraft  maintenance  sectors,  as  well  as  the  steadily 
increasing  surplus  in  the  services  component  of  the  current  account,  which  has  remained 
quite resilient during the recent turmoil.  
We cannot, however, rest on our laurels for the record shows that overall labour productivity 
has declined from more than 90 per cent of the euro area average in 2000 to 79 per cent last 
year.  A  key  consideration  here  is  the  extent  to  which  resources  are  allocated  to  capital 
formation  rather  than  consumed.  Between  2000  and  2008  the  share  of  gross  fixed  capital 
formation averaged 19 per cent of GDP in Malta, compared with 21 per cent in the euro area. 
In 2008 the share fell to 15 per cent for Malta. There is clearly scope for improvement. In this 
regard,  the  Budget  for  2010  provides  several  incentives  that  are  conducive  to  a  stronger 
productivity performance, particularly concerning SMEs and research and development.  
Beyond  capital  deepening,  improved  prospects  for  productivity  growth  also  require  a 
heightened  awareness  that  inefficient  work  practices,  including  over  manning,  slow  down 
output growth and threaten the sustainability of employment and income levels. The concept 
of  value  for  money  that  is  increasingly  determining  consumer  behaviour  should  be  given 
equal importance in the workplace.  
There also exists potential for creating a more congenial business climate to reinforce Malta 
Enterprise’s investment promotion strategy. In a recent survey of corporations, a reduction in 
bureaucracy topped the list of measures that were considered necessary to further enhance 
Malta’s  attractiveness  as  a  location  for  foreign  direct  investment.3  Education  policies,  too, 
can  play  a  role  by  strengthening  the  country’s  human  capital,  particularly  by  promoting 
greater synergies between educational institutions and industry.  
In assessing the role of productivity, it is well to reflect on the words of the Nobel laureate 
Paul  Krugman,  who  said  “productivity  is  not  everything,  but  in  the  long  run  it  is  almost 
everything.  A  country’s  ability  to  improve  its  standard  of  living  over  time  depends  almost 
entirely on its ability to raise its output per worker”.4 
… and sound public finances 
The  third  policy  priority  is  to  achieve  sustainable  public  finances.  The  process  of  fiscal 
consolidation must resume in earnest once the recovery materialises. For a start, each year’s 
deficit translates into higher debt and debt-servicing burdens, which already stand at 67 per 
cent and 3.4 per cent of GDP, respectively.5 Put differently, the 196 million euro in interest 
due on the debt next year is equivalent to what the Government would spend on medicines 
                                                 
2   Structural Issues Report 2010, which focuses on the impact of the energy markets on the macroeconomy. A 
detailed report is to be published next year in the form of an ECB Occasional Paper. 
3   Weathering the challenges, in Ernst & Young’s 2009 Malta Attractiveness Survey. 
4   Paul Krugman, The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the 1980s, MIT Press, 1992 
5   Estimates taken from the Budget speech 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2009
in three years at today’s prices. To complete this perspective, despite the reduction planned 
from 2011, the general government deficit in that year is still expected to remain just above 
the 3 per cent benchmark, and the forecast reduction to 2.9 per cent in 2012 is contingent on 
seemingly optimistic nominal growth assumptions. 
What are the options for reducing the deficit? Since any increase in the tax burden, already 
high  at  around  40  per  cent  of  GDP,  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  competitiveness, 
expenditure  restraint  seems  to  be  the  only  possibility.  This  option  is  more  complex  than  it 
might  seem,  however,  because  of  the  structure  of  recurrent  government  spending.  Fixed 
commitments in the form of wages, social transfers and interest on the public debt absorb 
more  than  two-thirds  of  the  total.  Furthermore,  these  expenditures  are  destined  to  grow 
autonomously. This is because, while the ongoing reduction in the public service headcount 
may  restrain  growth  in  wage  costs,  the  impact  of  the  slow  pace  of  planned  fiscal 
consolidation on the debt servicing burden and, in the longer term, of population ageing on 
the health and pensions budgets, cannot be easily avoided. In these circumstances, cutting 
the deficit while at the same time rebalancing the thrust of fiscal policy towards investment in 
growth-enhancing projects will be difficult. A determined effort must nevertheless be made. 
Areas  which  offer  scope  for  rationalisation  include  health  care  and  education,  which  have 
both  been  identified  as  producing  relatively  less  efficient  outcomes  in  terms  of  output 
compared with the EU average. Further savings could also be realised in the areas of social 
transfers to households and subsidies to enterprises. The latter are still equivalent to about 3 
per cent of recurrent expenditure even after substantial recent cutbacks. Subsidies not only 
aggravate the fiscal burden, they also distort the price-signalling mechanism. 
The  implications  of  this  fiscal  scenario  are  far  reaching.  Two  recent  reports,  one  by  the 
Today Public Policy Institute and another by the European Commission, conclude that in the 
long run Malta’s welfare system is unsustainable.6 The projected reduction in the working-
age  population  will  translate  into  slower  economic  growth  and  will,  therefore,  negatively 
impact tax revenues, at the same time as the fiscal burden of a larger population of elderly 
people  increases.  The  Commission  calculates  that  by  2015  the  share  of  age-related 
spending in GDP is expected to reach 20.1 per cent, two percentage points up from 2007, 
mainly  due  to  the  increased  cost  of  pensions  and  healthcare,  and  will  continue  to  rise 
thereafter.  
The  fiscal  correction  required  to  bridge  the  implied  sustainability  gap  clearly  cannot  be 
achieved  without  a  culture  change  regarding  the  welfare  state.  Put  simply,  it  needs  to  be 
understood that you cannot give away what you do not have. We must, therefore, adopt a 
more  cost-efficient  approach  to  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services,  whereby  only 
those  demonstrably  in  need  would  benefit.  Access  to  social  benefits,  healthcare  and 
subsidies should be streamlined through a combination of means testing and market-based 
mechanisms.  In  addition,  the  benefits  structure  could  be  further  refined  beyond  the  recent 
Budget measures with a view to making work pay and reducing the disincentives to enter the 
labour market. 
Conclusion 
The  Maltese  economy  is  experiencing  its  first  major  test  since  it  adopted  the  euro.  While 
membership  of  the  euro  area  has  provided  a  degree  of  protection  during  the  crisis,  in 
particular exchange rate stability, the road ahead is still fraught with challenges. Rigidities, 
whether  in  institutions,  markets  or  work  practices,  that  impede  progress  towards  cost 
                                                 
6   The Sustainability of Malta’s Social Security System: A Glimpse at Malta’s Welfare State and Suggestions for 
a Radical Change of Policy, Today Public Policy Institute, July 2009 and Sustainability Report 2009, European 
Commission. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 5
competitiveness and higher productivity are incompatible with enduring membership of the 
currency union. They also render the common objective of raising living standards less likely 
to be achieved. 
Needed structural reforms are being implemented, but given the uncertain growth prospects 
in export markets, the change process needs to be accelerated and given greater focus. The 
directions  for  change  I  have  suggested  are  by  no  means  original  because  they  emerge 
spontaneously from an analysis of the current state of the economy. They do, however, imply 
difficult  policy  choices,  not  least  because  they  often  entail  a  departure  from  established 
practices and the loss of acquired rights. This is undoubtedly a major challenge, but it is also 
one  that  cannot  be  avoided  if  we  want  Malta’s  boat  to  be  lifted  by  the  rising  tide,  when  it 
comes, along with those of other countries. 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2009
