Ardian Fullani: On building capacities for policy design and 
implementation  
Opening remarks by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop “On 
building capacities for policy design and implementation", Tirana, 3 December 2009. 
 Dear participants, 
It is a very great pleasure for me to open the proceedings of this two-day workshop, entitled 
“Building  Capacities  for  Policy  Design  and  Implementation”,  organised  for  the  first  time  in 
Albania  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  co-operation  with  the  Center  of  Excellence  in  Finance 
(CEF), Ljubljana, with support from the European Commission, European Central Bank, and 
International  Monetary  Fund.  Welcoming  you  here  in  Tirana,  allow  me  to  express  my 
gratitude for the excellent work done by the CEF in the course of these years, to the benefit 
of our region. 
Since  our  Washington  meeting  last  April,  the  effects  of  the  global  crisis  increased  their 
presence in  our  region;  however,  as  I  have  already  emphasised  even  earlier,  they  did  not 
immediately concert to full blown economic and financial problems. The extension of crisis 
effects to the real economy, to the budgets of governments and to financial sectors of the 
region, was mitigated by sound macroeconomic policies pursued in the recent years and by 
the  availability  of  International  Monetary  Fund  funding  on  an  unprecedented  scale,  in 
coordination with support from the European Commission and the EBRD.  
Due to this intervention, and mostly due to prudential policies pursued by the central banks 
with regard to financial stability and financial supervision, the region prevented not only twin 
crises in our banking systems and foreign exchange markets, but also any kind of meltdown. 
Nonetheless, this crisis has been a wake-up call. We agreed on this in our meeting last April, 
in Washington, among senior policy-makers from the region and from EU and IFIs.  
Now  that  we  have  managed  to  prevent  the  crisis,  we  must  start  the  evaluation  of  the 
collateral damage of our response to the crisis. In this respect, it is very important to asses 
not only the long run sustainability of our region’s equilibrium, but also the effectiveness of 
our short run response. It is crucial to plan and implement our future moves intelligently for its 
reversal in line with new normalities. 
While we are not out of the woods yet, it is important to make sure that the past year’s fiscal 
appetite that characterised our region does not become part of this new normality. Actually, 
we need to do some deep thinking about aspects of our policy regimes – starting with the 
design of monetary policies, continuing with the way they are anchored and the building of 
due capacities for a greater effectiveness of monetary policy in the future.  
That is why we agreed to put in place today’s workshop, as part of a continuing process of 
reflection and reform. 
In our discussions here in Tirana, we will begin with questions of policy design, which are 
fundamental  to  set  the  stage  for  the  later  topics  we  will  come  to.  We  have  suggested  in 
advance several questions that may help stimulate the discussion, covering some of the key 
questions  that  are  certainly  left  in  my  mind,  as  a  practitioner,  after  navigating  through  the 
crisis so far.  
The issues of policy design include the questions how much room for manoeuvre there has 
been to use discretionary macro policy measures; how far fiscal policy in future should build 
up a buffer against macro-financial risks; how far national monetary and prudential regimes 
have been able to shield us from turbulence; and whether we now see a need to attract new 
kinds of capital flow – perhaps to change the growth model in the region. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 1
This  discussion  of  policy  design  will  bring  us  to  our  second  issue.  It  concerns  the  role  of 
external  anchors  for  monetary  policy.  One  point  of  consensus  in  our  Washington  meeting 
was that we need to revisit some aspects of this anchoring process, and the way it interfaces 
with countries’ efforts to build up their own internal anchors over time. 
There  are  several  questions  about  the  future  role  of  external  and  internal  anchors.  They 
include some reflection whether there is a need for more co-ordination and synergy between 
our  policy  dialogues  with  the  IMF  and  the  Commission;  how  the  Commission’s  fiscal 
surveillance 
(through  Economic  and  Fiscal  Programmes,  Pre-Accession  Economic 
Programmes,  Convergence  Programmes)  can  be  deepened  and  serve  more  as  a 
commitment  device;  how  far  there  are  lessons  to  learn  about  monetary  anchors  and 
prudential  coordination  mechanisms  for  the  EU  accession  of  our  region;  and  how  we  – 
including  the  external  actors  –  can  foster  stronger  domestic  anchors  in  various  forms, 
ranging  from  medium-term  fiscal  frameworks  to  more  effective  policy  co-ordination 
mechanisms.  
Finally, we will turn to the issue of capacity-building. This is a question on which we agreed, 
at  this  workshop,  to  already  provide  some  operational  input  to  the  CEF  as  it  develops  its 
work  programme  in  this  area.  There  is  a  long  lead-time  in  the  effectiveness  of  capacity-
building,  although  fortunately  the  CEF  had  already  taken  the  initiative  a  few  years  ago  to 
ramp up its contribution in areas such as financial stability and policy co-ordination, so it has 
a head-start.  
In the field of capacity-building, we need to consider: what are the top priorities, and where 
are  the  gaps  to  be  filled  through  initiatives  in  terms  of  training  workshops,  technical 
assistance, and cross-country exchanges of experience.  
This will bring us to look carefully at the design and implementation of fiscal policy, among 
others, and the way policies come together through domestic co-ordination processes. And 
we also need to identify the needs in the areas of monetary and prudential policies, where 
the CEF’s member countries have urged it to continue expanding its activities. 
This is a full agenda, and I am sure it will not be the last time we get together to exchange 
views on these issues.  
I believe strongly that we stand to gain immeasurably from considering these challenges on a 
regional basis. 
We can learn from each other’s experience; we can engage at times in a joint dialogue with 
the  external  actors  in  the  region;  and  perhaps  our  political  leaders  can  find  some 
opportunities  to  launch  reform  initiatives  in  parallel  –  for  example,  in  developing  structural 
reforms to help promote a flow of new capital to, and within, this region. 
In this spirit, I look forward to very fruitful discussions – now in Tirana and in the future! 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2009
