Karolina Ekholm: Some lessons from the financial crisis for monetary 
policy 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting, 
Stockholm, 4 December 2009. 
 One  question  that  has  been  much  debated  over  the  past  year  is  to  what  extent  monetary 
policy has contributed to the financial crisis, which we have not quite seen the end of yet. 
Another – partly related – question is to what extent the policy conducted by central banks in 
the future should try to counteract potential bubbles1 building up so that we can ultimately 
avoid  a  new  dramatic  financial  crisis  with  substantial  consequences  for  the  real  economy. 
These are the questions I intend to focus on today.  
One conclusion that can be drawn in the light of the deepest recession in the world economy 
since  the  Second  World  War  is  that  it  is  important  to  try  to  counteract,  in  various  ways, 
bubbles building up that will then risk causing substantial problems in the real economy when 
they  burst.  How  this  should  be  done,  and  who  should  bear  the  main  responsibility  for  this 
task, are difficult questions to which there are at present no exact answers. The responsibility 
for a balanced development of the economy does not rest solely with the central banks; it 
also lies with the financial supervisory authorities and the legislators. On the other hand, a 
central bank like the Riksbank has considerable responsibility with regard to managing the 
consequences  of  a  financial  crisis  and  can  therefore  also  be  assumed  to  have  a  strong 
interest  in  preventing  such  crises  from  arising.  At  the  same  time,  a  central  bank  does  not 
have so many instruments to try to influence developments such as credit growth and asset 
prices.  The policy  rate  is  a  fairly  blunt  instrument  in  this  context.  This  does  not mean  that 
financial indicators are not taken into account in interest rate decisions, which has been the 
case  in  Sweden  on  a  number  of  occasions.  But  there  is  also  reason  to  consider  the 
possibility of using other tools than the policy rate.  
In this speech I shall begin by describing the causes behind the crisis. In this context I will 
explicitly  discuss  the  question  of  to  what  extent  monetary  policy  in  the  early  2000s  might 
have contributed to developments. I shall argue against the opinion that monetary policy was 
a  crucial  factor  behind  the  financial  crisis.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  I  do  not 
consider there are arguments in favour of central banks being more active when there is a 
risk of bubbles building up. I shall attempt to develop these arguments here today.  
A financial crisis with substantial consequences for the real economy  
The financial crisis that escalated in autumn 2008 in connection with the Lehman Brothers 
bankruptcy  is  the  largest  since  the  Great  Depression  at  the  end  of  the  1920s  and  early 
1930s. Confidence in the financial markets fell substantially last autumn and credit spreads  
–  the  difference  between  the  interest  rate  on  higher  risk  assets and  that  on  safe  assets  – 
rose rapidly. It was initially unclear how large the consequences of the financial turbulence 
would  be  for  developments  in  the  real  economy,  but  it  soon  became  clear  that  the 
consequences  were  widespread.  Credit  terms  were  quickly  tightened  for  companies  and 
households in both the United States and the euro area. Lending growth also slowed down in 
Sweden. Households and companies went from being relatively optimistic regarding future 
                                                 
1   By bubble, we mean here a development, which if it continues, will evidently not be sustainable in the long 
term. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 1
developments  to  being  very  pessimistic.  The  global  economy  entered  a  recession  where 
demand was falling more quickly than at any other time since the Second World War.  
Now  the  financial  turbulence  has  largely  subsided  as  a  result  of  the  measures  taken  by 
central banks and governments, although the situation in the financial markets can still not be 
called normal. The global economy has begun to grow again. Although the IMF is assuming 
that only half of all banks’ losses have been realised, market confidence has recovered and 
credit spreads have fallen markedly.  
However,  there  is  still  uncertainty  over  the  recovery  in  the  world  economy  and  the 
sustainability of the improvement that has occurred. Our assessment is that the recovery in 
Sweden will be slower than most of the previous recoveries have been. One reason for this 
assumption is that studies indicate that recessions in the world economy caused by problems 
in the financial sector are followed by a weaker recovery than in other recessions.  
What caused the crisis?  
There  have  been  many  discussions  on  what  caused  the  crisis  and  different  analysts 
emphasise different factors. Those factors that most often feature in these discussions are 
macro  economic  imbalances,  US  housing  policy,  inadequate  regulatory  frameworks  and 
supervision, and an overly expansionary monetary policy, particularly in the United States. 
Here I shall briefly discuss these factors.  
Macro economic imbalances  
At the macro economic level the US economy prior to the crisis was characterised by very 
low savings and a high level of household indebtedness. The US economy as a whole used 
more  goods  and  services  than  was  produced,  which  was  reflected  in  a  large  deficit  in  its 
international trading. The opposite situation applied to a number of Asian countries, where 
saving was high and the net export figure was positive. One can say that there was a saving 
deficit in the United States and a saving surplus in some Asian and oil-producing countries. 
Large parts of the saving surplus in countries like China were invested in US debt securities 
and contributed to low long-term interest rates in the United States. The imbalances and the 
low interest rates led to an increased demand for financial assets with a higher yield, which 
contributed to pushing down risk premiums to untenably low levels. Low risk premiums and 
low interest rates in turn contributed to overheating in the US housing market.  
Expansionary housing policy in the United States  
One important factor in triggering the crisis was the adjustment in the US housing market that 
began  in  autumn  2005.  The  housing  market  has  been  stimulated  by  an  expansionary 
housing  policy  over  a  long  period  of  time.  The  aim  was  that  more  households  would  own 
their own homes. To achieve this, targets were set for how much of the mortgage institutions’ 
lending  would  be  granted  to  wage-earners  with  medium  and  low  incomes.  These  targets 
were  then  gradually  raised.  The  demand  for  owning  one’s  own  home  increased,  and  thus 
housing prices and household indebtedness also increased. Moreover, an increasing number 
of  households  had  gained  access  to  credit  as  a  result  of  the  deregulation  of  the  financial 
markets.  
New financial products were created that enabled mortgages to be put together, repackaged 
and then sold on the financial markets. The idea behind these financial innovations was to 
spread the risks over more counterparties. Unfortunately the new instruments also reduced 
the possibility to assess where the risks lay.  
When  the  housing  market  bubble  burst  and  house  prices  began  to  fall,  the  underlying 
problems  rose  to  the  surface.  An  increasing  number  of  households  experienced  problems 
meeting their payment obligations, which led to problems in the US mortgage market. The 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2009
problems  then  spread  quickly  to  other  countries  with  banks  that  had  invested  in  the  new 
financial products. These banks were not able to estimate the contagion risks in full, as the 
risks  in  these  products  were  difficult  to  assess  and  even  the  credit  rating  agencies 
underestimated them. Uncertainty over the size of the problems led the banks to tighten their 
lending, which in turn impaired consumption and investment.  
Inadequate supervision and regulation  
With regard to the supervision and regulation of the financial markets, there has clearly been 
a lot left to desire in several areas. Supervision in the United States in particular appears to 
have been inadequate. The trade in OTC derivatives2 exploded and many new, complicated 
financial  instruments  were  introduced  onto  the  market.  This  made  the  banks’  counterparty 
risks larger and less transparent. Nor were the financial supervisory authorities fully aware of 
the contagion risks in these new instruments. The complex financial instruments created in 
the search for yield when interest rates were very low did not comprise a problem as long as 
the  situation  on  the  financial  markets  was  stable,  but  when  the  turbulence  increased,  it 
became  very  difficult  to  understand  and  evaluate  these  new  instruments.  It  was  the 
uncertainty over the value of the assets that led to many institutions facing problems when 
their  assets  declined  in  value  at  the  same  time  as  they  suffered  funding  problems.  Some 
institutions were then forced to sell of some of their assets which further pushed down the 
value of the assets and led to new funding problems. There was a belief that the extensive 
trade  in  financial  instruments  meant  that  the  risks  were  spread  and  that  the  system  thus 
became more stable. In actual fact, the risks appear to have finally landed in the bank sector. 
The financial system was thus in practice more vulnerable than most people – including the 
financial supervisory authorities – believed.3 
Expansionary monetary policy in the United States  
The  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  during  the  period  2002–2004  has 
also  been  held  up  as  a  possible  contributory  factor  to  the  overheating  in  the  US  housing 
market and the ensuing financial turbulence.4 Some analysts feel that very low, short-term 
interest rates contributed to the overheating. However, it should be emphasised that inflation 
in the United States was low during this period and there were fears that the US economy 
would  experience  what  is  known  as  a  liquidity  trap,  which  could  have  had  very  serious 
consequences  for  developments  in  the  real  economy.  Here  it  was  the  experiences  from 
Japan during the 1990s and 2000s that caused alarm. Following the financial crisis in Japan 
at  the  beginning  of  the 1990s,  prices  fell  and households postponed  their  consumption  as 
they were expecting prices to continue to fall. The Japanese central bank cut its policy rate to 
zero and let it remain there, but falling prices meant that monetary policy was nevertheless 
too tight, in real economic terms. The liquidity trap problem meant that growth was very low 
over a long period of time. For the three decades prior to the outbreak of the financial crisis in 
the early 1990s, the average GDP growth in Japan was just over 6 per cent a year. Following 
the financial crisis it has been just over 1 per cent a year.5 
Because of the risk of a liquidity trap it was difficult for the US central bank, on the basis of 
the information available at the time, to do anything other than cut the policy rate – the Fed 
                                                 
2   OTC instruments are bilateral financial instruments that are traded outside of the usual stock exchanges and 
market places, i.e. “over the counter”. 
3   Bean (2009). 
4   Bean  (2009)  and  Taylor  (2009).  In  BIS  (2008)  it  is  pointed  out  that  low  policy  rates  globally  may  have 
contributed to the crisis. Bubbles have also arisen on the housing markets in a number of other countries that 
burst in recent years. 
5   See Figure 8 in the presentation material. 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 3
Funds Target rate – to 1 per cent. It might perhaps have been possible to avoid the house 
price bubble if tighter monetary policy had been conducted at the beginning of the 2000s, but 
the price in terms of deflation and low growth could have been unreasonably high. Given the 
situation at the time the decision was made, the chosen policy appears well-motivated.  
Should central banks try to prevent financial bubbles from arising?  
Despite the fact that central banks perhaps cannot be blamed for the crisis arising, I think 
there is reason – given what has happened recently and the research carried out in recent 
years – to further consider what role they can and should play with regard to these issues. 
One  often  tries  to  distinguish  between  pure  monetary  policy,  which  is  conducted  with  the 
policy  rate  as  the  primary  instrument,  and  measures  that  are  first  and  foremost  aimed  at 
promoting financial stability. However, this crisis has shown that it can sometimes be difficult 
to  make  this  distinction.  Without  the  measures  to  reduce  the  turbulence  on  the  financial 
markets, the low interest rate policy conducted to counteract the recession would hardly have 
had  any  great  impact.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  be  important  to  make  this  distinction  as 
monetary  policy  is  something  for  which  the  central  bank  has  sole  responsibility,  while 
promoting financial stability is a task shared with other public authorities.  
There  is  currently  important  work  being  done  on  designing  better  methods  for  promoting 
financial  stability,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  One  international  example  is  the 
establishment  of  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  where  the  governors  of  the 
central banks in the 27 EU countries will play an important role. The ESRB’s work will focus 
on analysing financial stability and the risks that exist in an EU perspective.  
With  regard  to  straightforward  monetary  policy,  the  question  is  whether  the  interest  rate 
decisions should take into account asset prices and credit growth with the aim of preventing 
bubbles  from  arising.  An  interest  rate  policy  that  takes  such  factors  into  account  can  be 
described as “leaning against the wind”. When there are signs that a bubble is building up, 
the interest rate is set slightly higher than would otherwise be justified by the inflation outlook 
and resource utilisation. What are the arguments for and against such a policy?  
Arguments against  
The prevalent opinion is probably that monetary policy should not be used to prevent bubbles 
arising  in  the  financial  markets.  Three  conditions  should  be  met  if  one  is  to  use  monetary 
policy to prick financial bubbles: It must be possible to identify the bubbles, there must be 
tools  to  prick  holes  in  them  and  pricking  holes  in  them  must  provide  potential  gains.6  A 
common  perception  has  been  that  none  of  these  conditions  is  actually  fulfilled.  It  is  very 
difficult to ascertain whether there is a bubble or not. Policy rates would certainly seem to be 
far too blunt an instrument to fine tune asset prices.7 Moreover, raising the policy rate to prick 
a  hole  in  a  potential  housing  market  bubble  could  damage  the  economy  more  than  if  one 
allowed the bubble to burst on its own.8  
Leaning against the wind is thus a policy that is not without its problems. The welfare costs of 
making wrong decisions could be high. Moreover, many of the bubbles that have corrected 
themselves have not led to any major problems for the real economy.  
Perhaps,  on  the  whole,  it  is  not  the  role  of  monetary  policy  to  steer  developments  in,  for 
instance,  the  housing  market.  There  are  other  means  of  preventing  excesses,  such  as 
tougher regulations and supervision as well as demands for increased transparency in the 
                                                 
6   Kohn (2008). 
7   Mishkin (2007). 
8   Greenspan (2002) and Kohn (2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2009
financial  system.  A  number  of  measures  have  recently  been  proposed  to  bring  about  a 
change in this direction, and this could mean there is less risk that bubbles will arise in the 
future. One can also argue that it is primarily the responsibility of other authorities – such as 
the financial supervisory authorities and the finance ministries to take measures to prevent 
bubbles arising in the housing market.  
Arguments for  
But  it  is  nevertheless  the  case  that  burst  bubbles  can  have  serious  consequences  for 
developments in the real economy and thereby also for monetary policy. It is thus also in the 
interest of the central banks to do what they can in various ways to avoid a situation where 
the economy goes into recession because of a burst bubble. The costs of the most recent 
financial crisis have been so high that it is difficult to claim that there would not have been 
any  potential  gains  in  preventing  the  financial  bubble  from  arising.  I  mentioned  at  the 
beginning of my speech that the most recent financial turbulence is the greatest since the 
Depression  and  that  the  downturn  in  the  world  economy  is  the  largest  since  the  Second 
World War. Unemployment in the United States, for instance, has risen from around 4 per 
cent  to  more  than  10  per  cent  in  just  over  two  years.  The  percentage  of  US  households 
experiencing payment  problems is the largest ever noted and millions of households have 
been forced – and probably further millions of households will be forced – to hand over their 
home  to  the  lender  for  compulsory  sale.  In  Sweden  unemployment  has  risen  much  less 
during the same period, but it is now at just over 8 per cent, the highest level noted for more 
than 10 years.  
A further argument in favour of central banks preventing excesses in asset prices is the risk 
of  what  is  known  as  moral  hazard.  That  is,  that  risk-taking  will  increase  if  there  is  an 
expectation that the government will always bail out the financial sector when bubbles burst, 
but will remain passive while they are building up. A monetary policy that is characterised by 
leaning  against  the  wind  may  reduce  this  tendency.  If  the  central  bank  acts  more 
symmetrically (that is, not merely sweeps up after the crisis but also tightens policy when a 
bubble arises), it may encourage more responsible behaviour by investors and thus reduce 
the risk of new crises arising.  
Scope for a more active policy  
My opinion is that in the light of the severe impact this crisis has had on the economy, there 
is  justification  for  central  banks  being  more  active  in  reducing  the  risk  of  financial bubbles 
arising. However, I am dubious about a policy where the interest rate is used not merely to 
stabilise inflation and resource utilisation, but also asset prices. This would quite simply be 
too many aims for one single instrument. However, I do feel that it may be important to take 
into  account  indications  that  a  bubble  is  building  up  when  we  make  our  monetary  policy 
decisions. If these motives for a tighter monetary policy are communicated clearly, it should 
increase the general awareness of the risks with financial imbalances.  
I  also  consider  that  one  should  examine  the  possibility  to  increase  the  instruments  at  the 
disposal of central banks so that other measures than raising the policy rate can be taken 
when the risk of financial bubbles is assessed as high. However, it is necessary to analyse 
very carefully what the consequences of such an increase would be for conducting monetary 
policy before one takes a stand on this issue. Measures that influence credit granting and 
interest rate spreads in different ways have an impact on the transmission mechanism for the 
actual interest rate policy, which ultimately means that the impact of monetary policy on the 
economy may be different, at least initially.  
BIS Review 162/2009 
 5
Do reliable “bubble indicators” exist, and what alternative means to the repo rate are 
available?  
Let me spend the rest of the time discussing both the question of whether there are reliable 
indicators that can warn when financial bubbles are arising, and the question of what might 
be suitable tools, in addition to the interest rate, to use if the need arises. In connection with 
the first question it is relevant to also ask why indicators of financial bubbles, if these exist, 
are not used already and why the market would not be better at valuing the risks than central 
banks.  
There  are  studies  which  point  to  the  existence  of  indicators  which  can  –  more  or  less  – 
capture bubbles that the market has not corrected, for one reason or another. A study by the 
ECB9  presented  a  model  that  can  identify  just  over  80  per  cent  of  the  cases  in  OECD 
countries where excesses have later led to costly downward adjustments in the economy. In 
the  IMF’s  most  recent  “World  Economic  Outlook”10  the  conclusion  is  more  cautious.  It  is 
claimed  in  this  study  that  it  is  possible  at  best  to  identify  around  half  of  the  excesses 
(including the most recent crisis) that have later led to significant corrections in developed 
economies.  Both  of  the  studies  conclude  that  (global)  credit  growth  is  the  best  individual 
indicator of overheating. A study by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 200411 
also  concluded  that  although  it  is  difficult  to  find  relevant  bubble  indicators,  it  is  not 
impossible. The study claims that there are signs of asymmetry as some central banks have 
a  tendency  to  stimulate  the  economy  when  the  stock  market  falls,  but  not  to  tighten  their 
policy when stock market bubbles are building up.  
The conclusions of these studies are that central banks should try in various ways to take 
into  account,  for  instance,  an  overly  rapid  growth  in  credit  that  risks  leading  to  a  severe 
downward adjustment in the economy later on. However, it is emphasised in many studies 
that further research in this field is required to be able to draw more definite conclusions for 
future monetary policy. The development of this type of indicator is now high on the agenda 
both nationally and in the international economic policy cooperation.  
If one can identify the excesses, why couldn’t the market correct them itself? This could be a 
question  of  what  economists  call  market  failure.  Market  participants  act  in  a  way  that  is 
rational from the point of view of each individual participant, but taken together the outcome 
is  bad  for  all.  As  long  as  investors  continue  to  earn  money,  the  demand  for  credit  can 
continue to grow, even if the signs of a bubble are strong. On such occasions, intervention by 
public authorities may lead to a better outcome not just for the economy as a whole, but also 
for the individual market participants.  
If one looks at Swedish monetary policy over the past decade, one can actually claim that it 
has been characterised by some “leaning against the wind”. The published minutes of the 
monetary policy meetings in Sweden in 2003 and 2004 indicate that rising house prices, high 
growth  in  credit  and  an  increased  burden  of  debt  among  households  were  put  forward  by 
several Executive Board members as arguments in favour of conducting a less expansionary 
monetary policy. The message is even clearer during the period March 2005 until the end of 
September  2007,  when  the  Riksbank  gave  consideration  to  house  prices  and  growth  in 
lending in its monetary policy decisions. However, the decisions to take into account house 
prices and credit growth were not made on the basis of the Riksbank including asset prices 
as a further target variable for monetary policy. The argument was rather that the economy 
could suffer a deep recession in the long term if developments led to a bubble arising which 
then burst.  
                                                 
9   ECB (2009). 
10   IMF (2009). 
11   Borio and Lowe (2004). 
6 
 BIS Review 162/2009
The  economists  Francesco  Giavazzi  and  Frederic  Mishkin  expressed  concern  in  their 
assessment  of  Swedish  monetary  policy  between  1995  and  2005  that  the  Riksbank  had 
given  too  much  consideration  to  house  prices.12  However,  monetary  policy  that  entails 
flexible inflation targeting – like that conducted in Sweden – has the aim of stabilising inflation 
around  the  inflation  target  and  also  resource  utilisation.  This  means  that  temporary 
deviations from the inflation target may be motivated if the inflation target is attained in the 
longer term. This was also the assessment made by the Riksbank.  
House prices in Sweden rose by 3 per cent between the second and third quarters of this 
year, after a slowdown in 2008 and the average price increase since 1996 has been around 
8  per  cent  a  year.  The  question  is  whether  this  is  a  sustainable  long-term  development. 
There may be risks with this, even if the upturn is not as large as in some other countries 
which  have  recently  experienced  downward  adjustments.  Developments  in  the  housing 
market in Sweden also differ in that new construction has been considerably lower than in a 
number  of  other  countries.  Swedish  house  prices  were  discussed  at  the  most  recent 
monetary  policy  meeting,  where  several  members  emphasised  the  importance  of  more 
closely following developments.  
Given this, I will now go on to the question of what alternative tools – in addition to the policy 
rate – might be available to the Riksbank. One problem that has become clear recently is 
that the impact of the Riksbank’s analyses of financial stability, including warnings of how the 
risks  have  developed  in  the  Baltic  economies,  has  been  limited.  The  problem  could  be  a 
consequence of the distribution of responsibility between the public authorities. The Riksbank 
currently has a responsibility for the financial system at an overall level, where the focus is on 
macroeconomic  aspects.  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory  authority) 
has  responsibility  for  monitoring  stability  in  the  individual  institutions.  However,  only 
Finansinspektionen has the tools to directly influence the financial institutions’ behaviour, for 
example,  the  possibility  to  change  capital  adequacy  requirements  and  impose  sanctions  if 
necessary. There is now a discussion both in Sweden and a number of other countries as to 
whether this division of roles is optimal from a financial stability perspective. It is easy for a 
gap to arise between the conclusions drawn by a central bank and the decisions taken by the 
supervisory authority. Developments over the past year underline the importance of seeing 
the  system  as  a  whole  and  the  systemic  risks  that  might  exist  in  a  macroeconomic 
perspective.  
There  should  thus  be  a  better  system  with  regard  to  the  link  between  the  analysis  from  a 
macroeconomic  perspective  and  the  measures  taken  for  the  individual  banks.  One  can 
therefore wonder whether there might not be better organisational solutions for maintaining 
financial stability in Sweden. It is difficult to say exactly how this would look. There may be 
several possible solutions. Finansinspektionen could be given greater resources to monitor 
systemic  risks  in  a  macroeconomic  perspective.  Another  solution  might  be  to  extend  the 
Riksbank’s  power  of  authority  to  be  able  to  initiate  cases  at  Finansinspektionen.  A  third 
solution  could  be  to  link  the  work  of  Finansinspektionen  and  the  Riksbank  more  closely 
together and increase cooperation between the two authorities. Regardless of which solution 
is chosen, I believe that it will lead to positive effects for the Riksbank’s possibilities to take 
measures if one sees a risk that a bubble is developing on the financial markets.  
But there is also a tool that the Riksbank already has at its disposal, and which can be used 
to counteract excesses in the housing market, for instance, namely the repo rate path. The 
fact that the Riksbank publishes a forecast for the development of the policy rate makes it 
easier to clearly communicate the longer-term outlook for interest rates. This can reduce the 
risk  of  banks  and  households  being  led  to  believe  that  a  low  policy  rate  as  a  result  of  a 
downturn in the economy will continue to apply for several years to come.  
                                                 
12   Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006). 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 7
Conclusions  
My conclusion is thus that there may be a possibility for central banks to conduct a policy that 
counteracts  the  emergence  of  bubbles  in  asset  prices  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  them 
from  arising  and  having  substantially  negative  effects  on  the  real  economy.  However,  this 
should  not  be  done  mechanically,  and  asset  prices  should  not  be  target  variables  for 
monetary policy. However, together with, for instance, credit growth and indebtedness they 
may be used as indicators that can be highlighted when interest rate decisions are taken, as 
a broken bubble means that resource utilisation in the longer term risks being too low and 
inflation will therefore undershoot the target. More research is needed though in this field to 
improve  the  analysis.  It  is  desirable  that  better  indicator  models  are  developed  to  detect 
bubbles and that the financial market’s functioning is better incorporated into the models that 
are  regularly  used  in  the  forecasting  work.  The  process  has  already  started,  both  at  the 
Riksbank and in the international cooperation. I consider this to be a positive development.  
I  also  consider  that  one  should  examine  the  possibility  to  extend  the  instruments  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Riksbank  so  that  we  can  take  other  measures  than  raising  the  policy  rate 
when the risk of financial bubbles is assessed as high. This could be a question of allocation 
of  responsibility  between  public  authorities  and  of  extended  power  of  authority  for  the 
Riksbank. However, there are limits to what the Riksbank alone can do to prevent bubbles 
arising  in  the  financial  markets.  Swedish  authorities  can  only  influence  the  markets’  risk 
premiums to a limited extent. The risk premiums on Swedish financial instruments are also 
largely determined by international factors. To avoid suffering deep crises in the future we 
therefore  need  more  international  cooperation,  better  supervision  of  the  financial  markets, 
better regulation and increased transparency in the financial system.  
 
 8 
  BIS Review 162/2009
    BIS Review 162/2009 
 9
  10 
   BIS Review 162/2009
    BIS Review 162/2009 
 11
  References  
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great 
Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture, Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, 
Bank of England, August 2009, page 1 and page 16.  
BIS (2008), Bank for International Settlements, Annual Report 2008, page 138.  
Borio C., Lowe P. (2004), “Securing sustainable price stability: should credit come back from 
the wilderness?” Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No 157, page 19.  
ECB (2009), Alessi, L, Detken C., “Real Time Early Warning Indicators for Costly Asset Price 
Boom/Bust  Cycles,  a  Role  for  Global  Liquidity”,  European  Central  Bank  Working  Paper 
Series no 1039, March 2009, page 6.  
Giavazzi, F. and F. Mishkin (2006), “An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy between 1995 
and 2005”, Reports from the Riksdag 2006/07:RFR 55 page 55, Committee on Finance.  
Greenspan, A. (2002), “Economic Volatility”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson 
Hole Symposium 2002, page 4.  
IMF  (2009),  International  Monetary  Fund,  World  Economic  Outlook,  “Sustaining  the 
Recovery” October 2009, page 102. 
Kohn, D. (2006), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, The Federal Reserve Board, speech 
held on 16 March 2006, page 5.  
Kohn, D. (2008), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, The Federal Reserve Board, speech 
held on 19 November 2008, page 2.  
Mishkin,  F.  (2007),  “Enterprise  Risk  Management  and  Mortgage  Lending”,  The  Federal 
Reserve Board, speech held on 17 January 2007, page 3.  
Taylor, J. (2009), Wall Street Journal, 15 October 2009.  
12 
 BIS Review 162/2009
