Linah K Mohohlo: Global economic developments impacting Botswana 
Address by Mrs Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the Global Expo 
Botswana 2009, Gaborone, 4 November 2009. 
 It  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  be  a  part  of  the  festivities  marking  the  2009  Global  Expo 
Botswana, which is the country’s premier international business-to-business exhibition. 
At the outset, let me extend a special welcome to exhibitors and visitors from overseas and 
those from sister countries in the region. Please feel at home in our midst. 
This year’s Expo comes at an opportune time when the state of the global economy is on a 
stabilization  phase,  and,  therefore,  calling  for  closer  economic,  trade  and  entrepreneurial 
interaction in order to sustain recovery. 
At this moment of optimism in the global recovery, this year’s Global Expo assumes greater 
importance  more  than  ever  before.  The  Expo  presents  an  opportunity  for  exploring  new 
avenues  for  investment  and  trade,  so  that  we  can  continue  to  uplift  and  improve  our 
collective standard of living. It is, therefore, my hope and desire that potential investors will 
seek  opportunities  for  investment  on  their  own  or  by  partnering  with  their  domestic 
counterparts.  At  the  same  time,  domestic  entrepreneurs  should  be  able  to  widen  their 
horizon and acquire new ways of doing business; they should learn from their foreign and 
domestic counterparts and develop market networks. It is also my desire that you will in, the 
end,  develop  life-long  personal  friendships  that  will  enrich  your  experiences  as  individuals 
and families. 
I find it appropriate, therefore, that the theme for Global Expo Botswana 2009 is “Unlocking 
Opportunities in the Current Global Recession”. This theme calls on us to reflect on the 
current weak global economy, it call on us to reflect on the lessons learned as well as on 
emerging  trends;  it  also  affords  us  the  opportunity  to  prevent  history  from  repeating  itself 
from an economic perspective, here at home and globally. 
As  part  of  addressing  the  theme,  I  believe  it  is  relevant  that  I  highlight  some  global 
economic developments, as they impact on our economy. 
Since  last  year,  the  world  economy  has  experienced  the  worst  recession  since  the  Great 
Depression of the 1930s. 
Although  the  immediate  cause  of  the  economic  recession  was  the  2007  collapse  of  the 
mortgage  market  in  the  United  States  of  America,  its  depth  and  spread  reflected  deeper 
global  economic  and  trade  imbalances  that  had  not  been  addressed.  The  recession  was 
particularly severe in advanced economies which, as a group, are forecast to decline by an 
overall  3.4  percent  this  year.  Fortunately,  the  emerging  and  developing  economies  are 
expected to register a growth rate of 1.7 percent in 2009; this is, nonetheless, a much slower 
rate of expansion compared to the 6 percent achieved the previous year. 
The global recession has severely affected international trade. According to the International 
Monetary  Fund,  the  volume  of  trade  will  decline  by  a  steep  11.9  percent  this  year.  The 
reason for this is simple. Rapid economic growth in many countries, especially during the last 
two  decades  since  the  end  of  the  cold  war,  depended  on  export  performance.  When  the 
importing  countries  began  to  experience  an  economic  downturn,  their  demand  for  exports 
declined  at  a  faster  rate  than  the  slowdown  on  growth.  That  is  why  there  is  now  a  global 
consensus that at a time of economic recession, all efforts should be made to Bencourage, 
and  not  restrict,  trade  so  that  countries  can  bail  each  other  out.  Global  Expo  Botswana 
answers this call. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 1
The  good  news  is  that,  while  it  has  been  severe,  the  recession  has  been  less  deep  and 
lasted a shorter period than many had initially feared. This fortunate outcome is due to the 
unprecedented coordination of fiscal and monetary policies that were put in place by all the 
major economies. It is now clear that these efforts have begun to bear fruit, to the extent that 
a 3.1 percent global economic expansion is forecast for next year. 
Such is the optimism for global recovery that policy makers are now discussing how best to 
wind-down  the  stimulus  packages,  as  the  international  economy  progressively  returns  to 
more normal performance. In fact, countries that were  moderately in recession – Australia 
and Norway – have begun to tighten monetary policy. France and Germany have realised 
positive economic growth for almost two successive quarters. Similarly, the world’s largest 
economy, the United States of America, grew at an estimated annualised 3.5 percent in the 
third quarter of 2009, a significantly faster rate than expected, and it was the first economic 
expansion in two years. Thanks to China for continuing on its robust economic growth path. 
All these economic expansion statistics are encouraging, even for the domestic economy, as 
luxury sectors such as diamond mining and tourism should derive benefit. Unfortunately, the 
United Kingdom continues to experience constraints to economic recovery, but it is expected 
to be out of the woods in due course. 
With respect to developments in the domestic economy, you are aware that Botswana did 
not  escape  the  effects  of  the  global  recession.  However,  the  on-going  global  economic 
recovery has led to a rebound of economic activity, particularly in the third quarter, compared 
to the first half of the year, when there was no diamond production. 
In  addition  to  the  beneficial  effect  of  the  on-going  recovery  of  the  world  economy, 
government spending and the easing of monetary policy contributed to a strong expansion of 
the non-mining sector, which enabled the overall economy to grow by 1.3 percent in the third 
quarter  of  this  year.  This  suggests  that  the  underlying  trend  in  economic  activity  remains 
positive, partly because the Government was able to implement a fiscal stimulus by drawing 
on the savings that were accumulated when revenues were buoyant. 
As a result of the world economic upturn, diamond production has resumed in response to a 
steady revival of overseas demand for rough diamonds; and it is expected that this trend will 
continue in the second half of the year. The resumption of diamond exports has also led to 
surpluses in the current account of the balance of payments in recent months, so much so 
that the foreign exchange reserves are now increasing after months of consistent decline. 
As intimated earlier, the Bank of Botswana lent support to the domestic economic recovery 
by  easing  monetary  policy.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  Rate  was  reduced  from  15.5  percent  in 
December 2008 to the current level of 11 percent. It is important to emphasise that the Bank 
remains  vigilant  in  monitoring  inflation  trends,  to  ensure  that  the  medium  term  inflation 
objective of 3–6 percent is adhered to, despite some transient spikes in prices, which pushed 
inflation to 7 percent in September. After all it is the Bank’s policy to stabilise inflation at a low 
and sustainable level in order to promote long-term economic growth and diversification. 
Needless  to  add,  the  world  economy  remains  fragile.  For  a  strong  rebound  in  economic 
activity to be sustained, there is need to learn from the current crisis and to take corrective 
measures, if we are to avoid a recurrence of the recent economic and financial turmoil. 
At a global level, there is discussion of the need to create a new economic order. Towards 
this end, the G20 is no longer an obscure talking shop for finance ministers and central bank 
governors  of  advanced  economies.  Although  there  is  practically  no  developing  country 
participation, we should take comfort from the fact that it has now been transformed into a 
serious  forum  for  world  leaders  to  take  collective  global  decisions.  It  is  also  expected  to 
assume the responsibility for policy coordination, a role that has, until now, been played by 
the G8. After years of virtually fruitless discussions, there are now signs of progress in the 
long overdue reforms to the governance and functions of the Bretton Woods institutions, the 
World Bank and International Monetary Fund. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2009
However,  less  progress  has  been  made  on  reforms  of  the  regulation  and  supervision  of 
financial  institutions.  And  yet,  there  is  a  need  to  curb  the  excessive  risk-taking  by  these 
institutions.  After  all,  it  was  their  behaviour  which  threatened  the  collapse  of  the  global 
financial  system  in  2008,  that  then  triggered  the  recession.  Similarly,  there  is  little  sign  of 
reviving the global trading system under the Doha Round of trade talks. And yet it is clear 
that even-handed trade relations that could emerge through these negotiations could boost 
world  trade  and  fulfill  the  G20  commitment  to  discourage  countries  from  pursuing  policies 
that restrict trading through protectionist measures. 
Here  at  home,  one  of  the  main  lessons  derived  from  the  global  financial  turmoil  and 
economic recession is that reliance on the one dominant sector is far from safe. Clearly a 
concerted  effort  towards  diversifying  the  economy  is  even  more  urgent,  and  the 
Government needs to partner with the private sector in this endeavour. 
Many of the building blocks are already in place for diversified investment and development. 
We  have  macroeconomic  stability;  we  have  strong  and  robust  structures  for  sound  policy 
formulation;  we  have  no  exchange  controls;  and  the  banking  system  is  stable,  soundly 
managed  and  offers  diverse  products.  These  positive  attributes  have  been  consistently 
recognised by the sovereign credit rating agencies and other international organisations. 
At international level, the country scores highly in indicators of international competitiveness, 
such  as  The  Heritage  Foundation’s  “economic  freedom”,  the  World  Bank’s  “ease  of  doing 
business”,  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  “global  competitiveness“,  and  Transparency 
International’s “corruption perception index”. 
As  you  will  readily  agree,  despite  these  impressive  scores,  there  remain  challenges  in 
attracting foreign direct investment outside the mining sector. Therefore, the time has come 
to  address  the  remaining  constraints  to  broadbased  investment.  In  particular,  the  cost  of 
doing  business  in  Botswana  is  high  compared  to  other  landlocked  countries.  Businesses 
should  lobby  for  necessary  changes  that  reduce  production  costs,  but  not  seek  generous 
subsidies  or  clamour  for  imposition  of  additional  obstacles  that  favour  a  particular  interest 
group.  Equally  important,  businesses  should  not  always  look  up  to  the  Government  for 
solutions to their problems, as such an approach tends to entrench a culture of dependency. 
All-in-all, business should embrace the benefits that accrue from increased productivity in a 
global  economic  environment.  It  is  only  this  path  that  will  sustain  our  country’s  long-run 
broad-based economic and social prosperity. 
I had the pleasure of touring the exhibits earlier today, and was very impressed by the wide 
range  of  products  on  display.  I  am  also  encouraged  that,  despite  the  current  difficult 
economic conditions, organisers are optimistic that transactions will surpass last year’s fifty 
million  Pula  mark  by  an  estimated  ten  million  Pula.  This  suggests  a  rebound  of  consumer 
confidence in the region. Of equal importance, the organisers have appropriately arranged 
an  investment  forum,  buyer-seller  meetings,  and  several  workshops.  These  events  will 
contribute significantly to the achievement of the objectives of Global Expo Botswana 2009. I 
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  exhibitors  and  visitors  to  patronise  and 
participate in the events. 
I  also  wish  to  encourage  members  of  the  public  to  patronise  the  exhibition  especially  on 
Saturday when, I am reliably informed, there will be cultural performances, various delicious 
cuisines and other complementary activities that will, no doubt, make Global Expo Botswana 
2009 a memorable experience. 
Director of Ceremonies, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to conclude by wishing 
all exhibitors and visitors fruitful business negotiations in the next four days of the Exposition. 
I also commend the organisers for a sterling job in putting together this event; you make the 
city of Gaborone and the country proud. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 3
The Acting President, Honourable Ministers, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now 
my honour and privilege to declare Global Expo Botswana 2009 officially open. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2009
