Ardian Fullani: Effects of the exchange rate regime  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the lecture of the Governor 
of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr Durmus Yilmaz, entitled "Current Global 
Financial  Crisis  and  Recent  Developments  in  the  Turkish  Economy  and  Monetary  Policy", 
Istanbul, 24 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to give the greeting speech in this joint meeting, in which our dear and 
honourable friend, the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr. Durmus 
Yilmaz, will address very important theoretical and practical issues related to the most recent 
global developments, sharing at the same time his experience in Turkey.  
The global financial crisis hit all the advanced economies severely. It certainly affected the 
emerging economies of South-East Europe, our two countries are part of. The contraction of 
global  economic  growth,  the  decline  in  foreign  trade,  the  higher  risk  premiums,  the 
interrupted  functioning  of  the  credit  system  and  the  rush  to  get  liquidity  affected  our 
economies  as  well.  These  economies  remain  closely  related  to  the  Euro  area  economy 
through a number of trade and financial channels.  
The response of fiscal and monetary policies to this crisis is of prime importance; this aspect 
will be thoroughly elaborated by our dear friend.  
However,  I  would  like  to  briefly  address  an  aspect  of  macroeconomic  and  institutional 
framework,  which  has  been  an  important  determinant  of  the  extent  and  magnitude  of  the 
national authorities’ response to the crises: the exchange rate regime. A quick glance at the 
current  developments  in  the  region  and  broader  allows  us  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the 
countries  adopting  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  have  been  affected  by  the  global  crisis 
proportionally higher. Moreover, they have been more constrained in terms of responding to 
the  crisis.  By  contrast, countries  adopting  a  free  floating exchange  rate  regime  have  been 
affected  by  the  crisis  more  mildly  and  smoothly,  and  they  have  preserved  higher 
independence in their economic policies for the mitigation of crisis effects.  
Obviously,  this  is  not  occasional:  the  free  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is  an  important 
political,  economic  and  institutional  investment  of  emerging  countries.  Their  sacrifices  in 
terms  of  building  reliable  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  enhancing  public  confidence  in  the 
respective currencies and national financial institutions are rewarded with the flexibility this 
regime provides to macroeconomic policies in coping with the crises.  
Exchange  rate  volatility  mechanism  is  precisely  a  mechanism  that  allows  the  economy  to 
absorb  various  shocks.  The  free  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  devotedly  adopted  by  the 
Bank of Albania, allows the Albanian economy to withstand these shocks at minimum cost. 
Let us leave this mechanism operate smoothly, without excessive reactions from the market 
or  its  agents.  Any  smooth  moves  towards  the  exchange  rate  equilibrium  will  be  in  the 
Albanian  economy’s  own  interest.  Any  hasty  short-term  reactions,  like  the  ones  we  have 
been attesting to over the course of the present year and in the early days of this week, bring 
about  individual  financial  cost  to  those  undertaking  them,  as  well  as  financial  cost  to  the 
economy.  No  economic  agent  is  stronger  than  the  foundations.  The  high  volatility  and 
uncertainty in the foreign exchange market do not have any real base.  
The  euroisation  of  the  economy  is  a  visionary  idea,  not  only  for  Albania  but  for  the  entire 
region  as  well,  since  its  final  aspiration  is  the  membership  into  the  European  Union.  It 
encourages the domestic and the regional market, and the European authorities, to speed up 
the  convergence  process.  However,  convergence  in  the  Euro  area  is  a  derivative  of 
continuous structural reforms and strengthening of financial systems, wherein the stability of 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 1
the currency is of prime importance. There can be no European integration without a long-
term equilibrium of the national and European currency.  
In the long run, the exchange rate will inevitably reflect the sound foundations of the Albanian 
economy, which are to remain so. The past years’ equilibriums remain real indicators of the 
potentials of the Albanian economy.  
In the long run, we remain deeply convinced of the benefits the free floating exchange rate 
regime brings about. It will be the passport to and the best support to the Albanian economy 
in its path to European integration. I take this opportunity to invite all the economic agents to 
consider the benefits, that our national currency provides, impassively, as the best long-term 
instrument for protecting their savings and as the greatest buffer to wealth volatility.  
To Albania, the Lek has been, is and will remain a successful currency. The Lek serves as 
an  anchor  for  all  our  European  initiatives.  In  the  last  17  years,  the  Lek  has  managed  to 
withstand  the  inflationary  pressures  and  the  pressures  deriving  from  the  foreign  markets. 
Therefore,  it  should  be  left  alone.  It  should  move  freely  on  its  path,  concurrent  with  the 
market demand and supply. The Lek is the icon of the Albanian economy that will guide us 
through the European gates. I take this opportunity to invite the media to comprehend this 
message and transmit it to the public at large.  
Before giving the floor to our dear friend, I would like to briefly introduce Governor Yilmaz. 
Mr.  Yilmaz  obtained  his  BA  in  Economics  from  the  City  University  of  London  and  his  MA 
degree from the University College, University of London. Mr. Yilmaz started to work in the 
Foreign  Exchange  Department  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  in  1980.  After  a  long  and 
successful career, Mr. Yilmaz was appointed Executive Director of the Workers’ Remittances 
(Non-Residents FX Deposits) Department in 2002.  
One  year  later,  in  the  Shareholders  Ordinary  General  Meeting  held  on 7th  April  2003,  Mr. 
Yilmaz  was  elected  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey. 
Having served as Board Member between May 2003 and April 2006, Mr. Durmus Yilmaz was 
appointed Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey on 18th April 2006. 
Mr. Governor, the floor is yours. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2009
