Patrick Honohan: Financial regulation in Ireland – past, present and 
future 
Speech by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the Financial Services Ireland Annual Dinner, Dublin, 1 December 2009. 
 This evening I want to say a few words about the past, the present and the future of financial 
regulation in Ireland.  
As  far  as  the  past  is  concerned,  it  is  conventional  to  assume  that,  in  the  recent  words  of 
Judge  Richard  Posner,  applied  to  the  US  regulatory  agencies  in  the  run-up  to  their  own 
crisis, “ignorance and inattention” were at the heart of regulatory failure. Whatever else about 
that assessment, it hardly represents an explanation. Nor is it credible that a few simple rules 
like “no 100% mortgages” would have prevented the disaster that has occurred. In seeking a 
deeper understanding of why things went wrong, I have been struck by the disruptive effect 
in Ireland of the attempt to adopt the new international fashion in supervisory practice that 
emerged in the late 1990s. 
This new fashion, which later underpinned aspects of the Basel 2 standard, involved a shift 
from scrutinising the accounts, the loan portfolio and other aspects of the books of financial 
firms,  to  focusing  on  procedures  and  models.  The  motivation  for  this  shift  was  the  rapidly 
growing complexity of banking and other financial business, including the use of derivatives 
and complex hedges. Precisely because of the rapidly growing complexity of banks’ business 
models,  a  supervisor  who  only  looked  at  individual  parts  of  a  bank’s  business  (i.e.,  their 
exposures) on a piecemeal basis, without reference to the correlation of risks across those 
parts, would have a false picture of the institution’s overall risk. In addition, the wider range of 
instruments  being  traded  and  held  in  bank  portfolios  meant  that,  not  only  could  an 
institution’s exposure to market risks change dramatically from day-to-day (or even hour-to-
hour),  but  there  were  growing  operational  risks  related  to  the  difficulties  of  controlling  a 
complex portfolio.  
This  approach  envisaged  the  supervisor  standing  back  from  individual  transactions  and 
loans.  Instead,  the  supervisor  looked  in  a  holistic  way  at  the  banks’  systems,  at  their 
corporate  governance  and  their  risk  procedures  and  models  and  control  structures  and 
confirmed they were in place and in operation. The champions of the this approach rightly 
pointed  to  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  banks  had  good  systems  and  incentives  for 
remaining safe and sound. There is much to be said for this emphasis and for many of the 
refinements in regulation and supervision envisaged by Basel 2. Indeed, it both reflected and 
influenced  developments  in  risk  management  at  the  leading  global  banks.  The  speedy 
decision by over a hundred countries to move to Basel 2 reflected the prestige of the Basel 
Committee and the conceptual elegance of the new approach.  
But moving to a system for setting international capital standards that represented a quantum 
leap  in  complexity  introduced  its  own  risks,  especially  if  the  old  practices,  which  remain 
useful for traditional banking business, were abandoned. 
I  believe  that  Irish  bank  regulation  fell  into  this  trap.  The  business  of  our  banks  was  not 
particularly complex and could have been adequately supervised in the former style. But the 
old procedures fell into disuse in favour of the new approach which was, I am afraid, being 
applied rather formulaically by both banks and Regulator. I suspect that the banks made their 
risk  decisions  largely  independently  of  the  mechanical  models  and  procedures  peddled  by 
Basel 2-compliant consultants. The Regulator lost sight of the details of the banks’ portfolios, 
did not scrutinise the quality and extent of collaterals and guarantees that had been given by 
the big borrowers (information that could not have been available to outside commentators), 
and  ultimately  failed  to  question  the  robustness  of  the  business  models.  Accordingly  the 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 1
supervisors were no longer really in a position to challenge the banks’ complacent view of 
the  security  underlying  the  property  loans  they  were  making  and  of  the  threat  to  their 
survival.  
Of course, the first line of defence should have been – and must continue to be – the banks’ 
own directors and management.  
There do appear to have been fairly basic violations of good governance practices (to say 
the  least)  in  some  institutions.  Ongoing  investigations  into  possible  wrongdoing  are  being 
vigorously  pursued  both  by  the  Financial  Regulator  and  other  authorities.  My  own  focus, 
though, is on understanding the systemic failures, which is key to getting things right for the 
future. And it was not only the banks or the Regulator that were caught up in the exuberance 
of  those  years  and  failed  to  recognise  the  extent  to  which  the  character  of  the  boom  had 
changed from the Celtic Tiger era of the 1990s and the extent of the risks which were being 
assumed (especially from about 2003). It would, of course, have been unpopular to call an 
abrupt halt to an intoxicatingly profitable boom even one driven by banks that had lost the run 
of themselves; but it is not clear that any of the authorities considered it necessary to make 
that call. 
Since the nationalisation of Anglo Irish Bank, the Regulator here has adopted what has been 
termed  an  “intrusive”  approach  to  supervision  of  the  main  firms.  This  involves  on-site 
presence on a daily basis by several regulatory staff in each of the institutions covered by the 
Government  guarantee.  They  have  been  sitting  in  as  observers  on  key  decision-making 
committees in each of these banks as well as conducting a number of specific investigations 
and reviews.  
Meanwhile, more recently we have been re-engaging with the business of understanding the 
portfolios of these institutions in greater depth. The assets going into NAMA are of course 
being subjected to an intensive due diligence exercise which the Regulator is not duplicating; 
our main focus now is on the rest of the business.  
As you know, the new head of financial supervision, Matthew Elderfield, will be starting in a 
few  weeks.  He  brings  his  own  considerable  experience  and  skills  to  upgrading  and 
restructuring regulation in Ireland on a risk-based basis. We are together planning details of 
the new structures and approaches that will be adopted in what is rapidly becoming a unitary 
Central Banking organisation without artificial and unnecessary internal barriers.  
It may not be sufficiently recognised just how much restructuring and strengthening there has 
already been. I find that of the team dealing with the domestic banks as many of seventeen 
staff members – or about half of the total – were externally recruited within the past year or 
so,  with  management  and  staff  moved  in  from  entirely  different  parts  of  the  organisation 
since  the  severity  of  the  crisis  became  evident  around  the  time  of  Bear  Stearns.  The 
decision, which predates my arrival, to make a fresh start in this area was clearly a sound 
one.  
Actually, my personal impression is that, while we will undoubtedly continue to be much more 
hands-on  than  in  the  past,  the  style  of  engagement  currently  being  practiced,  while 
appropriate now, will probably not be quite the right approach as a supervisory model for the 
long term. When things settle, as they will over the coming months, we need to make the 
transition to a more sustainable and effective way of operating, one that is calibrated to the 
risks posed by the different firms in the sector. This will involve applying the existing rule-
book,  strengthened  as  necessary  to  plug  the  holes  revealed  by  the  crisis,  with  a  renewed 
clarity of principles that will serve to back-up and amplify these rules to deal with unforeseen 
loopholes and blockages.  
In  recent  years,  the  term  “principles-based  regulation”  seems  to  have  become  a  code  for 
deferring  to  the  preferences  of  the  regulated  entities.  That  will  certainly  not  characterise 
future  regulation.  Instead  you  may  expect  to  see  challenging  and  assertive  supervisors 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2009
taking an independent and robust view of the risks of a firm, and insisting on mitigation. They 
will be backed by a credible threat of enforcement action.  
In fact the Regulator already seems to have quite extensive powers. Exercising these can, 
though,  sometimes  be  less  trouble-free  than  you  might  suppose.  For  example,  to  be 
appointed a director of a bank, a person must be deemed “fit and proper” by the Regulator. 
Yet  if  the  Regulator  subsequently  revises  their  opinion  and  decides  that  a  director  is  no 
longer “fit and proper” it’s not as clear that there are comparably explicit powers to remove 
that person. Likewise, the legal restrictions on confidentiality (especially those coming from 
EU directives) can, at least as they have been interpreted up to now, greatly circumscribe 
regulatory freedom of action to the point that the Regulator can end up appearing passive 
and defensive.  
Nevertheless, I am determined that there will be a renewed emphasis on enforcement, even 
at the risk of the regulator incurring legal costs in unsuccessful actions. The risk of losing a 
court  case  taken  in  good  faith,  where  the  Regulator’s  legal  powers  prove  insufficient  to 
prevent socially harmful risk-taking behaviour by a financial firm, is one I am prepared to take 
– always ensuring of course that due process is followed. I am confident that, if existing legal 
powers do prove inadequate in such cases, legislative amendments will be forthcoming.  
The emphasis on enforcement also extends to consumer protection. I reject the notion that 
an unwarranted focus on consumer information and consumer protection played a part in the 
failure of prudential regulation. Achievements in the consumer area over the past number of 
years  have  been  widely  praised  –  and  I  would  include  in  this  the  work  of  the  Financial 
Ombudsman and MABS. There is no question of dismantling consumer protection because 
of a perception that mis-selling was not at the heart of the current crisis in Irish finance.  
Of  all  of  the  many  thousands  of  regulated  financial  firms  in  Ireland,  only  six  are  fully 
guaranteed by the Irish Government. Customers, depositors and policyholders at others are, 
of  course,  covered  by  a  variety  of  partial  guarantee  and  insurance  schemes.  Literally 
thousands  of  other  financial  firms  –  ranging  from  large  international  banks  and  insurance 
entities to sole-trading advisors – are continuing to operate in a regulated environment with 
no need for further assistance. It is important to keep this in perspective as we consider the 
future of regulation. Many of the larger entities are foreign-owned: I especially welcome the 
participation  of  sound  and  well-managed  foreign-owned  financial  firms  in  our  economy, 
whether focused mainly on export business, or providing financial services locally.  
Unfortunately as we are all well aware, a handful of IFSC firms – including one very large 
firm  –  got  into  serious  difficulties  in  the  past  30  months.  Even  though  primary  supervisory 
responsibility in the larger cases lay elsewhere, we need to be continually vigilant to ensure 
that emergent problems are detected and forestalled in such firms also. 
Much  of  the  regulatory  activity  around  the  IFSC  is  of  a  routine  character:  for  example, 
ensuring  that  the  prospectuses  of  funds  and  securities  that  are  listed  here  satisfy  the 
requirements of EU directives. Speed, reliability and accuracy in providing this assurance is 
something  on  which  the  relevant  departments  of  my  organisation  pride  themselves.  They 
know  they  perform  a  modest  but  significant  role  in  protecting  investors  all  over  the  world. 
Externally-determined  requirements  here  continue  to  grow,  placing  additional  demands  on 
this segment of regulation; we will meet these demands.  
With the continued welcome flow of new entrants, it is evident that more regulatory resources 
will have to be devoted to the task of assessing applications and monitoring approved firms. 
Given the pressures on the public finances, I am forming the opinion that we can not expect 
the public purse (through the Central Bank) to continue indefinitely its practice of, in effect, 
paying half of the costs of regulation. Moving to a 100 per cent charge-back arrangement for 
at least some of these activities seems inevitable to me. This may not be music to your ears, 
even though the costs involved are low in general relative to the scale of activities.  
BIS Review 157/2009 
 3
There  has  been  much  international  discussion  in  recent  months  about  the  desirability  of 
far-reaching  changes  in  the  regulation  of  financial  firms  in  the  years  ahead.  Many  of  the 
ideas that are floating around are very old – some of them none the worse for that. Few are 
entirely original. They include the aspiration of much higher risk capital requirements, specific 
requirements  to  hold  liquid  assets,  the  creation  of  narrow  banks  focused  on  public  utility 
services and higher taxation of banking and finance. I don’t have time to discuss all of these, 
some of which I have written about in the past. Here too the international developments will 
help  define  the  standards  to  be  applied  here.  We  will  not  be  a  guinea-pig  for  half-baked 
novelties, but I will certainly not allow Ireland to become a soft option for firms or activities 
that are no longer welcome elsewhere. 
Remuneration of top bankers is one of the areas on which, reflecting public disquiet, the G20 
and  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  European  Commission,  among  others,  have 
been focusing.  
My  personal  philosophy  makes  me  feel  more  comfortable  in  an  environment  where  the 
distribution  of  income  is  somewhat  more  equal  than  has  been  generated  by  the  financial 
systems  of  the  advanced  economies  in  recent  years.  There  is  no  conflict  between  such  a 
view and the effective functioning even of sophisticated finance. Indeed, the indications are 
that periods of exceptionally high remuneration in finance worldwide have been periods of 
excessive  risk-taking  and  eventual  crashes.  So  it  doesn’t  really  do  to  dismiss  the  issue  of 
remuneration as something that doesn’t matter “in the large scheme of things”: it really does 
matter.  Paying  bonuses  on  the  basis  of  apparent  short-term  profit  is  a  particularly  harmful 
practice that operates against the long-term interests of the firm as well as of society. Such 
practices are legitimately subjects for regulation and we are in the process of implementing 
the Commission’s April 2009 Recommendation on remuneration policies.  
If I am nevertheless willing to condone the payment of high salaries in some instances for 
those  filling  key  financial  positions  in  Ireland,  it  is  because,  when  it  comes  to  certain  key 
individuals with hard-to-find experience, skills and reputation, we have to be realistic price-
takers  and  acknowledge  the  opportunities  these  individuals  have  in  a  competitive  world 
market which still rewards these attributes very well.  
The  international  comparison  works  both  ways:  in  such  an  open  economy  remuneration 
needs to be gauged realistically by reference to conditions abroad. In an important sense it’s 
not  because  of  the  bust  that  people’s  pay  needs  to  come  down:  it’s  that  pay  had  got 
unsustainably  high  during  the  boom.  In  this  context  you  will  have  noticed  the  recent  CSO 
data indicating that average hourly earnings for the 84,000 people working in the financial 
sector (broadly defined) in Ireland fell by 12 per cent between the second quarter of 2008 
and the second quarter of 2009.  
Banks are legal constructs on whose financial health many people depend, whether directly 
as  depositors,  borrowers,  shareholders  or  employees,  or  indirectly  as  participants  in  the 
wider  economy.  In  considering  the  contribution  that  the  banks  can  make  to  the  recovery, 
although it may not be strictly accurate to say that the banks have no money, it needs to be 
borne in mind that any additional losses or costs now incurred by the banks are likely to pass 
straight through to the Government. For the banks have become largely dependent on the 
Government  for  capital (and  on  the  European  Central  Bank  for  liquidity)  since  their  losses 
threatened to overwhelm the risk resources provided by the shareholders (who have, as a 
result,  lost  almost  all  of  their  investment).  The  interlinked  process  of  securing  the  banks’ 
access  to liquidity  and rebuilding  their  capital  is  just  now  coming  to  crystallisation with  the 
imminent asset purchases by NAMA and the injections of risk capital that will promptly follow. 
The State will now be servicing a heavy – though manageable – burden of debt in the years 
to come.  
Re-established on a firm financial basis, the primary onus for sound operation must fall on 
the directors and management of the banks themselves. They must renew and reform their 
business  models  and  culture  to  ensure  that  a  recurrence  of  such  a  collapse  becomes 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2009
unthinkable.  As  has  been  suggested  by  one  former  regulator  abroad,  a  watchword  for 
supervisors in the new era must be: trust less, verify more. 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 5
