Mark Carney: The three Rs – review, reflect, and reaffirm 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Greater  Victoria 
Chamber of Commerce, Victoria, British Columbia, 28 September 2009.  
 September  is  a  time  to  review  the  past,  reflect  on  the  present,  and  reaffirm  goals  for  the 
future.  Like  students  who  returned  to  school  this  month,  I  will  follow  this  annual  discipline 
today by (i) reviewing the extraordinary events of the past year; (ii) reflecting on the policy 
response  and  the  current  economic  outlook;  and  (iii)  reaffirming  the  Bank  of  Canada's 
commitment to price stability. While this September brings signs of renewed growth around 
the globe, the recovery is in its earliest stages and almost entirely driven by public policy. 
Over the medium term, a difficult hand-off from public- to private-led growth must occur. Over 
the  longer  term,  the  economic  environment  will  be  challenging  as  the  global  economy 
undergoes a fundamental restructuring.  
Review 
A  year  ago,  we  were  in  the  midst  of  the  most  severe  economic  crisis  since  the  Great 
Depression. Major institutions had collapsed, and the very functioning of the global financial 
system was threatened. Virtually every financial asset in the world was being repriced: equity 
markets plunged, credit spreads soared, and currency volatility spiked. The financial crisis in 
the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  continental  Europe  spread  rapidly  through 
financial,  trade,  and  confidence  channels,  triggering  a  synchronous  and  deep  global 
recession. 
Major  central  banks  reacted  immediately  by  providing  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars  in 
extraordinary  liquidity  to  keep  the  system  functioning.  On  8  October,  G-10  central  banks, 
including the Bank of Canada, conducted an exceptional, coordinated interest rate cut of 50 
basis points, the first since the 11 September terrorist attacks. A few days later, the G-7 took 
decisive action. In a historic meeting on 10 October 2008, G-7 countries, including Canada, 
committed to: 
• 
Use  all  available  tools  to  support  systemically  important  financial  institutions  and 
prevent their failure.  
Take  all  necessary  steps  to  ensure  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have 
broad access to liquidity and funding.  
Ensure  that  our  banks  can  raise  capital  from  public  as  well  as  private  sources,  in 
sufficient amounts to re-establish confidence and permit them to continue lending to 
households and businesses.  
  The ambition and clarity of these commitments were unprecedented. In those countries at 
the  heart  of  the  crisis, governments  re-capitalized  banks and  guaranteed  their  borrowings, 
while  central  banks  further  expanded  liquidity  provision.  In  some  cases,  total  government 
commitments  to  the  financial  sector  reached  a  remarkable  25  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  effect, 
there was wartime spending on a peacetime calamity. 
At the beginning of this year, even though the financial system had retreated from the edge 
of the abyss, the economic outlook appeared exceptionally uncertain. The paradox of thrift – 
where individually rational actions are collectively damaging – was in full force. The shock 
and  severity  of  the  crisis  had  deeply  shaken  business  and  household  confidence. 
Businesses  were  delaying  investments  and  building  cash  reserves.  Similarly,  households 
were postponing major purchases and building up precautionary savings. And banks around 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 1
the  world  were  curtailing  lending  and  conserving  capital.  As  a  result,  industrial  production 
and world trade were plummeting.  
Nonetheless, in a decidedly minority view at the time, the Bank judged that the necessary 
policy responses to secure recovery were being put in place and that economic growth would 
resume later in the year. The scale and timeliness of monetary policy support were already 
significant.  By  April,  most  major  central  banks  had  reduced  interest  rates  to  their  lowest 
levels  in  history,  and  some  went  even  further  by  instituting  unconventional  credit  and 
quantitative easing strategies. Over the same period, fiscal policies around the world were 
eased substantially to support demand. Finally, through the G-20 process, bold reforms were 
launched to establish a more stable, more efficient global financial system.  
The Bank's message over the past year has been relatively straightforward: "There is a plan 
to restore confidence and growth, we are implementing it, and it will work." The Bank has 
long expected that the combined impact of policy measures would build over time and reach 
full force in 2010. And we have consistently expected that the impact would be particularly 
pronounced  in  Canada,  owing  to  the  combination  of  the  timeliness  and  scale  of  monetary 
policy stimulus, fiscal stimulus, the strength of our financial system, and the relative health of 
Canadian corporate and household balance sheets. It now appears that those expectations 
are beginning to be fulfilled. 
Reflect 
Indeed,  there  are  increasing  signs  that  activity  has  begun  to  expand  in  many  countries. 
Growth is probable in all major economies this quarter, and the pace of global growth next 
year  is  likely  to  be  even  higher  than  the  Bank  had  projected  in  our  last  Monetary  Policy 
Report. While this recovery is still nascent and sluggish, its appearance nonetheless makes 
some ask, what was all the fuss about? Was that truly the Great Recession?  
Initial  success  should  not  give  way  to  complacency.  Only  the  unprecedented  and  decisive 
actions across G-20 nations arrested the economic free fall and have begun to boost global 
demand. Reflecting the scale of fundamental adjustments still going on, the global recovery 
is likely to be protracted. In other words, we may be on the right track, but there is a long 
road ahead.  
As  we  go  forward,  it  will  be  important  to  distinguish  between  policy-induced  growth  in  the 
near term, private-demand momentum in the medium term, and the global economy's ability 
to respond to the longer-term challenges that this crisis has exposed.  
The near-term outlook: policy-induced growth  
The  nascent  global  recovery  is  largely  the  product  of  extraordinary  policy  measures  taken 
over the past year. In the United States, social security payments, tax credits, and temporary 
incentive programs, such as the "cash for clunkers," are having major impacts on demand. 
Similarly,  in  Japan,  government  transfers  to  individuals  have  provided  an  important, 
temporary  boost  to  consumption.  Chinese  domestic  demand  has  also  been  stronger  than 
originally expected, but here too, the impact of policy should not be underestimated. Crucial 
measures include a fiscal stimulus package estimated at 5.5 per cent of GDP and a 34 per 
cent increase in bank lending, underwritten by banks that are predominantly state owned. 
Global financial conditions have improved markedly, albeit from distressed levels. Spreads 
have  fallen,  corporate  bond  issuance  has  been  very  strong,  and  equity  markets  have 
rebounded to levels near those prior to the failure of Lehman Brothers. Nonetheless, in most 
major economies, bank lending is subdued and non-price terms are tight. Overall, the global 
financial  system  remains  strained  and  many  markets,  including  interbank  lending  and 
securitization markets in the United States, still benefit from public support.  
2 
 BIS Review 117/2009
On the business side, the sharp fall in activity around the globe earlier this year has meant 
that  firms  were  stuck  with  much  higher  inventories  than  desired.  A  brutal  de-stocking 
followed as firms slashed production. Now, with prospective sales recovering, the inventory 
cycle has begun to turn. This will provide a significant, but temporary, boost to growth.  
Against this backdrop, growth has resumed in Canada. Our recovery will be supported by the 
relative  health  of  Canadian  balance  sheets,  our  well-functioning  financial  system,  the 
timeliness  of  monetary  policy  action,  and  the  recent  firming  of  commodity  prices.  As  we 
signalled  in  our  interest  rate  decision  earlier  this  month,  GDP  growth  in  Canada  in  the 
second half of this year will likely be stronger than projected in our July MPR.  
It is important to recognize, however, the importance of temporary factors. For example, the 
strength  in  existing  home  sales  partially  reflects  pent-up  demand  from  the  consumer 
paralysis at the height of the crisis. In addition, affordability has improved, largely as a result 
of  very  low  interest  rates.  Another  example  is  Canadian  auto  production,  which  looks  on 
track to more than double (on a seasonally adjusted annualized basis) in the third quarter. 
That bounce primarily reflects the restarting of capacity that had been shuttered when major 
auto companies restructured earlier this year, as well as the need to rebuild inventories that 
have been drawn down as a result of the U.S. cash-for-clunkers program.  
These  dynamics  may  begin  to  reduce  the  amount  of  slack  in  our  economy.  It  should  be 
recalled,  however,  that  currently  there  is  a  very  large  gap  between  the  potential  of  our 
economy, or aggregate supply, and aggregate demand for our output. The evidence for this 
is widespread. Manufacturing capacity utilization rates are at their lowest level in at least a 
quarter century, the unemployment rate has increased by 2.9 percentage points to its highest 
level in 11 and a half years, and, according to our July Business Outlook Survey, only 28 per 
cent of firms would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand, which is the 
lowest level since the aftermath of 11 September 2001. In our July MPR, the Bank estimated 
that  our  conventional  measure  of  the  output  gap,  which  is  a  broad  measure  of  the  gap 
between aggregate supply and demand in the economy, reached -4.3 per cent. This is the 
widest gap, positive or negative, seen since the recession of the early 1980s.  
This  large  output  gap  will  moderate  inflationary  pressures  during  the  initial  phase  of  the 
recovery.  And  it  will  take  sustained  private  demand  growth  to  return  our  economy  to  its 
productive potential. 
The medium-term outlook: the hand-off to the private sector 
G-20 policy-makers have committed to maintain stimulus "until the recovery is assured." So 
what are the drivers of this recovery? What will be required to not only remain on track but 
also on schedule? 
Externally, it is important that private demand consistently grow in the countries that were at 
the epicentre of the crisis, particularly the United States. Unfortunately, this recovery may be 
both  difficult  and  uneven.  The  sharp  rise  in  unemployment  will  weigh  on  consumer 
confidence and the growth of disposable income. In addition, the repair of household balance 
sheets will take some time.  
Similarly,  the  repair  of  major  foreign  financial  systems  remains  a  work  in  progress.  The 
disappearance of the shadow banking sector and the ongoing strains of the recession will 
mean  that  it  will  take  further  restructuring  and  considerably  more  capital  for  financial 
conditions  to  return  fully  to  normal.  In  the  meantime,  the  financial  sector  will  continue  to 
restrain growth in many industrialized economies. 
There are some offsets to these external headwinds. First, the composition of U.S. activity 
will likely become more favourable to Canadian growth. The recent pattern of U.S. activity, 
with  its  severe  weakness  in  the  housing  and  auto  sectors,  meant  that  the  U.S.  recession 
proved  particularly  challenging  for  our  businesses.  As  these  sectors  stabilize  and begin  to 
grow modestly, this effect will be reversed and will be important for Canada.  
BIS Review 117/2009 
 3
In  addition,  while  the  overall  pace  of  global  growth  will  likely  be  subdued,  the  Canadian 
economy will rely more on emerging-market growth for external demand. This would provide 
an important support for commodity prices and, therefore, the Canadian economy over the 
medium term. However, the ability of emerging markets to sustain more vigorous growth in 
domestic  demand  remains  an  open  question.  For  example,  rapid  expansion  of  domestic 
lending is challenging in any environment, particularly in those countries, such as China, with 
developing banking systems. 
On  balance,  the  external  sector  may  not  be  reliable  as  the  sole  engine  of  the  Canadian 
recovery.  In  this  context,  domestic  factors  could  prove  decisive.  As  noted  earlier, 
contributions  from  inventories  will  be  temporary.  Housing  should  provide  some  near-term 
strength, but the degree of pent-up demand appears limited. With the fiscal stimulus largely 
finished by next year, consumer and business spending will need to drive economic growth. 
Sustained growth in consumer spending will require household decisions that are based on 
confidence rather than relief, and that are funded by income rather than debt. A rebound in 
disposable income growth will require improved labour market conditions, starting with hours 
worked, followed by stabilization, and then by increases in employment. Given the slack in 
the economy, this could take some time. 
Firms will need to act with confidence as well. Replenishing inventories and restarting idled 
capacity  will  not  be  sufficient.  Hiring  and  investment  intentions,  and  eventually  capital 
spending  and  employment  decisions,  must  recover  as  well.  Given  the  openness  of  our 
economy, these prospects will turn importantly on perceptions of external conditions. 
In  assessing  the  progress  of  the  recovery,  the  Bank  will  not  rely  on  a  single  data  point. 
Survey  indicators  will  likely  be  the  first  to  show  the  turn,  but  we  will  need  to  see  follow-
through in the harder statistics. Ultimately, we will be looking for an accumulation of evidence 
across a range of indicators.  
Considerable  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  remain.  Upside  risks  include  a  faster-than-
expected  recovery  in  consumer  and  business  confidence  and  further  improvements  in  our 
terms  of  trade.  Downside  risks  are  largely  external  and  include  setbacks  in  the  ongoing 
repair  of  the  global  financial  system  and  more  persistent  weakness  in  foreign  private 
demand. In addition, the possibility of persistent strength in the Canadian dollar would work 
against the positive factors just mentioned. The recent rise in the dollar is, in part, a reflection 
of  the  same  factors  that  are  leading  to  a  recovery  in  Canada,  notably  the  rebound  in 
commodity prices. It is also a result of a more generalized weakening of the U.S. dollar, as 
global  financial  conditions  normalize.  Other  things  being  equal,  a  persistently  strong 
Canadian dollar would reduce real growth and delay the return of inflation to target.  
The Bank will assess the balance of risks to inflation in its upcoming MPR. Even though we 
are at the effective lower bound for our policy rate, the Bank retains considerable flexibility in 
the conduct of monetary policy.  
The longer-term outlook: a more challenging global environment 
Over the longer term, the pattern and pace of global growth will be significantly altered. This 
was the Great Recession, and it will have far-reaching repercussions. The rate of potential 
growth in the global economy has likely fallen in the aftermath of the crisis and will take some 
time to rebuild. The fiscal cost of arresting the downfall will need to be first contained and 
then  repaid  over  many  years.  Most  fundamentally,  the  sources  of  demand  will  need  to 
rebalance, both within and across economies.  
Addressing these challenges will require difficult and extensive measures in all economies. 
Once  the  recovery  is  assured,  concerted  efforts  will  be  necessary  in  most  economies  to 
restore  fiscal  sustainability.  This  need  is  particularly  sharp  in  those  countries  with  looming 
demographic pressures and unsustainable entitlement programs. Fiscal pressures could also 
become more acute if the rebalancing of global growth is not successful. As the recent G-20 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2009
meetings attest, major reforms are necessary to create a more resilient and efficient global 
financial system. In addition, given the sharp rise in unemployment and the likely important 
changes to global growth, structural reforms to improve labour market flexibility and to retrain 
workers  will  be  important.  Finally,  surplus  countries  that  need  to  boost  domestic  demand, 
such as China, will require a comprehensive program of structural reforms. The necessary 
reforms to social safety nets and to liberalize the domestic financial sector are complex and 
will take years to bear fruit. They must also be complemented by material adjustments to the 
real exchange rates of deficit and surplus countries.  
Reaffirm 
In the face of these challenges and uncertainties, the credibility of macroeconomic policy is 
essential. One constant is the Bank's unwavering commitment to price stability. The single, 
most direct contribution that monetary policy can make to sound economic performance is to 
provide  Canadians  with  confidence  that  their  money  will  retain  its  purchasing  power.  That 
means  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  Price  stability  lowers  uncertainty, 
minimizes the costs of inflation, reduces the cost of capital, and creates an environment in 
which households and firms can invest and plan for the future.  
The Bank's sole monetary policy objective is to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target. Having 
a  simple,  credible  price  stability  objective  proved  enormously  helpful  during  the  crisis  and 
should continue to be so during the eventual exit. The Bank approaches inflation control in a 
symmetric way, meaning that we care as much about inflation dropping below the target as 
about  inflation  rising  above  the  target.  Inflation  targeting  is  equally  able  to  prevent  the 
entrenchment  of  high  and  volatile  inflation  or  the  onset  of  persistent  deflation.  As  a 
consequence, inflation expectations have remained well anchored at the Bank's 2 per cent 
target. 
The ability to maintain inflation expectations has helped to keep real interest rates low and to 
provide the necessary monetary stimulus. The inflation anchor remains essential, even when 
providing  extraordinary  guidance.  This  is  why  the  Bank's  current  commitment  –  that  our 
target rate is projected to remain at its effective lower bound through the end of the second 
quarter of 2010 – is explicitly conditional on the outlook for inflation.  
It is important to recognize this statement for what it is – the Bank's judgment that our policy 
rate should remain at 1/4 per cent at least through the end of June of next year in order to 
achieve our 2 per cent inflation target. This conditional commitment does not indicate what 
will happen following the end of the second quarter of 2010. Nor is it a guarantee that rates 
will  absolutely  remain  at  the  current  level.  In  short,  it  is  an  expectation,  not  a  promise.  If 
circumstances  affecting 
the  conditional 
commitment would change. The only constant is that the Bank will consistently set monetary 
policy appropriately in order to achieve the inflation target. 
inflation  change  materially, 
the  outlook 
for 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  one  lesson  should  be  clear:  policy  matters.  Aggressive  policies  arrested  the 
economic free fall triggered by the financial crisis. Policy action is driving the initial recovery. 
Policy-makers will have to act deftly to maintain stimulus long enough for private demand to 
take  up  the  burden  of  growth,  but  not  too  long  to  undermine  confidence  in  and  the 
sustainability of that growth. Even once that feat is accomplished, the aftermath of the crisis 
will make considerable demands on structural policies in all countries, including Canada.  
Recent  events  were  a  watershed.  A  powerful  and  sustained  restructuring  of  the  global 
economy  has  begun.  Canada  is  entering  this  period  with  many  strengths,  but  the  efforts 
required  of  us  will  be  historic.  Our  businesses  will  need  to  develop  new  markets  as  the 
traditional advantage of relatively open access to U.S. markets becomes less valuable. The 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 5
Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  review,  reflect,  and  report  on  the  broader  global  forces  I 
have  outlined  today.  As  I  have  reaffirmed,  our  principal  contribution  will  be  to  consistently 
achieve our inflation target, so Canadians can plan and invest with confidence. 
6 
 BIS Review 117/2009
