Dato’ Ooi Sang Kuang: Malaysia – ready to face a new world 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Dato’  Ooi  Sang  Kuang,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  National  Economic  Outlook  Conference  2010–2011,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
1 December 2009. 
 The  global  economic  and  financial  environment  of  the  past  two  years  has  been  extremely 
challenging. Financial market events previously thought to be highly improbable, occurred to 
create  a  financial  crisis  on  a  global  scale.  The  international  financial  system  froze,  wealth 
destruction not seen since the Great Depression took place, world trade collapsed, and many 
advanced  and  emerging  economies  entered  into  a  deep  synchronised  recession.  Several 
well-known  global  financial  institutions  disappeared  overnight  while  many  others  were 
rescued  by  Government  bailouts.  The  global  financial  crisis  saw  policy  makers  having  to 
respond  strongly  and  adopting  a  wide  range  of  unorthodox  policy  measures.  A  prolonged 
recession  was  averted  and  now  the  global  economy  is  recovering.  What  is  uncertain  is 
whether the current revival can be maintained and growth sustained. Risks remain that the 
current recovery could lose momentum. 
Arising from the worst global financial crisis since the last depression, the world’s economic 
order  and  the  character  of  the  global  financial  system  will  be  undergoing  a  process  of 
transformation that will be significantly different. In a transformed new world, Asia is set to 
emerge  as  one  of  the  most  vibrant  regions,  and  will  increasingly  play  a  critical  role  in 
determining  the  shape  of  the  future  global  economic  landscape.  In  this  context,  there  are 
several  key  issues  that  Malaysia  needs  to  address  to  face  a  new  world,  a  world  in  which 
trend growth will be lower, capital will be less readily available and at higher cost, competition 
more  intense,  short-term  capital  flows  remain  volatile  and  protectionism  could  rear  its  ugly 
head again. Malaysia also has to position itself to seize the opportunities to fully benefit from 
the  growing  economic  integration  and  dynamism  in  Asia.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  Malaysia 
must  be  ready  to  face  more  intense  competition  for  foreign  direct  investments  (FDIs)  and 
markets from key Asian neighbours. 
Aftermath of the crisis – emergence of a new world 
After one of the worst crises in modern history, the global economy – led by the emerging 
economies, especially China – is now en route to recovery but this revival is yet entrenched 
and risks remain on its sustainability. The global economy is still fundamentally weak, with 
the recovery uneven and growth remains highly dependent on policy support of very large 
fiscal  stimulus  and  aggressive  monetary  easing  around  the  world.  The  crisis-affected 
advanced  economies  continue  to  face  rising  unemployment,  weak  financial  systems,  on-
going  de-leveraging  of  households  and  financial  institutions  with  weak  balance  sheet. 
Although  financial  markets  have  begun  to  stabilise  following  extensive  policy  support,  the 
progress  of  financial  sector  resolution  and  reforms  in  the  advanced  economies  is  far  from 
complete.  Many  of  the  financial  institutions  are  still  being  constrained  by  large  non-
performing  assets,  and  despite  injection  of  capital  and  massive  liquidity  support,  financial 
intermediation is still not fully functional. On the fiscal front, the continuation of large fiscal 
deficits and rising public sector debt are increasingly placing a limit on fiscal flexibility while 
quantitative easing and very low interest rate environment globally are fuelling some asset 
prices to rise. 
Given these challenges, it will be a mistake to believe that the world is on the mend. In many 
ways, the global economic structure and the character and governance of the international 
financial  system  will  be  fundamentally  different.  First,  overall  global  growth  will,  for  a 
prolonged  period,  remain  below  its  past  trend,  with  the  growth  trajectory  in  advanced 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 1
economies  lower  than  its  average  in  the  decade  before  the  crisis.  Several  structural 
weaknesses in the advanced economies will require considerable time and resources to be 
resolved.  While  the  advanced  economies  address  these  issues,  the  global  economy  will 
increasingly be driven by the emerging market economies, particularly China, Brazil, Russia 
and  India.  Despite  Asia’s  large  potentials  and  as  a  growth  leader,  it  is  unlikely  that  in  the 
immediate term, Asia and other emerging economies would be able to lift global growth in 
the  short-term  back  to  the  pre-crisis  level.  In  the  short  to  medium  term,  the  emerging 
economies  will  take  time  to  fully  compensate  for  the  weak  growth  in  the  advanced 
economies. 
Second,  major  shifts  in  the  management  and  conduct  of  financial  institutions  and 
financial  markets  can  be  expected  in  order  to  address  the  pro-cyclical  nature  of 
international  financial  system  and  the  many  weaknesses  that  have  surfaced.  Tighter 
regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  to  prevent  large  financial  leverage  and 
accumulation of excessive risks will be in place. The challenge for regulators is to ensure that 
greater regulatory activism do not curtail the ability of the financial system to innovate and 
intermediate capital allocation efficiently. 
Third,  given  greater  regulatory  guidance  and  less  leverage,  global  financial  markets 
pricing of capital can be expected to be higher. Similarly, as corporations restructure their 
operations  to  adapt  to  slower  growth  in  global  demand,  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  is 
likely to be lower, while competition for FDI will become more intense. On the other hand, 
short-term  capital  flows  will  remain  very  volatile.  Promoting  financial  stability  will  require 
greater policy coordination at both the regional and global levels. 
Asia as the new locomotive of global growth 
Asia is today in a significantly much better position to adjust to a world where capital is no 
longer cheap and global demand is weaker. Asia is not experiencing a financial crisis. Asia’s 
banking  and  financial  system  is  functioning  and  financial  intermediation  is  deepening  and 
broadening.  Asia  has  a  very  large  growing  middle  class,  high  saving  rates  to  fund 
investments and has room for larger consumer demand to support growth. A relatively young 
and  dynamic  population  with  increasing  knowledge  content  will  also  support  Asia’s  faster 
pace growth. 
As  Asia  gathers  strength  and  has  a  more  forceful  impact  on  the  global  economy, 
opportunities  arise  for  Asia  to  shape  a  global  order  of  greater  stability,  sustainable  growth 
and  shared  prosperity.  One  area  that  Asia  has  begun  to  recognise  is  the  importance  of  a 
more balanced growth strategy both for the benefits of Asia and the world in general. Indeed, 
three  particular  trends  within  Asia  are  already  emerging  and  they  will  continue  to  gain 
momentum as policy places greater focus on them. First is the balancing of an outward-
oriented  development  strategy  with  efforts  to  promote  the  greater  role  of  domestic 
demand. For some Asian economies, this takes the form of promoting domestic investment 
activity  to  meet  the  immense  development  needs  within  Asia,  as  well  as  to  accelerate  the 
transformation  of  Asian  economies  towards  higher  value-added  output.  For  many,  policy 
content  to  build  broader  social  safety  net  and  institutions  to  increase  the  role  of  private 
consumption in contributing to growth is gaining importance. 
The second trend in Asia is the acceleration of regional economic integration as intra-
regional  trade  and  investment  flows  rise  rapidly  and  financial  markets  are  increasingly 
interlinked. Following the rapid trade liberalisation across Asia to improve market access is 
the  growing  pace  of  intra-regional  investment  flows.  Increasingly,  a  vast  market  for  goods 
and services will be created. Within Asia, as China becomes the locus of economic growth 
and transformation, the speed of ASEAN economic integration as one common market will 
provide  added  support  to  Asia’s  pace  of  growth  and  dynamism.  ASEAN  is  now  home  to 
some of Asia’s fastest-growing economies, contributing 17% of Asia’s total output and 20% 
of  Asia’s  total  trade.  The  region  presents  a  large  and  fast-growing  market  of  more  than 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2009
integration. 
region’s  economic 
Its  success  would  significantly  enhance 
500 million  people.  Of  importance,  the  fast-rising  income  levels,  broadening  affluence  and 
the  growing  middle  class  in  ASEAN  augur  well  for  private  consumption.  Similarly,  the 
diversity and different development stages in ASEAN is a repository of strength that can be 
harnessed. With its range of resource endowments, economic structures and income levels, 
the  ASEAN  economies  must  leverage  on  their  respective  comparative  advantages  to 
accelerate economic growth within ASEAN and for ASEAN to complement and compete with 
North East Asia. 
The third trend is deeper financial integration within Asia. This is a crucial complement for 
the 
the 
competitiveness and dynamism of Asia. In particular, financial integration will result in a more 
efficient recycling of Asian savings into investments within Asia. The effective channelling of 
Asia’s large pool of savings into productive uses within the region will certainly support more 
rapid  growth  and  development  in  Asia.  Deeper  financial  integration  within  Asia  has  made 
progress and there is intensification of regional efforts to accelerate this process. 
Indeed,  within  ASEAN,  the  agenda  is  now  focused  on  increasing  the  pace  of  regional 
financial integration. The ASEAN Finance Ministers have agreed in 2003 on the Roadmap on 
Monetary  and  Financial  Integration  of  ASEAN  in  the  areas  of  capital  market  development, 
capital  account 
liberalisation  and  ASEAN  currency 
cooperation.  In  2007,  the  ASEAN  Central  Banks  established  a  task  force,  chaired  by 
Malaysia,  to  chart  the  milestones  and  timeliness  for  ASEAN  financial  integration.  To 
complement  the  AEC  Blueprint,  leaders  in  early  2009  have  agreed  to  an  Implementation 
Plan  to  promote  the  development  of  an  integrated  capital  market  within  ASEAN.  These 
initiatives  along  with  other  regional  efforts  will  effectively  transform  ASEAN  into  a  single 
integrated  market,  and  thus  strategically  position  ASEAN  as  an  important  economic  zone 
with a role to play in contributing towards global stability and growth. 
With  the  broad  diversity  within  Asia,  the  pace  of  development  will  not  be  equal  for  all 
economies. The general agreement is that growth within Asia will be led by China, India and 
Korea. In a large part, the shape of Asia’s future will be dictated by the dynamic engagement 
of these prominent growth drivers with other Asian economies and the rest of the world. The 
prospects  for  ASEAN  to  thrive  would  depend  crucially  on  its  ability  to  engage  with  these 
growth  drivers  and  seize  on  the  opportunities  that  they  offer.  However,  ASEAN  must  also 
recognise that at the same time, the level of competition will further intensify within Asia. For 
ASEAN,  this  challenge  will  involve  countries  in  the  region  to  identify  areas  of  comparative 
advantage  and  leverage  extensively  on  the  complementarities  that  the  rise  of  China  and 
India present. For Malaysia, enhancing our competitiveness and positioning ourselves much 
higher in the global value-added production chain will be critical. 
financial  services 
liberalisation, 
Malaysia – agenda for sustained economic growth 
The full impact of the global recession was felt in Malaysia in the first quarter of 2009 when 
the  economy  contracted  by  6.2%.  Since  then,  timely  counter-cyclical  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy  responses,  together  with  a  sound  financial  sector  have  contributed  significantly  to 
improving  domestic  economic  conditions.  In  the  third  quarter,  real  year-on-year  GDP 
contraction  slowed  to  1.2%.  Of  significance,  the  economy  had  registered  two  consecutive 
quarters of quarter-on-quarter growth, growing by 4.8% and 5.7% in the second quarter and 
third quarter respectively. Domestic demand has been the key driver of these improvements. 
Recent  indicators  have  suggested  that  a  more  broad-based  recovery  is  gathering 
momentum.  Better  labour  market  conditions,  improving  private  sector  confidence  and 
continued  access  to  financing  have  supported  the  increasing  strength  of  domestic  activity. 
Prospects are that year on year GDP in the fourth quarter will show positive growth. 
The  recovery  is  expected  to  gather  some  strength  in  2010.  The  economy  will  be  driven 
primarily by domestic demand, with private expenditure contributing a growing share while 
the gradual recovery in external demand will provide a further support to growth. 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 3
As  economic  revival  gathers  pace,  the  immediate  policy  priority  is  to  ensure  that  the 
domestic foundations for recovery are more firmly entrenched and the medium and longer 
term growth potential is established. The private sector will need to resume its primary role in 
driving  economic  activity.  Of  particular  importance  is  the  growth  of  private  investment. 
Towards this end, the Central Bank will continue to ensure that access to financing across all 
segments remains in place. While it is critical for the public sector to play a counter-cyclical 
role, sustained fiscal stimulus that leads to excessive fiscal burden would be detrimental to 
longer-term  economic  prospects.  Thus,  the  Government’s  current  commitment  to  fiscal 
consolidation  and  enhancing  efficiency  in  public  spending  reflects  a  measured  and  sound 
approach in budgetary management. 
As for monetary policy, it is recognised that a prolonged period of low interest rate globally 
could  lead  to  potential  market  distortions,  particularly  in  an  environment  of  ample  liquidity. 
While consumer inflation is expected to remain low in the international environment, there is 
a need to be watchful of developments in asset markets and asset prices. 
Promoting  monetary  and  financial  stability  is  complicated  by  the  frequency  of  very  large 
short-term capital flows. Better prospects for recovery and expectation of a head start in the 
unwinding  of  policies  in  the  Asian  region  compared  to  the  rest  of  the  world  could  lead  to 
strong  capital  inflows.  This  could  in  turn  fuel  asset  prices,  thereby  increasing  the  risk  to 
financial  stability  which  could  undermine  the  process  of  economic  recovery.  Indeed,  some 
countries in the Asian region are already facing these issues and have introduced measures 
to reduce the risks associated with capital inflows. For Malaysia, however, it should be noted 
that the financial industry, the private sector and the country have the capacity to manage 
these challenges, given the stronger overall financial conditions in the country, low levels of 
corporate  leverage,  a  sound  banking  system  and  a  strong  external  balance  of  payments 
position.  
Beyond 
immediate  priority  of  establishing  economic  recovery  and  preserving 
macroeconomic  stability,  it  is  also  acknowledged  that  the  Malaysian  economy  currently 
stands at a pivotal juncture. In order to secure continued medium and long-term growth and 
development,  the  structure  of  the  economy  has  to  undergo  several  important  changes  – 
changes that would better position Malaysia in meeting the new challenges and reaping the 
opportunities that the future Asian and global landscape brings. 
Foremost, the events of the past two years have brought to the forefront the importance of 
having  a  more  balanced  and  diverse  model  of  development.  Malaysia’s  openness  and 
integration  with  global  trade  and  investment  flows  is  an  important  source  of  our  economic 
strength,  and  must  remain  so  going  forward.  However,  given  the  more  dispersed  growth 
prospects  of  the  global  economy  in  the  future,  it  is  important  that  the  export  structure  of 
Malaysia evolves to be more diverse too. This will both increase our economic resilience and 
decrease  our  reliance  on  the  traditional  markets  for  our  export  growth.  Encouragingly  this 
trend  of  export  market  diversification  has  already  started  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  A 
decade ago, the share of Malaysia’s exports to emerging and developing economies were 
below 50% of our total exports, but now, the figure has exceeded two-thirds. Going forward, 
it is important that this trend is reinforced.  
However,  to  achieve  a  more  balanced  growth,  we  need  to  not  only  leverage  on  our 
competitive  advantage  in  the  external  sector,  but  also  expand  the  strength  of  our 
domestic  sector.  Since  2003,  domestic  demand  has  been  a  main  contributor  to  our 
economic  growth,  especially  private  consumption,  in  which  growth  has  consistently 
outstripped  that  of  the  overall  economy.  Going  forward  however,  a  more  sustainable 
balanced growth would require higher contribution from private investment. It is important to 
recognise  that  no  country  has  ever  managed  to  consume  its  way  to  prosperity.  Both 
economic theory and the history of economic development point to the lesson that high-level 
of consumption does not guarantee higher rate of economic growth for a sustained period. 
the 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2009
Investment,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  dynamic  economy  that  is  moving 
towards a higher level of income and development.  
Indeed, many new areas of growth in Malaysia would benefit from higher investment, such 
as in niche growth segments in the services sector, as well as in the development of enabling 
infrastructure such as in broadband and green technology. Investment in green technology 
has the potential to not only increase the efficiency of the economy, but also to open up new 
sources of growth.  
As  Malaysia  moves  from  a  cost-competitive  economy  to  one  that  is  more  knowledge  and 
innovation-driven,  it  is  not  just  the  quantity  of  investment  that  matters,  but  the  quality  of 
investment  that  would  dictate  our  ability  to  move  up  the  value-chain.  An  important 
consideration in ensuring high quality investment is the availability of complementary factors. 
Here, I would like to highlight three of these factors, namely a private sector-led competitive 
environment,  high  quality  workforce  and  the  availability  of  enabling  infrastructures.  A 
business  friendly  environment  with  minimal  market  distortions  is  critical  to  ensure  that  the 
private  sector  can  direct  its  investment  activities  efficiently  and  to  areas  of  the  greatest 
growth  and  return  potentials.  Similarly,  the  availability  of  skilled  workforce  and  modern 
infrastructures such as high-speed broadband is key in ensuring that high value-added and 
high knowledge-content investments take place.  
Much is currently being discussed and debated on the issues of high quality workforce and 
information  age  enabling  infrastructures,  especially  given  the  Government’s  renewed 
emphasis  on  them  in  the  recent  efforts  to  transform  the  Malaysian  economy.  Allow  me  to 
elaborate  more  on  the  key  complementary  factor  that  has  been  in  my  opinion  receiving 
relatively less focus in current public debate, and, this is the need to develop an extensive 
market-driven private sector-led competitive environment.  
As  an  economy  moves  up  the  value-added  chain,  and  develops  knowledge  intensive 
industries, the dynamics of interplay and balance between the private sector and the public 
sector changes significantly. In a developing economy, the role of the public sector is broader 
and  it  actively  drives  many  economic  decisions  –  from  development  of  appropriate 
infrastructures  and  institutions  to  more  direct  allocation  of  resources.  But  as  an  economy 
becomes more developed, with progressively more complex, sophisticated and knowledge-
intensive  activity,  it  is  increasingly  untenable  for  the  public  sector  to  hold  comparative 
advantage in allocating resources efficiently. It is thus crucial that the private sector takes on 
a  more  dominant  role  in  driving  economic  growth  and  for  price  mechanism  to  be  widely 
market  driven  in  order  for  resources  to  be  efficiently  and  productively  allocated  across  all 
segments of the economy.  
For the private sector to develop and to drive economic growth, two crucial prerequisites are 
incentive  structure  must  underpin 
needed.  First, 
economic  motivations  and  clear  market  signals  must  be  allowed  to  guide  decisions  of 
economic agents. This implies that productive investment, employment and entrepreneurial 
decisions  are  not  to  be  hindered  by  direct  or  indirect  market  distortions.  Second, 
competition  is  needed  to  drive  economic  efficiency  and  dynamism.  A  vibrant  economy 
cannot exist without competition. In particular, with an ever globalised world, competition is 
no  longer  local  –  the  private  sector  cannot  just  compete  locally  when  the  flows  of  goods, 
capital and talent are global. Furthermore, in a global stage, long-term relevance can only be 
sustained  through  genuine  competition-driven  competitiveness  rather  than  through  public 
sector support.  
To  develop  both  an  appropriate  incentive  structure  and  a  market-driven  environment,  it  is 
crucial that market and price distortions are removed and greater competition is introduced, 
such  as  through  deregulation,  liberalisation  and  greater  transparency  of  rules  and 
regulations. While the government moves towards this, the private sector must be ready to 
operate  in  this  more  open  and  competitive  environment.  An  example  of  an  industry  within 
Malaysia  in  which  a  private  sector-led  competitive  environment  is  being  developed  is  the 
the  economy-wide  market-based 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 5
financial sector. Over the last several years, the domestic financial sector has been gradually 
liberalised and subjected to greater global competition, with the dual aims of enhancing the 
role  of  the  financial  sector  as  a  source  of  growth  and  as  a  key  enabler  and  catalyst  of 
economic growth. Growth of the financial sector also strengthens Malaysia’s economic inter-
linkages  with  other  economies.  Liberalisation  is  done  after  ensuring  that  the  financial 
institutions  are  in  a  state  of  readiness  to  compete  in  a  more  competitive  and  challenging 
environment. Through the financial reforms and capacity building efforts undertaken over the 
years since the Asian financial crisis, domestic financial institutions are now well capitalised 
and resilient with strengthened corporate governance, efficient internal structures, robust risk 
management  practices  and  diversified  sources  of  income.  Indeed,  the  domestic  financial 
institutions have extended their presence regionally.  
Conclusion  
The  global  financial  and  economic  system  over  the  past  two  years  has  gone  through  an 
equivalent of a cardiac arrest due to the excesses of the past. With swift, strong, coordinated 
and  committed  policy  responses  around  the  world,  however,  stability  has  been  gradually 
restored and a repeat of the last depression averted. Now, a new world is emerging, one that 
is very different from the one before the crisis. In this new world, the prospects for Asia is 
encouraging, in both contributing to and assuming greater responsibility for supporting global 
stability  and 
longer-term  growth.  For  Malaysia,  sustained  growth  and  successful 
transformation of the economy towards a higher level of development would depend crucially 
on  how  we  prepare  ourselves  in  facing  the  coming  challenges  and  seizing  the  emerging 
opportunities. 
6 
 BIS Review 158/2009
