Christian Noyer: Monetary policy and the crisis – some lessons for the 
future 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris-
Europlace Financial Forum, Tokyo, 16 November 2009. 
 Central banks have been very active over the last two years in containing the impact of the 
financial  crisis.  Monetary  policy  has  made  an  important  contribution  to  stabilizing  financial 
markets  and  the  real  economy.  Today,  however,  I  will  not  talk  about  our  response  to  the 
crisis, whether by conventional or unconventional measures. I will rather focus on the longer 
term and address two questions: "Was monetary policy the cause of the crisis?" and "How 
can it contribute to preventing future crisis?" These are two different questions. And they call 
for differentiated answers. While I doubt very much that monetary policy played a major role 
in triggering the crisis, I also believe that it can – and should – help in the future to better 
contribute to financial stability. 
Was monetary policy the cause of the crisis? 
One  major  success in the two last decades has been the achievement of price stability in 
most industrialized and many emerging economies. This success has rightly been ascribed 
to  the  monetary  policy  framework  almost  universally  adopted  in  the  world,  which,  beyond 
national  differences  and  specific  features,  is  based  on  two  common  pillars:  Central  bank 
independence  and  price  stability  as  a  primary  objective.  Price  stability  itself  has  coincided 
with  –  some  would  say  produced  –  a  prolonged  period  of  strong  growth  and  low  output 
volatility, which, as you know, has been dubbed the “great moderation". 
One  major  disappointment  however,  has  been  that  price  stability  has  not  led  to  financial 
stability.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  that,  over  the  last  two  decades,  financial  crises  have 
become more frequent, with increasingly serious consequences for growth and welfare.  
To get a sense of this puzzle, it may be useful to look at the intrinsic dynamics of the financial 
system.  Both  in  normal  times  and  times  of  stress,  amplification  mechanisms  are  at  work, 
which exacerbate the impact of any specific shock. These mechanisms act through changes 
in  leverage,  liquidity,  and  risk  aversion.  These  three  factors  interact  in  a  complex  and 
sometimes  unpredictable  way.  For  instance,  growth  in  leverage  may  be  fuelled  by  an 
increase in risk appetite. In turn, larger balance sheets of financial intermediaries give rise to 
liquidity  expansion  and  growing  risk  appetite.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  these  dynamics  can 
create strong procyclicality in the evolution of asset prices and credit aggregates. It is also 
likely that procyclicality is partly created, or accentuated, by our accounting and prudential 
regimes.  
If financial procyclicality was a short-term, mean-reverting, phenomenon, there would be little 
cause for concern. Unfortunately, those same mechanisms allow for the progressive build-
up, over a long period of time, of significant  imbalances and deviations in asset prices. At 
some stage, the correction becomes unavoidable, and is generally abrupt. That’s where the 
crisis  starts.  It  is  important  to  note  the  asymmetry  in  these  developments:  imbalances  are 
slow to build up but very fast to unwind. And the adjustment process can be disorderly and 
traumatic. 
What  role  does  monetary  policy  play?  In  a  very  basic  sense,  monetary  policy  is  about 
determining  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates.  And  it  is  equally  basic  to  state  that  the 
interest  rate  is  the  price  of  liquidity.  Therefore,  it  may  happen  that,  because  inflation  is 
contained, interest rates are kept at a low level, and liquidity is cheap and easily accessible 
for  financial  intermediaries.  In  turn,  abundant  liquidity  may  increase  risk  appetite,  induce 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 1
maturity transformation and lead to growth in leverage. This has been called the "risk-taking 
channel” of monetary policy. Ultimately, it creates a link between the level of interest rates 
and those of risk premia. And this, of course, means that movements in interest rates have, 
all other things being equal, a bigger (and possibly less predictable) impact on the financial 
system, credit aggregates and asset prices. A lot of work remains to be done to precisely 
quantify  that  channel  and  disentangle  its  effects  from  those  of  the  more  "traditional”  credit 
channel.  Nevertheless  it  is  clear  that,  in  the  future,  central  banks  will  need  to  pay  greater 
attention to the impact of their decisions on the level of risk in the financial system.  
Some analysts would go a step further. They would state that that the ultimate responsibility 
for  the  crisis  rests  with  monetary  policy.  Specifically,  according  to  this  view,  by  keeping 
interest rates too low for too long a time, central banks have tolerated – or even condoned – 
the build-up in risk and financial imbalances. They “created”, so to speak, the credit bubble 
which burst in 2007.  
Let  me  state  clearly  that  I  don’t  share  this  view.  It  is  very  apparent  that  some  features  of 
recent  financial  innovation  –  including  securitisation  –  have  contributed  to  excessive  risk 
taking and increased financial fragility. They explain why the crisis has been so severe. It is 
also  striking  that  real  –  not  only  nominal  –  interest  rates  have  stayed  at  low  levels  for  an 
extended period of time. Over the medium run, long term real interest rates are beyond the 
control of monetary authorities. They have been driven by the continuous increase in saving 
rates which occurred over the last decade, especially in emerging economies. This created a 
demand  for  safe  and  liquid  assets  which  could  not  be  met  by  equivalent  supply  in  those 
countries. Because of this “asset shortage”, saving flows were directed towards industrialized 
countries, first of all the USA. At the same time the financial system in those industrialized 
countries worked to produce “complex” assets which looked safe and liquid – and were rated 
as such. Apparently, supply matched demand. But we know now that this was an illusion. 
Complex  assets  were  neither  safe  nor  liquid.  The  root  causes  of  the  crisis,  therefore,  are 
deeply  structural.  There  was  a  combination  of  excess  savings  and  asymmetry  in  financial 
developments  between  countries  which  was  conducive  to  the  formation  of  bubbles.  This 
disequilibrium was amplified and compounded by distorted financial innovation. There was 
little, or no, role for monetary policy in that process. 
Looking  to  the  future,  however,  it  is  legitimate  to  ask  how  monetary  policy  can  better 
contribute to financial stability. 
Here, I would make four points  
1. 
Financial instability should first be addressed and dealt with by specific tools. Those 
tools  come  in  many  forms,  such  as  capital  or  margin  requirements,  loan  to  value 
ratios  and  liquidity  constraints.  Most  are  currently  available  to  regulators  and 
supervisors.  They  have  been  used,  however,  with  one  objective:  ensuring  the 
robustness  and  viability  of  individual  institutions.  There  is  now  a  need,  which  is 
widely recognized, for a change in perspective. Regulation and supervision should 
be designed and implemented in a broader, systemic perspective, with the objective 
of ensuring the stability and integrity of the financial system as a whole. 
There  is  a  strong  case  for  giving  central  banks  a  pivotal  role  in  this  new  “macro 
financial  supervision”.  They  have  intimate  knowledge  of  financial  systems  and 
markets.  They  have  an  incentive  to  act  since  monetary  policy  works  better  when 
financial institutions are robust and financial markets are stable and efficient. And, 
finally,  they  are  well  placed  to  have  an  integrated  view  of  the  economy  and  its 
interaction  with  the  financial  sector.  Indeed,  in  many  countries,  it  is  envisaged  to 
make the central bank the “systemic supervisor” or, at least, a central pillar in the 
macro-supervisory architecture. 
A key question, however, is how this new financial stability function would interact 
with monetary policy. In theory, things are simple. Central banks would have several 
tools available for different objectives. One set of tools (interest rates, international 
2. 
3. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2009
 4. 
reserves) would, as now, be used to fulfil the price stability mandate. On the other 
hand, macro-prudential tools would support and foster financial stability. In such an 
ideal “Tinberghen” world, each instrument would be precisely assigned to a single 
objective.  
Things may be more complex in the real world because these instruments are not 
independent. For instance, changes in capital requirements will affect credit growth 
and the transmission channel of monetary policy. Conversely, as I said, levels of or 
movements  in  monetary  policy  rates  may  increase  or  decrease  the  level  of  risk 
inside the financial system, hence its vulnerability to shocks. Finally, there may be 
circumstances in which the objectives of price and financial stability may not be fully 
compatible.  
When instruments overlap and the objectives possibly conflict with each other, the 
potential for confusion is real and significant. To avoid any damage to central banks' 
credibility and ability to fulfil their mandate, it is essential that a clear and transparent 
framework should be in place. It should be made clear, in particular, that, whatever 
the  new  tasks  and  functions  of  central  banks,  price  stability  should  remain  the 
primary objective of monetary policy. As I said, this may not be a sufficient condition 
to  ensure  financial  stability.  But  it  is  certainly  a  necessary  one.  Looking  at  recent 
events,  the  credibility  of  central  banks  has  enormously  helped  to  contain  financial 
instability  and  its  effects,  both  directly  and  indirectly.  Directly,  because  their 
credibility  has  allowed  central  banks  to  act  forcefully  in  the  knowledge  that  they 
could  do  so  without  “disanchoring”  inflation  expectations.  And  indirectly,  because, 
with  expectations  firmly  anchored,  the  risk  of  a  deflationary  spiral  has  been 
considerably reduced. Indeed, even when instant inflation turned negative in many 
countries  for  several  months  in  a  row,  long-term  inflation  expectations  remained 
remarkably stable.  
To  maintain  and  preserve  this  necessary  clarity,  we  are  fortunate,  in  the  Eurosystem,  in 
having  an  appropriate  and  efficient  framework.  The  Treaty  specifies  that  the  primary 
objective  of  monetary  policy  should  be  to  achieve  price  stability;  and  that  other  goals  can 
only be pursued without prejudice to this primary objective. The financial stability function fits 
naturally into this hierarchy. It cannot be pursued at the expense of the main objective.  
As you know, our approach to monetary policy making is organized around two “pillars”, with 
one  specifically  focused  on  monetary  and  credit  aggregates.  We  have  mainly  used  this 
second  pillar  to  detect  potential  long-term  risks  to  price  stability.  It  has  long  been  known, 
however, that strong growth in credit and money aggregates often signals or accompanies 
the emergence of bubble-like asset price movements or incipient financial imbalances. We 
can  therefore  expect  to  obtain  useful  insights,  in  the  future,  from  this  second  pillar  in  the 
fulfilment of our financial stability mission. 
Looking ahead, central banks face significant challenges. They are well equipped, however, 
both in terms of expertise and institutional framework, to take on new responsibilities without 
in any way compromising their core mandate, their independence or their credibility.  
Thank you. 
References  
T. Adrian and H. Shin (2009), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Policy”, contribution to 
the Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.  
C. Borio and I. Shim (2007), “What Can (Macro-)Prudential Policy Do to Support Monetary 
Policy?”, BIS Working Paper No. 242. 
C. Borio and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the 
Nexus”, BIS Working Paper No. 114. 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 3
R.  Caballero,  E.  Farhi  and  P.-O.  Gourinchas  (2008):  “An  Equilibrium  Model  of  “Global 
Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 98(2) 358-393. 
S. Dubecq, B. Mojon and X. Ragot (2009), “Fuzzy Capital Requirements, Risk-Shifting and 
the Risk taking Channel of Monetary Policy”, Banque de France DT 254. 
European Central Bank (2003), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary 
Policy Strategy, edited by O. Issing. 
F.  S.  Mishkin  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  Flexibility,  Risk  Management,  and  Financial 
Disruptions”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 11 January 2008.  
R.  G.  Rajan  (2005):  “Has  Financial  Development  made  the  World  Riskier?”,  in  The 
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Jackson Hole conference proceedings.  
R.  G.  Rajan  (2006):  “Monetary  Policy  and  Incentives”,  speech  given  at  the  Bank  of  Spain 
conference on Central Banks in the 21st Century, 8 June 2006. 
C.  M.  Reinhart  and  K.  S.  Rogoff  (2009),  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”,  American 
Economic Review, 99 (2), 466-472. 
Taylor  (2009),  “The  Financial  Crisis  and  the  Policy  Responses:  An  Empirical  Analysis  of 
What went Wrong”, NBER Working Paper No 14631. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2009
