Denton Rarawa: The current state of the Solomon Islands' economy and 
thoughts on the future 
Paper presented by Mr Denton Rarawa, Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, to 
the  University  South  Pacific  Development  Dialogue 
Islands,  Honiara, 
17 September 2009. 
in  Solomon 
 Distinguished USP Personnel 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning to you all 
Introduction 
First let me thank the USP Faculty of Business & Economics for inviting the Central Bank to 
participate in this important gathering this morning. It is a privilege to be part of this Dialogue. 
This morning I hope to provide a brief update of the current economic situation in Solomon 
Islands and to share with you a few thoughts on the direction in which I think we are heading 
as well as some challenges that need serious consideration by policy and decision makers. 
Some of these policy challenges are potential areas that institutions like USP can assist the 
country in by employing its academic research expertise. I believe this is one key goal of the 
Development Dialogue this morning. 
I  will  begin  by  looking  at  the  current  condition  of  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy 
including some of the future challenges and opportunities these sectors are facing. Then I 
will  move  to  areas  for  which  the  Central  Bank  is  directly  responsible;  the  monetary  and 
financial sectors of the economy. I will also describe the actions that the Bank has taken to 
influence events and discuss policies we may  implement in the future. I will conclude with 
some thoughts and advice for the future. 
Global economic crisis 
You are all aware that in the last eighteen months the global economy went through a severe 
financial  and  economic  crisis  that  spared  no  country.  Earlier  this  year  when  launching  the 
Central  Banks'  2008  annual  report,  I  described  the  Solomon  Islands  economy  then  as  a 
small boat in the middle of a severe storm. At that time, no one knew how strong the storm 
would be or how long it would last. But one thing was certain: the country has to survive the 
storm otherwise our boat MV Solomon Islands will sink. 
Today there is growing evidence that the storm is abating. Signs of recovery are emerging 
around  the  world.  Just  yesterday,  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Ben  Bernanke 
claimed  that  "the  recession  in  the  United  States  was  over".  Despite  these  positive  signs 
however,  Dominique  Strauss-Kahn  (the  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary 
Fund) issued a stark warning only last week "that the global economic crisis isn't over yet". 
Other prominent commentators have suggested that growth will be "slow and uneven" and 
"unemployment will remain a problem". 
Real sector 
The largest impact that the global economic crisis has had on Solomon Islands has been the 
reduction in our log exports. 2008 saw record levels of production from the forestry sector 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 1
with  1.5  million  cubic  meters  of  timber  being  exported.  This  accounted  for  around  16%  of 
GDP. 
 The global economic crisis led to reduced demand for raw materials particularly in Asia. The 
slowdown  in  China,  the  destination  for  around  half  of  Solomon  Islands'  logs  resulted  in  a 
decline  in  our  timber  industry.  For  Solomon  Islands,  logging  has  not  only  been  a  major 
contributor  to  growth  but  has  also  been  our  major  export  earner,  an  important  source  of 
employment and a crucial contributor to government revenues. The decline in logging that 
the crisis provoked has hurt the country. 
As the global economic situation recovers so we see a clear upturn in log exports. Second 
quarter results are up and the Bank predicts further increases in the third quarter. It must be 
remembered however, that the contribution of forestry to the Solomon Islands economy are 
numbered. We are destined to see a terminal decline in the industry due to the unsustainable 
rate of harvesting that has occurred. It is predicted that non-plantation logging will be fully 
exhausted in 4-5 years. In spite of any action we can take, the country will experience severe 
economic challenges as this industry declines unless new sources of growth can be found to 
take its place and take its place quickly. 
Another industry that has declined in the first half of 2009 is copra. Copra is an important 
industry in Solomon Islands because it is the major cash crop in many rural areas. Strong 
world prices in 2008 generated record production in Solomon Islands. Since the third quarter 
of 2008 however, world prices for copra have sharply declined resulting in substantial falls in 
production. Second quarter output was 45% lower than that recorded in the same period last 
year. The flooding that Solomon Islands experienced in the first half of the year has further 
affected  copra  production.  One  major  constraint  on  the  growth  of  the  copra  industry  in 
Solomon  Islands  has  been  infrastructure  weaknesses.  Problems  in  shipping  and  storage 
mean  that  even  during  the  peak  last  year  copra  export  levels  have  remained  well  below 
potential. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2009
The fishing industry has also seen a subdued start to the year. This probably has more to 
do with domestic factors than with the global economic crisis. The first half of the year has 
seen one company cease fishing activities as part of its strategy to restructure and focus on 
processing.  Poor  fishing  conditions  have  compounded  this  problem  and  magnified  the 
decline in catch. It is anticipated that catch will rebound in coming months as two new fishing 
boats come into operation. Fisheries is a sector in which the Bank expects future growth with 
investment into the sector remaining strong. 
 BIS Review 141/2009 
 3
   
Cocoa  production  has  been  one  success  story  in  2009.  Due  mainly  to  adverse  weather 
conditions,  cocoa  production  in  2008  was  poor.  Earnings  in  the  industry  were  however 
sustained due to resilient international prices. Production levels for the second quarter have 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2009
been very promising. It is hoped that a combination of good harvests and a fair international 
price will enable the cocoa industry to contribute more to the Solomon Islands' economy in 
2009. Cocoa forms an important source of income in many rural areas. 
The continued growth of the palm oil industry in the country has also been a major positive 
in the last few years. 2008 saw a 28% increase in output in palm oil and further gains have 
already been witnessed in 2009. Expansion in the size and yield of plantations, increases in 
mill processing and improvements in worker productivity are combining to drive forward the 
palm oil sector. It is anticipated that falls in the price of palm oil experienced over the last few 
quarters will be only temporary as international demand for palm oil and palm oil products 
remains strong. This dip in prices also does not seem to have dampened the industries plans 
for expansion. Issues of security and land tenure however, remain as serious and continued 
risks to development of the industry. These issues must be confronted if this sector is to grow 
and increase revenues and employment in Solomon Islands. 
Tourism has been identified by the Government as a key potential growth area. This sector 
has seen a 16% year-on-year growth in the second quarter of 2009. This is a very positive 
sign for the economy. One major contributor to this growth has been the recent entry of a low 
cost carrier to the Brisbane/Honiara route. This has increased competition and dramatically 
lowered fares for travelers. The upgrading of hotel facilities around Honiara and the opening 
of  a  new  hotel  on  Honiara's  waterfront  may  also  boost  tourism  in  the  county.  Limited 
infrastructure  and  problems  with  domestic  air  and  sea  travel,  remains  the  major  barrier  to 
developing the tourism industry across the country. 
 BIS Review 141/2009 
 5
 The Government has made steady progress in opening up the telecommunications sector. 
This is expected to provide a boost to the economy. The granting of a second mobile license 
could  see  new  investment  into  the  Solomon  Islands  economy.  The  experience  of  many 
countries  is  that  the  entrepreneurial  use  of  mobile  technology  can  reap  huge  rewards 
particularly in rural areas. 
The  last  sector  I  will  mention  is  mining.  There  are  currently  twelve  mineral  exploration 
companies  active  in  Solomon  Islands.  The  sector,  although  currently  small,  is  becoming 
increasingly  active.  The  main  short  term  potential  for  the  economy  lies  in  gold  production. 
According  to  industry  predictions,  a  major  gold  mining  project  could  be  in  operation  on 
Guadalcanal  by  March  2010.  In  the  longer  term  nickel  may  prove  an  important  export  for 
Solomon  Islands.  The  country  possesses  major  proven  nickel  reserves.  The  majority  of 
mining projects however remain a long way from production and continued peace, stability 
and patience is vital to maintain investor's confidence in such projects. 
Monetary and financial developments 
Let me turn to recent monetary and financial developments. It must be remembered that the 
impact of the global economic crisis on Solomon Islands has not been all bad. Whilst falling 
international commodity prices have had a damaging affect on our export receipts they have 
reduced  the  cost  of  imports.  This  has  been  a  major  contributing  factor  in  the  easing  of 
inflation pressures. Falling world prices for oil and food in particular have been instrumental 
in reducing the inflation rate from 23.5% in September 2008 to 5.9% in July 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 141/2009
 The  lowering  of  inflation,  to  a  more  sustainable  level,  is  a  major  policy  goal  for  the 
Central Bank, as set out in its 2009 monetary policy stance. Whilst international price falls 
have been one major contributor to this reduction in inflation, Central Bank intervention has 
also been important in increasing price stability. The CBSI intervened to reduce the level of 
excess liquidity in the financial system and so slow down lending, which was fueling inflation. 
In order to do this the Bank redefined the liquid asset ratio, which acted as a de facto raise in 
the required level of reserve holdings by the commercial banks. We also issued central bank 
backed securities and instituted a long run deposit facility to absorb liquidity from the system. 
The Bank anticipates the level of inflation to remain well within target during the remainder of 
the year. We will however continue to remain vigilant. An unanticipated upsurge in fuel or rice 
prices could increase upward pressure on the inflation rate. Other potential threats to price 
stability include public sector wage inflation and potential fiscal dominance. 
Our second stated policy objective for 2009 was to protect and if possible increase the level 
of foreign reserves. At the beginning of the year the level of import cover provided by gross 
reserves had fallen below the Banks minimum desired bench-mark of 3 months. Through a 
combination of tight monetary policy, foreign currency inflows and an increase in Solomon 
Islands'  allocation  of  special  drawing  rights  from  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  our 
external holdings have increased to more than four months import cover. 
 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 7
  We must however remain cautious as large risks to our external balances persist. Whilst the 
second quarter of the year saw an improvement in the overall balance of payments position 
and in fact witnessed a positive overall position, this was based solely on the position of the 
capital account. The trade balance of Solomon Islands remains in a structural deficit which 
8 
 BIS Review 141/2009
without action will only worsen with the decline in logging. The structural imbalance in trade 
is a major concern and is a key area in which action is required. 
   9
BIS Review 141/2009 
 The final goal that the Bank set itself for 2009 was to ensure the stability and robustness 
of the financial sector in Solomon Islands. Given the events of the global economic crisis 
and the financial meltdown across the world, it is understandable that individuals and families 
in Solomon Islands are worried about their hard earned savings. In this connection, I want to 
assure  the  public  that  the  financial  sector  of  Solomon  Islands  remains  secure  and  well 
managed. The Central Bank is in the process of bringing in further measures to ensure the 
continued strength of the sector and to protect investors both now and in the future. 
Issues & challenges 
Let  me  comment  on  a  few  issues  and  challenges  facing  Solomon  Islands.  Given  the  time 
constraint I have, it is not possible to cover all the issues. I have selected but a few. 
The need to find new sources of growth to replace logging. is crucial. As yet this remains 
the great unanswered question for the nation. Solomon Islands must keep striving to develop 
the areas that it already has and to develop new economic opportunities. Many industries, 
such  as  the  cattle  industry,  have  not  retained  pre-tension  levels  and  redeveloping  these 
could  be  one  potential  area  for  growth.  Other  areas  already  exist  in  Solomon  Islands  and 
with careful effort and planning could provide future growth. The country must encourage and 
nurture  the  spirit  of  entrepreneurship  whenever  possible  to  help  the  economy  to  flourish. 
Developments  in  the  mobile  phone  market,  for  example,  could  present  a  range  of 
opportunities for local businesses. 
Another challenge for our country is our high population growth. The population issue in 
Solomon Islands is like the elephant in the room. We know it is there but nobody wants to 
talk about it or even acknowledge its presence. Successive Solomon 
Islands  governments  have  been  unable  and  even  reluctant  to  address  population  related 
issues. But rapid population growth is driving the development agenda in this country from 
the  demand  for  constitutional  change,  unemployment,  and  pressure  on  infrastructure  and 
social services. Thus it is very important and makes "development sense" to rein in on the 
population growth in this country as a means of raising per capita income levels and welfare 
of the people. 
The final area I wish to comment on is that of education. Education is of vital importance in 
driving the economy and the nation forward. In order to investigate and change the world we 
live in it is vital that we have the correct information available to us and that we can correctly 
interpret  and  understand  it.  For  this  reason  events  such  as  this  one  today  are  vital  to  the 
economic wellbeing of the country and every organization. Every one present here today has 
something which they can add in this area. 
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  2009  has  so  far  proved  to  be  a  challenging  year  for  the  Solomon  Islands 
economy. Although the situation is improving, the Bank predicts that economic growth for the 
year will be around 1%. There are reasons to be hopeful for the long run prospects of the 
country,  in  particular  if  managed  carefully,  the  agricultural,  mining  and  tourism  sectors  all 
have  potential  as  sources  of  growth.  The  short  to  medium  term  prospect  for  the  economy 
however  look  less  cheerful  and  structural  reform  must  be  implemented  now  to  avoid  a 
stagnation or worse shrinking of the economy. A warning about how far we still have to go 
was issued by the World Bank last week when they ranked Solomon Islands 104th in their 
"ease of doing business" rankings. 
Key constraints in Solomon Islands involve weaknesses in infrastructure, insecurity of land 
rights and difficulties in starting businesses. Reform to these areas is vital to ensure future 
prosperity. 
10 
 BIS Review 141/2009
The  Central  Bank  maintains  its  commitment  to  ensuring  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability in Solomon Islands and providing an environment where we can grow in a rapid and 
sustainable way. If all organizations and individuals in the country continue to pull together 
and work in their own unique way towards the development of this country I am sure that we 
can continue to improve the state of the economy and the lives of people across the islands. 
There is certainly a lot of work to do if we are to improve the livelihood of the majority of our 
people. And as I alluded to earlier, USP can assist by using its research skills and expertise 
to finding solutions to these complex issues. 
Thank you for your time and God bless Solomon Islands. 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 11
