José Manuel González-Páramo: New investment fund statistics for the 
euro area 
Introductory remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board 
of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the  first  statistical  release,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
11 December 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to the ECB. Today it is my pleasure to introduce an important new set of statistics 
for  the  euro  area  as  single  economic  entity.  These  statistics  provide  detailed  harmonised 
information on the assets and liabilities of investment funds resident in the euro area. They 
are compiled by the ECB in close cooperation with the national central banks. Fruitful work 
has  also  been  conducted  in  liaison  with  the  European  Fund  and  Asset  Management 
Association (EFAMA), a business association represented in this room. 
Since the inception of the ECB, major progress has been achieved in developing monetary 
and financial statistics for the euro area. This work, carried out in close cooperation with the 
Member States, has resulted in a full range of timely and high quality euro area statistics, 
which the ECB constantly monitors in performing its policy functions. The first major steps 
were  the  implementation  of  euro  area  statistics  for  monetary  financial  institutions  (in 
particular  to  derive  statistical  information  on  monetary  aggregates),  lending  and  interest 
rates, as well as on the balance of payments. In recent years, efforts have focused on the 
development  of  statistics  for  other  financial  sectors.  This  also  reflects  the  increasing  links 
between  the  banking  sector  and  other  financial  institutions.  Moreover,  our  statistics  have 
been  integrated  into  the  euro  area  accounts,  which  provide  an  overall  picture  of  the  euro 
area  economy.  The  next  milestone  is  the  release  of  the  new  investment  funds  statistics, 
today. 
For some years, the ECB has already published un-harmonised and partly estimated euro 
area investment fund statistics, at a quarterly frequency. Today we will present, for the first 
time,  harmonised  investment  fund  statistics  that  cover  all  investment  funds  resident  in  the 
euro area. This includes data for the main fund types such as bond, equity or mixed funds, 
but also other types of funds, including hedge funds. Our new dataset contains much more 
detailed breakdowns both on the assets held and liabilities issued by investment funds. The 
data provide, for example, detailed information on the residency and sector of the issuers of 
securities  and  shares  held  by  the  funds.  New  information  is  available,  as  well,  on  the 
residency of the holders of the shares issued by euro area investment funds. In addition to 
the detailed quarterly information, the ECB now also publishes key monthly information on 
the  outstanding  amounts  and  net  sales  of  shares  issued  by  the  funds.  A  further  important 
improvement concerns the timeliness of the publication of these statistics: as from 2010, the 
statistics  will  become  available  after  one-and-a-half  months  (compared  to  3-and-a-half 
months in the past).  
There  are  many  reasons  why  high  quality  statistics  on  euro  area  investment  funds  are 
important for the ECB’s monetary and financial analysis. Let me just highlight two of them: 
First, since investment funds are large institutional investors, their portfolio choices may be 
indicative of more general trends in portfolio diversification. For that reason, these statistics 
are  certainly  also  useful  for  explaining  monetary  developments.  Second,  changes  in 
investment  funds’  asset  value  are  transmitted,  through  the  valuation  of  their  shares,  to 
households  and  firms.  In  turn,  these  wealth  effects,  may  have  implications  on  aggregate 
demand.  The  structure  of  the  financial  assets  held  by  investment  funds  also  provides 
important  information  regarding  the  financial  risks  that  are  indirectly  borne  by  households 
and firms through their portfolio of investment fund shares.  
BIS Review 165/2009 
 1
In addition to the new statistics on investment funds, separate data are now also published 
every quarter on euro area Money Market Fund balance sheets. As a consequence, one can 
now  perform  analyses  for  the  whole  sector  of  funds.  These  new  data  on  Money  Market 
Funds  are  also  a  useful  addition  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis.  Because  of  the  close 
substitutability  between  their  shares  issued  and  bank  deposits,  money  market  funds  form 
part of the Monetary Financial Institutions sector and are thereby contained in the M3 figures. 
From  now  on,  the  new  investment  fund  and  money  market  fund  data  will  be  published  in 
regular  monthly  ECB  statistical  press  releases.  I  am  convinced  that  the  new  harmonised 
statistics yield novel insights into the structure and development of the financial sector of the 
euro area economy. The financial crisis clearly demonstrated that high quality and up-to-date 
statistics are indispensable to policy makers and market participants alike. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
Now, the Director General Statistics, Mr. Steven Keuning, will present more detailed features 
and  the  first  results  of  the  new  statistics.  Following  his  presentation  we  stand  ready  to 
answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2009
