Sada Reddy: Fiji’s first Stock Exchange celebrates its 30th anniversary 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  30th 
Anniversary of the South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE), Suva, 28th October 2009.  
 Introduction 
Representatives  of  the  capital  market  intermediaries,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. Good evening to you all.  
I am delighted to join you this evening to celebrate the 30th Anniversary of the South Pacific 
Stock Exchange (SPSE), and I thank the SPSE for the warm invitation.  
Firstly, I would like to commend the Board and Management of the SPSE for continuing the 
good work in developing SPSE to where it is today. As we reflect on the developments over 
the last 30 years, I would also like to pay respect to the founding members for this vision, 
some 30 years ago to establish the first ever Stock Exchange for Fiji.  
Importance of the capital markets 
The stock market is often seen as a very significant component of the financial system of any 
economy. There is indeed a growing body of research which points towards capital market 
development making positive contribution to economic growth.  
Fiji’s stock market fulfils two main functions. Firstly, the market acts as a means for raising 
capital for companies, and secondly, a more important secondary role is that it facilitates the 
exchange of previously issued shares.  
No doubt, a market economy like ours needs a vibrant and developed capital markets as it 
offers  great  opportunities  to  make  a  real  and  positive  contribution  to  the  economic 
development  of  our  country.  It  is  therefore  important  that  these  opportunities  are  fully 
exploited. 
History of the stock exchange  
Let me share with you some of the brief highlights of Fiji’s stock market over the past years. 
What started off as a mere trading post in 1979 at the then Suva Stock Exchange, has today 
grown to accommodate 16 of Fiji’s most successful public companies. I congratulate the few 
public  companies  who  had  pioneered  this  establishment,  and  have  decided  to  remain  on-
board despite the bull and bear cycles of the industry within the last 30 years - Fiji Sugar 
Corporation  Limited  (FSC),  Toyota  Tsusho  Company  Limited  (TTS)  and  prominent 
manufacturer, Flour Mills of Fiji Limited (FMF), to name a few.  
Although there have been ups and downs in the industry, and the economy as a whole, the 
stock market continued to provide alternative savings and investment opportunities for most 
of our citizens. Let me highlight few statistics:  
• 
In 2008, the total dividends declared and distributed to shareholders amounted to 
around $57 million; 
The  market  capitalization,  which  represents  the  total  value  of  stock  listed  on  the 
Exchange, reached a peak of $1.2 billion in 2008; 
 BIS Review 135/2009 
 1
   The number of listed companies on the Exchange has increased from 4 companies 
in 1996 to 16 in 2009; 
The average value of trades per annum has increased from about $93,000 for the 
first 5 years of the trading post to around $17.1 million1 in the past 5 years; 
Public  companies  have  managed  to  raised  around  F$113  million  using  the  Stock 
Exchange.  
Considering the general level of Fiji’s macro economic developments, these developments in 
the Stock Exchange are quite encouraging.  
Challenges in the capital markets 
Despite  these  achievements,  I  believe  that  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  in  terms  of 
developing a more vibrant capital market. Fiji is generally regarded as having a relatively well 
developed  financial  sector  among  the  Pacific  Island  countries.  Most  of  the  basic 
fundamentals are in place, upon which we can built a more vibrant capital market. However, 
the  range  of  investments  and  financing  options  available  are  very  limited.  The  potential 
benefits of further mobilizing capital markets in Fiji are significant, as you know - but so too, 
are the challenges.  
A number of challenges confront us in the development of the capital market in Fiji. Let me 
mention a few: 
1. 
Listing  of  more  public  companies  and  privatization  of  state  enterprises  to 
improve  liquidity  at  the  stock  exchange  -  I  believe  that  concerted  efforts  have 
been undertaken by both the SPSE and the CMDA over the years to identify and 
recruit  potential  issuers  of  securities  in  the  market.  However,  most  companies 
remain reluctant to tap into the opportunities in the market. We need to find out why 
companies choose to remain private, or what’s hindering them to go public and list; 
Development  of  new  financial  products  –  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  need  to 
make available more investments and financing instruments for both companies and 
potential  investors,  and  provide  financing  options  for  Government  and  municipal 
authorities; 
An  efficient  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  also  an  important  element  in 
promoting market integrity and investor confidence; 
A supportive macro-economic policy and financial environment is also critical 
for the capital market to grow as the economy grows;  
Investor education is also important to raise the level of financial literacy both in 
the capital markets and financial sector generally. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
These are enormous challenges, which need to be addressed urgently if our capital market is 
to realize its full potential. It calls for coordinated efforts by all stakeholders - the government, 
the  regulator,  and  the  market  players.  No  single  stakeholder  has  the  resources  or  the 
capacity to develop this market alone. We need one another, and we need to understand the 
roles each can play, and the contribution each can make, in the development of our market. 
                                                 
1   $17.1 million includes special crossing transactions. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2009
New regulatory arrangements 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now talk very briefly on the recent changes in capital markets 
regulatory arrangements undertaken by the Government.  
As most of you are aware that the Government on 13th August 2009, announced that the 
administration  of  the  Capital  Markets  Development  Authority  (CMDA)  Act,  was  being 
transferred to the Reserve Bank of  Fiji as part of the Government’s ongoing review of the 
Financial Services Sector in Fiji.  
This  recent  decision  by  the  Government  has  meant  that  the  whole  administration  of  the 
CMDA  and  likewise  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  Fiji’s  capital  market  will  now  be 
consolidated  under  the  ambit  of  the  RBF.  For  a  small  economy  like  ours,  it  makes  good 
practical  and  financial  sense  to  consolidate  our  supervisory  functions  and  to  approach 
supervision of the financial markets in an integrated and coherent manner. 
I  am  aware  that  some  of  you  will  view  this  move  as  a  conflict  of  interest  for  the  RBF 
especially  where  Bonds  are  concerned.  If  anything,  a  central  regulatory  entity  for  Fiji’s 
financial systems will ensure that operations and processes are done in a much coordinated 
and  orderly  fashion.  Fiji  is  not  the  first  country  in  the  world  to  introduce  such  a  unified 
regulatory  model.  Similar  practices  have  been  followed  in  other  economies  such  as  in 
Singapore,  Denmark,  Japan,  Korea  and  the  UK,  where  3-4  regulatory  organizations  were 
integrated into a single financial regulatory agency.  
The merger also bonds in well with Government’s overall public sector reform efforts to bring 
about greater efficiency and cost savings. 
I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  transition  has  been  successfully  undertaken,  and  a 
Capital  Markets  Unit  under  the  Financial  Systems  Development  and  Compliance Group  of 
the RBF has already been set up in Tower 6 of the RBF.  
Let  me  assure  you  all  that  I  have  no  intention  of  down  grading  or  removing  any  of  the 
important  functions  previously  carried  out  by  the  CMDA.  I  am  personally  aware  of  all  the 
capital market developmental work that was undertaken at the Reserve Bank back in the mid 
1990s when the Bank decided to move the Capital Market regulation and development role 
to a specialized institution - after which the CMDA was established. 
The Capital Markets Unit will continue to license and carry out all the supervisory activities 
previously  done  by  the  CMDA,  but  with  a  more  strategic  and  focused  approach.  A  list  of 
indicators  are  being  developed  which  will  measure  developments  in  the  capital  markets 
within certain time frames. These indicators are currently being drafted by the unit and you 
should expect to be contacted to comment or assist in its development.  
Let me turn to the purpose for this evening. 
Launching of the Stock Market Index 
Tonight we will witness the launching of the SPSE Total Return Index (STRI). This STRI will 
be very useful in gauging how the equities markets in Fiji are performing on a daily basis. 
The concept, I am told, is similar to the various stock market indices that you are all familiar 
with – for example, the NZSX, ASX, SING SX, etc.  
I  am  sure  that  in  developing  and  maintaining  its  own  Index,  the  SPSE  should  be  able  to 
provide great assistance to issuers and investors both at home and internationally, to monitor 
the level of market activity and make better and informed investment decisions and choices.  
Tonight, we will also be unveiling the new corporate logo for the Exchange. I have also been 
briefed that the purpose of changing the logo was to give a more professional and corporate 
look to better reflect the role of the Exchange and its progress over the thirty years. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 3
I am confident, that if provided the right policy and direction, the Fiji capital markets and the 
financial markets as a whole will be well placed to become a reputable international financial 
centre for the region in time to come.  
I hope that the Exchange will grow from strength to strength in the years ahead.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2009
