William C Dudley: A bit better, but very far from best – US economic 
outlook and the challenges facing the Federal Reserve 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Fordham  Corporate  Law  Center  Lecture,  New  York,  5 
October 2009. 
 Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to 
discuss the economic outlook and the challenges that face the Federal Reserve in terms of 
monetary policy going forward. As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions 
and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. 
My  assessment  of  where  things  stand  today  is  mixed.  On  the  positive  side,  the  financial 
markets are performing better and the economy is now recovering. In fact, the improvement 
in  financial  conditions  has  caused  usage  of  the  Fed’s  special  liquidity  facilities  to  fall 
considerably.  Consistent  with  their  design,  these  facilities  have  become  relatively  less 
attractive as market conditions have improved. Also, the Federal Reserve has begun to taper 
its  rate  of  asset  purchases.  The  Treasury  purchase  program  will  end  this  month  and  the 
agency MBS purchase program by the end of the first quarter of 2010. 
On the negative side, the unemployment rate is much too high and it seems likely that the 
recovery  will  be  less  robust  than  desired.  This  means  that  the  economy  has  significant 
excess slack and implies that we face meaningful downside risks to inflation over the next 
year or two. Also, there are those who express anxiety about whether the Fed has the tools 
and the will to raise the federal funds rate when the time is appropriate. I want to assure you 
that the Fed has the tools to tighten monetary policy regardless the size of its balance sheet. 
Moreover, we have the will to do so in order to keep inflation in check.  
Turning first to the developments in financial markets, there is little doubt that we have seen 
a vast improvement over the past six months. The major equity indices have risen sharply, 
credit  spreads  have  narrowed  and  bank  equity  prices  have  generally  shown  a  substantial 
recovery. Many large financial and nonfinancial firms have found it relatively easy again to 
tap the debt and equity markets.  
The recovery in financial asset prices has been mirrored – albeit with a lag – in the economy. 
Industrial production has begun to rebound as the pace of inventory liquidation has slowed. 
Housing  prices  and  activity  have  recovered  somewhat  –  aided  by  the  improvement  in 
housing  affordability  and  the  first-time  homebuyer  tax  credit.  Fiscal  stimulus  is  providing 
support to consumption and to state and local infrastructure spending. 
The vicious cycle we had a year ago – in which the deterioration in financial markets led to 
economic weakness and that weakness reinforced the tightening of financial conditions – has 
been broken. In fact, to some extent, it has been replaced with a virtuous cycle. As financial 
markets  have  recovered,  that  has  led  to  an  improvement  in  business  and  consumer 
sentiment that, in turn, has helped to lift the economy, spurring further gains in financial asset 
prices.  
In  the  same  way  that  the  improvement  in  market  conditions  is  helping  to  support  a 
sustainable economic recovery, the fact that the recovery in economic activity is a world-wide 
phenomenon  helps  mitigate  the  risk  of  a  so-called  “double-dip.”  The  recovery  in  foreign 
demand should help to support the U.S. economy even if U.S. domestic demand grows more 
slowly  than  anticipated.  Given  these  developments,  the  consensus  forecast  of  about  3 
percent annualized real GDP growth in the second half of the year appears reasonable. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 1
However, I also suspect that the recovery will turn out to be moderate by historical standards. 
This is a disappointing outcome in that growth will likely not be strong enough to bring the 
unemployment rate – currently 9.8 percent – down quickly.  
I see three major forces restraining the pace of this recovery. First, households are unlikely 
to have fully adjusted to the net wealth shock that has been generated by the housing price 
decline  and  the  weakness  in  share  prices.  Peak  to  trough,  home  prices  nationwide  have 
declined by 11.5 percent measured by the FHFA (Federal Housing Finance Agency) index 
and by 32 percent according to the 20-city Case-Shiller index. With respect to stock prices, 
the  S&P  500  index  has  recovered  by  more  than  50  percent  from  the  trough  reached  in 
March. But this should be put in context. The S&P 500 index is still about one-third below its 
recent peak in October 2007. Moreover, compared with its level ten years ago, the S&P 500 
index is down by about 20 percent.  
The  shock  to  household  net  worth  seems  likely  to  have  several  important  implications  for 
household behavior. The shock creates a risk that the household saving rate could increase 
further.  For  example,  during  the  period  from  1990  to  1992,  the  household  saving  rate 
averaged about 7 percent of disposable personal income, considerably higher than the 4.3 
percent average rate during the first half of this year. If the household saving rate were to 
rise, then consumption would rise more slowly than income, making it more difficult for the 
economy  to  develop  strong  forward  momentum.  In  addition,  it  seems  likely  that  some 
workers will respond to the wealth shock by postponing their retirement. This suggests that 
the labor force participation rate may rise once labor market conditions improve. This would 
tend to push up the unemployment rate, all else being equal.  
The second force that could restrain the recovery is the fiscal outlook. The fiscal stimulus that 
is currently providing support to economic activity is temporary rather than permanent. This 
has to be the case if we are to ensure that fiscal policy is on a sustainable path over the long-
run. This means that the positive impulse from fiscal stimulus will abate over the next year.  
The  third,  and  perhaps most  important  factor,  is  that  the  banking  system  has  still  not  fully 
recovered.  Bank  credit  losses  lag  the  business  cycle  and  are  still  climbing.  Thus,  while 
banks’ access to the capital markets has sharply improved, banks are still capital constrained 
and hesitant to expand their lending. Most importantly, some significant classes of borrowers 
– namely commercial real estate and small business – are almost wholly dependent on the 
banking sector for funds, and those funds are not easily forthcoming.  
The commercial real estate sector is under particular pressure because the fundamentals of 
the sector have deteriorated sharply and because the sector is highly dependent upon bank 
lending. In terms of the fundamentals, there are two problems. First, the capitalization rate – 
the ratio of income to valuation – has climbed sharply. At the peak, capitalization rates for 
prime properties were in the range of 5 percent. That means that investors were willing to 
pay $20 for a $1 of income. Today, the capitalization rate appears to have risen to about 8 
percent. That means that the same dollar of income is now capitalized as worth only $12.50. 
In other words, if income were stable, the value of the properties would have fallen by 37.5 
percent. Second, the income generated by commercial real estate has generally been falling. 
For example, as the recession has pushed up the unemployment rate, the demand for office 
building space has declined; as the recession has led to a reduction in discretionary travel, 
hotel occupancy rates and room prices have declined; and as retail sales have weakened, 
this has reduced the demand for prime retail property space.  
The decline in commercial real estate valuations has created a significant amount of “rollover 
risk” when commercial real estate loans and mortgages mature and need to be refinanced. 
The  slump  in  valuations  pushes  up  loan-to-value  ratios.  This  makes  lenders  wary  about 
extending  new  credit,  even  in  the  case  when  these  loans  are  performing  on  a  cash  flow 
basis. This means that more pain likely lies ahead for this sector and for those banks with 
heavy commercial real estate exposures.  
2 
 BIS Review 122/2009
For  small  business  borrowers,  there  are  three  problems.  First,  the  fundamentals  of  their 
businesses  have  often  deteriorated  because  of  the  length  and  severity  of  the  recession  – 
making  many  less  creditworthy.  Second,  some  sources  of  funding  for  small  businesses  – 
credit card borrowing and home equity loans – have dried up as banks have responded to 
rising  credit  losses  in  these  areas  by  tightening  credit  standards.  Third,  small  businesses 
have few alternative sources of funds. They are too small to borrow in the capital markets 
and  the  Small  Business  Administration  programs  are  not  large  enough  to  accommodate 
more than a small fraction of the demand from this sector.  
All  of  these  factors  will  tend  to  inhibit  the  pace  of  the  economic  recovery.  Given  that  the 
recovery is starting with an abnormally large amount of slack, and the pace of recovery is not 
likely to be robust, this means the economy is likely to have significant excess resources for 
some time to come. As a result, the balance of risks to inflation lies on the downside, not the 
upside, at least for the next year or two.  
To see why this is the case, it is useful to note that inflation dynamics are mainly driven by 
two factors – the degree of capital and labor resource utilization relative to sustainable levels, 
and long-run inflation expectations. The degree of resource utilization is essentially driven by 
the  business  cycle  and,  and  to  some  extent,  by  the  Fed’s  success  in  achieving  the 
“maximum sustainable growth” component of its dual mandate. Inflation expectations, on the 
other hand, are driven by a combination of actual inflation outcomes and the credibility of the 
central bank’s commitment to price stability. If inflation is low and the central bank is credible, 
then long-run inflation expectations are likely to remain well anchored.  
In practice, the relationship between the inflation rate and the level of resource utilization is 
very difficult to estimate accurately. This stems, in part, from the fact that the data on inflation 
and resource utilization are “noisy” and because sustainable levels of resource utilization are 
not  directly  unobservable.  The  fact  is  that  there  is  often  not  much  resource  slack  in  the 
economy also makes it hard to discern a clear empirical relationship.  
Unfortunately,  in  this  episode,  we  don't  need  a  precise  estimate  of  slack  to  be  highly 
confident that the level of slack in the labor market is at or above the record of the post-World 
War  II  period.  Although  the  headline  unemployment  rate  of  9.8  percent  is  about  one 
percentage point below its level at the end of the 1981-82 recession, other, more indicative 
measures paint a bleaker picture. For example, the prime age male unemployment rate is at 
a record high, by a significant margin. The labor market data released last Friday showed the 
September value at 10.4 percent, an increase of 6.5 percentage points from the start of the 
recession.  In  contrast,  in  the  1981-82  recession  the  prime  age  male  unemployment  rate 
peaked at 9.3 percent, rising by 4.2 percentage points from the start of that recession.  
Over the post-World War II period as a whole, it was only in the wake of the 1981-82 and 
1990-91 recessions that the prime age male unemployment rate remained above 6 percent 
for more than just a few months. In addition, during all post-war expansions, the prime age 
male  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  below  5  percent,  even  during  the  short  expansion  of 
1980-81.  Currently,  even  under  very  optimistic  forecasts  for  the  economy,  it  appears  very 
unlikely that the prime age male unemployment rate will dip below 6 percent before 2011. 
Alongside  the  current  unusually  high  degree  of  labor  market  slack,  we  have  a  situation  in 
which  core  inflation  levels  are  low  by  historical  standards. Continuing  the  comparison  with 
the  recession  of  1981-82,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  core  inflation  rate  today  is  almost  5 
percentage  points  lower  than  it  was  toward  the  end  of  that  episode.  In  addition,  historical 
experience shows that the slack generated during a recession typically pushes core inflation 
lower in the early stages of recovery. So far, this cycle looks little different. As the degree of 
slack in the economy has climbed over the past year, measures of core inflation, particularly 
of core services inflation, have moderated. The tendency for service price movements to be 
persistent,  coupled  with  the  current  unusually  large  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy, 
suggests that the core inflation rate is more likely to fall than it is to rise over the next 12 to 
18 months.  
BIS Review 122/2009 
 3
In  summary,  I  believe  the  current  balance  of  risks  around  the  inflation  outlook  lie  to  the 
downside due to the very low level of resource utilization and the fact that long-run inflation 
expectations remain stable. This balance of risks is problematic because the current level of 
inflation is already so low – the core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) deflator has 
increased  only  1.3  percent  over  the  past  12  months.  Thus,  we  would not  need  much  of a 
decline in inflation to run the risk of an outright deflation. Outright deflation, in turn, would be 
a  dangerous  development  because  it  would  drive  up  real debt  burdens  and  make  it  much 
more difficult for households and businesses to deleverage.  
So what are the implications of all this for monetary policy? 
The first implication is that the federal funds rate target is likely to remain exceptionally low 
for “an extended period.” The desired policy outcome is a robust recovery in the context of 
price stability.  
The second implication is that the Federal Reserve needs to ensure that market participants 
and the public understand that the FOMC has the tools to exit smoothly from the very low 
federal funds rate, and that it stands ready to do so when the time comes. On this point, let 
me be perfectly clear: An enlarged balance sheet and the high level of excess reserves in the 
banking system will not delay or prevent a timely exit.  
The angst about the Fed’s ability to exit smoothly stems from the rapid growth of its balance 
sheet over the past year. In September 2008, on the eve of Lehman Brothers’ failure, the 
consolidated Federal Reserve balance sheet was about $900 billion. Today it is about $2.15 
trillion, and it is likely to peak at around $2.5 trillion early next year.  
Some  observers  are  concerned  that  this  expansion  will  ultimately  prove  to  be  inflationary. 
Proponents  of  this  view  say  that  the  monetary  base,  the  broad  monetary  aggregates,  and 
total credit outstanding have historically tended to move together with inflation, at least over 
longer time periods. Thus, if the monetary base is growing rapidly, as it has been over the 
past year with the growth in the Fed’s balance sheet, the argument is that this growth will 
ultimately lead to inflation.  
This  concern  is  not  well  founded  because  the Federal  Reserve  now  has  the  ability  to  pay 
interest on excess reserves (IOER), and this tool allows us to prevent excess reserves from 
leading to excessive credit creation. It works as follows. Because the Federal Reserve is the 
safest of counterparties, the IOER rate effectively becomes the risk-free rate. By raising that 
rate, the Federal Reserve raises the cost of credit because banks will not lend at rates below 
the  IOER  when  they  can  instead  hold  these  excess  reserves  on  deposit  with  the  Fed. 
Because banks no longer seek to lend out their excess reserves, there is no increase in the 
amount  of  credit  outstanding,  no  increase  in  economic  activity  and  no  risk  that  excessive 
credit creation will fuel an inflationary spiral.  
In  the  event  that  the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  excess  reserves  for  any  reason  proved 
insufficient  or  the  excess  reserves  themselves  had  unanticipated  side  effects  that  the  Fed 
wished to mitigate, we are developing a number of tools that can be used to drain reserves. 
Two such tools are large reverse repos with dealers and other investors and term deposit 
facilities for banks.  
Finally, the Federal Reserve could always drain reserves the old-fashioned way, by selling 
assets. The vast bulk of the Fed’s portfolio is highly liquid – currently we hold $769 billion of 
Treasury securities, $692 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, and $131 billion of 
agency debt against about $900 billion of excess reserves. All the excess reserves could be 
mopped up by asset sales alone if that proved necessary.  
The Federal Reserve has been very aggressive in responding to the financial crisis. We have 
rolled  out  numerous  new  liquidity  facilities  and  have  engaged  in  lending  activity  under 
Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act for the first time since the Great Depression. These 
actions have been successful in mitigating the risks of financial collapse and a more severe 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2009
contraction in economic activity. The financial system is now healthier and the economy is 
recovering.  
But despite these successes, we need to be clear that what has happened to our financial 
system  and  the  economy  is  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and  that  a  broad  range  of  regulatory 
policies and practices need to be recalibrated to address the shortcomings of our financial 
system. With inflation low and long-run inflation expectations stable, and our ability to remove 
monetary accommodation in a timely manner intact, our near-term focus should be to keep 
significant monetary accommodation in place for an extended period in order to achieve our 
dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be very happy to take a few questions. 
 
 BIS Review 122/2009 
 5
