Donald L Kohn: Monetary policy research and the financial crisis – 
strengths and shortcomings 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Conference  on  Key  Developments  in  Monetary 
Policy, Washington DC, 9 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 The first two volumes of the Handbook of Monetary Economics were published in 1990.1 It is 
fitting that the Federal Reserve Board should hold a conference showcasing the chapters of 
the  third  volume  of  the  Handbook.  Since  1990,  there  has  been  a  sharp  increase  in  the 
degree of interaction between academic economists and central bank economists in the field 
of monetary analysis. The beginnings of this trend were evident in the author list of volume 
one  of  the  Handbook,  which  featured  two  chapters  coauthored  by  economists  Athanasios 
Orphanides  and  Daniel  Sichel,  who  went  on  to  have  long  careers  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board.2  It  is  reflected  today  in  the  planned  contents  for  volume  three,  which  feature 
additional collaborations between central bank and academic economists.  
The interaction between researchers at academic and policy institutions is also reflected in 
the  enormous  amount  of  scholarly  research  on  monetary  policy  that  is  relevant  for 
policymakers. That subject is the focus of my talk today. I will organize my remarks around 
the  following  two  questions:  First,  what  aspects  of  the  existing  literature  in  monetary 
economics have been particularly helpful in formulating the course of monetary policy since 
the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis?  Second,  what  are  the  gaps  in  this  literature  that  have 
become particularly evident since the onset of the financial crisis and, therefore, would be 
fruitful directions for further research that could contribute to the effective design and conduct 
of  monetary  policy?  Each  of  these  questions  is  quite  broad,  so  I  will  be  selective  and 
highlight only a few of the most important research issues.3
In  many  respects,  central  banks,  including  the  Federal  Reserve,  have  drawn  heavily  on 
important threads of monetary policy research in responding to the financial crisis over the 
past two years. For example, many of our efforts have involved the provision of liquidity to 
financial markets and classes of institutions facing funding pressures – a key prescription for 
central banks as far back as the classic writings of Thornton and especially Bagehot, whose 
message  was  that  to  avert  panics,  central  banks  should  lend  early  and  freely  to  solvent 
institutions, against good collateral and at high rates.4  
                                                 
1   See Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank H. Hahn, eds. (1990), Handbook of Monetary Economics, vols. 1 and 2 
(Amsterdam: North-Holland/Elsevier). 
2   See  Athanasios  Orphanides  and  Robert  M.  Solow  (1990),  "Money,  Inflation  and  Growth,"  in  Benjamin  M. 
Friedman  and  Frank  H.  Hahn,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  vol.  1  (Amsterdam:  North-
Holland/Elsevier),  pp.  223-61;  and  Stephen  M.  Goldfeld  and  Daniel  E.  Sichel  (1990),  "The  Demand  for 
Money," in Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 1, pp. 299-356. 
3   The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors 
of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  or  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  Michael  Kiley,  Jesper  Lindé,  and 
Edward Nelson of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks. 
4   See Henry Thornton ([1802] 1962), An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain 
(New  York:  A.  M.  Kelley);  and  Walter  Bagehot  ([1873]  1897),  Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the  Money 
Market (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons). Brian Madigan discusses in detail the Federal Reserve's policy 
actions  during  the  financial  crisis  and  relates  them  to  the  ideas  of  Bagehot;  see  Brian  F.  Madigan  (2009), 
"Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," speech 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 1
Although  flight  to  liquidity  and  safety  may  be  rational  behavior  on  the  part  of  an  individual 
market participant when uncertainty runs high, there is a danger that, left unchecked, such 
behavior can spiral into a damaging loss of confidence in solvent firms and in the financial 
system as a whole. In these circumstances, central banks are in a good position to provide 
liquidity to solvent firms without taking much, if any, risk.  
By lending freely, the central bank can accommodate spikes in demand for liquidity, avert fire 
sales of assets that weaken other firms' net worth positions, and facilitate continued lending 
by  financial  institutions.  By  lending  only  to  solvent  firms  with  sufficient  collateral  and  at  a 
penalty  rate,  the  central  bank  mitigates  the  moral  hazard  problem  and  other  distortionary 
effects of its provision of assistance. To be sure, these important central banking principles 
have  needed  to  be  interpreted  and  applied  in  the  real  world,  where  the  line  between 
insolvency and illiquidity may be blurry. But the extraordinary actions taken so far during the 
financial crisis by the Federal Reserve and other central banks have closely adhered to these 
basic principles of central banking. 
Another body of research that I believe has been valuable for the formulation of monetary 
policy over the past couple of years is the work that has examined the implications of the 
zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  The  zero  lower  bound  challenged  monetary 
policy in Japan during the late 1990s, triggering a large volume of research. One of the main 
insights from this literature is that even when policy rates already stand at a relatively low 
level,  central  banks  should  cut  rates  aggressively 
face  of  large  contractionary 
disturbances.5  This  insight  influenced  the  historically  large  cuts  in  the  federal  funds  rate 
during 2008. 
One  prerequisite  for  this  type  of  aggressive  policy  response  is  a  credible  commitment  to 
long-term price stability – an important implication of both standard models and experience. 
The public's understanding of the central bank's commitment to price stability helps to anchor 
inflation  expectations, thereby  contributing  to  stability  in  both  prices  and  economic  activity. 
The Federal Reserve has acted to enhance that understanding in the current environment by 
lengthening  the  horizon  of  the  economic  projections  of  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC)  participants  and  by  providing  additional  information  about  their  objectives  for 
inflation. The stability of long-run inflation expectations during the current crisis has facilitated 
the policy response and should contribute to the recovery.6
Our efforts to inform the public better about our expectations for inflation illustrate another 
strand of research that has informed recent policy actions. This research has focused on the 
in 
                                                                                                                                                      
delivered at "Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 20-22.  
  Research  that  is  more  recent  than  that  of  Thornton  and  Bagehot  has  also  provided  formal  support  for  the 
existence  of  financial  panics  and  thereby  support  for  the  ideas  of  Bagehot.  See,  for  example,  Douglas  W. 
Diamond  and  Philip  H.  Dybvig  (1983),  "Bank  Runs,  Deposit  Insurance,  and  Liquidity,"  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, vol. 91 (3), pp. 401-19. 
5   See,  for  instance,  the  analysis  in  Jeffrey  C.  Fuhrer  and  Brian  F.  Madigan  (1997),  "Monetary  Policy  When 
Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 79 (4), 573-85; and the work by 
David Reifschneider and John C. Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (4, pt. 2), pp. 936-66. For interesting analysis on the Japanese 
experience,  see  Alan  Ahearne,  Joseph  Gagnon,  Jane  Haltmaier,  and  Steven  Kamin  (2002),  "Preventing 
Deflation:  Lessons  from  Japan's  Experience  in  the  1990s,"  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers  729 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June). 
6   For  instance,  10-year  inflation  expectations,  as  measured  by  the  survey  of  professional  forecasters,  have 
remained  nearly  constant  during  this  period.  There  is  also  evidence  that  inflation  expectations  at  shorter 
horizons  are  better  anchored  today  relative  to  a  couple  of  decades  ago.  See,  for  example,  Refet  S. 
Gürkaynak, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005), "The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates to Economic 
News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models," The American Economic Review, vol. 95 (1), 
pp. 425-36. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2009
central  role  of  communication  in  guiding  private-sector  expectations  in  a  manner  that 
contributes  to  stability  in  economic  activity  and  inflation.  Effective  communication  not  only 
about  inflation  but  also  about  the  possible  path  of  the  policy  rate  may  be  particularly 
important  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  when  the  scope  to  influence  expectations  through 
changes  in  the  policy  rate  is  obviously  limited.7  And,  in  a  historically  unusual  period,  the 
economic  developments  motivating  central  bank  actions  may  be  more  difficult  to  interpret 
and  predict  than  in  typical  periods,  making  such  communication  especially  important.8 
Notably, in FOMC statements since our policy interest rate was lowered to about zero, the 
Committee has provided some guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate. 
To be sure, we have not followed the theoretical prescription of promising to keep rates low 
enough for long enough to create a period of above-normal inflation. The arguments in favor 
of such a policy hinge on a clear understanding on the part of the public that the central bank 
will tolerate increased inflation only temporarily – say, for a few years once the economy has 
recovered  –  before  returning  to  the  original  inflation  target  in  the  long  term.  In  standard 
theoretical  model  environments,  long-run  inflation  expectations  are  perfectly  anchored.  In 
reality, however, the anchoring of inflation expectations has been a hard-won achievement of 
monetary policy over the past few decades, and we should not take this stability for granted. 
Models are by their nature only a stylized representation of reality, and a policy of achieving 
"temporarily"  higher  inflation  over  the  medium  term  would  run  the  risk  of  altering  inflation 
expectations beyond the horizon that is desirable. Were that to happen, the costs of bringing 
expectations back to their current anchored state might be quite high. 
A final strand of literature has contributed to our policy strategy over the past two years by 
emphasizing  the  role  of  credit  and  financial  intermediation  for  macroeconomic  fluctuations 
and monetary policy transmission, particularly the literature that developed during the 1980s 
on  nonprice  aspects  of  credit  restriction  and  the  importance  of  such  factors  in  severe 
economic downturns.9 From the onset of this financial crisis, we were especially alert to the 
possibility that limits on the availability of credit to financial intermediaries and in the flow of 
credit between intermediaries and the household and business sectors could exert unusual 
constraints on spending.  
It  is  fair  to  say,  however,  that  the  core  macroeconomic  modeling  framework  used  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  around  the  world  has  included,  at  best,  only  a 
limited  role  for  the  balance  sheets  of  households  and  firms,  credit  provision,  and  financial 
intermediation.  The  features  suggested  by  the  literature  on  the  role  of  credit  in  the 
transmission of policy have not yet become prominent ingredients in models used at central 
banks  or  in  much  academic  research.10  For  example,  the  standard  framework  used  in 
                                                 
7   Research  that  discusses  the  role  of  communication  at  the  zero  lower  bound  includes  Taehun  Jung,  Yuki 
Teranishi,  and  Tsutomu  Watanabe  (2005),  "Optimal  Monetary  Policy  at  the  Zero-Interest-Rate  Bound," 
Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  vol.  37  (5),  pp.  813-35;  Klaus  Adam  and  Robero  M.  Billi  (2006), 
"Optimal  Monetary  Policy  under  Commitment  with  a  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal  Interest  Rates,"  Journal  of 
Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  vol.  38  (7),  pp.  1877-1905;  and  Gauti  B.  Eggertsson  and  Michael  Woodford 
(2003),  "The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and  Optimal  Monetary  Policy,"  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, vol. 2003 (1), pp. 139-211. 
8   See,  for  instance,  the  discussion  and  references  in  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  (2006),  "Social  Value  of  Public 
Information: Comment: Morris and Shin (2002) Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con," American Economic 
Review, vol. 96 (1), pp. 448-52. 
9   See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (1983), "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of 
the  Great  Depression,"  The  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  73  (3),  pp.  257-76;  and  Dwight  Jaffee  and 
Joseph Stiglitz (1990), "Credit Rationing," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank H. Hahn, eds., Handbook of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 2 (Amsterdam: North-Holland/Elsevier), pp. 837-88. 
10   This  circumstance  was  clear  even  in  1990  when,  in  considering  the  view  of  the  transmission  mechanism 
emerging from monetary policy analysis, I expressed concern that "all the adjustment was propelled through 
movements  along  the  price  axis  –  a  doubtful  proposition  even  for  the  United  States."  See  Donald  L.  Kohn 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 3
dynamic general equilibrium models, with its simplifying emphasis on a single representative 
agent, does not lend itself to analysis of financial intermediation.11
A large volume of work has emphasized the potential importance of intermediation channels 
given  asymmetric  information  between  borrowers  and  lenders.12  But  the  importance  of 
considering  intermediation  channels  in  the  aggregate,  as  opposed  to  taking  them  into 
account for some firms at some times, has remained difficult to quantify.13  
Moreover,  that  work  has  tended  to  concentrate  on  the  intersection  between  intermediaries 
and nonfinancial borrowers. A characteristic of the recent crisis, however, was the critical role 
of  interactions  within  the  financial  sector.  Although  rising  defaults  on  subprime  mortgages 
caused the initial turbulence in financial markets, roadblocks to the flow of credit within the 
financial sector from heightened uncertainty, increases in the asymmetry of information, and 
questions  about  the  alignment  of  incentives  helped  turn  a  conventional  credit  event  into  a 
full-blown  crisis.  Recent  research  has  begun  to  augment  core  monetary  models  with 
heterogeneous agents, multiple interest rates, and risky lending, but even so, it has become 
obvious that research on the importance of intermediation and supply constraints on credit 
provision and thus on spending has lagged significantly.14 An encouraging sign in this regard 
is  the  large  number  of  recent  studies  that  add  the  banking  sector  and  credit  creation  to 
standard  monetary  policy  models.15  Some  of  these  studies  emphasize  bank  capital  as  a 
constraint  on  financial  intermediation,  while  other  studies  allow  for  heterogeneity  among 
banks and thereby interbank borrowing and lending.16 Future research is likely to feature a 
                                                                                                                                                      
(1990),  "Making  Monetary  Policy:  Adjusting  Policy  to  Achieve  Final  Objectives,"  in  W.E.  Norton  and  Peter 
Stebbing, eds., Monetary Policy and Market Operations (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia), pp.11-26. 
11   See,  for  example,  the  models  analyzed  in  Michael  Woodford  (2003),  Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a 
Theory  of  Monetary  Policy  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press);  and  the  model  advanced  in  the 
influential  work  of  Lawrence  J.  Christiano,  Martin  Eichenbaum,  and  Charles  L.  Evans  (2005),  "Nominal 
Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113 (1), 
pp. 1-45. 
12   See, for instance, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore (1997), "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 
vol.  105  (2),  pp.  211-48;  and  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  Mark  Gertler,  and  Simon  Gilchrist  (1999),  "The  Financial 
Accelerator  in  a  Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework,"  in  John  B.  Taylor  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds., 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1 (Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland/Elsevier), pp. 1341-93. 
13   For  an  example  of  the  difficulties  of  quantifying  such  channels  in  a  macroeconomic  framework,  see  the 
discussion  of  the  large-scale  macroeconomic  models  used  by  the  Federal  Reserve  for  the  past  several 
decades  in  Eileen  Mauskopf  (1990),  "The  Transmission  Channels  of  Monetary  Policy:  How  Have  They 
Changed?" Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 76 (12), pp.985-1008; and David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow, and 
John  C.  Williams  (1999),  "Aggregate  Disturbances,  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Macroeconomy:  The  FRB/US 
Perspective," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 85 (1), pp. 1-19. 
14   See,  for  example,  Vasco  Cúrdia  and  Michael  Woodford  (2009),  "Credit  Frictions  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy," manuscript, Columbia University, May. 
15   See,  for  example,  Marvin  Goodfriend  and  Bennett  T.  McCallum  (2007),  "Banking  and  Interest  Rates  in 
Monetary Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (5), pp.1480-
1507;  Matthew  Canzoneri,  Robert  Cumby,  Behzad  Diba,  and  J.  David  López-Salido  (2008),  "Monetary 
Aggregates and Liquidity in a Neo-Wicksellian Framework," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 40 (8), 
pp. 1667-98; and Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2009), "Financial Factors in 
Economic Fluctuations," paper presented at "Financial Markets and Monetary Policy," a conference sponsored 
by the Federal Reserve Board and the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Washington, June 4-5. 
16   For examples of studies that emphasize bank capital as a constraint on financial intermediation, see Césaire 
A. Meh and Kevin Moran (2008), "The Role of Bank Capital in the Propagation of Shocks ," Bank of Canada 
Working Paper 2008-36 (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Bank of Canada, October); and Mark Gertler and Peter 
Karadi (2009), "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy," manuscript, New York University, June. 
For an example of a study that allows for heterogeneity among banks and thereby interbank borrowing and 
lending,  see  Gregory  de  Walque,  Olivier  Pierrard,  and  Abdelaziz  Rouabah  (2009),  "Financial  (In)stability, 
Supervision  and  Liquidity  Injections:  A  Dynamic  General  Equilibrium  Approach,"  CEPR  Discussion  Paper 
DP7202 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, March). 
 4 
 BIS Review 124/2009
proliferation  of  macroeconomic  models  that  flesh  out  the  interconnections  between  risks, 
liquidity, and capital in the financial system and their implications for the real economy.  
Research  on  the  credit  channel  and  developments  within  the  financial  sector  should  be 
paired with work on asset prices and their role in the transmission of economic shocks and 
monetary  policy.  In  neoclassical  models,  asset  prices  affect  spending  and  investment 
decisions  through  substitution  and  wealth  effects.  But  these  channels  fail  to  capture  the 
multiplicity  of  interactions  among  asset  prices,  credit,  and  real  activity  that  became  so 
important in the current crisis, and in particular, how fluctuations in asset prices can affect the 
availability and terms of credit to different types of borrowers. This failure to capture all of the 
elements in play is most apparent by looking back at the course of house prices and their 
effect on the financial system and economic activity. It is now clear that house prices in the 
United States became overvalued over some period leading up to 2006. The rise in house 
prices  contributed  to  an  increase  in  credit  availability,  and  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  by 
affecting  financial  intermediaries  as  well  as  households,  had  larger  adverse  effects  than 
anticipated. Lower house prices caused the prices of mortgage-related securities to decline, 
which  weakened  the  balance  sheets  of  a  broad  array  of  financial  institutions.  Financial 
institutions' need to rebuild their capital positions led them to adopt more-restrictive lending 
practices. The restriction on credit supply in turn put downward pressure on asset prices on 
economic  activity,  further  damaging  banks'  asset  values  and  setting  off  another  round  of 
credit  restriction.  The  various  mechanisms  that  have  tended  to  amplify  asset  price 
movements and the feedback among those movements, credit supply, and economic activity 
were not well captured by the models used at most central banks.17  
Our  limited  knowledge  of  the  determinants  of  asset  prices  and  their  effects  on  credit  has 
made it more challenging to respond to the crisis and explain our actions to the public. We 
have  had  to  relax  our  standard  assumptions  that  financial  assets  are  highly  substitutable, 
and  that  their  rates  of  return  can  be  readily  arbitraged.  For  example,  the  degree  to  which 
assets of different types and maturities are imperfect substitutes is central to understanding 
the large-scale asset purchase, or LSAP, program of the Federal Reserve. Our purchases of 
longer-term  Treasury,  agency,  and  agency-guaranteed  mortgage-backed  securities  were 
undertaken to support aggregate demand. These actions were designed to lower mortgage 
and  other  interest  rates  by  exerting  downward  pressure  on  yields  on  assets  that  are  only 
imperfectly substitutable for very short-term assets, and whose substitutability for those very 
short-term  assets  likely  has  decreased  in  the  crisis  period.  In  addition,  discussions  of  the 
effects  of  the  buildup  in  reserves  at  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  often 
emphasize the imperfect substitutability of reserves for other bank assets, even when those 
reserves  are  remunerated  at  something  like  a  market  interest  rate.  More  generally,  while 
most of the literature on the effects of monetary policy assumes that the federal funds rate is 
the single relevant tool for monetary policy, the financial crisis has shown that a wide array of 
policy  measures,  acting  on  the  prices  of  different  assets,  may  be  needed  in  extreme 
circumstances. The research literature that could help gauge the potential impact of these 
measures – and the exit from them – is disappointingly sparse. 
A better understanding of asset prices, the credit channel, and their interaction also would 
seem to be critical for successfully carrying out some of the tasks central banks and other 
authorities  are  being  urged  to  take  on  in  the  future.  Discussions  of  macroprudential 
regulation of financial institutions have noted the tendency for financial crises to be preceded 
by  bubbles  spurred  by  financial  liberalization  or  innovations,  and  how  the  most  pernicious 
crises have been associated with disruptions to credit provision that resulted from excessive 
                                                 
17   See  Frederic  S.  Mishkin  (2008),  "Monetary  Policy  Flexibility,  Risk  Management,  and  Financial  Disruptions," 
speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 5
leverage.18 And increasingly, central banks are being encouraged to "lean against the wind" 
in  the  face  of  asset  price  bubbles.  As  researchers,  we  need  to  be  honest  about  our  very 
limited ability to assess the "fundamental value" of an asset or to predict its price. But the 
housing  and  credit  bubbles  have  had  a  substantial  cost  –  and  the  final  bill  is  not  yet  in. 
Research on asset prices, credit, and intermediation should help to identify risks and inform 
decisions about the costs and benefits from a possible regulatory or monetary policy decision 
attempting to deal with a potential asset price bubble.  
The  research  agenda  growing  out  of  this  crisis  is  formidable  and  difficult  –  and  I  have 
covered only a portion of it. For example, I have not touched on the need for models to take 
much better account of nonlinearities and tail events, which played such a prominent role in 
the rapid deterioration of the global economy last year. The new agenda will require letting 
go of a number of the simplifications and assumptions that have made our models tractable 
and delving into literatures related to – but not necessarily considered traditional – monetary 
economics. But the developments of the past two years have highlighted both the strengths 
and weaknesses of the previous research agenda. Policymakers will be making judgments 
based on what we think we have learned in that time. We need your work to organize our 
thoughts and guide our judgments about the lessons from this experience. The Handbook of 
Monetary Economics has played a critical role in this regard in the past, and I am confident 
that it will continue to do so in the future.  
                                                 
18   For a recent discussion of the history of financial crises and their relationship to the evolution of the financial 
system and leverage, see Michael D. Bordo (2008), "An Historical Perspective on the Crisis of 2007-2008," 
NBER Working Paper Series 14569 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December). 
A discussion of such issues and their implications for macroprudential regulation can be found, for example, in 
Markus Brunnermeier, Andrew Crockett, Charles Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin (2009), "The 
Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation," preliminary conference draft, Geneva Reports on the World 
Economy (Geneva, Switzerland: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, January). (Note: This 
paper is a preliminary version of a forthcoming report in the Geneva Reports on the World Economy series; 
the paper was prepared for presentation at a conference in Geneva on January 24, 2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2009
