Jeanette R Semeleer: To dollarize or not to dollarize – the Central Bank 
of Aruba’s point of view  
Speech  by  Ms  Jeanette  R  Semeleer,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Aruba,  at  the 
conference “Opportunities and Risks of Dollarization for the Dutch Caribbean”, organized by 
the Minister of Finance of the Netherlands Antilles, Curaçao, at the Bank of the Netherlands 
Antilles, Willemstad, 24 August 2009.  
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning!  
 Introduction  
1.  
I am truly honored to have been invited to speak to such a distinguished audience on a topic 
that  touches  everyone’s  wallet,  and  that  is  dollarization.  With  dollarization  in  this  context  I 
refer to as the use of the US dollar as the exclusive legal tender in a country.  
I must admit that at the Centrale Bank van Aruba (CBA), although we have regular bilateral 
meetings, we have been quite surprised with the recent consideration of the BNA to replace 
the  Netherlands  Antillean  guilder  for  the  US  dollar  as  the  legal  tender  for  the  island  of 
Curaçao on a very short term.  
In view of the far-reaching consequences of such a change, possibly for Aruba too, I highly 
applaud Mrs. De Lanooy’s initiative to organize a forum of experts, which could enlighten us 
further on a rather complicated issue. At the end, it is of crucial importance that the required 
political  decision  is  based  on  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  opportunities  and  risks 
associated with dollarization.  
In  the  next  few  minutes  I  will  first  clarify  my  view  regarding  dollarization  in  general  and, 
subsequently,  I  will  briefly  focus  on  the  special  case  of  small-island  economies  like  Aruba 
and the Netherlands Antilles.  
Dollarized countries  
2.  
Countries that have dollarized their economy can broadly be divided into two categories. The 
first group consists of countries, which are generally small and have strong political and/or 
economic ties with the country that issues the currency they use.  
Various island states in the Caribbean (Virgin Islands) and in the Pacific (Guam, Micronesia) 
belong to this group, which are in economic size comparable with Aruba, Curaçao and St. 
Maarten.  
Other examples include the mini states in Europe like Andorra and Monaco, which use the 
euro  as  legal  tender.  All  in  all,  some  thirty  countries  or  territories  can  be  classified  in  this 
category.  
The second group of countries is much smaller. It consists of economies that are dollarized 
because of a former special political event or economic crisis.  
Ecuador is a good example of this case. At the end of the 1990’s, this country experienced 
high  inflation  and  depreciation  of  its  local  currency  (the  sucre)  when  the  government 
suddenly decided to dollarize the economy, even without consulting the IMF.  
Mr. Stanley Fischer, at that time Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, later stated that he 
would have advised against dollarization, as the banking sector in Ecuador was unhealthy 
and  the  fiscal  position  weak.  However,  in  the  end,  the  IMF  decided  to  cooperate  with 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
Ecuador in its move towards dollarization of the economy, the latter becoming a success as 
economic performance in Ecuador has been fairly stable since dollarization was introduced.  
The  Ecuadorian  case  proves  that  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  merits  and  the  costs  of 
dollarization. In fact, a successfully executed dollarization is not enough to realize a stable 
economic  environment:  this  process  needs  to  be  followed  by  sound  economic  and  fiscal 
policies, otherwise the situation will go from bad to worse. In other words: dollarization is not 
a magic wand!  
Effects of dollarization  
3.  
The  case  of  Ecuador  illustrates  well  how  hard  it  is  to  formulate  general  conditions  for  a 
successful dollarization. It is not only difficult to assess the pros and cons of dollarization, it is 
also  necessary  to  analyze  the  country’s  starting  position,  assess  the  political  and  social 
willingness  to  abandon  the  local  currency,  and  to  execute  a  sound  economic  policy  after 
dollarization, in order to be able to conclude what the effects of dollarization were or are.  
In  the  last  ten  years  there  has  been  a  steady  discussion  on  the  pros  and  cons  of 
dollarization. Very distinguished economists like Stanley Fischer (who is currently governor 
of  the  Bank  of  Israel),  Sebastian  Edwards,  Rudiger  Dornbusch,  Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Paul 
Krugman  all  made  valuable  contributions,  reaching  however  different  conclusions  on  the 
merits of dollarization.  
I will now briefly elaborate on the pros and cons of dollarization on a macro-economic level, 
thus  not  the  operational  implications.  Whether  an  effect  of  dollarizing  the  economy  is 
considered  a  positive  or  a  negative,  it  could  greatly  differ  between  its  advocates  and  its 
opponents.  
I will now briefly refer to some effects of dollarization:  
1. 
Dollarization  could  lower  transaction  costs,  especially  when  most  payments  to 
nonresidents are in US dollars.  
Depending on the capital restrictions in place and the depth of the domestic banking 
sector,  it  could  lead  to  reduced  interest  rates,  thereby  making  it  less  costly  to 
borrow. This could also be the case when acquiring an international loan, as there 
will be no exchange devaluation premiums on rates charged to local companies and 
the government.  
Because of the elimination of exchange rate risk, dollarization could be beneficial to 
international trade and foreign investment.  
The  import  of  the  monetary  policy  of  the  U.S.,  being  the  issuing  country  of  the 
adopted currency, is unavoidable. This means that local policymakers are no longer 
in  the  position  to  use  the  exchange  rate  to  absorb  external  shocks  or  to  finance 
budget deficits by printing money.  
Some of the tasks of the central bank, especially the function of lender of last resort, 
which  is  the  credit  line  for  local  banks  when  experiencing  financial  stress,  will 
disappear.  This  is  typically  linked  to  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to  print  its 
country’s currency.  
In the process of dollarization, in which the central bank will have to buy back the 
local  currency,  a  large  portion  of  the  current  stock  of  international  reserves  is 
needed. Although the need for international reserves to support the exchange rate is 
eliminated,  it  is  still  crucial  that  the  central  bank  retains  an  adequate  level  of 
reserves to help support economic shocks, as well as to finance its operations.  
Dollarization will eliminate seigniorage earnings, which is the income of the central 
bank from issuing the local currency minus the cost of printing banknotes and coins. 
This could lead the reduced income to the government.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
View on dollarization  
4.  
Particularly  the  reduction  in  banking  costs  and  the  perspective  of  low  interest  rates  could 
make dollarization appear very attractive. However, it seems to me that in a stable economic 
environment  with  strong  fundamentals,  a  reliable  macroeconomic  policy,  and  a  credible 
central bank, the advantages of dollarization are marginal. The more so when there is a good 
track record of maintaining a fixed and stable exchange rate with the US dollar.  
The  goal  of  maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  is  to  be  able  to  benefit  from  the  trade 
advantages of being anchored to the currency of the country with which there exist strong 
economical  ties,  while  maintaining  some  degree  of  independence  in  terms  of  monetary 
policy.  
Furthermore,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  a  political  and  social  aspect  to  this.  Having 
one’s own central bank and issuing one’s own currency not only gives political status, it is 
often an important element of national identity.  
The case of Aruba  
5.  
Only a few months prior to Status Aparte in 1986, the Island Council of Aruba, after many 
studies and discussions, decided to institute its own central bank and issue its own currency, 
the Aruban florin, with the same nominal value as the Antillean guilder, and that is 1.79 florin 
to one US dollar. The prime reasons behind this decision were the perceived complexities 
within a monetary union with the Netherlands Antilles hen adopting the Antillean guilder and 
the loss of monetary independence in a fully dollarized economy.  
For those who are not fully familiar with these issues, I must point out that the decision of the 
Aruban  authorities  to  peg  the  Aruban  florin  to  the  US  dollar  is  a  unilateral  one,  and  is 
anchored  in  the  Central  Bank  Ordinance,  the  Ordinance  governing  foreign  exchange 
transactions,  and  the  State  Decree  value  of  the  florin.  In  other  words,  it  takes  a  political 
decision to change the exchange rate of the Aruban florin vis-à-vis the US dollar.  
Just as the Netherlands Antilles, Aruba has been able to maintain this peg, meaning that we 
have experienced an unchanged rate of exchange with the US dollar since 1971.  
Starting from 1986, our economy has had an average annual per capita real growth rate of 
2.3  percent,  a  moderate  inflation  (on  average  4.0  percent),  a  debt  to  GDP  ratio  of  44.1 
percent,  which  is  still  manageable,  and  a  level  of  international  reserves  that  is  more  than 
adequate (currently at 8.7 months of import payments).  
In the last two decades, Aruba has made great economic progress: we chose to invest in 
tourism  and,  currently,  Aruba  is  one  of  the  most  popular  tourism  destinations  in  the 
Caribbean. Two out of three of our visitors are Americans, which does not make it strange to 
hear that the US dollar is a widely accepted means of payment in Aruba.  
These economic and institutional developments demonstrate that it is possible to issue and 
manage a local currency successfully in a small open economy like ours.  
The case of the Netherlands Antilles  
6.  
Now, I would like to turn to the case of the Netherlands Antilles. I know that dollarization of 
the Antillean economy has been discussed before. As early as 1986, de Boer and Kamps 
investigated the possibilities of dollarization in the Netherlands Antilles in a study initiated by 
the University of the Netherlands Antilles.1 The authors advocated prudence with respect to 
                                                 
1   J. de Boer / J.A. Kamps – Dollarisatie op de Nederlandse Antillen. Een verkennende studie. UNA Cahier, No. 
21, June 1986. 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
dollarization  of  the  Antillean  economy,  as  they  thought  it  sensible  to  first  investigate  the 
situation of similar countries with an experience in dollarization. To my knowledge, no follow-
up has been given to this study.  
The discussion was again brought up in 2005 when it became clear that Curaçao and St. 
Maarten  would  become  separate  entities  within  the  Kingdom,  while  the  BES-islands 
(Bonaire,  Saba  and  Statia)  elected  to  become  an  integral  part  of  the  Netherlands.  De 
Nederlandsche Bank (conditionally) advised to form a monetary union between the various 
islands 
the 
recommendation made in 2004 by the working group on governmental and financial relations 
headed  by  Mr.  Jesurun).2  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  also  mentioned  that  a  credible  and 
independent central bank is important when forming a monetary union and that the BNA has 
proved to be well-equipped for this task.3  
the  economy.  This  was 
instead  of  dollarizing 
full  conformity  with 
in 
Concluding remarks  
7.  
In view of the forthcoming changes in the Kingdom’s Statutes, Curaçao and St. Maarten will 
have to decide on a very short term what to do with regard to their legal tender. Although 
these islands are deemed too small to justify the costs associated with maintaining a local 
currency, our experience in Aruba, which entails the existence of a local currency linked to 
the US dollar and a credible central bank, gives us strong arguments to continue with our 
dollar-linked florin. In choosing for such an option, Curaçao and St. Maarten could continue 
to benefit from the financial soundness of the dollar, while still maintaining a certain degree of 
monetary independence.  
Last but not least, I would like to point out that the currency choice, whether at the end it 
would be a local currency or the US dollar, is purely a stage for an economic act. Depending 
on the actors, the outcome of the play would be a drama or a happy one. In the choice of a 
dollarization,  the  role  of  the  central  bank  would  be  limited  if  not  nihil,  while  that  of  the 
government would become even more prominent. There is a significant shift of responsibility.  
While the starting fiscal position for both St. Maarten and Curaçao would be advantageous 
as  autonomous  countries,  meaning  a  low  debt  stance,  it  is  critical  that  fiscal  rules  and 
benchmarks are legally imbedded, and that accountability is a normal way of life. This would 
ensure that internal fiscal discipline is guaranteed, and it does not need to be forced upon by 
an external party. That is true independence.  
I would even go a step further and recommend the creation of special reserves, which would 
be used to counteract any financial stress. This would provide the necessary confidence to 
promote financial and economic stability.  
There is no doubt that these are exciting times in the Netherlands Antilles. I strongly advise 
you to learn from the experiences of Aruba, the good but also the bad ones.  
I wish you success and thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
2   Werkgroep Bestuurlijke en Financiële Verhoudingen Nederlandse Antillen – Nu kan het… nu moet het!, p. 11 
(8 October 2004). 
3   H.J.  Brouwer  (director  DNB)  –  Schuldsanering  van  het  Land  Nederlandse  Antillen  en  de  afzonderlijke 
eilanden., Staten-Generaal, vergaderjaar 2005–2006 30 461, D en nr. 4 (Bijlage 4). 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
