Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Unconventional policies against fear of “unknown 
unknowns”  
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Session "The Repositioned Role of Central Banks in Today's Economic Environment" at the 
CME Group’s Global Financial Leadership Conference, Tokyo, 2 November 2009.  
 First, I would like to take this opportunity to briefly comment on the unconventional policies1 
of central banks and their gradual wind-down.  
Aggravator of the global financial crisis: fear of “unknown unknowns”  
I would like to remind you of what aggravated and transformed a peripheral U.S. subprime 
mortgage  problem  into  a  full-blown  global  crisis:  Namely,  the  contagious  erosion  of 
confidence,  or  the  fear  of  “unknown  unknowns”  in  financial  markets.  Market  participants 
become excessively fearful that they might be confronting a previously unknown, essentially 
uncertain and unpredictable world. They assume the most pessimistic scenario possible and 
try to make the most of it.2 What is more, market participants tend to stand on the sidelines 
until  market  confidence  has  been  restored.  The  failure  and  the  fear  of  failure  of  large 
international financial institutions caused market participants to be fearful of the possibility of 
the  failure  of  their  counterparties.  Haircuts  for  the  collateral  rose  rapidly  and  financial 
institutions were obliged to sell their assets at distressed prices to obtain immediate liquidity. 
Financial markets became severely segmented and some literally collapsed.  
Central banks’ policy responses: “catastrophe insurance” provider  
In  order  to  address  this  problem,  the  central  banks  of  developed  countries  first  conducted 
ample and enhanced liquidity provision by offering more frequent operations to more counter 
parties at longer maturities and against broader collateral, in addition to series of policy rate 
cuts. Then, as the erosion of confidence intensified after the failure of Lehman Brothers and 
market  dysfunctions  became  more  pronounced,  the  central  banks  began  intervening  in 
specific  market  segments  by  introducing  and  expanding  asset  purchase  programs  for 
commercial papers, corporate bonds and government debts.3  
By  these  augmented  liquidity  provisions  and  market  function-enhancing  interventions,  the 
central  banks  effectively  provided  “catastrophe  insurance,”  or  put-like  options  for  a  broad 
range  of  financial  institutions  to  hedge  against  some  unknown,  possibly  grave  downside 
risks. In this way, these measures were intended to reduce the fear of “unknown unknowns”. 
                                                 
1   For a more detailed account on the topic, see Nishimura, K. G., “Unconventional Policies of Central Banks: 
Restoring  Market  Function  and  Confidence,”  Remarks  at  the  Panel  Session  “Monetary  Policy  Boundaries: 
Alternative  Instruments  and  Policy  Coordination”  at  the  Money  and  Banking  Conference  sponsored  by  the 
Central 
at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0909a.pdf. 
If a decision maker’s confidence is “contaminated” or eroded in the sense that he/she thinks, though with a 
small probability (say ε), that he/she is ignorant about the situation he/she faces, his/her rational behavior can 
be  described  as  “maximin”  optimization.  In  the  maximin  optimization,  he/she  is  particularly  sensitive  to  the 
worst-case  scenario.  See,  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki  (2006),  “An  Axiomatic  Approach  to  ε-
contamination,” Economic Theory, Vol. 27(2), pp. 333-340. 
Argentina 
available 
Sept.1, 
online 
2009, 
Bank 
on 
of 
2  
3   Also, the Fed expanded swap lines with other central banks to enable other central banks to provide further 
dollar liquidity. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 1
institutions’ 
A significantly longer duration of liquidity-provision operations helped to substantially reduce 
financial 
liquidity.  The  expansion  of 
counterparties  and  collateral  eligibility  secured  them  new  no-risk  funding  sources,  that  is, 
central  banks,  to  partly  alleviate  a  lingering  fear  of  counterparty  risks  in  money  markets.  I 
think  no  additional  words  are  needed  about  their  put-option  characteristics  of  the  asset 
purchase programs.  
fear  over  procuring 
longer-term 
Looking ahead: no free umbrella against plain old rain  
Clearly, central banks’ provision of catastrophe insurance measures has worked quite well, 
together with various governmental measures of similar characteristics.4 Immediate dangers 
have  subsided,  though  we  are  still  facing  a  possibly  bumpy  adjustment  process  after  the 
collapse of the “credit bubble”.  
In order to look ahead, the following two points should be kept in mind. 
First,  these  catastrophe-insurance  measures  are  in  fact  “free”  insurance.  Beneficiaries  of 
these measures do not pay fair, or, in many cases, any premium for these hedges. Rather, 
central  banks  and  governments  implemented  these  measures  against  the  “unusual  and 
exigent”  circumstances  of  contagious  confidence  erosion.  Thus,  the  measures  were  to  be 
temporary. A permanent provision of such free put-like options obviously distorts the market 
mechanism and prompts undesirable risk taking or “moral hazard.” To put it differently, free 
shelters should be provided against a hurricane, but there should be no free umbrella against 
plain old rain.  
Second,  central  banks’  ability  of  providing  “catastrophe  insurance”  is  not  unlimited  and 
depends  crucially  on  market  participants’  confidence  in  them.  Some  measures  taken  by 
central  banks  impose  financial  and  possibly  reputational  risks  on  themselves.  An  option 
provider should make sure that it would not seriously undermine its capital base.  
That  being  said,  unconventional,  catastrophe  insurance-like  measures  should  be  explicitly 
temporary and for some measures “self-fading” as market conditions improve. Currently, we 
see in fact some measures winding down in the US and other places, including Japan, and 
some other measures, such as the U.S. Treasury’s Guarantee Program for Money Market 
Funds, to have expired. The wind-down shall be carefully arranged, in some cases step by 
step, to avoid possible transitional problems as much as possible.  
Finally, I would like to add that as the immediate threat subsides and the hurricane shelters 
are removed, nobody assumes that that is the end of public efforts to rebuild the devastated 
community. This is exactly the same for central banks’ unconventional measures. Although 
the balance sheets of central banks may be reduced when these unconventional measures 
are faded out, this is not a sign of a change in the stance of central banks. Rather, this is the 
sign that central banks can now use conventional means more effectively to pursue current 
monetary policy. 
                                                 
4   “Put option-like measures” include measures such as capital injections and debt guarantees. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2009
