Barbro Wickman-Parak: Financial stability in focus  
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Swedish Chambers, Gothenburg, 29 October 2009. 
 Two  years  of  global  financial  crisis  have  shaken  the  economies  of  the  world  to  their 
foundations.  Central  banks  and  other  authorities  around  the  world  have  implemented 
extensive  measures  to  deal  with  the  problems  created  by  the  crisis.  I  am  sure  that  many 
people are asking what it is that is so special about the financial sector - and particularly the 
banks – that justifies this intervention on the part of the authorities. It is hardly likely that such 
massive efforts would be made for any other commercial or industrial sector. To answer this 
question,  we  need  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  importance  of  the  financial  sector  to  the 
economy  as  a  whole.  If  our  modern  societies  are  to  work  effectively,  we  must  be  able  to 
make and receive payments quickly and safely. It must also be possible to efficiently channel 
our  savings  surplus  to  those  companies  and  households  that  need  to  borrow  so  that,  for 
example, important investments can be made. Trust and confidence are cornerstones of this 
system. If we are to accept money – cash – as a means of payment we must have faith in its 
value. And if we are to deposit our money in various bank accounts we must have faith in the 
banks concerned.  
Money – a smart invention  
What do we really need money for? Bartering is a complicated and time-consuming process. 
Someone who wants to sell an item has to find a buyer who wants that particular item at that 
particular  time.  And  the  buyer  must  also  be  able  to  offer  something  in  exchange  that  the 
seller wants. The need for a third item that could serve as an intermediary in the bartering 
process  thus  arose  at  an  early  stage  in  the  history  of  civilisation.  Metals  of  various  kinds, 
especially silver and gold, soon acquired a central position as a currency for trade as they 
are relatively durable and easy to transport and divide.  
An  important  step  in  the  development  process  was  taken  when  people  began  to  use  the 
metals to mint coins. This made it possible to use an authorised stamp that guaranteed that 
the metal content and weight were correct. 
The  next  logical  step  was  taken  when  people  realised  they  could  use  pieces  of  paper  to 
represent the value of a metal coin. In other words, notes that could be exchanged for metal 
coins on request. This made handling and transportation even easier and worked as long as 
the  public  accepted  the  notes  as  a  means  of  payment  and  had  confidence  in  those  who 
issued them.  
A further stage in the development process was reached when it became possible to issue 
money without the back-up of reserves in the form, for example, of gold and silver. Instead, 
the value of the notes was set, for instance, by royal decree, that is the king or queen simply 
decreed what value the notes should have. Such money is sometimes called ”fiat money”. 
This is money that has no link whatsoever to metals or other material objects. Faith in such 
money must thus be created in some other way.  
We can view money as a "good" with special properties. It can be used to pay for things and 
it has a special information value, it is a measuring stick that makes it possible to compare 
prices. It also acts as a means of preserving value, it can be stored and saved to be used for 
future consumption. It is in this context that price stability comes into the picture. If inflation 
rockets,  the  money  we  have  saved  loses  purchasing  power.  It  was  therefore  quite  natural 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 1
that the central banks – when they were eventually given the monopoly for issuing notes – 
were also given the task of safeguarding price stability. In Sweden, the state, in the form of 
the  Riksbank,  first  acquired  the  sole  right  to  issue  notes  in  1903.  One  of  the  reasons  the 
Riksbank was given this sole right was the desire to create a uniform and stable payment 
system. Previously, the banks had been able to fund their operations by issuing their own 
notes.  However,  when  a  bank  went  bankrupt  its  notes  became  worthless.  Here  we  can 
discern  the  two  core  tasks  that  the  Riksbank  still  has:  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to 
promote a safe and efficient payment system.  
Banks are of central importance  
Nowadays,  a  very  large  part  of  what  we  normally  refer  to  as  money  consists  of  funds  in 
accounts at the banks, and a very large proportion of the payments made take the form of 
transfers between the accounts provided by the banks. The banks therefore play a central 
role in the financial system.  
Although banks in various forms have existed for many centuries, it was not until the 19th 
century that the financial sector began to develop on a large scale. The emerging industries 
needed funding. There was also a need for major infrastructure investments, for example in 
the railways. The banks acted as credit intermediaries, thus enabling the investments to be 
made. They gathered together our savings surplus and converted it into loans.  
Even though the financial markets are much more sophisticated today than they were in the 
1800s, the basic role is the same, that is to mediate credit and provide payment services. 
These  functions  are  indispensable  to  a  modern  society.  If  they  were  to  fail,  the  entire 
economy would suffer extensive and indiscriminate damage. This is what gives the financial 
sector its unique position.  
Banks entail bank crises  
The expansion of the banks also led to bank crises. In Sweden, for example, the expansion 
of the 1870s ended in the severe crisis of 1878-1879. One of the causes was that the private 
construction of railways had been excessively boosted by the ample supply of capital during 
the  expansion.  The  crisis  hit  those  trading  companies  and  banks  that  had  been  far  too 
optimistic in their provision of loans. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, headed by A.O. Wallenberg, 
suffered the most when the public stormed the bank to withdraw their money. The finance 
minister  of  the  time  was  forced  to  intervene  and  Stockholms  Enskilda  Bank  and  other 
problem banks were able to get liquidity assistance with the help of foreign loans.  
Lack of experience and underdeveloped risk culture paved the way for the crisis of the 
1990s  
If  we  take  a  leap  forward  in  history,  then  many  of  us  probably  remember  the  domestic 
financial crisis that began in the early 1990s. For a long period following World War II, the 
financial  markets  had  been  kept  under  very  strict  regulatory  control  by  the  Riksbank. 
However,  the  phase-out  of  the  regulations  began  in  the  second  half  of  the  1980s  and 
culminated  when  the  foreign  exchange  controls,  which  originally  were  part  of  the  crisis 
regulations  introduced  during  the  war,  were  abolished  in  1989.  When  the  floodgates  were 
opened there was no way to stop the rapid increase in the demand for loans, and there was 
no  incentive  to  say  no  to  loan  applications.  The  risk  culture  at  the  banks  was  still 
underdeveloped.  One  consequence  of  this  was  that  the  credit  risks  on  the  overheated 
property  market  were  underestimated  and  underpriced.  Once  again,  careless  lending 
became one of the causes of a crisis in the financial system.  
A factor worth mentioning in connection with the crisis of the 1990s is the role of the finance 
companies.  The  credit  regulations  had  gradually  creating  a  breeding  ground  for  a  "grey" 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2009
credit market. The less strictly-regulated finance companies had been given room to expand 
by providing loans to the rapidly-expanding construction and property markets. The financial 
companies  largely  financed  themselves  in  the  short  term  by  issuing  so-called  commercial 
papers  on  the  money  market.  When  the  property  market  folded,  it  was  also  a  financial 
company, Nyckeln, which in September 1990 was the first to throw in the towel when it could 
not renew its funding. Other financial companies then followed suit. 
Many of the financial companies were owned by the banks. And the banks were tied by both 
formal and informal commitments to these finance companies. The fact that a large part of 
the  banks'  exposures  to  the  property  sector  were  indirect  in  this  way  concealed  the  real 
extent of the banks' loan losses for a long time. When the losses of the finance companies 
subsequently appeared on the balance sheets of the banks in 1991, it became clear that the 
banks  also  had  serious  problems.  The  bank  crisis  had  become  a  reality.  Many  of  us 
remember the consequences for the real economy.  
Global imbalances laid the foundations for the current crisis  
If  we  now  move  on  to  the  current  global  financial  crisis  we  can  see  that  there  are  both 
similarities  and  differences  compared  to  the  Swedish  bank  crisis  of  the  1990s.  The 
circumstances that formed the background to the outbreak of the current crisis in the summer 
of 2007 included the considerable global imbalances that had developed, with an enduring 
savings  surplus  in  some  countries and  deficits  in  others. The  surplus  was  invested  on  the 
global financial markets and the substantial capital flows there helped to push down interest 
rates. As a result, demand and prices on many asset markets around the world increased 
explosively  and  there  was  a  general  fall  in  the  premiums  for  credit  risk.  The  explosion  in 
asset prices was fuelled by a rapid expansion in credit. Money was lent more carelessly than 
previously.  Housing  bubbles  developed  in  several  parts  of  the  world.  In  the  USA,  the 
development of such bubbles was reinforced by the inadequate regulation of the mortgage 
market and a political agenda that aimed to promote house ownership among people on low 
incomes.  
The search for yield drove investors to borrow more in order to achieve greater leverage in 
their investments. Financial innovations also helped to drive this development. A steady flow 
of  new  and  increasingly  complex  instruments  were  created  to  satisfy  the  demand  for 
investments with a higher yield. At many banks around the world, although not at Swedish 
banks  to  the  same  extent,  it  became  common  to  "securitise"  different  types  of  credit. 
Previously,  the  banks  has  specialised  in  developing  long-term  customer  relations  and  in 
continuously evaluating and monitoring credit risk. Now the banks simply lifted some of their 
loans out of their balance sheets, repackaged them to form various securities and sold them. 
These securities could then be bought and sold by different investors on a secondary market. 
Many banks thus changed their business model.  
One  might  think  that  the  banks  used  securitisation  to  get  rid  of  a  large  proportion  of  their 
credit  risks.  Unfortunately,  this  was  largely  an  illusion.  The  banks  set  up  special 
intermediaries – SIVs and conduits and so on – off their balance sheets to hold and structure 
the loans that they removed from their balance sheets and then converted into different types 
of security. This made it possible for the banks to increase indebtedness both on and off their 
balance sheets and thus to circumvent part of the authorities' capital adequacy requirements. 
However,  the  banks'  explicit  and  implicit  guarantees  to  these  special  companies  meant  in 
practice that the risks led directly back to the banks' balance sheets.  
Almost impenetrable structures arose  
The result of all these new instruments and artificial intermediaries was a structure that it was 
extremely difficult to oversee. Apart from the fact that it was difficult to value the instruments 
themselves,  the  complex  links  between  the  banks  and  their  special  companies  made  it 
difficult to see the actual exposures of the banks. Eventually, no one knew where the risks 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 3
were. The increasing amount of loans not only made investors highly indebted in relation to 
their equity, many banks also did not really have enough capital in relation to the risks they 
took. When economic activity began to decline in the USA and prices fell on the US housing 
market, many institutions suffered major losses. Uncertainty about who might be exposed to 
impaired assets led to trade petering out on a number of financial markets. Many banks now 
found it difficult to find funding on these markets. 
In  September  2008,  the  major  US  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy 
protection. This had extensive repercussions throughout the world. The global financial crisis 
escalated  and  the  Swedish  banks  were  also  seriously  drawn  into  the  crisis.  All  over  the 
world, banks and other financial institutions began to cut back their exposures and reduce 
their  level  of  indebtedness.  The  decline  in  lending  reinforced  the  downturn  in  global 
economic  activity.  This  in  turn  accelerated  the  decline  –  many  assets  fell  dramatically  in 
value and the banks' loan losses increased. A vicious circle arose in the global economy in 
which the financial turmoil aggravated the weakening of the real economy and  vice versa. 
This in turn led the authorities around the world to intensify their efforts.  
Uncontrolled lending and regulatory arbitrage are common features  
Although the current crisis is unique in terms of it extent and complexity, it is not difficult to 
see  parallels  to  other,  previous  crises.  Uncontrolled  and  careless  lending  in  an  economic 
boom is a common feature in the history of bank crisises. This is not the first time we have 
seen inadequate risk management.  
Another interesting feature is the attempt to circumvent regulations in both past crises and 
the present crisis. In Sweden, the "grey" credit market appeared in the 1980s in an attempt to 
get  round  the  credit  regulations.  The  latest  wave  of  securitisation  of  credit  portfolios  at 
international  banks  was  driven  in  part  by  a  desire  to  avoid  costly  capital  adequacy 
requirements.  The  fact that  loans  in  both  cases  were  partly  offered  alongside  the  ordinary 
banking market in what is now called "the shadow banking system" concealed the real extent 
and location of the risks.  
Why all these crises?  
So why do such financial crises arise? The root of most financial crises can be found in the 
imbalance  between  assets  and  funding.  The  simplest  way  to  illustrate  this  is  to  look  at  a 
fictitious  bank’s  balance  sheet.  On  the  asset  side  there  is  lending  to  companies  and 
households. These are assets that cannot be sold quickly without a substantial discount. In 
other  words,  they  are  illiquid.  The  bank’s  funding  on  the  other  hand  largely  consists  of 
deposits  from  the  general  public  and  short-term  borrowing  on  the  interbank  and  securities 
markets. Their funding is thus very liquid. 
In normal circumstances this is not a problem, as we do not expect all depositors and other 
lenders  to  withdraw  their  money  or  their  funding  at  the  same  time.  However,  this 
transformation of illiquid lending into liquid funds in accounts makes the banks dependent on 
the confidence of the funders in the bank's ability to meet its obligations. Suspicions that the 
bank has financial problems could very quickly lead to a bank run.  
At the same time, problems that arise in one bank can easily spread to other banks. This 
contagion  can  occur  in  different  ways.  Firstly,  there  can  be  a  direct  contagion  through  the 
exposures  the  banks  have  to  one another  in the  payment  systems  and  in connection  with 
foreign exchange and securities trading. Serious chain effects can arise if the customers of a 
bank  that  is  experiencing  problems  have  their  funds  tied  up  at  the  bank  as  this  makes  it 
difficult  for  them  to  make  payments  to  other  households  and  companies.  This  can  lead  to 
liquidity problems that in turn may give rise to loan losses and payment problems for other 
banks and their customers.  
4 
 BIS Review 135/2009
Secondly,  the  banks  are  often  exposed  to  the  same  sorts  of  risk.  This  increases  the 
probability  that,  for  instance,  a  macroeconomic  shock  may  affect  more  than  one  bank. 
Problems  can  thus  spread  between  banks  as  an  indirect  effect,  through  expectations  that 
other banks may suffer similar problems to the one first affected, or via more well-founded 
suspicions of the banks' exposures to one another. 
The contagion risks thus mean that problems in one bank can easily lead to problems for the 
entire bank system. The costs to society of a crisis that affects the entire bank system may 
be substantial.  
The need for a "safety net"  
The  shareholders  can  never  lose  more  capital  than  they  have  invested  and  individual 
depositors find it difficult to monitor a bank with widespread operations. They therefore lack 
sufficient  incentives  to  take  protective  measures  against  crises  that  affect  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  Alongside  the  need  to  protect  consumers,  this  is  one  of  the  crucial 
reasons  why  we  now  have  a  financial  safety  net  in  the  form  of  special  regulations, 
supervision  and  a  deposit  guarantee.  It  is  also  the  reason  why  central  banks  have  the 
possibility to provide various forms of liquidity assistance, that is to act as the “lender of last 
resort”.  
Here I should mention that the safety net for financial operations does not have only positive 
effects.  One  of  the  less  desirable  effects  is  that  it  can  also  lead  to  less  cautious  risk 
behaviour. As the safety net can in various ways make the bank's funders immune to certain 
risks, it may be tempting to allow the bank to take greater risks than is optimal from the point 
of view of the economy as a whole. Simply put, the safety net reduces the private costs of 
applying  strategies  associated  with  a  higher  level  of  risk;  the  bank’s  financiers  gets  the 
upside but not the downside of the increase in the level of risk. This phenomenon is usually 
called moral hazard.  
The  design  of  public  supervision  and  regulation  is  important  in  the  effort  to  reduce  the 
problems  relating  to  moral  hazard.  Not  least,  the  conditions  concerning  aspects  such  as 
guarantees  and  liquidity  assistance  have  a  major  impact  on  the  possibility  to  counteract 
problems and reduce the costs they give rise to. If the state is forced to intervene and save a 
bank, it is important that the shareholders and other funders do not come out of the process 
unscathed.  Designing  a  public  safety  net  for  financial  operations  thus  entails  a  number  of 
difficult considerations.  
Crises change the role of the authorities  
During the bank crisis of the 1870s, however, there was no real safety net to speak of. The 
Riksbank  sat  on  the  sidelines  and  had  no  role  to  play  in  the  practical  management  of  the 
crisis. At the time, the Riksbank had neither the mandate nor the desire to be the lender of 
last resort, that is the body that the banks can turn to when they suffer a shortage of liquidity. 
The  Riksbank  was  instead  more  like  a  bureaucratic,  state-owned  commercial  bank  that 
competed with the privately-owned commercial banks.  
There was, however, a growing realisation in the UK and other countries that it was important 
to  have  a  liquid  credit  market  and  that  the  central  bank  could  play  an  important  role  in 
safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  One  of  the  people  who  developed  these 
ideas was Walter Bagehot, who was appointed edi-tor of the journal The Economist in 1860. 
The experience of countries that did not have a central bank, for example Switzerland, also 
pointed to the need for a central bank to safeguard the stability of the financial system. In 
connection with various bank crises in Switzerland the banks had tried to protect themselves 
by reducing lending, which in effect only made the crises worse.  
BIS Review 135/2009 
 5
In Sweden, it was not until the Riksbank Act of 1897 that the Riksbank was given an explicit 
role to stabilise the payment system. When Sweden and the rest of Europe were infected by 
the  crisis  in  the  USA  in  1907,  the  Riksbank  was  prepared  and  maintained  liquidity  in  the 
system. The crisis of 1907 was also, by the way, the event that hastened the formation of the 
US central bank, the Federal Reserve.  
The Riksbank's stability work developed after the crisis of the 1990s  
Almost one hundred years later, the Swedish bank crisis of the 1990s also acted as a wake-
up  call  for  the  authorities.  The  crisis  revealed  several  serious  shortcomings,  both  at  the 
banks  and  with  regard  to  the  authorities'  preparedness.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  risk 
management culture in the financial sector left much to be desired. But even authorities such 
as Finansinspektionen, the Ministry of Finance and the Riksbank lacked the overall view of 
the risks in the banking sys-tem required to predict and counteract the approaching crisis. 
Nor had any of these authorities been given the task of overseeing the system as a whole. 
After  the  crisis,  however,  it  was  natural  that  the  Riksbank  began  to  develop  analyses  and 
stress  tests  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  system.  Since  1997,  the  Financial 
Stability  Reports  have  become  a  central  part  of  the  Riksbank's  stability  work  and  they 
represent an important starting point for a dialogue with the banks and other players.  
The  Riksbank  has  also  worked  for  a  number  of  years  to  strengthen  its  prepared-ness  for 
financial  crises,  for  example  by  running  crisis  exercises  and  entering  into  cooperation 
agreements  on  crisis  management  with  other  authorities  in  both  Sweden  and  our 
neighbouring countries. The Riksbank has also long contributed actively in various ways to 
efforts to improve financial regulation, both in Sweden and abroad.  
The efforts made to strengthen preparedness have probably contributed to the fact that the 
Swedish authorities were better equipped to deal with a crisis in the financial system this time 
than  they  were  in  the  early  1990s.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  lessons  learned  during  the 
crisis of the 1990s have provided a number of insights and greater risk awareness on the 
part of many of the players in the financial sector; even though we can assume that some of 
these lessons have been forgotten. This should in turn mean that the Swedish banks were in 
a somewhat more favourable position at the outbreak of the current crisis than many banks 
in other parts of the world.  
The current crisis has revealed new weaknesses  
Despite the measures taken by the Riksbank and other central banks to promote stability, it 
is clear that hardly any of the authorities around the world predicted the global extent and 
complexity  of the current financial crisis. The indications that could be discerned here and 
there that risks and bubbles were developing were not strong enough to convince enough 
people of the need for countermeasures. Above all, it seems that there was no clear overall 
picture of the possible global consequences if any of these bubbles burst. Previous financial 
crises  have,  after  all,  mainly  been  generated  domestically  and  have  thus  been  a  primarily 
national concern. In addition, it has become far too difficult to monitor the financial sector with 
its large, complex institutions that have operations and commitments all over the world. And 
even if monitoring had been simpler and better, there are still no effective mechanisms for 
counteracting  bubbles.  The  regulation  and  supervision  that  has  existed  has  proved 
inadequate to prevent either exaggerated risk taking in upturns or destructive herd behaviour 
in downturns.  
The  global  extent  of  the  current  crisis  points  to  the  need  to  further  develop  inter-national 
cooperation regarding financial regulation, supervision and crisis management. A number of 
proposals  are  accordingly  being  put  forward  at  the  international  level  concerning  how 
regulation and supervision can be developed to reduce the risk of similar crises occurring in 
the future.  
6 
 BIS Review 135/2009
The  measures  that  are  now  being  discussed  by  authorities  around  the  world  largely  stem 
from the fact that in many areas supervision has focused far too much on the state of health 
of  individual  institutions  and  far  too  little  on  broader  development  trends,  for  example  the 
expansion  of  credit  in  the  economy,  and  on  the  links  between  institutions  in  the  financial 
system.  Above  all,  financial  supervision  has  not  sufficiently  taken  into  account  the  risk  of 
financial problems becoming highly contagious. It is, after all, the contagion effects that may 
have  the  most  serious  repercussions  for  the  financial  system  and,  ultimately,  the  real 
economy.  
Some factors have also been procyclical so that problems in the financial sector have had a 
negative impact on the real economy and vice versa. In good times, there is almost always a 
tendency  to  expand  the  provision  of  credit  and  to  dismiss  the  risks  this  entails.  However, 
when the downturn comes, the same players tend to run for the exit at the same time, which 
serves only to make the overall situation worse. Some of the characteristics of the financial 
regulations,  for  example  the  capital  adequacy  requirements  and  certain  accounting 
regulations,  have  reinforced  these  tendencies  towards  herd  behaviour  among  the  financial 
players.  We  have  been  aware  of  these  problems  for  a  long  time,  but  there  have  been  no 
effective mechanisms for counteracting them.  
Nor have the supervisory arrangements adequately reflect the increased internationalisation 
of  the  financial  sector.  In  recent  decades,  the  financial  markets  have  become  increasingly 
interlinked  and  large,  complex  financial  institutions  now  conduct  extensive  operations  in 
several countries. At the same time, supervision has mainly been conducted on the basis of 
national  mandates  and  focused  on  companies  within  individual,  national  jurisdictions. 
Supervision has thus lacked the oversight required. In the wake of the crisis, a number of 
initiatives have therefore been taken that aim to create a clearer link between the supervision 
that  focuses  on  institutions  and  the  more  system-oriented  supervision  of  stability,  and  to 
sharpen the tools we use to promote stability in general.  
So what needs to be done? 
First,  the  authorities  must  become  better  at  gathering  and  analysing  information  about 
conditions in the financial sector and the rest of the world in order to be able to better assess 
the risks of future crises in the financial system. One of the problems has been that the risks 
have  developed  during  periods  when  the  financial  sector  has  appeared  to  be  in  excellent 
health, at least on the surface. This points to the importance of two things: We need a more 
transparent  financial  sector  and  we  need  ongoing  research  and  development  work  to 
produce indicators that are better at revealing that systemic risks are developing, as well as 
other types of analytical tools. However, this is not only about discovering and understanding 
the risks, it is also about counteracting the development of the risks in a more concrete way.  
This  is  why  we  also  need  effective  corrective  tools  that  enable  the  authorities  to  better 
influence risk behaviour in the financial sector and thus reduce the risk of crises in the future. 
This  includes,  for  instance,  finding ways  to  ensure  that  the  assessments  of  the  authorities 
have a sufficient impact on the risk behaviour of the financial players. Apart from effective 
communication,  we  also  need  to  think  about  whether  we  have  the  "teeth"  needed  to  put 
sufficient pressure on the players to make them change their behaviour. For example, the 
possibility  to  im-pose  an  extra  capital  adequacy  requirement  on  particularly  large  and 
complex (and therefore systemically-important) banks has been discussed. Another proposal 
is to set a ceiling for the loan-to-value ratio, that is the size of the loans the banks may offer 
in relation to the value of the collateral. In addition, there are various proposals that aim to 
reduce  the  liquidity  risks  that  have  arisen  because  the  banks  have  become  increasingly 
dependent on short-term funding on the securities markets.  
The  corrective  tools  also  include  more  or  less  automatic  mechanisms  that  we  can  use  to 
reduce the kind of procyclical behaviour in the financial sector that I mentioned before. These 
are  tools  that  can  hinder  financial  bubbles  from  developing  and  reduce  incentives  to  take 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 7
excessive  risks.  Proposals  that  have  recently  been  mentioned  in  the  general  discussion 
include allowing the banks' reserves for loan losses to vary in a way that reduces rather than 
reinforces fluctuations in economic activity, so-called dynamic provisioning. Another proposal 
with  a  similar  effect  is  to  introduce  contracyclical  capital  buffers,  that  is,  that  we  should 
require the banks to maintain larger capital buffers in boom periods when there is a tendency 
for  the  provision  of  credit  to  expand,  but  smaller  buffers  in  periods  when  growth  is  more 
limited.  
Finally, and just as important, there is a need to coordinate the gathering of in-formation and 
the use of various tools to promote stability between national and international authorities. 
Work is now underway in Europe to set up a new body, the European Systemic Risk Board. 
One of the tasks of this board, which will be located at the ECB, will be to gather and analyse 
information that may be of significance to the stability of the financial system in the EU. If the 
work of the council is to be effective, it is important that it will be able to be forthright about 
the risks it sees and that the message it delivers is not obscured by political considerations. 
In  order  to  strengthen  the  coordination  of  financial  supervision  in  the  EU,  the  existing 
committees  for  collaboration  on  the  supervision  of  banking,  securities  and  insurance 
operations  are  now  being  converted  into  authorities.  This  will  give  these  bodies  greater 
powers to intervene.  
Concluding thoughts  
So, it is clear that financial crises are nothing new. What distinguishes this crisis from earlier 
ones is its global extent and extreme complexity. Basically, it is about the fact that the flows 
in  the  financial  system  have  increased  dramatically  at  the  same  time  as  the  system  has 
become increasingly complex and difficult to oversee. The mutual dependence of the various 
markets has increased. This means that crises can more quickly and more forcefully hit an 
increasing number of economies at the same time. The current crisis has demonstrated this 
in no uncertain terms.  
This crisis has probably already passed its peak. Extensive efforts are now underway around 
the world to design a regulatory and supervisory system that will reduce the risks of a new 
major financial crisis. We need a better insight into the build-up of global risks. And to find the 
means  to  counteract  the  build-up  of  large  imbalances  the  authorities  must  begin  to  think 
along new lines. This is important but also difficult work.  
The financial sector is dynamic in the sense that new instruments, techniques and institutions 
are constantly appearing. This means that the risks are also constantly changing. Not least, 
the  increase  in  the  banks'  cross-border  operations  and  their  increasing  dependence  on 
market funding pose new challenges to the authorities that are responsible for the stability of 
the  financial  system.  This  means  that  authorities  like  the  Riksbank  need  to  constantly 
reconsider and develop their methods. Ongoing and intensive everyday efforts are important, 
even when the crisis has receded and the spotlight is no longer aimed at the financial side of 
the economy.  
Since the bank crisis of the 1990s, the Riksbank has developed the tools it uses to promote 
financial  stability.  But  these  tools  are  largely  "soft".  They  entail  persuading  and convincing 
those involved with good arguments, something that is usually referred to as "moral suasion". 
This  distinguishes  the  Riksbank  from,  for  ex-ample,  Finansinspektionen,  which  has  wider 
powers to intervene directly at individual institutions. When times are good, it may also be 
tempting  to  ignore  the  warnings  of  the  authorities  and  it  may  be  difficult  to  resist  the 
opportunity to expand when all the indicators are positive. The dramatic credit expansion of 
several of the Swedish banks in the Baltic region in euro is one example of a behaviour that 
entails considerable risks, something that the Riksbank has long pointed out in its Financial 
Stability Reports. 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2009
There may therefore be good reasons for thinking about different ways to achieve a greater 
impact for our analyses and assessments in the future. Can we be clearer and more direct 
when formulating warnings and risk scenarios? Can we, for example, go public to a greater 
extent,  for  example  by  using  open  letters  and  so  on,  in  order  to  increase  the  pressure  on 
banks to change their risk behaviour? And how should we handle the increase in the banks' 
lending in foreign currencies? These are examples of questions that the Riksbank and other 
central banks must now address.  
There is no doubt that the crisis has raised important and complicated questions. Wars and 
crises  usually  strengthen  the  position  of  the  state.  This  crisis  is  no  exception.  The  central 
banks have taken over the issuing of banknotes, but the provision of credit is still essentially 
conducted on private markets. The general view is that it is not appropriate for the state to 
work,  for  example,  with  the  credit  assessment  or  risk  assessment  of  individual  loans.  The 
state can establish rules and regulations for the market, but not work in the market itself. At 
the same time, faith in the ability of the financial markets to work effectively in all situations 
has been undermined. 
 An effective financial sector contributes to growth and prosperity in the economy, and it is 
indisputable that more effective regulation and supervision are now required. In my opinion, 
however,  it  is  important  that  the  changes  in  the  regulatory  structures  that  are  now  being 
implemented  are  balanced  and  well  considered.  Above  all,  I  believe  that  it  is  important  to 
avoid the sum total of all the regulations that are introduced restricting growth or, in the worst 
case, giving rise to new crises. It would be a mistake to underestimate the inventiveness of 
the  financial  sector  and  its  ability  to  circumvent  regulations  of  different  kinds.  Producing  a 
regulatory framework that makes the financial system safer and more secure without losing 
important welfare gains is really the major challenge that the authorities now face.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 9
