Patrick Honohan: Making Ireland’s public finances sustainable again 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial 
Services  Authority  of  Ireland,  at  the  ESRI  /  Foundation  for  Fiscal  Studies  Budget 
Perspectives Conference, Dublin, 13 October 2009.  
 Thanks to the Institute and the Foundation – both organisations with which I have had a long 
association  –  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  open  this  year’s  Budget  Perspectives 
Conference.  Always  an  important  event  in  the  calendar,  the  potential  usefulness  of  this 
year’s  pre-budget  conference,  at  which  options  and  strategies  can  be  discussed  among 
experts in a very practical way, hardly needs emphasis. So I am glad that it is here that I can 
make my first public address as Governor of the Central Bank.  
Naturally, my theme today is adapted to the focus of the Conference. Thus today I want to 
talk mainly about bringing the public finances back to a sustainable position. I will also touch 
on  two  central  tasks  of  my  new  role,  namely  price  developments  and  the  reform  of  the 
banking system, though mainly insofar as they interact with the budgetary situation.  
Actually, it is banking that chiefly preoccupies me at present, but this is not the place for a 
detailed  discussion  of  it.  For  the  moment,  let  me  just  briefly  remind  you  that  our  banking 
situation  has  called  for  clear  and  decisive  action  on  a  number  of  fronts.  These  include 
restoration  of  the  liquidity  of  the  system  to  robust  levels,  dealing  directly  with  the  problem 
property loans, replenishing the cushion of risk capital that allows banks to expand lending 
again, and renewing bank senior management (ensuring that the lending decisions are better 
in the future). Strengthening the regulatory capacity to detect and forestall any recurrence of 
imprudent banking is also crucial, and this has both international and domestic dimensions. 
Of  course,  the  ongoing  investigations  into  certain  alleged  wrongdoings  are  also  important. 
Current and recent policy measures are addressing all of these issues (and others besides). 
Optimising the design and implementation of each of these measures is a key priority and 
one on which I will speak further over the coming weeks.  
For today, though, I want to concentrate on how we can help bring the public finances back 
to a sustainable position. This can be done, and it does not require reinventing the economy. 
Instead, the goal of policy should be to regain, as far as possible, many of the structures and 
relativities of just a short number of years ago. Replicating the past is not fully possible, but 
we can come close, especially if the global recovery strengthens. A sense of proportion as to 
the scale of the adjustments that will be called for – relative to the living standards of just a 
few  years  ago  –  will  help  restore  confidence  and  build  a  consensus  for  the  needed 
measures.  
It  is  necessary  to  rebalance  public  spending  and  taxation  through  setting  both  of  them  at 
levels that are sustainable over time and not sensitive to cyclical economic conditions. This 
could be done by restoring the shares of taxation and spending in GNP to the levels which 
prevailed  in  the  years  running  up  to  the  turn  of  the  millennium  when  the  economy  was 
growing  along  a  sustainable  path.  More  generally,  restoring  the  structure  of  the  broader 
economy to that which prevailed around the start of this decade would help bring about a 
return to sustainable employment-generating growth.  
Falling prices are also threatening the budgetary situation, both through adversely affecting 
the  tax  take  if  they  result  in  higher  real  wages  (thereby  choking-off  the  recovery  of 
employment),  and  generating  an  unintended  increase  in  the  real  value  of  payments  which 
are  fixed  in  monetary  amounts.  Wage  discussions  need  to  recognise  the  increased 
purchasing power of money in an environment where inflation is falling; if not then our wage 
structures will move out of line with competitors. Retaining wage competitiveness to sustain 
and increase employment is a key priority, even if it means cuts in nominal wages.  
BIS Review 125/2009 
 1
 It  was  just  last  year  at  this  conference  that  I  first  proposed  that  the  fiscal  crisis  –  then 
emerging into full view – could best be addressed by looking back a few years to where we 
had been around the turn of the millennium in terms of the shares of taxation and spending in 
GNP.  Those  years  define  the  end  of  the  thoroughly  healthy  and  sustainable  path  of 
aggregate activity. Getting back to those shares seemed like an appropriate target.  
I  believe  that  this  approach  to  repositioning  the  budget  remains  a  useful  one.  Indeed  the 
need for such a way of framing budgetary planning was reinforced by the sharp decline in 
global trade and in economic activity in many of our major trading partners, a decline which 
for  several  months  had  no  evident  bottom.  As  we  will  see,  though,  the  numbers  need  to 
change a bit to take account of all that has happened over the past year. Now by general 
consensus the bottom to the international recession seems to have been reached. Although 
global growth is projected to be weak, the upward movement offers some buoyancy to help 
stabilize  Irish  economic  activity  too,  and  provide  a  platform  on  which  a  recovery  to  future 
growth from 2010 can be built. 
I would go further to assert that a wider rebalancing of the structure of the economy (going 
beyond just tax and spending) to something much closer to that of the year 2000 would leave 
us best-placed for a resumption of employment-generating growth on a sustainable basis.  
When  external  observers  ask  me  whether  the  Irish  economy  has  to  be  reinvented,  this 
therefore  is my  answer:  not  reinvented,  merely  restored  to where  it  was  just  a  short  while 
ago.  
Let me stay first, though, with those budgetary aggregates. Compared with this time last year 
there have, of course, been some unexpectedly severe adverse developments. 
We have seen a collapse in total revenues as a share of GDP. Unlike the deliberate decline 
in this ratio in the latter part of the 1990s, this collapse was an unplanned consequence of, 
first, the collapse in housing activity and, then, the rest of the downturn. Especially important, 
as has been widely discussed, was the role of those evanescent taxes whose receipts were 
highly  contingent  on  a  booming  economy  generating  large  profits,  capital  gains,  and  – 
notably – stamp duty from property transactions. We had become highly dependent on these 
as  the  steady  expansion  in  revenue  from  these  sources  during  recent  years  came  to  be 
taken for granted and rates elsewhere in the tax code were lowered.  
Thus  the  income  tax  increases  of  2008-9  represent  –  broadly  speaking  –  no  more  than  a 
return  to  rates  that  prevailed  within  the  past  decade  or  so  and  over  a  period  when  the 
economy  was  growing  strongly.  While  high  marginal  tax  rates  are  distorting  to  economic 
performance,  this  comparison  with  recent  history  is  needed  to  put  the  tax  increases  in 
context  (Admittedly  tax  rates  also  need  to  be  assessed  in  terms  of  international 
competitiveness,  but  the  contemporary  income  tax  increases  in  the  UK  dulls  some  of  the 
impact of this caveat).  
With the economy underperforming by so much, it will be some time before tax as a share of 
GDP gets back to its medium-term target value.  
What  of  spending?  Here  there  has  been  a  huge  expansion  of  what  we  are  again  calling 
automatic stabilisers, the largest of which are payments related to the very sharp increase in 
unemployment. (And of course the higher rates on these payments also amplify this effect.)  
There has been a tendency by some commentators to bemoan spending cuts, but spending 
has, in the past year, jumped substantially as a result of this automatic stabilizer effect. This 
time  last  year  we  knew  there  would  be  an  element  of  this  type  –  though  the  scale  of  the 
increase was not anticipated because the rise in unemployment has been much larger than 
was expected before the global downturn kicked-in.  
2 
 BIS Review 125/2009
In the background, though, if we are to get back to that millennial share of spending in GNP, 
there have to be other cutbacks reversing the expansion of the mid-2000s. That of course is 
where the report of the McCarthy group comes in.  
But there is something else new, namely the sharp fall in consumer prices since last year. 
This has raised the value of real transfer payments and other contractual amounts fixed in 
nominal terms and worsens the budget deficit, while giving an uncovenanted bonus to some. 
We have never seen price falls on such a scale. The illusion that money cannot gain in value 
is something that must be seriously addressed if the budget is to be brought back into line, 
especially  because  of  its  tendency  to  result  in  higher  real  wages,  thereby  threatening 
employment. I’m sorry to touch on  such a sensitive issue, but I think  we need to  be quite 
unambiguous about this. In previous times, whenever real wages moved as far ahead of our 
trading  partners  as  they  have  since  2000  (abstracting  from  a  gradual  trend  in  differential 
average productivity in Ireland and abroad) an inevitable sequence followed. Sooner or later 
unemployment rose, as producers were forced by lack of profitability to shrink or close. But 
then, the real value of wages was eventually eroded by inflation and depreciation. In the euro 
zone the second, corrective step, is not going to happen. It is crucially important to recognise 
that the old automatic stabilizer of real wages – depreciation of the exchange rate – has been 
put out of action (and for good reason).  
There’s  no  point  in  getting  distracted  in  this  discussion  by  pointing  out  inequities  in  the 
current  structure  of  wages  and  salaries  or  remuneration  generally:  attempts  to  fix  such 
inequities  and  anomalies  do  not  need  to  get  in  the  way  of  ensuring  that  the  average  real 
wage structure does not move out of line with that of the indirect competitors for workers in 
Ireland, namely workers abroad.  
In this context, the trend in Irish wage competitiveness over the years is worrying. If average 
wages in Ireland do not get back reasonably close to where they were relative to competitors 
earlier in this decade, then a reduction in unemployment will owe more to migration than to a 
return to job growth.  
This does not, of course, mean a return to earlier living standards, because there has been 
quite a bit of productivity growth in the meantime. Besides, Irish wages were arguably super-
competitive around 2000. The main point, though, is that here too reference to the millennial 
benchmark helps avoid a serious error in policy discussions.  
By the way, some sectors are more affected than others, for example those which compete 
with  UK  producers.  One  of  the  reasons  why  consumer  prices  are  falling  further  in  Ireland 
than elsewhere in the euro area (where on average prices have dipped only a fraction of one 
per cent in the past 12 months) relates to the continued extent of our reliance on trade with 
the UK, whose currency has been very weak over the past couple of years. One dramatic 
expression  of  this  weakness  will  resonate  with  the  older  members  of  the  audience:  the 
current  exchange  rate  for  sterling  against  the  euro  translates  into  IR£1=£1.18  sterling  –  a 
high level never approached during the twenty-year independent life of the Irish pound.  
Retaining wage competitiveness to ensure maximum employment in these difficult times is 
surely  a  key  priority,  even  if  it  means  cuts  in  nominal  wages.  If  all  prices  had  fallen  by 
another  10  per  cent,  would  the  old  nominal  wages  be  “just  right”?  Of  course  not.  This 
reduction ad absurdum shows how important it is to shake-off the fetish of no nominal cuts. 
I indicated at the start that the medium term targets for the spending and tax ratios to GNP 
could  not  be  quite  the  same  as  appeared  last  year.  The  reason  is  that  this  unexpectedly 
deep  recession  will  result  in  a  very  large  increase  in  net  public  debt  even  before  making 
allowance for the recapitalization of the banks. The deficit/borrowing requirement which has 
opened  up  will  be  closed  over  time,  and  the  government  have  embarked  on  a  credible 
convergence path for doing so, the commitment to which I am glad to see is reconfirmed in 
the  newly  agreed  Programme  for  Government.  Even  with  this,  however,  a  large  debt  will 
have to be serviced. This will add to interest payments and mean that the gap between non-
BIS Review 125/2009 
 3
interest spending and tax revenue  must be wider in the long-run (since debt ratios cannot 
spiral away to infinity). This is a drag, and the higher the debt level reached, the bigger the 
drag it is. That’s an important reason for minimizing that accumulated debt, for example by 
sticking to the announced convergence path.  
The recapitalisation of the banking system is also now sure to be a costly exercise, adding to 
net  debt  and  impeding  the  possibility  of  getting  back  to  2000.  For  the  same  reason  of 
avoiding the drag imposed by heavy debt in the long-run, this argues for a recapitalisation 
strategy that minimises the state’s net long-term financial outlay. At the same time, though, it 
is crucial for sustaining the growth that will generate tax revenues in the long run that the 
banks  move  forward  with  adequate  capital.  Therefore  it  is  not  wise  to  skimp  on  the 
restructuring. 
In  conclusion,  although  I  cannot  strike  quite  as  optimistic  a  tone  as  I  offered  last  year,  it 
remains true that the Irish economy is a productive one capable of delivering both high living 
standards and financing a good level of public services on a sustainable basis. Correcting 
some of the drift in wage competitiveness (notably by recognizing the implications of falling 
prices and the strength of the currency) will help ensure that employment can pick up again 
on a medium-term basis on the back of the global recovery. The sooner we can correct the 
structural elements of the budget deficit, the less public debt will be accumulated during the 
adjustment and hence the closer we will be able to return to the healthy and achievable living 
standards of just a few years ago. That perspective should help put what may seem to be 
large needed adjustments in context. 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2009
