Ferenc Karvalits: Current issues of the monetary policy in Hungary 
Speech by Mr Ferenc Karvalits, Deputy Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank 
of Hungary), at the Reuters Summit, Vienna, 29 September 2009. 
 It is a pleasure to be here today. Just a bit more than a year after the global financial crisis 
intensified  dramatically  in  September  2008,  it  is  appropriate  to  look  back  at  what  the 
Hungarian policy makers have done in the last twelve months. In this stock taking I will focus 
on the measures of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank, presenting the various policy instruments in a 
consistent framework. 
Before  going  into  the  details,  I  would  just  like  to  set  the  stage  by  describing  the 
macroeconomic situation of Hungary in mid-2008. Looking back into the pre-crisis years, it 
might  even  seem  to  be  a  peaceful,  relatively  prosperous  period.  Until  early  2008  all 
segments  of  the  financial  markets  enjoyed  ample  liquidity,  GDP  growth  was  driven  by 
dynamic  exports.  Despite  the  ongoing  fiscal  tightening,  households  were  rather  optimistic 
about the future, consumption growth hardly decelerated from its peak values. However, it is 
important  to  emphasize  that  the  Hungarian  economy  started  facing  difficulties  earlier  than 
last  autumn  and  that  the  tension  had  been  building  up  below  the  surface  for  a  while,  as 
illustrated  by  the  gradual  increase  of  external  and  government  debt  ratios.  The  crisis  last 
September  had  gravely  impacted  the  Hungarian  economy  at  nearly  all  levels.  The 
sustainability of the debt path became uncertain, external financing resources dried up, the 
risk  premium  expected  from  Hungarian  instruments  dramatically  increased,  and we  had  to 
face a free fall in external demand in the real economy – all this happening at the same time. 
One  can  summarize  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  that  Hungary  had  large  vulnerabilities  by 
2008, even though the fiscal consolidation since 2006 helped to bring the economy closer to 
a sustainable path. Neither the public sector, nor the financial system, nor the wider private 
sector had sufficient cushions for the once-in-a-century-crisis that was ahead of us.  
Therefore it is no surprise that in the first months of the crisis the central bank focused on 
“fire fighting” measures: combating the consequences of the liquidity crisis and strengthening 
the confidence in Hungarian assets. As the most straightforward way to demonstrate strong 
commitment  to  longer  term  sustainability,  to  rebuild  confidence,  the  Monetary  Council 
increased interest rates by 300 bps on October 22. To ease the liquidity situation, the Magyar 
Nemzeti  Bank  implemented  various  measures,  providing  liquidity  in  different  markets, 
lowering the required reserve regulations and also introducing euro and Swiss francs swap 
facilities with various maturities for domestic banks.  
Notwithstanding  the  importance  of  the  monetary  policy  measures  probably  the  most 
important development in this period was the deal reached with the IMF and the EU on the 
financial  support  package.  On  the  one  hand  the  package  gave  us  the  necessary 
“ammunition” to avoid a full-blown current account crisis, a sudden stop in capital flows. On 
the  other  hand,  by  designing  a  medium  term  path  towards  sustainable  fiscal  and  external 
position,  helped  significantly  to  increase  the  credibility  of  the  fiscal  tightening  measures 
announced by the government. In short, we needed two things, funding and credibility and 
the international institutions could help us with both. With the help of the package we could 
manage the roll-over risk of the Hungarian economy, and at the aggregate level there was no 
capital  outflow  from  the  banking  sector,  foreign  investors  only  withdraw  capital  from  the 
government securities market.  
In the subsequent months the focus of policy makers shifted towards the real economy. This 
was  mainly  justified  by  the  global  collapse  of  trade  that  worsened  short  term  economic 
outlook  to  a  previously  unimaginable  extent.  Hungary  as  a  small,  open  economy  was  hit 
particularly  hard  by  fall  in  external  demand.  On  top  of  this  adverse  external  impact,  the 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 1
sizeable  fiscal  consolidation  further  deteriorated  short  term  GDP  outlook.  Our  inflation 
forecasts indicated that, despite inflation persistence stemming from the high inflation history 
of  Hungary,  the  fall  in  demand  will  bring  CPI  below  the  target  over  the  monetary  policy 
relevant  horizon.  The  text  book  response  of  monetary  policy  in  this  situation  is  to  ease 
monetary  conditions,  trying  to  smooth  the  downturn  of  the  economic  cycle,  without 
endangering the primary objective of price stability. Our situation, however, was complicated 
by the sustainability concerns, justifying higher interest rates to compensate investors for the 
higher risk premium. Monetary policy had to balance between these two forces and following 
the rate increase in October, we ultimately decided to cut the interest rate 4 times between 
November and February, tolerating a gradual, controlled weakening of the forint. But investor 
sentiment  worsened  abruptly  and  dramatically  towards  the  Central  and  Eastern  European 
region at the beginning of the year. 
We faced the second wave of the crisis during the spring of 2009, as the entire Central and 
Eastern European region did. The exchange rate depreciated to historic lows, risk premiums 
and yields jumped up, region-wide concerns of banking failures intensified significantly. We 
witnessed a clear over-shooting in risk perception. 
 Two forces were at play in the region. First, all countries in the region depend heavily on 
external demand, especially on German demand. As you know, Germany was hit particularly 
hard  by  the  collapse  of  international  trade.  Second,  financial  sector  tensions  grew  by  the 
worsening  macroeconomic  outlook  until  spring  2009.  In  Hungary,  as  in  many  new  EU 
members, it was not only the well-known pro-cyclicality of banking sector at play, but also the 
effects  of  FX  lending  started  to  surface.  At  the  first  sight,  banks  had  no  FX  exposure:  FX 
loans were matched by FX funding. However, the funding had a much shorter maturity, as 
indicated  by  the  FX  liquidity  shortage,  and  ultimately  the  balance  sheet  problems  of 
unhedged borrowers could turn into significant bank losses, at times when collateral values 
were  also  falling.  It  is  thus  no  surprise  that  banking  sector  risks  in  Hungary  are  closely 
correlated with the exchange rate. 
Our foremost objective was, in this period, to contain financial stability risks, to ensure the 
adequate capitalization of commercial banks. To this end, we could use the assigned portion 
of the IMF package and encouraged mother institutions to maintain capital adequacy ratios 
above the required levels in their Hungarian subsidiaries. I can summarize that our objective 
in  this  period  was  to  avoid  worst  case  scenarios,  a  meltdown  of  the  financial  sector  and 
uncontrolled weakening of the exchange rate. And we succeeded. 
At this point, let me take a sidestep, and share with you some thoughts on FX lending. With 
the benefit of hindsight it is very tempting to identify the rapidly growing FX lending as one of 
the  major  causes  of  problem  in  the  region.  This  is  indeed  the  case  for  a  large  part  of  the 
financial stability risks. Let me mention, though, two additional considerations. As a central 
banker,  I  am  aware  of  the  impact  FX  lending  can  have  on  monetary  transmission.  When 
significant stocks of FX loans have already built up the depreciation of the domestic currency 
can exert pressure on the balance sheet of unhedged borrowers. This, in turn, can have an 
impact on the transmission mechanism: lower interest rates, and thus weaker exchange rate 
in a UIP framework, will not necessarily mean a substantial monetary easing. The increased 
burden  of  the  FX  loans  can  act  against  the  effect  of  the  lower  domestic  interest  rates. 
Therefore  in  economies  with  high  levels  of  FX  loans  monetary  policy  has  less  room  to 
behave  counter-cyclically.  Because  of  that  we,  central  bankers  are  interested  in  limiting 
currency mismatches in the balance sheet of domestic market participants.  
One can also look at FX borrowing of the unhedged domestic agents as the mirror image of 
the  well-known  convergence  play,  when  foreigners  invest  in  assets  denominated  in  local 
currency. The only constraint of this convergence play is the risk absorption capacity of the 
borrowers. Magyar Nemzeti Bank supports responsible lending and borrowing behavior that 
targets to increase the risk absorption capacity of borrowers. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2009
I am sure we still have to discuss the role of FX loans in more detail in the future. However, I 
am convinced that an overly simplified view, emphasizing only type of risks, would not lead 
us towards a consensus view and would help little in guiding future policy measures.  
Finally let me say a few words about the events of the most recent months and touch briefly 
on future challenges we are facing.  
Summer brought favourable developments in various dimensions. Global risk aversion eased 
significantly,  thanks  mainly  to  the  well  coordinated  fiscal  and  monetary  measures  of 
developed countries. This was obviously a very welcome phenomenon for Hungary. It helped 
the  currency  to  appreciate  by  more  than  10%  compared  to  the  levels  in  spring,  and  also 
contributed to the significant drop of domestic bond yields, even at longer maturity. I consider 
the  functioning  of  the  government  securities  market  to  be  a  key  indicator  of  market 
perception on fiscal sustainability. In this regard, it was particularly favorable that, following a 
long pause, the government was also able to issue long maturity bonds in forints. While the 
IMF/EU package provides reliable source of financing, the ultimate goal is obviously to return 
to market financing, preferably in forints. Therefore we not only have to present sound and 
credible fiscal consolidation measures to the international institutions for approval, we also 
have to make sure that market participants find the fiscal path credible. Last, but not least, 
the return of market confidence gave the Magyar Nemzeti Bank the room to start reducing 
the key interest rates.  
Further  positive  news  was  coming  from  price  developments.  Ex  ante  there  were  well-
grounded concerns about the inflation impact of the large VAT hike, a crucial part of the fiscal 
tightening measures. Central banks never welcome any administrative increase in the price 
level, there is always the risk that a part of the one-off increase will lead to more permanent 
inflation pressure. This was especially a pronounced concern in Hungary given our less than 
satisfying track record of meeting the inflation targets. While it is obviously too early to say 
the final judgments, July and August CPI data indicate that VAT increase is reflected in the 
prices to a smaller degree than previously expected, and, probably more importantly, there is 
no sign that underlying inflation trend would have accelerated due to the tax increase. 
I  find  it  important  to  emphasize  in  this  context  that  monetary  easing  in  Hungary  is  also 
conditional on the evolution of global risk appetite. We have learned during the crisis that risk 
premia  can  be  extremely  volatile.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  have  a  robust  strategy,  to  be 
prepared  to  cope  with  potential  unfavorable  shifts  in  risk  perception.  To  this  end  the 
Monetary Council has decided to follow a gradual approach in reducing the interest rate.  
Despite of the dominance of good news of the last few months becoming complacent at the 
current juncture would be a great mistake. We are perfectly aware that still a lot has to be 
done  in  Hungary  to  finally  reach  a  sound,  sustainable  fiscal  and  external  position, 
characterized  by  dynamic  growth  and  low  inflation  and  well  functioning  financial  sector. 
Monetary policy of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank has a clear objective: price stability. This does 
not  mean  that  we  are  narrowly  looking  only  at  inflation  forecasts,  but  rather,  in  a  broader 
context, we want to contribute to longer term predictability in the Hungarian economy. I am 
convinced  that  price  stability  cannot  be  attained  and  maintained  without  longer  term 
predictability. To this end we will be focusing on managing risks to stability and sustainability, 
risks that we expect to be with us for a protracted period of time.  
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 3
