Anselmo Teng: Development and supervision of BVI business 
companies 
Opening remarks by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at a 
seminar  on 
“Development  and  supervision  of  BVI  business  companies”,  Macao, 
23 November 2009.  
 Dear Mr. Baker, 
Honourable Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
On behalf of the financial sector of Macao, I would like to express our warm welcome and 
heartfelt  gratitude  to  Mr.  Baker,  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  Financial  Services 
Commission  of  British  Virgin  Islands,  who  has  kindly  consented  to  be  the  speaker  of  this 
seminar entitled “Development and Supervision of BVI Business Companies”. I would also 
welcome participants from relevant government agencies and financial institutions to attend 
this informative seminar.  
One year ago, the financial tsunami, triggered by the subprime fallout, started to take its toll 
on global financial markets in a scale which is unprecedented since 1930. A vast number of 
reputable financial institutions encountered severe difficulties in liquidity and solvency arising 
from toxic assets they acquired in the hey day. Fortunately, governments and central banks 
around  the  world  took  concerted  actions,  which  included  fiscal  stimulus  and  monetary 
easing,  to  stabilize  the  global  financial  system.  Equity  and  commodity  prices  have  mostly 
returned to pre-crash levels. The emerging markets, particularly China, are faring well after 
the crisis.  
Being  a  micro  open  economy,  Macao  was  inevitably  affected  by  the  turmoil.  The  overall 
economy of Macao started to feel the pinch in the second half of 2008. The shrinkage has 
started to moderate but growth in 2009 will inevitably show certain degree of adjustment. The 
financial  sector  of  Macao  also  underwent  a  mild  consolidation  since  the  eruption.  As  our 
experience  of  toxic  assets  was  rather  limited,  the  direct  impact  of  the  crisis  on  Macao 
financial sector was minimal. In addition, the spillover effect of the huge stimulus package of 
China has effectively uplifted the Macao economy. As a result, financial institutions in Macao 
have been able to maintain fine asset quality, ample liquidity and adequate capital. I should 
say  the  economy  of  Macao  and  hence  its  financial  sector  have  survived  and  emerged 
unscathed after the outbreak.  
Our prudential supervision has never been impaired by any crisis. As a responsible member 
of  the  global  village,  the  Macao  SAR  Government  has  never  been  lax  in  its  efforts  to 
enhance  sound  financial  supervision  through  persistent  offsite  surveillance  and  onsite 
inspection applied to authorized institutions. In addition, the Monetary Authority of Macao has 
been procyclically issuing supervisory guidance on risk management, internal control with a 
view  to  maintaining  the  stability  of  our  financial  system.  To  align  with  international 
understanding and standards, guidelines on anti-money laundering (AML) and countering the 
financing of terrorism (CFT) have been promulgated and seriously enforced. We have close 
cooperation with other regulatory authorities and international agencies in all these aspects. 
As  a  result,  all  our  regulatory  efforts  are  being  kept  up-to-date  with  the  requirements  of 
internationally  accepted  standards.  For  instance,  the  AML/CFT  guidelines  have  recently 
been  revised  by 
the 
recommendations  of  the  mutual  evaluation  raised  by  the  Asia/Pacific  Group  on  Money 
Laundering (APG) and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors (OGBS). The opinions of 
practitioners and findings in the course of AML/CFT inspections have also been taken into 
the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao.  The  move  arises 
from 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 1
account. We emphasize on the enhancement of customer due diligence (CDD) measures to 
be  undertaken  by  banks  and  insurance  companies.  Particular  attention  is  paid  to  offshore 
companies  who  are  required  to  implement  proper  and  stringent  account  opening  and 
subsequent monitoring procedures.  
To this end, I am very pleased to see that this seminar has been organized to offer a very 
valuable opportunity for financial institutions of Macao to acquire a more indepth knowledge 
of the institutional arrangements of international business companies and the practices and 
methodology required in exercising CDD measures on offshore companies. Today, we are 
privileged to have Mr. Baker with us to share his versatile and professional experience. It is a 
timely  arrangement  that  Mr.  Baker  is  here  today  to  impart  to  us  insightful  thoughts  and 
valuable  experience  in  this  respect  when  the  MSAR  is  striving  to  diversify  its  economic 
activities. I am very sure that participants will benefit much from our knowledgeable speaker 
whose input is certainly conducive to enhancing the reputation of our financial industry.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2009
