Jean-Claude Trichet: Key lessons from the crisis 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the “Annual 
conference  2009”,  organised  by 
the  Asociación  de  Mercados  Financieros,  Madrid, 
23 November 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First of all let me thank the Asociación de Mercados Financieros for inviting me to its Annual 
conference. It is a special honour for me to speak directly to so many active participants in 
Spain’s  financial  sector  and  beyond.  Your  association  provides  an  important  platform  for 
market participants to reflect and address the challenges and opportunities for the sector in a 
rapidly changing environment.  
The  financial  industry  is  a  key  part  of  the  service  sector,  the  infrastructure  that  makes 
businesses efficient and a source of value for the economy.  
We all have been witnessing the formidable change and progress of the Spanish economy 
since its accession to the European Community in 1986. Today, and despite the crisis, the 
Spanish economy is close to the highest standard of economic and social progress available 
worldwide. The 1990s and the early years of this century have inspired perceptions that a 
renewed siglo de oro had started.  
But the crisis has not spared this country. Spain’s unemployment rate is once again edging 
above  euro  area  averages,  with  impacts  on  private  consumption  and  capacity  utilisation. 
Looking  forward,  Spain’s  convergence  to  a  balanced  growth  pattern  will  require  a  more 
balanced progression of income components. Consumption needs to be less dependent on 
perceived wealth gains, and investment to be more diversified, well beyond the construction 
sector. This will make participation rates more sustained.  
For what concerns the Spanish financial sector, it has long been a source of strength and 
national pride for this country. In many respects, Spain can be a leading example for global 
financial reform. I will say more on this later in my talk. Spain’s financial system has proved 
resilient  to  the  shock  in  the  early  stage  of  the  crisis.  Supported  by  prudent  regulation  and 
supervision,  the  banking  system  in  this  country  has  built  dynamic  provisioning  cushions 
during  good  times.  And  the  traditional  role  of  banking,  founded  on  long-term  relationships 
with customers, has largely been preserved. Looking forward, this is an important asset. 
But  a  solid  future  calls  for  some  areas  of  adjustment  in  the  way  the  financial  industry 
behaves. The exceptional support of public policies will, at some point, have to be withdrawn. 
Private  sector  confidence  in  the  future  will  need  to  replace  policy  intervention  as  the  main 
spur of growth. 
The Asociación de Mercados Financieros and its members are an important link in the chain 
through which confidence will build and transmit to your customers. The obvious prescription 
for  a  sustainable  return  to  stability  is  for  many  of  you  to  simply  look  back  at  your  past  of 
prudent and sound management. 
Today, I will mainly focus on what we have done at the ECB to deal with the crisis and to 
support the euro area economy and its banking sector. In particular, I would like to explain 
the policy that the ECB has adopted to support credit flows in the current environment. This 
policy has provided a tangible support to households’ disposable incomes and firms’ credit 
conditions in all member countries. The people of Spain – a country where a large share of 
the  outstanding  mortgages  have  adjustable  rates  –  have  benefited  from  this  policy 
considerably.  
I will draw some key lessons for the stability, resilience and health of the financial system, the 
global economy and the individual economies more specifically.  
BIS Review 150/2009 
 1
Structural  reforms  in  Spain  –  as  in  other  euro  area  countries  –  cannot  be  avoided  or 
postponed. But in facing these challenges, Spain can build on its past of consistent progress 
and success since its entry into the European Union, on a young and well-educated labour 
force and on solid institutions. 
The ECB’s response to the crisis 
I. 
As you all know, the start of the turbulences began on 9 August 2007. The interactions of 
very  bad  risk  management  and  wrong  incentives  in  the  financial  industry,  excessive 
complexity in financial products and underlying global imbalances were responsible for the 
previous credit boom and the ensuing bust. The asset cycle turned, and many of the missing 
links in the financial chain were exposed.  
Then, the collapse of a major financial player mid-September 2008 transformed a large-scale 
crisis  of  confidence  into  a  global  financial  panic.  Financial  intermediaries  scrambled  to 
restore  liquidity  buffers,  shed  risk  and  tightened  lending  conditions.  Collectively,  they 
engaged  in  a  large-scale  process  of  “deleveraging”.  Credit  spreads  surged  and  trading 
activity in a large number of markets collapsed.  
In  these  unprecedented  circumstances,  the  ECB’s  primary  mission  was  to  preserve  price 
stability, in line with our definition – below 2% but close to 2% – and therefore contribute to 
financial stability. As the inflationary pressures seen over the summer of 2008 receded, we 
swiftly reduced our policy interest rate in a tight series of steps down to 1%. This interest rate 
level has not been experienced in the countries of the euro area at any time in recent history. 
In parallel, we had to tackle the paralysis of inter-bank transactions in the money market. As 
you know, the flow of credit is primarily channelled by banks in the euro area. A complete 
breakdown in the funding relationships that constitute the money market would have derailed 
the  bank  lending  channel  altogether.  The  interruption  of  the  bank  lending  channel  would 
have  made  our  policy  action  ineffective.  It  could  have  turned  the  financial  crisis  into  a 
profound depression. 
This is what motivated the second tier of our approach to crisis management: what we refer 
to  as  our  policy  of  “enhanced  credit  support”.  These  “non-standard”  measures  started  in 
October  2008  and  were  designed  to  ensure  that  our  monetary  policy  intentions  were 
transmitted  to  the  broader  economy,  despite  the  problems  in  the  financial  sector.  The  aim 
has been to enable banks to continue their lending to households and firms. 
What  have  we  done  specifically?  Since  October  2008  we  have  been  supplying  liquidity  in 
unlimited amounts at the policy rate to the banks demanding refinancing. At the same time, 
we expanded the list of eligible assets to allow banks to refinance with us a larger share of 
their balance sheet. This made it possible for many banks to protect their loan and securities 
portfolios from forced liquidation. Otherwise they could have triggered an avalanche of fire 
sales in the open market. The interruption of loan contracts would have taken a high toll on 
the real economy.  
We also wanted to support banks in maintaining longer-term credit commitments. Therefore, 
we  have  provided  liquidity  for  longer  periods.  In  June  this  year,  we  conducted  the  first 
operation for one year. We allotted more than €440 billion in this operation. In the second 
operation, in late September, we supplied banks with €75 billion, and a third operation of one 
year is scheduled for December.  
The  crisis  also  exposed  the  severity  of  currency  mismatches  in  banks’  balance.  To  help 
alleviate those problems, we have provided liquidity in foreign currencies, most notably in US 
dollars,  backed  by  a  swap  facility with  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Thanks  to  our  policy, 
banks could count on an ongoing access to foreign currency balances.  
These measures can all be seen as an expansion of our regular open market operations with 
banks.  In  consonance  with  this  tradition,  our  non-standard  policy  was  first  and  foremost 
aimed at expanding that form of credit in volume and maturity. In July this year, we started to 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2009
purchase securities outright as a vehicle for introducing further credit support. We intervened 
directly in the longer-maturity segments of financial markets by buying covered bonds issued 
by banks. When presenting this decision, I stressed that we were very much in the continuity 
of our open market operations, because we still had in front of us both the signature of the 
commercial bank issuing the bonds and the underlying asset itself.  
Let  me  focus  more  closely  on  covered  bonds  for  a  moment,  as  they are  important  for  the 
euro area – and for Spain.  
Covered bonds are an attractive source of funding for banks because they have long-term 
maturities.  They  help  control  and  rebalance  the  maturity  mismatch  between  assets  and 
liabilities in banks’ balance sheets.  
But  they  are  attractive  instruments  of  finance  for  investors  as  well.  Unlike  asset-backed 
securities,  covered  bonds  do  not  involve  a  transfer  of  credit  risk  from  the  issuer  to  the 
investor. Credit risk stays with the originator, preserving the incentives for prudent evaluation 
and monitoring.  
From the point of view of the Eurosystem, this was a very important attribute, on top of the 
fact that covered bonds are akin to our traditional repurchase operations.  
Since the announcement in May there has been a wave of new issuances. As Spanish banks 
have  traditionally  been  significant  issuers  of  this  type  of  securities,  developments  in  Spain 
are representative.  
The issuance volume of Spanish banks between the time of the announcement and the end 
of October has reached 16 billion euro. It is now around 20% of the total euro area issuance. 
Spreads have declined in tandem. In Spain they are now more than 100 basis points lower 
than the level they reached at their peak. Liquidity has returned to the market, with tangible 
reductions in bid-ask spreads in secondary transactions. 
We interpret these developments as a confirmation that our purchase programme, although 
measured  in  size,  has  been  effective  in  bringing  new  life  to  an  important  segment  of  the 
European  financial  market.  Overall,  we  are  very  satisfied  with  the  effectiveness  of  this 
programme. 
Lessons: present and future 
II. 
What lessons can we draw from the financial crisis that has occupied all of us for more the 
last two years?  
The  crisis  has  exposed  the  fundamental  fragility  of  the  international  financial  system.  No 
segment of the market or category of players has been spared. 
Therefore, we have to re-consider all aspects of finance as a precondition to reform. Macro-
economic  policies  in  some  areas  have  also  shown  deficiencies,  in  particular  when  they 
lacked a medium-term orientation towards sustainability.  
Looking ahead, we need to refine and broaden their oversight of the nexus between financial 
markets and the macro-economy. Financial risks and the increasing potential for these risks 
to become contagious and escalate to systemic proportions need to be better identified.  
At the level of national economies, efforts should be reinforced by measures to strengthen 
the  structural  engines  of  their  economic  systems.  Far  from  putting  off  the  agenda  for 
structural reforms, the crisis has made them more urgent.  
I want to share with you my thoughts on reform along each of these three dimensions: the 
financial sphere, global governance, and the structural set-up of local economies. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 3
Financial reform 
The ultimate goal of financial reform is clear: the financial sector will have to return to its role 
of providing the best possible service to the real economy. The fundamental role of financial 
markets is the intermediation of funds between savers and investors.  
During  the  recent  past,  this  function  has  been  expanded  by  increasing  possibilities  for 
diversification:  diversification  of  risks  for  savers;  diversification  of  funding  sources  for 
investors.  For  a  long  time,  the  demand  for  hedging  against  economic  risk  among 
entrepreneurs has grown in tandem with the growing supply of new and innovative financial 
techniques.  But  at  some  point  supply  outgrew  demand.  Financial  innovation  ceased  to 
facilitate trade and real investment opportunities and started to become self-sustaining. This 
weakened incentives to conduct prudent screening and a thorough monitoring of loan quality. 
Credit  became  plentiful  and  market  liquidity  expanded  at  a  pace  that  could  ultimately  no 
longer be justified.  
Looking ahead, three steps will be required to a more resilient system.  
• 
First, the tendency for finance to become pro-cyclical even at a system-wide level 
needs  to  be  strongly  mitigated.  The  quality  and  quantity  of  bank  capital  and  their 
liquidity buffers have to be improved in good times to provide a sufficient buffer for 
bank equity when the cycle turns. The cyclicality of market economies is inevitable. 
But the financial system should not be allowed to amplify swings. 
Second,  the  transparency  of  the  financial  structures  needs  to  be  enhanced. 
Informed decisions by market agents are a key element of market economies. Lack 
of transparency of financial products masked abuse and led to disaster. Looking into 
the  future,  all  institutions,  instruments  and  markets  of  any  relevance  for  systemic 
stability need to enhance risk disclosure.  
Third, once more, incentives need to be aligned. Market participants – traders, loan 
managers, risk committees and boards of directors – were given strong economic 
incentives  to  focus  on  short-term  profits.  Long-term  value  creation  was  not  a 
concern  in  the  pre-crisis  world.  Collectively,  this  has  resulted  in  excessive  risk 
taking.  A  reform  of  the  executive  compensation  schemes  and  practices  is  an 
essential part of our effort to secure financial stability. 
  At  the  financial  level,  reform  in  Europe  will  follow  a  two-pronged  approach.  First,  it  will  be 
centred  around  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors.  The  establishment  of  this 
System  will  permit  better  coordination  among  national  authorities  responsible  for  financial 
regulation.  If  one  lesson  can  be  learnt  from  the  crisis,  it  is  that  the  reach  of  financial 
supervision and regulation needs to be extended to better monitor those financial institutions, 
including highly leveraged, which can arbitrage across national borders and across oversight 
jurisdictions. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  will  be  the  other  dimension  of  the  European 
approach  to  financial  reform.  This  new  body  will  provide  early-warnings  and  issue 
recommendations  that  will  help  to  prevent  a  renewed  build-up  of  excessive  risk  in  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  crisis  has  displayed  the  phase  transition  that  risk  can 
undergo almost overnight: a mutation from localised liquidity risk to a generalised solvency 
threat  attacking  the  whole  system  of  financial  interconnections.  The  ESRB  will  have  to 
oversee the likelihood and measure the severity of these reactions and instant transmissions. 
The  ECB  and  the  National  Central  Banks  in  the  EU  will  fully  contribute  to  this  new 
institutional framework. 
Global governance 
The underlying approach to reforms should be holistic. The global proportions of the crisis 
call for a rethinking of the links between financial behaviour and macroeconomic policies, as 
they interact in a global scene.  
4 
 BIS Review 150/2009
The G 20 has made a quantum leap in creating the new premier global economic group. The 
aspect  that  impresses  me  most  about  this  group  is  the  virtually  universal  consensus  on 
global economic issues. There is a broad consensus at the level of the G 20 on the diagnosis 
of the crisis. There is a broad consensus on the appropriate response to the crisis. And there 
is a broad consensus on the direction of financial sector reform, along with the main ideas 
that I described a moment ago.  
There is agreement that macroeconomic policies at the domestic level need to be consistent 
with  the  objective  of  global  financial  and  economic  stability.  Medium-term  and  long-term 
sustainability in domestic macroeconomic policies will have to prevail. A renewed medium-
term  perspective  should  guide  macro-economic  policies  from  now  on.  Like  financial 
regulation, policies should not amplify economic fluctuations. 
Structural reform  
As I said, structural reform is ultimately the responsibility of individual economies. The crisis 
has reduced some of the imbalances almost automatically. In the euro area, economies with 
wide  current  account  imbalances  –  including  Spain  –  have  suffered  relatively  more  than 
others. As a consequence, output and employment losses in these countries are acting as 
potent stabilisers to re-absorb long-standing gaps between domestic savings and domestic 
investment. As Miguel Fernández-Ordóñez has said, some structural weaknesses have been 
revealed even more clearly and call for appropriate reforms.  
Spain was on a pattern of growth in the run-up to the crisis that was not sustainable. Before 
the  decline,  the  housing  market  had  seen  an  important  boom  fuelled  by  expected  future 
higher earnings, an important inflow of migrants and low financing costs. The buoyancy of 
aggregate demand, in turn, supported a wage-setting environment that did not correspond to 
the underlying gains in productivity.  
In the future, changes in labour market institutions to make wages adjust to productivity are 
essential to repairing past cumulative misalignments. There is a need for moderation in wage 
claims  to  regain  competitiveness.  This  window  of  opportunity  cannot  be  missed  in  those 
countries where substantial increases of production costs have been one of the causes for 
widening  imbalances  in  current  accounts,  and  Spain  is  one  of  them.  In  this  country,  the 
burden  of  the  crisis  has  fallen  disproportionately  on  temporary  workers.  Compensation  for 
those  employed  on  a  permanent  basis  has  seen  only  minor  adjustments.  Looking  into  the 
future, wage flexibility will need to be made more widespread.  
At  the  same  time  the  main  asset  for  growth  and  development  in  our  societies  is  human 
capital. Incentives need to be shaped to maintain and develop knowledge by each individual 
and – collectively – by companies and institutions. This includes training and investment into 
the workforce, supported by well-designed employment contracts. Reforms in services, can 
further support the recovery and contain price increases once private expenditure recovers. 
In the end, these reforms, by increasing productivity and competitiveness help rebalance the 
external accounts on a permanent basis and reduce the reliance on external financing. 
Needless  to  say,  the  complexity  of  the  international  financial  crisis  and  the  synchronised 
weakening of the real economy have put banks in a complex and exceptional position. In the 
short-term, with the economic slump and the high levels of unemployment, non-performing 
loans will be on the rise. And pressure on banks’ balance sheets will keep increasing. The 
business  model  will  have  to  adapt  to  the  new  competitive  reality  and  the  international 
conditions.  This  may  translate  into  stricter  cost  management  and  the  use  of  new 
technologies. One of the most important tasks will be to embark on a profound restructuring 
of  a  number  of  medium-sized  institutions.  Restructuring  processes  ought  to  aim  at  tighter 
synergies  and  economies  of  scale.  The  effort  that  needed  is  formidable,  but  Spain  has 
witnessed  numerous  processes  of  this  type  in  the  past,  which  have  resulted  in  highly 
successful business models. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 5
On the way to normal times 
III. 
As you know, in its last meeting the Governing Council of the ECB has judged the present 
level  of  our  policy  rates  as  appropriate.  As  regards  our  non  standard  measures,  as  the 
situation returns to more normal times, the focus on the medium term calls for a gradual and 
timely phasing out of these measures. 
A  number  of  measures  –  think  of  our  refinancing  operations  –  will  phase  out  naturally  by 
design.  As  of  today,  it  is  still  premature  to  declare  the  financial  crisis  over.  But  when  the 
appropriate  time  comes,  there  should  be  no  concern  about  the  ECB’s  determination  and 
ability to exit. As I said on behalf of the Governing Council, looking ahead, not all our liquidity 
measures will be needed to the same extent as in the past. Accordingly, we will make sure 
that  the  extraordinary  liquidity  measures  taken  are  phased  out  in  a  timely  and  gradual 
fashion and that the liquidity provided is absorbed in order to counter effectively any threat to 
price stability over the medium to longer term. By so doing, we will continue to ensure a firm 
anchoring  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations.  Such  anchoring  is  indispensable  to 
supporting sustainable growth and employment and contributing to financial stability.  
On the institutional side, the Governing Council has the unfettered capability to decide and 
institute appropriate policies whenever circumstances warrant.  
Fiscal authorities, too, need an exit strategy. Their response was instrumental in avoiding a 
collapse of the financial system. It helped to halt the sharp decline in economic activity and 
build  general  confidence.  But  that  response  also  entailed  significant  fiscal  costs.  Only  the 
additional  fiscal  burden  that  is  associated  with  the  workings  of  automatic  stabilisers  will 
reverse by design once economic conditions improve. Discretionary interventions will need 
discretionary action to unwind. In any case, the additional fiscal costs that governments have 
shouldered  will  be  carried  forward  in  terms  of  higher  debt  for  years  to  come.  This  is  why 
there is an increasingly pressing need for ambitious and realistic fiscal exit strategies and for 
fiscal consolidation. Some countries are in a relatively favourable position because their past 
management was wise and prudent, while others are already very close to losing credibility. 
Spain – where fiscal consolidation had progressed more than elsewhere – will have to make 
sure that it keeps its fiscal credibility in the years to come in strictly meeting the requirements 
of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
A  clear  plan  for  a  medium-term  fiscal  correction  becomes  even  more  pressing  for  rapidly 
ageing  societies  like  ours,  as  an  increasing  numbers  of  pensioners  will  mean  mounting 
claims on public transfers.  
Conclusion 
IV. 
More than one year after the dramatic deepening of the financial crisis in September 2008, 
we can spot a number of signs of economic stabilisation in the euro area. We have halted the 
freefall  in  economic  activity  that  we  witnessed  over  a  period  lasting  more  than  six  months 
after the intensification of the crisis in mid-September 2008. 
But  the  crisis  has  debilitated  the  real  economy.  As  I  said,  the  crisis  has  proved  so  deep 
because  it  has  deprived  our  citizens  of  confidence.  Every  business  activity  is  by  its  very 
nature an act of trust, an expression of confidence. As regards bankers, by granting loans 
more actively to entrepreneurs they can contribute to transmitting and inspiring confidence to 
the economy at large.  
Being part of the euro area and the European Union will help in this process.  
For what concerns the ECB and the entire Eurosystem team, with Banco de España as a 
very active member of the team, our 330 million fellow citizens in the euro area ask that we 
continue to deliver price stability over the medium term, in line with our definition – less than 
2% but close to 2%. Our determination to anchor solidly inflation expectations has served us 
well since the introduction of the euro, including in the recent period of crisis, by helping to 
avoid the materialisation of the risk of deflation.  
6 
 BIS Review 150/2009
The euro area can count on us to continue to be a solid anchor of stability and confidence in 
these challenging times.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 7
