Masaaki Shirakawa: Balance-sheet adjustments and the global economy  
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Paris 
EUROPLACE Financial Forum, Tokyo, 16 November 2009. 
 Introduction  
Thank  you  for  having  me  today  at  the  International  Financial  Forum  organized  by  Paris 
EUROPLACE.  
Counting  the  Banque  de  France,  financial  institutions,  clearing  systems,  law  firms,  and 
accounting offices among its members, Paris EUROPLACE is an organization with a wide 
range  of  members  with  an  interest  in  French  financial  markets.  Communication  among 
market participants is important for the development of markets, but it is particularly crucial 
during a period of financial crisis. I have learned that Paris EUROPLACE plays an important 
role in providing the opportunities for such communication, and I salute the members of Paris 
EUROPLACE for their contributions.  
At this forum today, reflecting the current financial crisis, various workshops will be held to 
address  issues  concerning  financial  markets  and  the  financial  system,  and  the  workshops 
will  no  doubt  give  rise  to  active  discussions.  The  topic  I  would  like  to  talk  about  today  is 
balance-sheet  adjustments.  As  the  governor  of  the  central  bank  of  a  country  that  has 
experienced the hardship brought by balance-sheet adjustments before any other advanced 
economy, I believe that balance-sheet adjustments are a key factor in shaping the prospects 
for the global economy following the economic crisis.  
Global economic developments and balance-sheet adjustments  
I.  
I will start by discussing recent developments in the global economy.  
Following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  global  financial  market 
conditions  deteriorated  significantly  and  economies  around 
the  world  contracted 
simultaneously  and  sharply.  Recently,  however,  global  financial  markets  have  increasingly 
been showing signs of improvement, and the global economy has started to pick up. On the 
whole,  Japan's  economy  has  followed  a  similar  trend  as  other  advanced  economies, 
although both the economic contraction and the subsequent recovery were greater in Japan. 
The reason is that industries that were the most severely affected by the global economic 
downturn,  such  as  automobiles,  electrical  machinery,  and  general  machinery,  carry  a 
particularly large weight in Japan. 
The current pick-up in the global economy is supported by the following three factors. First, 
dissipation  of  the  panic,  namely  the  liquidity  crisis.  Second,  progress  in  inventory 
adjustments. And third, the implementation of massive economic stimulus measures around 
the world. However, the fundamental problem that caused the current economic crisis, that 
is,  the  need  for  balance-sheet  adjustments  due  to  the  bursting  of  the  credit  bubble  in  the 
United States and Europe, remains unresolved. This means that households and firms will 
have to restrain consumption and investment in order to reduce the debts accumulated when 
asset  prices  were  rising.  While  such  debt  reduction,  in  other  words,  deleveraging,  is  a 
rational  response  from  the  perspective  of  individual  households  and  firms,  if  they  restrain 
spending simultaneously in large numbers, this could cause a decline in aggregate demand 
and  a  fall  in  income  and  profits,  which  provide  the  necessary  resources  for  deleveraging. 
Financial institutions, too, will inevitably have to reduce assets and risks, which had grown 
excessively 
their  capital  bases.  While  balance-sheet  adjustments  are 
indispensable for the economy to return to a sustainable growth path, they will continue to 
exert chronic downward pressure on the economy during the adjustment process, as Japan's 
relative 
to 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 1
experience  shows.  Meanwhile,  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  essentially 
face few balance-sheet problems of their own and have been recovering at a faster rate than 
anticipated in early spring.  
Given these considerations, a key issue in determining the outlook for the global economy is 
how to assess the pressures from these balance-sheet adjustments in U.S. and European 
economies. Comparing Japan's experience of balance-sheet adjustments in the 1990s and 
the current situation in the United States may provide some important pointers in this context.  
II.  
Balance-sheet adjustments and policy responses  
The size of balance-sheet adjustments  
Let me begin by comparing the size of balance-sheet adjustments necessary in Japan and 
the  United  States.  Taking  as  an  example  real  estate  prices  in  real  terms  –  using  the 
consumer price index as deflator – the pace of decline in both residential and commercial 
real estate prices from their peak levels has been more or less the same in the United States 
and Japan, although thus far it seems to have been slightly faster in the United States. Next, 
how do the two square up in a more direct comparison of the degree of excessive leverage? 
One  way  to  gauge  excessive  leverage  is  to  look  at  the  upward  divergence  of  the  debt-to-
GDP ratio for the non-financial private sector from the trend of the past 20 year. Based on 
this  somewhat  mechanical  approach,  we  find  that  the  level  of  excessive  leverage  is  also 
about the same for Japan and the United States.  
Sectors that require balance-sheet adjustments  
Another  difference  between  Japan  and  the  United  States  is  the  sectors  requiring  balance-
sheet  adjustments.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  it  was  the  corporate  sector  that  mainly  faced 
excessive debt within the non-financial private sector. The excess of investment over savings 
reached more than 10 percent of GDP in 1990. Amid the rise in asset prices, firms had made 
aggressive  real-estate  investments  and,  at  the  same  time,  increased  business  fixed 
investment by borrowing from banks using real estate that had gone up in value as collateral. 
After the bubble burst, economic activity deteriorated together with the fall in asset prices, 
and  the  corporate  sector  was  confronted  with  excesses  in  debt,  production  capacity,  and 
employment.  
In contrast, in the current situation in the United States, it is the household sector that needs 
to make balance-sheet adjustments. As seen in the subprime mortgage problem, against the 
background  of  rising  home  prices,  households'  borrowing  against  homes  as  collateral 
increased substantially, which in turn led to excessive consumption.  
Policy responses amid balance-sheet adjustments  
Next,  I  would  like  to  look  at  differences  in  the  policy  responses  in  Japan  and  the  United 
States.  
The  first  aspect  in  this  regard  is  the  timing  and  scale  of  policy  responses.  Starting  with 
monetary policy, both the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve undertook the first policy 
rate reduction about one year after real estate prices in major cities had reached their peak. 
Therefore, the time it took for the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve to start lowering 
interest  rates  was  about  the  same.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pace  of  policy  interest  rate 
reductions  was  faster  in  the  United  States  than  in  Japan,  reflecting  the  difference  in  the 
sequence in which impaired asset problems arose, as described later. In Japan, the policy 
rate reached 0.5 percent after four years from the start of rate reductions, while in the United 
States, it was after only 15 months. With regard to the scale of injections of public capital into 
the  financial  sector,  which  are  a  key  to  the  restoration  of  the  functioning  of  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2009
intermediation,  the  size  of  public  capital  injections  relative  to  GDP  was  approximately  2.5 
percent in Japan, while it was 1.5 percent in the United States. The relative size of injections 
was slightly larger in Japan, but injections were undertaken considerably earlier in the United 
States. In the United States, because the bursting of the bubble started with a fall in market 
prices  of  securitized  products,  financial  institutions'  capital  shortages  were  revealed  at  an 
early stage by market forces. In contrast, in the case of Japan, it took time before financial 
institutions' capital shortages were recognized and public capital was injected. The reason is 
that financial institutions' impaired assets consisted mainly of loans and it was more difficult 
to gauge the decline in their value. It should, however, be noted that currently in the United 
States,  commercial  real  estate  prices  continue  to  fall  and  the  quality  of  consumer  loans 
continues  to  deteriorate,  and  therefore  the  sequence  in  which  the  problems  related  to 
impaired assets arise is different in the United States from that in Japan. Meanwhile, in terms 
of  financial  market  stability,  which  is  key  to  avoiding  a  sharp  economic  contraction,  the 
degree of instability seems to have been relatively smaller in Japan reflecting partly the Bank 
of Japan's active stance as the lender of last resort.  
The balance-sheet adjustment process and the effectiveness of monetary policy  
The  second  aspect  with  regard  to  the  policy  response  concerns  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy.  As  Japan's  experience  shows,  the  effectiveness  of  accommodative 
monetary policy through policy rate reductions declines substantially in an economy that is 
undergoing balance-sheet adjustments. This, of course, does not mean that monetary easing 
is ineffective. Monetary easing encourages spending and risk-taking activity by entities that 
are  not  suffering  from  excessive  debt  and  supports  aggregate  spending  and  income. 
Monetary easing also enhances debt reduction through a decline in interest payments and 
accelerates balance-sheet repairs by supporting asset prices.  
One of the distinct differences between Japan and the United States in terms of the conduct 
of  monetary  policy  amid  balance-sheet  adjustments  concerns  the  income  transfer  effects 
between  economic  entities.  Needless  to  say,  in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  for  economic 
entities with excess debt there will correspondingly be entities with excess savings. In Japan, 
as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in  the  policy  rate,  there  was  a  large  income  transfer  from  the 
household  sector,  which  held  large  amounts  of  assets,  to  the  heavily  indebted  corporate 
sector. However, in terms of income distribution, I believe that in the final analysis, the policy 
rate  reductions  supported  household  sector  income:  although  they  lowered  households' 
interest income, thereby restraining consumption to some extent, the policy rate reductions 
facilitated  the  adjustment  process  in  the  corporate  sector  and  supported  economic  activity 
overall,  thereby  propping  up  household  sector  income  from  employment  and  hence  the 
economy.  
Meanwhile, since the United States, unlike Japan, is a net debtor country, the reduction in 
policy  interest  rates  will  reduce  interest  payments  to  creditors  overseas,  resulting  in  an 
income  transfer  from  overseas  sectors  to  the  United  States.  In  other  words,  in  terms  of 
balance-sheet  adjustments,  the  United  States  has  the  advantage  that  policy  interest  rate 
reductions bring about income transfers that are favorable to the country. However, there are 
also  risks  involved  in  continued  low  interest  rates.  If  the  continuation  of  low  interest  rates 
leads to a substantial rise in long-term interest rates by raising inflation expectations or by 
generating expectations for a weak dollar, this may give rise to another problem, namely that 
the  fiscal  burden  increases  and  in  turn  the  need  for  adjustments  in  the  government's 
balance-sheet arises.  
Effects resulting from different sectors making balance-sheet adjustments  
The difference between the United States and Japan in terms of what sectors have to or had 
to make balance-sheet adjustments can result in considerable differences not only in income 
transfer effects, but also in the adjustment process. In the case of Japan, since it was mainly 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 3
the corporate sector that had to make balance-sheet adjustments, progress in the adjustment 
process for the economy overall was achieved through an increase in exports owing to high 
global  economic  growth.  However,  at  present,  it  is  difficult  for  the  United  States  to  expect 
similar  help  from  a  substantial  rise  in  its  exports,  because  other  advanced  economies  are 
also,  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent,  undergoing  balance-sheet  adjustments.  An  additional 
problem  is  that  employees'  income  has  declined  more  substantially  than  in  previous 
recessions in the United States. While this may help the recovery in corporate profits, it at the 
same time entails the risk of a delay in balance-sheet adjustments by households.  
Having  said  that,  I  must  hastily  add  that  there  are  elements  in  the  structure  of  the  U.S. 
economy  that  will  encourage  rapid  progress  in  balance-sheet  adjustments.  The  size  of 
necessary balance-sheet adjustments depends on the size of the excess in supply capacity 
in the overall economy relative to the long-term equilibrium growth rate – that is, the potential 
growth  rate.  If  expectations  for  economic  growth  are  high,  pressures  for  balance-sheet 
adjustments will be small. In this context, the United States has the significant advantage of 
having  a  flexible  economic  structure.  If  labor  and  capital  shift  swiftly  from  low-productivity 
sectors  to  high-productivity  sectors,  this  should  sustain  high  productivity  growth  in  the 
economy overall. In contrast, reflecting population aging and a falling birth rate, the growth 
rate  of  Japan's  working-age  population  first  declined  and  then  turned  negative  during  the 
1990s. Moreover, labor and capital mobility was relatively low, which was partly responsible 
for  the  gradual  decline  in  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  overall.  As  a  result,  Japan's 
potential growth rate after the bubble burst declined, which protracted the duration of balance 
sheet adjustments.  
Balance-sheet adjustments and the global economy  
III.  
Lastly, I will broaden my perspective and touch upon the relationship between balance-sheet 
adjustments  and  the  global  economy.  What  is  important  in  this  context  is  the  relationship 
between  developments  in  emerging  and  advanced  economies.  Currently,  large-scale 
economic stimulus measures are being implemented around the world. Although emerging 
economies did not face pressure for balance-sheet adjustments, given the decrease in global 
demand  they  nevertheless  implemented  large-scale  economic  stimulus  measures.  In 
addition, monetary easing in advanced economies has stimulated capital inflows to emerging 
economies, boosting economic activity there. On top of that, the effects of monetary easing 
have been magnified by foreign exchange interventions by emerging economies to contain 
the appreciation of their currencies. In these  circumstances, economic activity in emerging 
economies has been recovering at a faster rate than anticipated in early spring, contributing 
to the recovery of the global economy overall. However, we also need to be aware of the risk 
that if the difference in the pace of recovery in emerging and advanced economies does not 
diminish, and if capital inflows from advanced  economies continue for a protracted period, 
emerging economies might overheat and experience financial turmoil, triggering a recession. 
Although  this  may  be  stating  the  obvious,  given  the  growing  interconnectedness  between 
economies around the world, what is important for the global economy is that advanced and 
emerging  economies  grow  in  a  sustained  and  well-balanced  manner.  Therefore,  it  is 
necessary  to  pay  attention  to  the  relationship  between  developments  in  advanced  and 
emerging economies and especially to capital flows from advanced to emerging economies.  
Closing remarks  
In my speech today, using Japan's experience in the 1990s for comparison, I highlighted a 
number  of  issues  concerning  balance-sheet  adjustments  that  will  play  an  important  role  in 
shaping the outlook for the global economy. As a policymaker, I believe it is important to be 
aware  of  the  issues  I  discussed  today  and,  keeping  duly  in  mind  that  the  past  is  not 
necessarily  a  good  guide  to  the  future,  to  continue  to  carefully  assess  economic 
developments without any prejudgment. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2009
