Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Banking issues in Uganda  
Speech  by  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor,  Bank  of  Uganda,  on  the 
occasion  of  Eid-El-Fitri  Celebrations  at  BoU  Western  Gardens,  Kampala,  25  September 
2009. 
 Your Eminence the Mufti of Uganda 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Asalaam Aleikum, 
Eid El-Fitr, Al- Mubarak. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this annual auspicious occasion when we at the 
Bank mark the end of the Holy Month of Ramadthan and the celebration of Eid El Fitr. 
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Your Eminence and all Muslims in Uganda for 
having been steadfast in observing the fast throughout the Holy Month of Ramadthan. 
To  the  Bank  Muslim  staff  who  observed  the  Fast,  I  highly  commend  you  and  urge  you  to 
maintain this noble act of worship. The virtues of fasting should be upheld throughout your 
daily life both at work and elsewhere. 
The Bank of Uganda as a public institution upholds the freedom of worship for every member 
of staff. It is our conviction that religion plays a great role in enhancing morality in the society 
leading  to  ethical  conduct,  discipline  in  the  work  place  and  invaluably  contribute  to  better 
outcomes. Our commitment is demonstrated by the Bank values which each staff is required 
to  uphold.  This  blends  very  well  with  the  requirements  of  fasting  in  the  holy  month  of 
Ramadthan. Fasting brings a reminder to all of us to go back to God, to do the right things 
and shun evil. 
Let me take this opportunity to address you on the health of the Uganda's financial sector. 
First of all there was a baseless rumour in the Red Pepper of September 14, 2009 that a 
“Top Bank faces Closure over Gadaffi Cash” that the workers of "an Islamic founded bank" 
were about to become jobless and that the top management faced arrest because the bank 
was being used as a conduit for money "to some officials at Mengo" from foreign sources. 
Let  me  reiterate  the  statement  in  the  press  release  I  issued  on  September  15,  2009  –“I 
assure  everyone  that  no  bank  in  Uganda  is  under  any  threat  of  closure  whatsoever”.  The 
general public should continue to ignore these completely baseless allegations. 
All  banks  and  other  supervised  financial  institutions  are  well  managed,  well  capitalized, 
profitable, and in good shape. 
Our  Supervision  staff  are  well  trained  and  adequately  equipped  to  carry  out  the  BOU 
mandate to foster a sound financial system. 
The second issue relates to the licensing of Islamic banks in Uganda. The Bank of Uganda 
has received some inquiries for opening Islamic banks or banks which offer Islamic banking 
products. As you are aware the licensing and regulation of financial institutions in Uganda is 
governed by the Financial Institutions Act (FIA) 2004. Some of the provisions of the FIA 2004 
are not compatible with the Islamic Banking model, a matter which is currently under review. 
Bank of Uganda is in the process of amending the relevant provisions of the FIA Act with a 
view to accommodating Islamic banking, or enabling existing banks to offer Islamic banking 
products.  The  Bank  of  Uganda  has  also  received  technical  assistance  from  the  Islamic 
Development Bank (IDB) to train the Bank Supervision staff for full understanding of Islamic 
banking and finance so that they are in position to effectively regulate these institutions once 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 1
they  are  established  and  licensed  to  operate  in  Uganda.  I  am  therefore  confident  that,  as 
soon as the law is amended, we should be having an Islamic bank or banks offering Islamic 
products in the not too distant future. 
Let  me  conclude  by  wishing  you  once  again  happy  celebrations.  May  Almighty  God  bless 
you all 
Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak, Eid Mubarak. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2009
