William C Dudley: More lessons from the crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Center for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) Symposium, 
Princeton, New Jersey, 13 November 2009. 
 Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to 
speak at CEPS again – this is a great forum to talk about policy issues. Tonight I want to 
discuss  some  of  the  challenges  we  face  in  making  our  financial  system  more  robust.  We 
have  learned  a  great  deal  over  the  past  two  years  about  our  financial  system  and  its 
vulnerabilities.  The  task  ahead  is  to  put  these  lessons  to  good  use.  Our  goal  must  be  to 
make the financial system more resilient to shocks. If we can do that successfully, we should 
be able to reduce the risk of financial crises. 
In  assessing  the  causes  of  this  crisis,  one  clear  culprit  was  the  failure  of  regulators  and 
market participants alike to fully appreciate the strength of the amplifying mechanisms that 
were built into our financial system. These mechanics exacerbated the boom on the way up 
and the bust on the way down. Only by better understanding the sources of these damaging 
dynamics  can  we  construct  solutions  that  will  strengthen  our  financial  system  and  make  it 
more robust. 
Today, I am going to focus mainly on the extraordinary liquidity events that played out during 
this crisis. I will tackle this topic in four parts. I will begin by describing how funding dried up 
rapidly  for  firms  such  as  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers,  and  AIG.  I  then  will  propose  a 
conceptual framework that might prove helpful in better understanding what went wrong on 
the liquidity front. With this conceptual framework in hand, I will then suggest some concrete 
steps we might take toward making the financial system more resilient – cautioning that there 
are no magic bullets. Finally, I will talk about the major initiatives that are already underway 
to help reduce the risk of future liquidity crises. 
As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Reserve System. 
At  its  most  fundamental  level,  this  crisis  was  caused  by  the  rapid  growth  of  the  so-called 
shadow banking system over the past few decades and its remarkable collapse over the past 
two years. Let me give you some figures to illustrate the disparity between the growth of what 
I  will  call  the  “traditional”  commercial  banking  system  and  the  shadow  banking  system  in 
recent years. At the end of 2006, the shadow banking system had grown so large that U.S. 
commercial banks’ share of credit market assets had fallen to only 17.7 percent, down from 
27.3 percent in 1980. 
With  this  shift  in  the  composition  of  activity  also  came  an  important  change  in  the 
composition  of  funding,  particularly  in  the  middle  part  of  this  decade.  Commercial  paper 
outstanding grew from $1.3 trillion at the end of 2003 to a peak of about $2.3 trillion. Repo 
funding by dealers to nonbank financial institutions – as measured by the reverse repos on 
primary  dealer  balance sheets  –  grew  from  less  than  $1.3  trillion  to  a  peak  of  nearly  $2.8 
trillion over this period. In contrast, commercial bank retail deposits rose by less than 30% in 
the four year period from 2003 to 2007. 
Though  the  shadow  banking  system  was  often  credited  with  better  distributing  risk  and 
improving the overall efficiency of the financial system, this system ultimately proved to be 
much more fragile than we had anticipated. Like the traditional banking system, the shadow 
banking  system  engaged  in  the  maturity  transformation  process  in  which  structured 
investment  vehicles  (SIVs),  conduits,  dealers,  and  hedge  funds  financed  long-term  assets 
with short-term funding. However, much of the maturity transformation in the shadow system 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 1
occurred without the types of stabilizing backstops that are in place in the traditional banking 
sector. 
A  key  vulnerability  turned  out  to  be  the  misplaced  assumption  that  securities  dealers  and 
others  would  be  able  to  obtain  very  large  amounts  of  short-term  funding  even  in  times  of 
stress. Indeed, one particularly destabilizing factor in this collapse was the speed with which 
liquidity buffers at the large independent security dealers were exhausted. To take just one 
illustrative  example,  Bear  Stearns  saw  a  complete  loss  of  its  short-term  secured  funding 
virtually  overnight.  As  a  consequence,  the  firm’s  liquidity  pool  dropped  by  83  percent  in  a 
two-day span.1 
These liquidity dynamics were driven by two main factors. The first factor was the underlying 
stress  on  dealer  balance  sheets  as  the  prices  on  complex  collateralized  debt  obligations 
(CDOs), private label residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), and commercial real 
estate-related assets fell sharply and uncertainty about underlying asset values rose sharply. 
The  uncertainty  stemmed,  in  part,  from  the  lack  of  transparency  about  what  prices  these 
assets could be sold for, which, in turn stemmed from the difficulty of valuing these extremely 
complex and heterogeneous securities. 
The stress on underlying asset prices and the uncertainty about the valuations of pools of 
illiquid  assets  caused  investors  to  become  concerned  about  the  solvency  of  some  of  the 
weaker  dealers.2  These  concerns  contributed  to  liquidity  pressures,  which,  in  turn,  led  to 
forced asset sales by dealers and others. These sales both further depressed asset prices 
and increased asset price volatility. 
The second factor contributing to the liquidity crisis was the dependence of dealers on short-
term  funding  to  finance  illiquid  assets.  This  short-term  funding  came  mainly  from  two 
sources, the tri-party repo system and customer balances in prime brokerage accounts. By 
relying on these sources of funding, dealers were much more vulnerable to runs than was 
generally appreciated. 
Consider  first  tri-party  repo,  a  market  in  which  money  market  funds,  securities  lending 
operations,  and  other  institutions  finance  assets  mainly  on  an  overnight  basis.  As  asset 
prices  fell  and  volatility  climbed  during  this  period,  the  financial  condition  of  some  dealers 
became more troubled. As a result, some investors in this market became worried about the 
risk that they might not get their cash returned in the morning, but instead might be stuck with 
the collateral that secured their lending. Investors responded by increasing their haircuts – 
that is the margin of extra collateral used to secure their funding – and reducing the range of 
collateral  they  would  accept  as  security  for  their  lending.  Of  course,  these  very  rational 
reactions on the part of investors only further weakened the liquidity positions of the major 
securities firms. 
A  similar  dynamic  occurred  in  the  context  of  prime  brokerage  accounts.  Some  institutions 
treated  the  free  cash  balances  associated  with  these  accounts  as  if  they  were  a  stable 
source of funding. Implicitly, they assumed that these balances would be “sticky” due to the 
strength of broader business relationships and the cost incurred by customers in shifting the 
business  elsewhere.  However,  once  markets  became  strained,  this  assumption  of  stable 
funding proved to be false. Prime brokerage customers began to withdraw their free credit 
balances  and  some  moved  their  business  elsewhere.  Both  of  these  steps  reduced  dealer 
liquidity buffers and further tightened the funding noose. 
                                                 
1   The collapse of the shadow banking system, in turn, put intense pressure on commercial banks. Off-balance- 
sheet items came back on to bank balance sheets and the quality of bank assets fell sharply. The end result 
was  a  sharp  tightening  in  the  availability  of  credit  that  served  to  exacerbate  the  downward  pressure  on 
economic activity. 
2   Some dealers were further weakened by having provided significant amounts of funding to failed investment 
funds, which reduced the amount of funding that was available to meet other needs. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2009
In the case of the tri-party repo market, the stress on repo borrowers was exacerbated by the 
design  of  the  underlying  market  infrastructure. In  this  market,  investors  provide  cash  each 
afternoon to dealers in the form of an overnight loan backed by securities collateral. 
Each  morning,  under  normal  circumstances,  the  two  clearing  banks  that  operate  tri-party 
repo systems permit dealers to return the cash to their investors and to retake possession of 
their securities portfolios by overdrawing their accounts at the clearing banks. During the day, 
the clearing banks finance the dealers’ securities inventories. 
Usually, this arrangement works well. However, when a securities dealer becomes troubled 
or is perceived to be troubled, the tri-party repo market can become unstable. In particular, if 
there is a material risk that a dealer could default during the day, the clearing bank may not 
want to return the cash to the tri-party investors in the morning because the bank does not 
want  to  risk  being  stuck  with  a  very  large  collateralized  exposure  that  could  run  into  the 
hundreds of billions of dollars. Overnight investors, in turn, don’t want to be stuck with the 
collateral.  So  to  avoid  such  an  outcome,  they  may  decide  not  to  invest  in  the  first  place. 
These self-protective reactions on the part of the clearing banks and the investors can cause 
the  tri-party  funding  mechanism  to  rapidly  unravel.  This  dynamic  explains  the  speed  with 
which Bear Stearns lost funding as tri-party repo investors pulled away quickly. 
Despite the strains created by the collapse of Bear Stearns, the “rivets” of the tri-party repo 
system held for several reasons. First, Bear Sterns did not fail; instead it was acquired by 
JPMorgan Chase with assistance from the Federal Reserve. Second, the Federal Reserve 
stepped in to support the tri-party repo system  by implementing the Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility (PDCF). The PDCF essentially placed the Fed in the role of the tri-party repo investor 
of last resort thereby significantly reducing the risk to the clearing banks that they might be 
stuck  with  the  collateral.  As  a  consequence,  the  PDCF  reassured  end  investors  that  they 
could safely keep investing. This, in turn, significantly reduced the risk that a dealer would 
not be able to obtain short-term funding through the tri-party repo system.3 
Over much of this period preceding the failure of Lehman Brothers, U.S. commercial banks 
were relatively insulated from the liquidity run dynamics that plagued the securities dealers.4 
This relative stability was due, in part, to the broad access these commercial banks had to 
the Fed’s discount window through the traditional primary credit facility and through the Term 
Auction Facility (TAF), which had been introduced earlier in the crisis in response to liquidity 
strains  in  the  interbank  market.  The  fact  that  most  commercial  banks  relied  on  insured 
deposits  for  significant  portions  of  their  funding  was  also  important.  Not  only  were  these 
insured  deposits  stable  sources  of  funding  because  they  were  guaranteed  by  the  Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  but  also  because  they  were  unsecured;  these 
deposits freed up collateral that could be used by banks to secure borrowing from the central 
bank and elsewhere. 
However,  once  Lehman  Brothers  failed,  many  commercial  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions encountered significant funding difficulties. News that the Reserve Fund – a large 
money market mutual fund – had “broken the buck” due to its holdings of Lehman Brothers 
paper led panicked investors to withdraw their funds from money market mutual funds. This 
caused  the  commercial  paper  market  to  virtually  shut  down.  This  hurt  bank  holding 
                                                 
3   One final factor that  was important in exacerbating the funding crises  was the novation of over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivative exposures away from a troubled dealer. In a novation, a customer asks a different dealer to 
stand in between the customer and the distressed dealer. This process results in the outflow of cash collateral 
from the distressed dealer. The novation of OTC derivatives was an important factor behind the liquidity crises 
at both Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers. 
4   There were funding strains prior to the Lehman Brothers failure and these were most apparent in the elevated 
spreads evident in term LIBOR funding compared with the federal funds rate. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 3
companies and other large financial firms that depended on the commercial paper market for 
short-term funding. 
The result was a widespread loss of confidence throughout the money market and interbank 
funding market. Investors became unwilling to lend even to institutions that they perceived to 
be solvent because of worries that others might not share the same opinion. Rollover risk – 
the risk that an investor’s funds might not be repaid in a timely way – became extremely high. 
The  extreme  market  illiquidity  did  not  abate  until  a  number  of  extraordinary  actions  were 
taken by the Federal Reserve and others. For example, the Federal Reserve introduced the 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to reduce rollover risk in the commercial paper 
market,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks’  massively  expanded  the  ability  of 
banks  to  obtain  dollar  funding  through  the  TAF  and  associated  foreign  exchange  swap 
programs;  the  Treasury  guaranteed  money  market  mutual  fund  assets;  and  the  FDIC 
increased deposit insurance limits and set up the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program 
(TLPG) to backstop bank and bank holding company debt issuance. 
Having  described  “what”  happened  on  the  liquidity  front  during  the  crisis,  I  next  want  to 
examine, in a bit more detail, “why” it happened. To do this, I will lay out a simple conceptual 
framework that I will then use to assess what can be done to mitigate the risk of such runs 
occurring in the future. As a starting point, I will talk about how unsecured lenders react in a 
crisis, and then I will consider the behavior of secured lenders. 
Unsecured liquidity providers run for two basic reasons. First, they run because there is a 
risk that the company they are lending funds to is insolvent. In other words, there is a risk 
that  the  assets  will  be  worth  less  than  the  liabilities,  creating  the  potential  for  loss  to  the 
creditor.  The  second  reason  that  unsecured  creditors  run  is  the  risk  that  they  will  not  be 
repaid in a timely way. Even if the borrowing firm ultimately turns out to be solvent, there may 
be a delay in a lender getting its funds back, and this delay may prove to be unacceptably 
costly to the lender. 
This second cause of liquidity runs – the risk of untimely repayment – is significant because it 
means  that  expectations  about  the  behavior  of  others,  or  their  “psychology”,  can  be 
important. This is a classic coordination problem. Even if a particular lender judges a firm to 
be  solvent, it  might  decide  not  to lend  to  that  firm  for  fear  that  others might  not  share  the 
same assessment. The less certain any one lender is about the willingness of other lenders 
to provide liquidity to a firm, the greater the risk that too few loans will be extended to prevent 
liquidation. In that case, even if the lender turns out to be correct in its judgment of the firm’s 
solvency, there still will be a cost in terms of delay in receiving repayment. 
A  few  pictures  can  help  to  illustrate  these  concepts.  Figure  1  illustrates  what  a  creditor’s 
assessment of the net worth of a financial firm might look like in normal times. Creditors have 
uncertainty  about  what  that  value  is,  thus,  the  valuation  is  represented  by  a  probability 
distribution. The higher the degree of uncertainty, the greater is the degree of dispersion in 
the probability distribution. As long as the probability distribution is sufficiently far to the right 
– in other words – well within positive territory so that there is virtually no risk that the firm is 
insolvent, lenders will generally be willing to lend. 
So what happens in a financial crisis? First, the probability distribution shifts to the left as the 
financial environment deteriorates and the financial firm takes losses that deplete its capital. 
Second,  and  even  more  importantly,  the  dispersion  of  the  probability  distribution  widens  – 
lenders  become  more  uncertain  about  the  value  of  the  firm.  These  two  phenomena  are 
shown together in Figure 2. A lack of transparency in the underlying assets will exacerbate 
this increase in dispersion. As the degree of dispersion widens, a portion of the probability 
distribution  falls  into  negative  territory.  This  means  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  loss  for 
unsecured creditors if the firm were forced to liquidate its assets. 
Finally, in a crisis, unsecured lenders become more uncertain about others’ assessment of 
the  probability  distribution.  For  example,  if  creditor  A  believes  the  probability  distribution 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2009
looks like Figure 1, but at the same time is concerned that creditor B views the probability 
distribution as looking like Figure 2, creditor A may pull back. If there is a risk creditor B and 
others  will  not  lend,  the  firm  may  not  receive  sufficient  funding.  In  other  words,  even  if 
creditor A believes the firm is solvent, it may not lend because it does not want to risk a delay 
in repayment. 
So  what  can  creditors  do  to  mitigate  these  risks?  First,  they  can  respond  by  charging  a 
higher interest rate in compensation for the increase in the risk of default. However, there are 
a  number  of  difficulties  that  limit  how  well  this  works  in  practice.  Most  significantly,  by 
undermining  the  firm’s  profitability,  the  higher  interest  rates  may  increase  the  risk  of 
insolvency.  If  higher  rates  push  insolvency  risk  up  sharply,  then  higher  rates  may  not  be 
sufficient to make lending – even at higher rates – an attractive proposition. 
In  addition,  some  investors  such  as  money  market  mutual  funds  may  have  a  very  low 
tolerance  for  risk.  Thus,  they  may  not  be  interested  in  trading  off  higher  rates  as 
compensation  for  a  non-negligible  increase  in  insolvency  risk.  Finally,  paying  higher  rates 
may generate an adverse signal about the health of the borrowing institution. This may cause 
investors to become more worried about the risk of default. 
Second, creditors can secure their lending – taking collateral valued at more than the amount 
they lend. However, this is not foolproof because secured funding can be just as vulnerable 
to a run dynamic as unsecured funding. For starters, the same types of uncertainties about 
the value of the firm may apply to the liquidation value of the collateral. This is especially the 
case if the collateral is lower quality and markets are already illiquid. Moreover, if creditors 
are  left  with  the  collateral  instead  of  being  repaid,  fear  of  widespread  collateral  liquidation 
might  further  erode  collateral  values.  If  investors  respond  by  seeking  more  collateral  to 
ensure they will be secured – that is, that they will be made whole in a liquidation scenario – 
the  firm  may  run  out  of  high-quality  collateral  that  the  firm  can  borrow  against.  This  is  a 
significant  risk  when  a  financial  firm  is  highly  leveraged  and  equity  is  only  a  very  small 
proportion of total assets.5 
The risks of liquidity crises are also exacerbated by some structural sources of instability in 
the  financial  system.  Some  of  these  sources  are  endemic  to  the  nature  of  the  financial 
intermediation process and banking. Others are more specific to the idiosyncratic features of 
our  particular  system.  Both  types  deserve  attention  because  they  tend  to  amplify  the 
pressures that lead to liquidity runs. 
Turning first to the more inherent sources of instability, there are at least two that are worthy 
of  mention.  The  first  instability  stems  from  the  fact  that  most  financial  firms  engage  in 
maturity  transformation  –  the  maturity  of  their  assets  is  longer  than  the  maturity  of  their 
liabilities. The need for maturity transformation arises from the fact that the preferred habitat 
of borrowers tends toward longer-term maturities used to finance long-lived assets such as a 
house  or  a  manufacturing  plant,  compared  with  the  preferred  habitat  of  investors,  who 
generally have a preference to be able to access their funds quickly. Financial intermediaries 
act  to  span  these  preferences,  earning  profits  by  engaging  in  maturity  transformation  – 
borrowing shorter-term in order to finance longer-term lending. 
If  a  firm  engages  in  maturity  transformation  so  that  its  assets  mature  more  slowly  than  its 
liabilities, it does not have the option of simply allowing its assets to mature when funding 
dries  up.  If  the  liabilities  cannot  be  rolled  over,  liquidity  buffers  will  soon  be  weakened. 
Maturity  transformation  means  that  if  funding  is  not  forthcoming,  the  firm  will  have  to  sell 
assets. Although this is easy if the assets are high-quality and liquid, it is hard if the assets 
                                                 
5   Moreover,  certain  classes  of  investors  such  as  money  market  mutual  funds  do  not  take  much  comfort  in 
collateral. Also, the headline risk of having exposure to a troubled participant could subject investors such as 
money  market  funds  to  liquidity  pressures  of  their  own.  Investors  could  withdraw  funds  before  losses  are 
realized. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 5
are  lower  quality.  In  that  case,  the  forced  asset  sales  are  likely  to  lead  to  losses,  which 
deplete capital and raise concerns about insolvency.6 
The  second  inherent source  of  instability  stems  from  the  fact  that  firms  are  typically  worth 
much more as going concerns than in liquidation. This loss of value in liquidation helps to 
explain  why  liquidity  crises  can  happen  so  suddenly.  Initially,  no  one  is  worried  about 
liquidation.  The  firm  is  well  understood  to  be  solvent  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  But  once 
counterparties  start  to  worry  about  liquidation,  the  probability  distribution  can  shift  very 
quickly  toward  the  insolvency  line,  as  shown  in  Figure  2,  because  the  liquidation  value  is 
lower than the firm’s value as a going concern. 
There are also a number of idiosyncratic sources of instability worthy of mention, some of 
which  are  unique  to  our  particular  system.  One  source  of  instability  is  the  tri-party  repo 
system  that  I  discussed  earlier.  Another  is  the  convention  of  tying  collateral  calls  to  credit 
ratings. In this case, if a firm’s credit rating is lowered, the firm may have to post additional 
collateral to its counterparties, eliminating this collateral as a potential source of funding. This 
phenomenon  was  a  particularly  important  problem  for  AIG,  which  lost  its  access  to  the 
commercial paper market and was subject to increased collateral calls. Both factors caused 
the liquidity of the AIG parent company to be depleted very quickly. Finally, if asset volatility 
rises, haircuts can increase. This can lead to haircut spirals in which higher haircuts lead to 
forced asset sales, increased volatility and still higher haircuts. 
These sources of instability create the risk of a cascade – of firms moving rapidly from the 
situation  represented  in  Figure  1  to  that  shown  in  Figure  2.  Once  the  firm’s  viability  is  in 
question and it is does not have access to an insured deposit funding base, the next stop is 
often  a  full-scale  liquidity  crisis  that  often  cannot  be  stopped  without  massive  government 
intervention.  
Fortunately,  there  are  ways  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  a  cascade.  First,  we  can  require  that 
financial intermediaries hold more capital. This would push the probability distribution to the 
right  in  Figure  2.  With  sufficient  additional  capital,  the  probability  of  insolvency  could  be 
reduced to a low enough level that liquidity providers would not run.  
Higher capital requirements work to reduce the risk of liquidity runs, but potentially at the cost 
of  making  the  process  of  financial  intermediation  much  more  expensive.  In  particular,  a 
requirement  that  firms  must  hold  more  capital  increases  intermediation  costs.  Moreover, 
banks may respond to higher capital requirements by taking on greater risk. If an increase in 
risk-taking were to occur, the movement of the probability distribution to the right in Figure 2 
might be offset by an increase in the degree of dispersion. Thus, higher capital requirements 
might not necessarily be sufficient to push all of the probability distribution above zero. 
Second, regulators could require greater liquidity buffers. These buffers would help protect 
the firm against having to liquidate assets under duress, and would therefore help prevent 
the probability distribution from sliding left toward the zero line in Figure 2. But there is a cost 
to  the  firm  from  holding  greater  liquidity  buffers  in  terms  of  lower  returns  on  capital.  So, 
requiring greater liquidity buffers would also tend to drive up intermediation costs. And, just 
as in the case of higher capital requirements, banks could respond by taking greater risks. 
Third, regulators could implement changes that would reduce the degree of dispersion in the 
potential value of a firm, pushing the right tail of the distribution in Figure 2 to the left. For 
example,  we  could  require  greater  transparency  about  the  composition  and  quality  of  the 
firm’s  assets  and  liabilities.  Or,  regulators  could  increase  transparency  by  forcing  greater 
disclosure of the sale price of assets and/or by pushing for greater homogeneity and price 
                                                 
6   This problem has been largely addressed in the banking sector by deposit insurance and by providing access 
to  lender  of  last  resort  facilities.  In  addition,  supervisory  and  reporting  requirements  address  transparency 
issues. 
6 
 BIS Review 143/2009
discovery for products such as OTC derivatives. We could improve the quality of regulation 
and  supervision,  which  would  increase  confidence  in  regulatory  measures  of  capital  and 
financial firms’ soundness.  
Fourth, the central bank could provide a liquidity backstop to solvent firms. For example, the 
central bank could commit to being the lender of last resort as long as it judged the firm to be 
solvent and with sufficient collateral. This would reduce the coordination problem and the risk 
of  panics  sparked  by  uncertainty  among  lenders  about  what  other  creditors  think.  If  the 
central bank is willing to provide backstop liquidity, then a lender that judges the financial firm 
to be solvent should be willing to lend. The backstop liquidity ensures timely repayment. The 
lender  of  last  resort  role  eliminates  the  externality  in  which  the  expectations  about  the 
willingness of one lender to lend influences the decisions of others.  
However, providing a liquidity backstop is not without its own set of problems. If firms have 
liquidity backstops that are viewed as credible, then this creates moral hazard. Firms do not 
have to worry as much about what lenders think about their capital adequacy or the size of 
their liquidity buffers. This creates incentives to run leaner in terms of capital and liquidity, 
which increases the risks to the backstop liquidity provider.  
To  mitigate  such  effects,  the  backstop  liquidity  provider  could  presumably  charge  financial 
firms for the value of the backstop. But what fee would be appropriate? It is difficult to assess 
the probability of financial panics and the value of backstop liquidity facilities.7 
Fifth, regulators could take steps to reduce the difference between the value of the firm dead 
versus alive. For example, we could improve the resolution process so that less of a firm’s 
value  is  destroyed  by  the  liquidation  process.  If  we  could  reduce  the  difference  in  value 
between a firm as a going concern versus the same firm in liquidation we could reduce the 
severity of the cascade effect when financial conditions deteriorate.  
Sixth, we could make  structural changes to the financial system to  make it more stable in 
terms of liquidity provision. For example, consider the three structural issues outlined earlier 
that  amplified  the  crisis  –  tri-party  repo,  collateral  requirements  tied  to  credit  ratings,  and 
haircut  spirals.  In  the  case  of  tri-party  repo,  the  amplifying  dynamics  could  be  reduced  by 
enforcing standards that limited the scope of eligible collateral or required more conservative 
haircuts. Formal loss-sharing arrangements among tri-party repo borrowers, investors, and 
clearing banks might reduce or eliminate any advantage that might stem from running early. 
Eliminating  the  market’s  reliance  on  intraday  credit  provided  by  clearing  banks  could 
eliminate the tension between the interests of clearing banks and investors when a dealer 
becomes  troubled.  In  the  case  of  collateral  requirements,  collateral  haircuts  could  be 
required to be independent of ratings.  
Many of these suggestions are already in the process of being implemented. For example, 
the Basel Committee is in the process of strengthening bank capital in four ways: 1) higher 
capital requirements; 2) higher quality capital; 3) more complete risk capture; and 4) capital 
conservation  measures,  including  the  use  of  contingent  capital  instruments.  With  greater 
capital buffers, the risk of liquidity runs should be reduced going forward. It should be noted, 
however,  that  use  of  contingent  capital  instruments,  or  any  other  potential  changes  to  our 
current capital regime, does not obviate the need for an improved resolution process. 
Second,  the  Basel  Committee  is  moving  forward  with  its  work  in  establishing  liquidity 
standards for large, complex financial institutions. These liquidity standards would consist of 
two parts. First, there would be a liquidity buffer made up of high-quality liquid assets that 
would be of sufficient size so that the firm could manage a stress event caused by a short-
term  loss  of  investor  confidence.  Second,  there  would  be  rules  concerning  the  degree  of 
                                                 
7   Supervision could also be brought to bear to limit the tendency for firms to reduce their capital and liquidity 
when provided with a credible liquidity backstop. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 7
allowable maturity transformation. Long-term illiquid assets would have to be largely funded 
by equity and longer-term borrowing, not by short-term borrowing, such as tri-party repo. 
Third,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  working  with  a  broad  range  of  private  sector  participants, 
including  dealers,  clearing  banks,  and  tri-party  repo  investors  to  eliminate  the  structural 
instability of the tri-party repo system so that tri-party borrowers are less vulnerable to runs. 
Exactly  how  the  mechanics  of  the  tri-party  repo  system  will  be  adjusted  is  still  a  work  in 
process.8  
Fourth,  the  major  U.S.  securities  dealers  are  now  subject  to  supervision  by  the  Federal 
Reserve under the Bank Holding Company Act. This means that their liquidity funding needs 
are subject to supervisory oversight, including stress tests, to ensure that the firms can meet 
large funding drains.  
Liquidity risk will never be eliminated, nor should it. The preferences of borrowers to borrow 
long and of lenders to lend short means that the maturity transformation process generates 
real  benefits.  However,  we  can  do  better  to  make  our  system  less  prone  to  the  types  of 
liquidity runs that we have experienced. If we remain committed to implementing the reforms 
that are already underway, I am confident that we can dramatically reduce the risks of the 
type of liquidity crises that we experienced all too recently.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
 
                                                  
8   Work is also underway to shift the settlement of OTC derivative trades to central counterparties (CCPs). This 
is  important  because  CCPs  reduce  risk  exposures  by  netting  out  the  offsetting  exposures  among  the  CCP 
participants.  Also,  because  the  counterparty  risks  move  to  the  CCP  rather  than  staying  with  the  individual 
dealers, the incentive to novate - move trades away from troubled dealers - is reduced. 
8 
 BIS Review 143/2009
 BIS Review 143/2009 
 9
