Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Prospects and challenges in 2010 – the bond 
market in the context of the Philippine economy? 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Bloomberg  Conference  "Gearing  for  2010.  Ensuring 
Profitability. Containing Risk”, Makati, 4 November 2009. 
 A few days ago, I had the occasion to speak before an international body of Asian bankers. 
There,  I  shared  my  views  about  the  future  of  the  regional  banking  market  and  specifically 
raised product and policy issues that confront Asia today. These are the concerns that arise 
if  we  are  to  move  forward  as  a  banking  hub  underpinned  by  the  region’s  vast  economic 
potential.  
I join you this afternoon to focus in particular on the Philippine situation. Instead of providing 
you  with  the  usual  parameters  that  come  with  a  macro  prognosis,  allow  me  instead  to 
discuss the bond market in the context of our broad macro-financial situation. This would be 
our natural recourse given the inherent relationship between interest rates and fixed-income 
valuation on one hand and between economic activity and capital-raising on the other.  
When structure translates into operations 
To  talk  about  the  Philippine  bond  market  necessarily  means  talking  about  the  Philippine 
government securities (GS) market. In addition, it is probably not much of an exaggeration to 
argue that the local bond market is inherently linked to fiscal policy. Over the last 5 decades, 
the national government has found itself in a budget deficit position, with the exception of 5 
fiscal years. The NG funds the deficit principally by the issuance of domestic GS. Of course, 
as the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals improved, the NG has also been able to tap 
the international capital market for portion of the budgetary requirement.  
Nevertheless, domestic funding remains the primary funding source to a ratio of more than 
two-thirds  of  total  borrowing  mix.  Relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy,  outstanding  GS 
accounted for about one-third of nominal GDP as of end 2008.  
This  basic  structure  translates  into  a  challenging  operating  framework.  To  be  sure,  the 
national government has every interest to bring down its cost of borrowing. Yet in the same 
token, it is also the most active borrower in the market. 
One added feature that can readily be seen from the data of the BTr is that GS issues thru 
ADAPS  have  been  predominantly  in  the  form  of  Treasury  Bills,  accounting  for  58%  on 
average since 2000. This significant amount of short-term debt invariably puts pressure on 
managing liquidity and fiscal authorities have to fund frequently maturing obligations. 
The  shorter-term  debt  profile  also  helps  explain  lower  trading  activity.  As  of  June  2009, 
calculations by the ADB show a turnover ratio of 0.37 which literally means a recorded trade 
value of only 37 centavos per peso of outstanding government security. 
At the other end of the tenor profile, many institutional participants choose to immunize their 
long-term obligations with long-term assets. Even those who may not have such long-dated 
obligations  often  prefer  to  hold  Treasury  Bonds  to  term  because  of  the  steady  stream  of 
coupons  over  the  long-term.  The  net  effect  of  both  of  these  is  that  our  long-term  treasury 
issues  tend  to  be  rather  illiquid.  One  can  readily  check  that  the  long-end  of  the  PDST-R2 
series is often the “best bid” of benchmark bonds rather than actual done deals. 
The irony then is that sheer volume has really not nurtured a liquid GS market. Asset price 
liquidity  can  be  problematic  to  establish  for  certain  issues.  For  some  tenor  buckets  and 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 1
specific issues, funding liquidity may also be a concern from time to time. The point has been 
raised that the market dominance of GS may in fact be absorbing funding liquidity away from 
other market instruments, curtailing the development of the latter product lines. 
Market development and policy 
Moving forward then, the clear mantra is to jump-start and nurture liquidity in GS. The recent 
launch  of  the  trading  platforms  for  repos  and  Securities  Lending  Transactions  (SLT) 
separately should go a long way in institutionalizing organized secondary markets. The case 
of the inter-professional repo platform, for example, gives us high hopes of what lies ahead. 
From  an  outstanding  amount  of  Php5.4  Billion  as  of  year-end  2008,  it  is  now  at  Php36.3 
billion as of October this year.  
What  we  would  like  to  encourage  is  for  trading  activity  and  turnover  to  increase  without 
mandating holders of long-term issues to liquidate their positions. This is of course possible 
only if the various tenors maintain sufficient depth while generating credible and transparent 
market prices. In this way, we provide investors with the level of comfort that they can exit 
their  positions  in  an  orderly  manner  without  having  to  absorb  significant  distortions  in 
valuation. 
This  basic  approach  provides  an  essential  ingredient,  that  of  credible  prices  where  trades 
can and do occur. The BSP had previously issued in 2006 guidelines on what we deem to be 
acceptable benchmark  prices.  What  we  would  like  to  see  is  more  depth  and  more  activity 
across  the  benchmark  tenors  precisely  to  assure  investors  that  market  prices  reflect 
consummation  of  demand  and  supply  pressures.  This  is  the  only  yield  curve  that  would 
eventually matter. 
We understand that international accounting standards rely on “bid” rates to establish fixed 
income benchmark rates. In a liquid market, there would be no debate that buy-side rates 
would be sufficient since this would generally reflect the short-side that defines equilibrium. 
However, if we are starting from a fragmented market where both funding and asset price 
liquidity are not uniformly established, it is less clear that “done” rates are of less reference 
value than “bid” rates. 
The  yield  curve  is  essential  for  policy  because  it  allows  us  to  eventually  price  corporate 
issues.  Since  GS  would  still  enjoy  the  least  of  credit  risk,  the  prices  that  come  out  of  this 
market  reflect  the  market’s  premium  for  time.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  pure  premium  for 
waiting.  With  that  on  hand,  corporate  issues  can  be  priced  then  for  their  tenor  and  credit 
quality.  The  transparency  of  this  dichotomy  makes  the  market  more  efficient  for  investors 
who can now choose the combination they are prepared to absorb as an investment risk. 
To this end, the BSP is quite pleased to see the debt issues being listed at the fixed income 
exchange. These are not only straight bonds but more recently includes two bank issues of 
unsecured subordinated debt. As I have remarked at a previous occasion, the listing of these 
corporate issues reflect the willingness of the issuer to be eventually judged by the market on 
the market’s terms. The fact that the last two listings are bank issues gives the BSP added 
pleasure because this is aligned with our stated objective of broadening the ownership base 
of banks while enhancing the capital market with newer instruments. 
The bond market and the needs of the Philippine economy 
Of course, a deep and liquid bond market that generates credible pricing has always been 
the plan. The real question then is what else needs to be done to put the bond market within 
the specific context of the Philippine economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2009
I already mentioned the valuable contribution that the repo and SLT platforms can provide. 
These are a good start because these platforms can unlock trapped liquidity in the long-term 
issues for which we expect to improve on both liquidity and market turnover. 
Beyond trading venues however, four initiatives come to mind. 
First, it may be useful to revisit the issue of having 11 benchmark tenor buckets. It should be 
evident  by  now  that  having  so  many  benchmark  tenors  does  not  necessarily  improve  the 
ability  of  the  market  to  price  off-the-run  issues.  Stated  differently,  the  major  economies 
typically have 4-6 benchmark tenor buckets only and this has not weighed against liquidity 
and the pricing of off-the-run issues. Recent initiatives to exchange short-for-long-term issues 
help to consolidate depth but a significant potential remains untapped. 
Second, the bond market can be a more active vehicle for raising long-term capital. The fact 
that the GS market is as big as a third of GDP is itself not a binding constraint. Economies 
such  as  Hong  Kong,  Korea,  Malaysia  and  Singapore  all  have  significant  corporate  bond 
markets that complement their respective GS market. This would be a healthy next step for 
the  Philippines  as  it  broadens  the  financing  options  for  corporations  while  reducing  the 
gapping pressure on bank credits. 
Third, we need to recognize that the Philippines is an archipelago. The implication is that the 
market  needs  to  bridge  the  gap  in  space  to  provide  real-time  opportunities.  Two  credits 
cannot be priced differently if all that distinguishes them is location. Unless there is economic 
value to location, any such difference is simply arbitrage. Worse, the same credit cannot be 
priced  differently  as  an  investment  opportunity  in  two  different  locations  at  the  same  time. 
That is simply blatant inefficiency, if not market bias. 
Fortunately, technology has moved forward to allow us to fill gaps in time and space. Some 
time  back,  the  BSP  entered  into  a  partnership  with  market  stakeholders  on  the  National 
Settlement  Highway.  The  NSH  is  the  technological  backbone  that  will  allow  the  public  to 
efficiently clear and settle good funds across entities in different regions. More recently, the 
FI-BIOS  was  launched  to  provide  retail  investors  in  different  regions  with  the  capability  to 
place investment orders on real time basis. 
These are the type of technological innovations that help us address the unique situation of 
the  Philippines.  I  trust  that  we  can  maximize  the  use  of  such  facilities  and  make  further 
innovations where needed. 
Fourth  and  final  initiative,  the  development  of  the  bond  market,  whether  GS  alone  or 
inclusive  of  corporate  issues,  will  not  be  self-sustaining  unless  there  is  a  financially-aware 
investing public. This is not a trivial task but the onus of providing the public with relevant 
information must be shared by all stakeholders, both regulator and the regulated. The recent 
passage of the PERA law together with its attendant IRR is a prime example of the type of 
financial awareness campaign that must be pursued. PERA itself is encompassing given the 
wide  variety  of  products  that  may  be  offered.  This  can  therefore  be  the  linchpin  for  a 
concerted campaign and eventually extended beyond PERA. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered quite a bit of ground here this afternoon. Some may 
choose  to  see  this  as  an  indication  that  there  is  much  that  is  impaired  with  the  Philippine 
bond market, particularly that of the government securities. I beg to differ since I have seen 
the strides that have been taken particularly in more recent times. Thus, I choose to see the 
vast  potential  this  market  can  offer  to  the  Philippines  as  a  necessary  vehicle  to  promote 
further economic development. 
It would be a grave mistake however if we see the market simply as government securities. 
While it is true that in the Philippines the GS market in inherently linked to our fiscal situation, 
the broader development initiative cannot be held hostage by such limited concerns.  
BIS Review 137/2009 
 3
Fiscal  consolidation  is  a  continuing  commitment  and  our  collective  efforts  to  address  our 
fiscal  position  may  soon  come  to  fruition.  Between  now  and  the  point  of  a  sustainable 
national budget, the bond market needs to develop so that it moves beyond a largely fiscal-
centric  tool  to  one  that  can  provide  opportunities  for  both  business  initiatives  and  the 
investing public. 
From  the  regulatory  end,  our  commitment  is  to  provide  the  enabling  environment  for  the 
broad fixed income market to thrive. That will include the prudential framework that is needed 
for effective oversight and to protect the interests of the public. It will have to also include a 
stable  macroeconomic  environment  where  expectations  on  market  prices  and  economic 
activity can be reasonably ascertained. This combination of a prudential framework and the 
ability to mitigate volatilities is certainly at the heart of a thriving fixed income market. 
I  will  submit  to  you  this  afternoon,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  indeed  we  have  such  an 
enabling  macroeconomic  environment  before  us.  The  outlook  remains  that  of  manageable 
inflation expectations, “within-target” inflation rates for 2009 and 2010, continuing remittances 
from overseas Filipinos, a surplus BOP position, market-driven peso value and interest rates 
that are responsive to our market’s needs. Already the current low interest rate environment 
provides an interesting market backdrop for this point. Between a fixed coupon rate payable 
over  the  long-term  and  bank  credit  that  is  re-priced  annually,  the  current  environment 
appears to favour the former than the latter. Certainly, we have seen a number of debt issues 
structured of late and I am told that a few more are in the realm of the possible.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  GS  market  can  very  well  serve  as  the 
catalyst for further reforms. The goal is to transform the market from a basic fiscal tool to a 
broader  venue  that  migrates  savers  into  investors  while  raising  capital  for  productive 
initiatives. Instead of tapping foreign saving, entrepreneurs can very well raise funds locally 
without  the  complications  of  cross-currency  cross-border  risks.  Instead  of  crowding  out 
private saving, the GS market can act as the necessary base from which corporate credit can 
be properly priced and sourced. Instead of seeing its limitations, I see what the Philippines 
can do in this market and hold high hopes for its eventual success. 
With that, ladies and gentlemen, I bid you all a pleasant afternoon. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2009
