K C Chakrabarty: GenNext Banking – issues and perspectives 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Panel 
Discussion on GenNext Banking at the 4th International Finance and Banking Conference, 
organised by the Indian Merchant’s Chamber, Mumbai, 25 November 2009. 
The  assistance  provided  by  Dr  Deba  Prasad  Rath  and  Mr  Tarun  K  Singh  in  preparation  of  the  address  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
At  the  outset,  let  me  thank  the  Indian  Merchant’s  Chamber  for  inviting  me  to  chair  this 
session on GenNext Banking of the 4th International Banking and Finance Conference 2009. 
I congratulate the organizers on having chosen such topical and germane topics as “Banking 
– Crisis and Beyond”, “Credit Instruments – Beyond Vanilla Lending” for the earlier sessions. 
I  particularly  congratulate  the  organizers  for  selecting  the  topic  “GenNext  Banking”  for  this 
session, which is both timely and contextual, and merits serious deliberation. 
As you all may be aware, India is in the midst of a demographic transition. The demographic 
transition  that  India  is  going  through  will  result  in  addition  of  millions  of  youth,  who  are 
potentially  a  bankable  population  and  present  a  unique  opportunity  for  banking  system  to 
expand  their  customer  base.  It  has  been  estimated  that  the  population  in  the  15–24  age 
group grew from around 175 million in 1995 to 190 million in 2000 and 210 million in 2005, 
increasing by an average of 3.1 million a year between 1995 and 2000 and 5 million between 
2000 and 2005. In 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years old, compared with 37 in 
China and the US, 45 in West Europe and 48 in Japan. 
In addition to the demographic transition, other drivers of GenNext Banking are inadequate 
penetration, GDP growth and availability of information and communication technology. The 
issue is how the banking system will gear up and tune itself with this new generation across 
the length and breadth of the country. As India is poised to be a global power in the 21st 
century,  GenNext  banks  will  be  a  catalytic  agent  in  making  India  a  global  power.  The 
GenNext  society/economy  will  essentially  be  a  knowledge  society/economy  and  the 
challenge is to see how we can facilitate banking in a knowledge economy. There are also 
going to be challenges of dealing with knowledge workers. 
In the above perspective, I organize the rest of my presentation under the following sections. 
First,  in  Section  1,  I  propose  to  cover  the  macro  setting  for  GenNext  banking  by  way  of 
discussing  the  demographic  composition  of  India’s  population  and  the  nexus  between  low 
dependency  ratio  and  saving.  Section  2  provides  a  projection  of  Housing  and  Education 
Loan  requirement  in  the  economy  in  the  next  few  years.  Section  3  discusses  how  banks 
need  to  emerge  GenNext  with  suitable  new  schemes  and  reorientation  of  their  banking 
activities.  It  also  contains  a  discussion  on  how  to  facilitate  banking  in  the  context  of 
knowledge  economy/society.  Section  4  concludes  highlighting  certain  implications  and 
challenges arising from GenNext banking which need further deliberation. 
Section 1: Demographic composition of India’s population 
According  to  the  Technical  Group  on  Population  Projections  constituted  by  the  National 
Commission  on  Population,  May  2006,  annual  population  growth  is  expected  to  gradually 
decelerate from 1.6 per cent in the five years ending in 2006 to 0.9 per cent in the five years 
ending in 2026. India’s population, which is estimated to have gone up from the Census 2001 
figure of 1,029 million to 1,112 million in 2006, is projected to increase to 1,400 million by 
2026 (Table 1). 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 1
The  age  structure  of  a  population  affects  a  nation's  key  socioeconomic  issues.  The 
proportion of population in the working age group of 15–64 years will increase steadily from 
62.9 per cent in 2006 to 68.4 per cent in 2026. This demographic transition actually to yield a 
demographic dividend would depend a lot on ensuring proper healthcare and other human 
resource development such as education, etc. as also their employability into the productive 
workforce of the economy. 
 Penetration levels suggest healthy potential and target market still expanding 
Despite the aggressive growth in most financial segments over the past decade, there is still 
the under-penetration of most financial products/services. Even though Indian banking credit 
has enjoyed a significant growth during the period 2003–08, credit penetration remains well 
below regional benchmarks, which is suggestive of healthy growth potential in the medium 
term.  Indian  financial  sector  offers structural  growth  opportunities  and  an  expanding  target 
market. In India, it is the household sector which generates largest savings in relation to the 
private  corporate  and  public  sectors,  in  that  order.  A  significant  proportion  of  household 
financial savings is routed through the banking system. As of 2008–09, while the household 
deposits  accounted  for  around  54  per  cent  of  the  gross  financial  assets,  bank  credit 
accounted for around 94 per cent of household financial liabilities. 
While the credit growth during the high growth phase has encompassed all sectors – both 
retail and industrial – and incremental lending has been much diversified compared to in the 
mid – and late 1990s, the retail credit as a proportion of GDP has remained quite low (Table 
2). 
2 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
 
With the low existing penetration levels and the fact that more than 30 per cent of Indians 
who are below 15 years of age, will enter in the age group of 15–64 years over the next 5 to 
10 years, the structural opportunity for banks is evident. The younger generation is far more 
open  to  consumer  loans,  financial  products  like  insurance,  mutual  funds  and  wealth 
management and thereby offers a much bigger revenue base for financial-service providers. 
Although significant financial deepening has been taking place in Indian economy over the 
years as seen from the deposit-GDP ratio, bank assets-GDP ratio and credit-GDP ratio, the 
low  levels  of  penetration  in  India  can  provide  a  medium  term  structural  growth  driver  for 
banks. A noteworthy feature discernible in the Indian context is that the rise in indicators of 
financial  deepening  takes  place  along  with  a  noticeable  rise  in  the  domestic  savings  rate. 
This has to be seen in the backdrop of financial sector reforms, rise in total factor productivity 
and investment boom which has led to acceleration in the growth performance. 
Low dependency ratio and saving nexus 
In the recent years, a virtuous cycle of growth, saving and investment has been in operation 
(Table  3)  and  is  likely  to  continue  in  the  near  to  longer-term  being  contributed  by 
demographic dividends and decline in dependency ratio. These factors will facilitate both rise 
in  saving  and  capital  formation  and  are  expected  to  further  reinforce  the  virtuous  cycle  of 
growth  in  future.  The  existing  studies  on  India  suggest  a  near  one-for-one  relationship 
between the dependency ratio and national savings. According to recent studies (Goldman 
Sachs 2007), 1 percentage point decrease in the dependency ratio adds 0.8 per cent to the 
national saving ratio. Rodrik and Subramanian (2004) used estimation results by Mulheisen 
(1997)  on  India's  consumption  behaviour,  which  shows  a  one-to-one  relationship  between 
the  dependency  and  saving  ratios.  Accordingly  in  India,  a  fall  in  dependency  ratio  from 
37.1 per cent in 2006 to 34.6 in 2011 and 31.7 per cent in 2026 will result in rise in saving 
from the present level of 37.7 per cent in 2007–08. 
 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 3
 in  2009–10,  25.0  per  cent  each 
Section 2: A projection of housing and education loan requirement 
The vast business potential for banking can be ascertained from a brief empirical exercise 
and a projection on the housing loan in India. The housing loan is an important component of 
the loans and advances portfolio of the SCBs (Table 2). As at end-March 2009, the housing 
loans constituted 44 per cent of the retail loan portfolio of SCBs and 9 per cent of the total 
loans and advances of SCBs. The growth rate of housing loans, which witnessed very high 
growth  during  2004–05  and  2005–06,  has  however  been  witnessing  a  deceleration  since 
then. 
A statistical analysis of the data on GDP, housing loan and educational loan for the period 
March 2004 to March 2009 suggests that a 1 per cent increase in GDP growth is associated 
with 3 per cent increase in housing loan and 5 per cent increase in education loan. Assuming 
a real GDP growth rate of 6.25 per cent in 2009–10 and 8 per cent each in 2010–11 and 
2011–12, and 9 per cent each during 2012–13 to 2014–2015, the housing loan is expected 
to  grow  at  20.3  per  cent 
in  2010–11  and  
2011–12 and at 28.1 per cent during the period 2012–13 to 2014–05. The education loan is 
expected to grow at a rate of 32.3 per cent in 2009–10 and at 39.8 per cent each in 2010–11 
and 2011–12 and 44.8 per cent during the period 2012–13 to 2014–15. 
It may be mentioned here that these estimates are indicative and based on historical data. In 
reality  as  the  country  moves  towards  the  high  growth  trajectory,  given  the  strong  income 
effect  and  complex  interplay  of  factors  affecting  the  demand  for  housing,  the  demand  for 
housing  loans  may  grow  manifold.  According  to  some  estimates,  presently  there  is  a 
shortage  of  about  19.4  million  housing  units  in  India.  In  addition,  the  Indian  population  is 
projected to grow at a rate of 1.6 per cent per annum while GDP is expected to grow at a rate 
of 8–9 per cent per annum. As a result, the per capita income is expected to quadruple by 
2020. The Indian middle class is also expected  to expand by more than 10 times from its 
current size of 50 million to 583 million people in next 18 years. Given this rise in per capita 
income, swelling middle class and rapid urbanization, it is estimated that additional 45 million 
housing units would be required by the year 2012. These estimates suggest that the housing 
loan to GDP ratio would grow sharply in the coming years. 
Size  of  housing  financial  systems  as  a  share  of  GDP  in  a  cross-country  perspective 
[Warnock,  Veronica  Cacdac  and  Francis  E.  Warnock  (2008)]  suggest  that  the  emerging 
market  economies  generally  have  a  smaller  housing  financial  system  averaging  to  10  per 
4 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
cent of GDP with the largest being between 20–30 per cent of GDP and developed countries 
accounting for around 55 per cent of GDP. During 2001–05, mortgage debt (housing finance) 
to GDP ratio for India was lower at 4.9 per cent than other developed countries USA (67.4 
per cent), UK (66.6 per cent), Japan (35.7 per cent), France (24.1 per cent) and Korea (20.8 
per  cent),  and  Asian  emerging  economies  like  China  (10.0  per  cent),  Malaysia  (28.3  per 
cent), Philippines (6.8 per cent), Taiwan (26.0 per cent) and Thailand (15.5 per cent). 
17.  An  educated  young  population  gives  a  head  start  in  today’s  knowledge  economy.  In 
India,  they  form  the  backbone  of  the  country’s  booming  service  sector.  According  to  a 
NASSCOM study, the number of students enrolled for tertiary education in India is close to 
10 million. While banks are now regularly extending education loan for courses in India and 
some  banks  are  also  contemplating  extending  education  loans  for  courses  aboard,  this  is 
indicative of the growth potential of education loans in India. 
Section 3: GenNext Banking 
Life cycle wise products and services available under one roof  
The  Indian  banks  have  identified  the  growth  potential  of  the  Gen  Next  and  are  already 
providing  schemes  especially  keeping  in  mind  the  requirements  and  preferences  of  the 
younger  generation.  As  mentioned  in  the  earlier  section,  the  banking  sector  can  help  in 
reaping  the  “population  dividend”  by  providing  life  cycle  wise  products  and  services  under 
one  roof.  Let  me  elaborate  on  this.  The  GenNext  banks  would  be  offering  products  and 
services  right  from  birth  till  death.  The  relationship  would  start  with  birth  when  a  savings 
account  could  be  opened.  I  recall  PNB’s  scheme  where  soon  after  birth  when  devotees 
visited Golden Temple, an account was opened for the newly born. Then as the child grows, 
appropriate products and services would be offered at the right time. During infancy, small 
health  and  life  insurance  services  could  be  offered.  Other  features  could  include  recurring 
deposit  and  fund  transfer  from  parents  to  kids  account.  As  the  child  reaches  educational 
stage,  educational  loans,  debit  card  and  two-wheeler/scooter  loans  could  be  offered.  After 
education, as the youth enters job, then products like housing loans, credit cards, etc could 
be offered. Equity and mutual fund products could be offered. Once he gets a job, savings, 
demat  and  e-broking  accounts  could  all  be  offered.  At  later  stages,  the  composition  of 
investments  in  equity  oriented  schemes  would  shift  in  favour  of  debt  oriented  as  the  age 
advances.  For  entrepreneurs,  loans  and  insurance  could  be  offered  for  entrepreneurial 
ventures.  For  people  in  different  professions,  offering  products  suited  to  their  profession 
would present a challenge and opportunity. If a loan is given, then non-life insurance like that 
for house, education and car loans could be made available. At stage of marriage, marriage 
loans could be offered. Once, he becomes old, loans for refurbishment of house etc. would 
be offered and this cycle continues till funeral insurance products. Thus, the essential idea is 
that a relationship once built at birth carries on till death and all the products and services are 
made available under one roof. Every person will have a customized web-page where they 
can simply select and avail of the various products and services required by them. 
The GenNext banking would thus not just be to attract the youth but to attract them at infancy 
itself so that in future the bank can become the preferred source for other requirements of 
the growing customer. The saving accounts for youngsters are intended to inculcate habits of 
thrift. They will have to be educated and financial education initiatives would be important. 
The banks would have to envisage the changing environment by gauging the dreams and 
aspirations of the youth brigade and launch/provide services accordingly. 
The banks are also providing facilities like internet banking, tele-banking etc. recognizing that 
the younger generation is much more tech-savvy and believe in saving time and energy by 
using technology. Banks are also opening exclusive branches for GenNext, which cater to all 
the aspects of banking for the young population. But, in my opinion, for GenNext banking to 
be a success, staff at all branches would have to be youth-oriented otherwise it is naturally 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 5
not possible to reach the vast majority of our youth. To sum up, the various dimensions of 
GenNext  banking  which  will  have  a  profound  impact  are  information  requirement,  number, 
volume, diversity, density and delivery model among others. 
Knowledge economy and reorientation in Indian banking 
It is now commonplace to say that the 21st Century will be the “Knowledge Century” and we 
are transiting from product-based to knowledge-based economy. The knowledge economy – 
an economy in which wealth is based upon the ownership of knowledge and the ability to use 
that knowledge to create or improve goods and services – presents significant challenges. All 
the  more  so  due  to  the  demographic  transition  underway  now  in  our  country,  since 
knowledge  resources  such  as  know-how  and  expertise  are  as  critical  as  other  economic 
resources in this economy. India will probably have the world’s largest set of young people. 
Even as other countries begin to age, India will remain a country of young people, potentially 
to our great advantage. 
The  transformation  of  banking  caused  by  the  rapid  development  of  information  and 
communication  technologies  has  provided  banking  entities with  new  ways  of  bringing  their 
products to the customers. The banks would now have to increasingly deal with knowledge 
workers i.e. one who works primarily with information and uses knowledge in the work place. 
Traditional  banking  has  thus  changed  into  electronic  banking,  and  therefore  the  standard 
form of contact – personal contact – is taking a back seat to new, faster, more conformable, 
and cheaper means of communication. 
The introduction of electronic banking services also creates new tasks to be faced, such as 
the optimization of distribution channels and the security of data transfer. The customer will 
not  purchase  a  service  that  fails  to  meet  his  requirements  or  a  service  that  does  not 
guarantee the required privacy and security. That is why banks are trying to devote enough 
attention to all aspects of the modernization of traditional banking. 
Basic  electronic  banking  includes  services  provided  through  self-service  zones,  Internet 
Banking,  E-mail  Banking  and  Phone  Banking  etc.  A  new  product  is  the  electronic  purse, 
sometimes called a "multipurpose payment card", which is a payment instrument for making 
non-cash payments. The e-shop represents a specific form of electronic banking. Electronic 
commerce comes in three basic forms: the e-shop, e-store, and e-exchange. 
India’s banking industry must strengthen itself significantly if it has to support the modern and 
vibrant economy which India aspires to be. Focusing on enriching human capital will help the 
banking  sector  competitive.  The  banking  sector  needs  to  fundamentally  strengthen 
institutional  skill 
in  sales  and  marketing,  service  operations,  risk 
management and the overall organisational performance ethic. The last, i.e., strengthening 
human capital will be the single biggest challenge. Old private sector banks also have the 
need to fundamentally strengthen skill levels. However, even more imperative is their need to 
examine  their  participation  in  the  Indian  banking  sector  and  their  ability  to  remain 
independent in the light of the discontinuities in the sector. 
In the field of the knowledge economy, the re-orientation in banking is required at two levels. 
The first is the field of banking management, the continuous improvement of which relates 
mainly to expanding the use of information technologies and knowledge systems. This will 
involve,  above  all,  support  for  financial  system  management,  internal  quality  management 
systems in banks, interactive payment systems, and management information systems. 
The  field  of  banking  management  is  closely  connected  with  the  second  field  –  banking 
products along with the services and operations directly related with them. On the one hand, 
there are products directly connected with progressive information technologies – electronic 
banking and electronic commerce. A second group comprises products and services which 
in terms of formation and quality of provision are directly related to the quality, reliability and 
levels  especially 
6 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
speed of information technologies. One of the most important components of the knowledge 
economy is the people who use the information and communication technologies. 
Section 4: Issues and challenges 
The expansion of banking services for the millions of new customers would imply that there 
would be tremendous growth in the volume of such services. While this presents tremendous 
business opportunities for the banking sector, it also raises new issues and challenges for 
the players, regulators and policy makers. 
As  the  banking  sector  takes  initiatives  to  cater  to  the  evolving  needs  of  the  economy,  we 
need to deliberate on the following issues: 
i) 
What are the appropriate systems and structure to generate information for future 
generation banks? Let us not do GenNext banking without information. 
Will the existing players be able to meet the required volume, number, density and 
diversity of services? If not, would new players, such as MFIs, NBFCs, Corporates, 
telecom companies and foreign players be authorized to perform these services? 
What should be the Delivery Structure for the entire financial system for seamless 
delivery  of  all  products  under  one  roof?  Should  the  model  be  based  on  universal 
banking, subsidiary or collaborative route? 
What should be the delivery model at grass root level? Should it be by way of direct 
or  indirect  approach?  Given  the  dimensions  of  business  involved,  a  multichannel 
delivery  system  utilizing  a  combination  of  branches,  smart  cards  and  mobile 
services appears to be the most appropriate model. 
What are the policy changes necessary to meet these challenges and to facilitate 
growth and transition? 
What  should  be  regulatory  framework  for  meeting  these  challenges?  Does  it  not 
require  a  180°  change?  Since  there  are  a  large  number  and  variety  of  financial 
products involved, what appropriate regulatory framework needs to be in place for 
effective  regulation?  The  question  that  may  need  to  be  examined  would  be  the 
appropriateness of single versus multiple regulators. Whether the existing regulatory 
co-ordination  mechanism,  as  followed  through  HLCCFM,  continue  in  the  same 
form? Is there a need to separate regulation from supervision? 
What  should  be  Business  Model 
terms  of  pricing,  marketing,  product 
development? Transparency in pricing is the key in the context of the huge volumes 
involved  and  banks  may  need  to  examine  the  level  of  their  margins.  Treating 
Customers Fairly will be a crucial issue for GenNext banking as the customers will 
be more educated and aware of their rights. 
What should be the approach to Risk Management Framework? In view of the large 
volume, products and customers involved and the exponential growth taking place in 
banking services, how risk management will evolve to mitigate the emerging risks? 
What  are  the  institutions  and  supporting  requirements  and  challenges  in  the 
Technology, Communication and Network Connectivity which will enable seamless 
services in a secured and cost-effective environment? 
HR  issues  will  assume  prominence  as  the  banks  may  have  to  assess  the  skill 
requirement for providing such services and accordingly create the workforce. 
in 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 
x) 
To  sum  up,  I  have  attempted  to  outline  the  scope  for  increasing  the  banking  industry's 
operations and competitiveness through information and communication technologies in the 
context of demographic trends of India and the knowledge economy that we are embarking 
upon. I hope that this conference will further deliberate on these issues and come out with 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 7
the  appropriate  framework  to  be  developed  through  which  all  players will  work  together  to 
establish  the  system  to  cater  to  the  requirements  of  the  future.  It  is  important  that  all  the 
banking  products  be  made  available  under  one  roof  and  provided  in  a  seamless  manner; 
otherwise, we would lose this opportunity. I am sure that 21st century will be our century and 
the banking sector will rise to these challenges and more. I wish the deliberations a success. 
Thank you. 
Select reference  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Goldman Sachs (2007), India’s Rising Growth Potential, January 2007. 
Government of India (2007), Economic Survey 2006–07. 
Mühleisen,  Martin  (1997),  Improving  India`s  Saving  Performance,  IMF  Working 
Paper No. 97/4, International Monetary Fund, January. 
Rodrik, Dani and Arvind Subramanian (2004), Why India Can Grow at 7 Percent a 
Year  or  More:  Projections  and  Reflections, 
IMF  Working  Papers  04/118, 
International Monetary Fund. 
Warnock, Veronica Cacdac and Francis E. Warnock (2008),  Markets and housing 
finance, Journal of Housing Economics.  
4. 
5. 
8 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
