Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Het Financieele Dagblad 
Interview  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  Het 
Financieele  Dagblad,  The  Netherlands,  conducted  by  Mssrs  Cor  de  Horde  and  Klaas 
Broekhuizen on 16 November 2009 and published on 25 November 2009. 
 Q.  How  stable  is  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  nowadays,  with  bigger  and  bigger 
differences between countries deficits? 
A.  “The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  is  more  important  than  ever.  We  have  a  single 
currency and no full fledged political federation with a full-fledged federal budget. The SGP is 
an essential element, which is fully part of the overall Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
It  is  the  E  in  EMU.  Sustainability  of  public  finances  in  the  medium  term  will  reinforce 
confidence  of  households  and  corporate  business.  The  recovery  can  only  succeed  if  we 
improve confidence. “  
Q. Confidence is the key word? 
A. “Yes, absolutely.” 
Q:  Does  that  mean  the  path  towards  sustainable  deficits  should  be  realistic,  rather 
than too ambitious? 
A. “It has to credible, but it has to be ambitious in order to signal very clearly medium term 
sustainability. If governments are not able to be convincing in their capacity to deliver fiscal 
sustainability in the medium term, households and enterprises will not regain confidence.” 
Q. For some countries 2013 will come too soon to have their deficit under –3% GDP.  
A. “First: the redressing exercise must start in 2011 at the latest. Second: taking into account 
the  situation  of  practically  all  countries,  they  have  to  engage  in  recovery  programs  that 
should deliver significantly more than 0,5% of GDP in structural terms of improvement every 
year. And in many cases more than 1%. We expect the Commission to make the analysis as 
rigorously as possible and we will back its rigorous implementation of the Pact.” 
Q. Does that mean “one size fits all”? 
A. “A few countries have been wise, sound and reasonable in the past, they are in a better 
situation.  The  efforts  for  them  will  be  relatively  easy.  But  many  others,  that  are  in  a  very 
difficult situation, in particular because they did not behave properly in the past, will have to 
engage  in  an  ambitious  and  tough  recovery  program.  But  for  all  the  medium  term  goal  is 
clear: implement the provisions of the Pact which are the same for all.” 
Q. You mean deliver more than 1% deficit reduction per year? 
A. “For some it is a necessity that has already been agreed upon by the Ecofin.”  
Q.  Greece  has  had  problems  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the  Euro.  Does  that  mean 
SGP-sanctions are not effective? 
A.  “In  that  particular  case,  it’s  up  to  the  Euro  Group,  the  Commission  and  the  Greek 
authorities to first of all improve definitively the way the figures are produced, the way they 
are computed, the way they are certified and stamped by the national authorities and by the 
European authorities. That is essential. We must work on the basis of reliable figures. On top 
of that the Stability and Growth Pact has to be applied fully and rigorously for all countries, as 
I said earlier.”  
BIS Review 152/2009 
 1
Q. Some economists call a loose monetary policy the real cause for the crisis. In let’s 
say 2005, did you see the danger of that policy? 
A. “The Governing Council of the ECB has demonstrated its dedication to its mandate during 
this period. We refused to decrease rates when we were called upon to decrease rates, in 
the beginning of 2004 by the chancellor of Germany, the president of France and the prime 
minister of Italy. In December 2005 we decided to increase rates. This decision was criticised 
by  ten  out  of  twelve  governments  that  belonged  to  the  euro  area  at  that  time.  Not  by  the 
Dutch  government,  by  the  way.  The  international  institutions  and  many  economists  were 
calling upon us not to increase rates. In 2006 and 2007 we mentioned publicly that global 
finance had to prepare for a correction due to a marked underassessment and underpricing 
of risks. I was public myself in January 2007, before the start of the turbulences, expressing 
the sentiment of most central bankers, who were diagnosing this underpricing of risk.”  
Q. Some economists say interest rates are so low for so long, that the new bubble is 
being born now? 
A. “The Governing Council of the ECB has always taken decisions commensurate with the 
challenges we had to cope with, and quick and expeditious when exceptional circumstances 
were requiring it. At the same time we have always been dedicated to our mandate and did 
not hamper, in any respect, our capacity to deliver price stability in the medium term. We can 
tell our 330 million fellow citizens: you can have confidence, we will deliver price stability. Our 
credibility has helped us solidly anchoring inflation expectations which has also proved very 
important in the crisis: we have avoided the materialisation of deflationary risks thanks to this 
solid anchoring.” 
Q. What are the lessons learned from the last five years? 
A. “Global finance was much too fragile. The lack of resilience has been paid dearly. Taking 
into account the interplay between the financial sector and the real economy, we saw that the 
system  as  a  whole,  financial  and  non-financial,  was  extraordinary  fragile.  We  have  to 
improve everything in the system. And we should not exclude anything from the review we 
have  embarked  on.  Private  sector  of  course,  where  the  responsibilities  are  obvious  and 
large. Public sector as well, we have to improve the rules and regulations, the standards and 
codes, the prudential regulations, the accounting rules, the auditing and I would not exclude 
the improvements in the institutional framework, in particular on both sides of the Atlantic.” 
Q. Do you think bankers have learned their lessons? 
A. “They have to understand very clearly that all that we’ve been doing, central banks – in 
the form of non-standard measures – as well as governments, has not been done for their 
‘beaux yeux’, but it has been done to avoid the collapse of the financial system in order to 
avoid a depression of the real economy. A lot of taxpayers’ money from the government is at 
stake, in order to permit the bankers to continue to do their job. Their job is to finance the real 
economy  in  the  best  fashion  possible.  It’s  a  clear  message.  On  bonuses,  we  expect  all 
financial institutions to apply the rules that have been worked out by the Financial Stability 
Board. On top of that I would say it is not only a question of rules and regulations but an 
issue of values. The financial sector must understand that it has to respect values that are 
acceptable  by  the  society  at  large.  Your  country,  influenced  by  Calvinism.  is  particularly 
attached to these values of measure and moderation.” 
Q. Do you think the economic recovery came so soon it might stop politicians taking 
bold restructuring measures?  
A.  “No,  taking  into  account  in  particular  the  situation  of  unemployment,  I  wouldn’t  say  the 
recovery comes too soon. That being said, this is no time for complacency. The future is not 
written. It will depend on our capacity to engage resolutely in structural reforms, to draw all 
the lessons from the present crisis, without accepting any taboos and to be fully dedicated to 
our own responsibilities both in the private sector and the public sector.” 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2009
