Ben S Bernanke: The Federal Reserve's balance sheet – an update 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  Conference  on  Key  Developments  in 
Monetary Policy, Washington DC, 8 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 To fight a recession, the standard prescription for a central bank is to lower its target short-
term interest rate, thereby easing financial conditions and supporting economic growth. In the 
current  downturn,  however,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  faced  two  historically  unusual 
constraints on policy. First, the financial crisis, by increasing credit risk spreads and inhibiting 
normal  flows  of  financing  and  credit  extension,  has  likely  reduced  the  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation  associated  with  any  given  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  target,  perhaps 
significantly.  Second,  since  December,  the  targeted  funds  rate  has  been  effectively  at  its 
zero lower bound (more precisely, in a range between 0 and 25 basis points), eliminating the 
possibility  of  further  stimulating  the  economy  through  cuts  in  the  target  rate.  To  provide 
additional  support  to  the  economy  despite  these  limits  on  traditional  monetary  policy,  the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors have taken a number 
of actions and initiated a series of new programs that have increased the size and changed 
the composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.  
I thought it would be useful this evening to review for you the most important elements of the 
Federal Reserve's balance sheet, as well as some aspects of their evolution over time. As 
you'll  see,  doing  so  provides  a  convenient  means  of  explaining  the  steps  the  Federal 
Reserve  has  taken,  beyond  conventional  interest  rate  reductions,  to  mitigate  the  financial 
crisis  and  the  recession,  as  well  as  how  those  actions  will  be  reversed  as  the  economy 
recovers. I laid out some of these points in April at a conference sponsored by the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond,  but  a  lot  has  happened  in  the  intervening  period  and  so  an 
update seems timely.1  
For those of you who might be interested in learning more about the Federal Reserve's policy 
strategy, by the way, an excellent source of information is a feature of the Board's website 
titled  "Credit  and  Liquidity  Programs  and  the  Balance  Sheet."2  This  source  provides 
extensive  and  regularly  updated  information  on  our  programs  and  goes  well  beyond  the 
basic balance sheet data that we publish every week.3
To get started, slide 1 provides a bird's eye view of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as 
of September 30, the quarter end, with the corresponding data from just before the crisis for 
comparison. As you can see, the assets held by the Federal Reserve currently total about 
$2.1  trillion,  up  significantly  from  about  $870  billion  before  the  crisis.  The  slide  shows  the 
principal categories of assets we hold, grouped (as I will explain) so as to correspond to the 
various types of initiatives we've taken to address the crisis. The liability side of the balance 
sheet,  also  summarized  in  slide  1,  primarily  consists  of  currency  (Federal  Reserve  notes) 
                                                 
1   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  "The  Federal  Reserve's  Balance  Sheet,"  speech  delivered  at  "Looking  Forward: 
Rebuilding the Credit Markets." the 2009 Credit Markets Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond, held in Charlotte, N.C., April 2-3. 
2   See "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet." 
3   The  Federal  Reserve  publishes  its  balance  sheet  each  week,  typically  around  4:30  p.m.  Thursday.  The 
balance  sheet  is  included  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  H.4.1  Statistical  Release,  "Factors  Affecting  Reserve 
Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks." 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 1
and bank reserve balances (funds held in accounts at the Federal Reserve by commercial 
banks and other depository institutions). Later in my remarks, I will discuss the relationship 
between Federal Reserve liabilities and broader measures of the money supply. I will also 
discuss ways we can manage the link between the size of the Federal Reserve's  balance 
sheet and the broader money supply during the transition back to a more familiar framework 
for monetary policy. Our capital, the difference between assets and liabilities, is about $50 
billion.  
The asset side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet 
Let's  now  look  at  the  balance  sheet  in  more  detail,  beginning  with  the  asset  side.  For 
decades, the Federal Reserve's assets consisted almost exclusively of Treasury securities. 
Since  late  2007,  however,  the  share  of  our  assets  made  up  of  Treasury  securities  has 
declined, while our holdings of other financial assets have expanded dramatically. As slide 1 
shows, putting aside the miscellaneous "other assets" category, which includes such diverse 
items  as  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  the  buildings  owned  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, the assets on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet can be usefully grouped into four 
categories:  
(1) 
short-term  lending  programs  that  provide  backstop  liquidity  to  financial  institutions 
such as banks, broker-dealers, and money market mutual funds;  
targeted  lending  programs,  which  include  loans  to  nonfinancial  borrowers  and  are 
intended to address dysfunctions in key credit markets;  
holdings of marketable securities, including Treasury notes and bonds, the debt of 
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) (agency debt), and agency-guaranteed 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS); and  
emergency lending intended to avert the disorderly collapse of systemically critical 
financial institutions. I will say a bit more about each of these in turn. 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Short-term lending programs for financial institutions 
The  breakdown  of  the  first  category  of  assets  –  short-term  lending  programs  for  financial 
institutions – is shown on slide 2. As you can see, these assets currently total about $264 
billion, which is about 12 percent of the assets on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. This 
category  of  assets  consists  mainly  of  loans  made  directly  or  indirectly  to  sound  financial 
institutions. Such loans are fully secured by collateral and, in almost all cases, by recourse to 
the borrowing institution, and are for maturities no greater than 90 days. Thus, they involve 
very little credit risk; the Federal Reserve has suffered no losses on any of these loans.  
From its beginning, the Federal Reserve, through its discount window, has provided credit to 
depository  institutions  to  meet  unexpected  liquidity  needs,  usually  in  the  form  of  overnight 
loans.  The  provision  of  short-term  liquidity  is,  of  course,  a  longstanding  function  of  central 
banks, and – as we know from Bagehot and earlier authors – a principal tool for arresting 
financial panics.4 Indeed, when short-term funding markets deteriorated abruptly in August 
2007, the Federal Reserve's first response was to try to increase the liquidity available to the 
market by lowering the rate charged for discount window loans and by making it easier for 
                                                 
4   See  Brian  F.  Madigan  (2009),  "Bagehot's  Dictum  in  Practice:  Formulating  and  Implementing  Policies  to 
Combat  the  Financial  Crisis,"  speech  delivered  at  "Financial  Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,"  a 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 20-
22; and Ben S. Bernanke (2008), "Liquidity Provision by the Federal Reserve," speech delivered (via satellite) 
at the Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Sea Island, 
Ga., May 13. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2009
banks  to  borrow  at  term.  However,  as  in  some  past  episodes  of  financial  distress,  banks 
were reluctant to rely on discount window credit, frustrating the Federal Reserve's efforts to 
enhance  liquidity.  The  banks'  concern  was  that  their  recourse  to  the  discount  window,  if  it 
somehow became known, would lead market participants to infer weakness – the so-called 
stigma  problem.  To  address  this  issue,  in  late  2007,  the  Federal  Reserve  established  the 
Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF),  which,  as  the  name  implies,  provides  fixed  quantities  of  term 
credit to depository institutions through an auction mechanism. The introduction of this facility 
seems  largely  to  have  solved  the  stigma  problem,  partly  because  the  sizable  number  of 
borrowers provides a greater assurance of anonymity, and possibly also because the three-
day period between the auction and auction settlement suggests that the facility's users are 
not  using  it  to  meet  acute  funding  needs  on  a  particular  day.  As  slide  2  shows,  as  of 
September 30, conventional discount window loans totaled $29 billion, and funds auctioned 
through  the  TAF  totaled  $178  billion.  These  programs,  along  with  similar  lending  by  other 
major central banks, appear to have helped stabilize the financial system here and abroad by 
ensuring depository institutions access to ample liquidity. In particular, increases in Federal 
Reserve  loans  to  banks  have  been  associated  with  substantial  improvements  in  interbank 
lending markets, as reflected, for example, in the sharp declines in the spread between the 
London interbank offered rate, or Libor, and measures of expected policy rates. 
Like depository institutions in the United States, foreign banks with large dollar-funding needs 
have also experienced powerful liquidity pressures over the course of the crisis. This unmet 
demand  from  foreign  institutions  for  dollars  was  spilling  over  into  U.S.  funding  markets, 
including the federal funds market, leading to increased volatility and liquidity concerns. As 
part  of  its  program  to  stabilize  short-term  dollar-funding  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve 
worked  with  foreign  central  banks  –  14  in  all  –  to  establish  what  are  known  as  reciprocal 
currency arrangements, or liquidity swap lines. In exchange for foreign currency, the Federal 
Reserve  provides  dollars  to  foreign  central  banks  that  they,  in  turn,  lend  to  financial 
institutions  in  their  jurisdictions.  This  lending  by  foreign  central  banks  has  been  helpful  in 
reducing  spreads  and  volatility  in  a  number  of  dollar-funding  markets  and  in  other  closely 
related markets, like the foreign exchange swap market. Once again, the Federal Reserve's 
credit risk is minimal, as the foreign central bank is the Federal Reserve's counterparty and is 
responsible  for  repayment,  rather  than  the  institutions  that  ultimately  receive  the  funds;  in 
addition,  as  I  noted,  the  Federal  Reserve  receives  foreign  currency  from  its  central  bank 
partner of equal value to the dollars swapped. Because the loan to the foreign central bank, 
as  well  as  the  repayment  of  principal  and  interest,  are  set  in  advance  in  dollar  terms,  the 
Federal Reserve also bears no exchange rate risk in these transactions. Slide 2 shows the 
current value of outstanding swap lines at $57 billion, down from $554 billion at the end of 
last year, reflecting the marked improvement in dollar-funding markets across the globe. 
In March 2008, following a sharp deterioration in funding conditions and the near failure of 
the  investment  bank  Bear  Stearns,  the  Federal  Reserve  opened  up  its  short-term  lending 
facilities to primary dealers.5 Discount window lending and swap lines are part of the Federal 
Reserve's  standard  toolkit  and  are  recognized  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  with  provisions 
specifically  identifying  and  authorizing  each  practice.  However,  the  extension  of  credit  to 
primary dealers is not authorized by the act in routine circumstances. To make these loans, 
which we judged to be necessary for the stability of the financial system and of the economy, 
the  Board  of  Governors  invoked  general  emergency  lending  authority  provided  by  section 
13(3) of the act, which allows the Federal Reserve to make secured loans under "unusual 
and  exigent"  circumstances  to  any  individual,  partnership,  or  corporation.  Using  this 
authority,  the  Federal  Reserve  made  short-term  collateralized  loans  available  to  primary 
dealers through an analogue to the discount window called the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
                                                 
5   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 3
(PDCF). In serving as a lender of last resort to this important class of financial institutions, 
the Federal Reserve supported broader market and systemic stability. Reflecting a gradual 
improvement in financial markets, outstanding PDCF credit dropped to zero this past spring. 
For similar reasons, the Federal Reserve also invoked the 13(3) authority to provide liquidity 
to another type of financial institution, money market mutual funds. The money fund industry 
suffered a significant run in September 2008 after a prominent fund "broke the buck" – that 
is,  was  unable  to  maintain  a  net  asset  value  of  $1  per  share.  Together  with  an  insurance 
program offered by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve's lender-of-last-resort activity helped 
to  end  the  run  and  stabilize  the  money  funds.  The  final  row  of  slide  2  shows  that  credit 
outstanding under the Federal Reserve programs aimed at stopping the run on money funds 
has also dropped essentially to zero.6
The  unstinting  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  central  bank  is  crucial  for  arresting  a  financial 
panic.  By  the  same  token,  the  pricing  and  terms  of  central  bank  lending  facilities  should 
discourage  usage  and  encourage  firms  to  return  to  the  private  markets  when  the  panic 
subsides.  Slide  2  shows  that  this  has  been  the  case.  Short-term  lending  to  financial 
institutions was zero in June 2007, just before the crisis began, and exceeded $1.1 trillion at 
the end of last year. Currently, as I mentioned, this category has fallen to about $264 billion, 
a decline of more than 75 percent since the turn of the year. We expect this trend to continue 
as markets improve. 
Targeted lending to address credit market dysfunction 
The second category of assets on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, shown on slide 3, 
consists of targeted lending programs aimed at improving the functioning of certain key credit 
markets, thereby providing critical support to the economy. Unlike the first category of assets, 
some  of  these  loans  are  to  nonfinancial  borrowers.  As  the  slide  shows,  this  category 
comprises  the  Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  (CPFF)  and  the  Term  Asset-Backed 
Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF).  The  current  amount  of  credit  outstanding  under  these 
programs is about $84 billion, or four percent of the assets held by the Federal Reserve. 
The commercial paper market is an important source of short-term funding for both financial 
and  nonfinancial  firms  in  the  United  States.  In  September  2008,  the  collapse  of  the 
investment bank Lehman Brothers set off a chain reaction: The money fund that broke the 
buck, to which I just alluded, did so because of its losses on Lehman Brothers commercial 
paper. Because money market funds are major investors in commercial paper, the run on the 
money funds that ensued also severely disrupted the commercial paper market. During this 
period,  commercial  paper  rates  spiked,  even  for  the  highest-quality  firms.  Moreover,  most 
firms were unable to borrow for terms longer than a few days, exposing both the borrowing 
firms and the lenders to significant rollover risk. The Federal Reserve's CPFF addressed this 
risk by offering to lend at a term of three months, at a rate above normal market rates plus 
upfront fees, to high-quality commercial paper issuers. This program appears to have been 
quite successful. Since the CPFF was created, commercial paper spreads have returned to 
near-normal levels, and – as anticipated – borrowings from the CPFF have declined sharply, 
from $334 billion at the turn of the year to less than $50 billion today. 
Before the crisis, securitization markets were an important conduit of credit to the household 
and business sectors; some have referred to these markets as the "shadow banking system." 
Securitization markets (other than those for mortgages guaranteed by the government) were 
virtually shut down in the crisis, eliminating an important source of credit.7 To address this 
                                                 
6   The programs for money market funds are the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund 
Liquidity Facility, or AMLF, and the Money Market Investor Funding Facility, or MMIFF. 
7   The shutdown of these markets was traced, in part, to broad concerns about the risks of structured products, 
particularly those backed by nonprime mortgages. In addition, these difficulties were linked to the evaporation 
of liquidity from short-term credit markets. In the years leading up to the financial crisis, market participants 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2009
concern, the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Treasury, launched the TALF. Under 
the TALF, eligible investors may borrow to finance purchases of the AAA-rated tranches of 
certain  classes  of  asset-backed  securities.  The  program  originally  focused  on  credit  for 
households and small businesses, including auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and 
loans  guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.  More  recently,  we  have  added 
commercial mortgage-backed securities to the program, with the goal of mitigating a severe 
refinancing problem in that sector.  
The  TALF  has  had  some  success  in  restarting  securitization  markets.  Rate  spreads  for 
asset-backed securities have declined substantially, and we are seeing some market activity 
that does not use the facility. Like our other programs, the TALF carries little credit risk for 
the  Federal  Reserve,  because  we  lend  investors  less  than  the  value  of  the  collateral  and 
because  capital  from  the  Treasury  provides  additional  loss-absorption  capacity.  Unlike  the 
other programs, TALF credit outstanding has increased over time, as the loans made under 
this program are for terms ranging from three to five years.  
Relative to the Federal Reserve's short-term lending to financial institutions, the CPFF and 
the TALF are rather unconventional programs for a central bank. I believe they are justified 
by the extraordinary circumstances of the past year and by the need for the central bank's 
crisis response to reflect the evolution of financial markets. Nonbank sources of credit, such 
as  the  commercial  paper  market  and  the  securitization  markets,  are  critical  to  the  U.S. 
economy,  especially  compared  with  the  more  bank-centric  economies  of  many  foreign 
countries. By backstopping these markets, the Federal Reserve has helped normalize credit 
flows for the benefit of the economy. 
Purchases of longer-term, marketable securities 
The  third  major  category  of  assets  on  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  is  holdings  of 
high-quality,  marketable  securities  –  specifically,  Treasury  securities,  agency  debt,  and 
agency-backed MBS. As shown by slide 4, these holdings currently total about $1.6 trillion, 
or about 75 percent of Federal Reserve assets. By way of comparison, slide 4 also shows 
that, prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve held $791 billion in securities, which was about 
90 percent of its assets, and that all of these securities were Treasury obligations. 
Even  as  other  categories  of  assets  shrink,  Federal  Reserve  holdings  of  longer-term 
securities are set to continue to rise in the near term and will increasingly dominate the asset 
side  of  the  balance  sheet.  As  slide  4  shows,  our  holdings  of  securities  declined  from  the 
period  before  the  crisis  to  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  Federal  Reserve  announced  in 
November  2008  that  it  would  begin  to  purchase  agency  debt  and  agency  MBS;  then  in 
March,  it  announced  plans  to  increase  such  purchases  to  as  much  as  $1.25  trillion  in 
agency-backed MBS and $200 billion in agency debt, and also announced plans to buy up to 
$300 billion in Treasury securities.8 We recently indicated that we expect to purchase the full 
$1.25 trillion of agency-backed MBS announced in March.9 The Treasury purchase program 
is being completed this month, while the purchases of agency securities will be executed by 
the end of the first quarter of 2010. Note, incidentally, that the Federal Reserve's purchases 
                                                                                                                                                      
increasingly  used  short-term  debt  to  fund  the  purchase  of  highly  rated  tranches  of  securitizations,  in  some 
cases with little or no liquidity support. As a result, when short-term credit markets froze, the demand for highly 
rated tranches of securitizations dropped. 
8   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Federal Reserve Announces It Will Initiate a 
Program  to  Purchase  the  Direct  Obligations  of  Housing-Related  Government-Sponsored  Enterprises  and 
Mortgage-Backed  Securities  Backed  by  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  Ginnie  Mae,"  press  release, 
November  25;  and  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "FOMC  Statement,"  press 
release, March 18. 
9   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, September 23. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 5
of Treasury securities have served only to bring its holdings of U.S. Treasury debt back to 
roughly the level of before the crisis. The principal goals of our recent security purchases are 
to  lower  the  cost  and  improve  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and  businesses.  As 
best we can tell, the programs appear to be having their intended effect. Most notably, 30-
year fixed mortgage rates, which responded very little to our cuts in the target federal funds 
rate, have declined about 1-1/2 percentage points since we first announced MBS purchases 
in November, helping to support the housing market. 
Support for specific institutions 
In addition to the programs I have  discussed, the Federal Reserve has provided financing 
directly to specific systemically important institutions. In particular, with the full support of the 
Treasury, we used our emergency lending powers to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns 
by  JPMorgan  Chase  &  Co.  and  also  to  prevent  the  imminent  default  of  the  insurance 
company AIG. Slide 5 summarizes the amount of credit outstanding from these episodes. 
From a credit perspective, these emergency loans obviously carry more risk than traditional 
provisions of central bank liquidity. Two observations on this point are worth making: First, 
these loans amount to less than five percent of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. Thus, 
Federal Reserve loans that are collateralized by riskier securities are quite small compared 
with  our  holdings  of  assets  with  little  or  no  credit  risk.  Second,  and  more  important,  these 
financial  risks  were  the  result  of  actions  taken  to  avert  what  likely  would  have  been  a 
substantial  further  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis,  with  potentially  dire  economic 
consequences. 
All  that  said,  we  undertook  these  operations  with  great  discomfort  and  only  because  the 
United  States  has  no  workable  legal  framework  for  winding  down  systemically  critical 
financial institutions in a way that would allow firms to fail and their creditors to lose money 
without  inflicting  massive  damage  on  the  financial  system.  The  Administration  and  other 
regulatory agencies have joined the Federal Reserve in calling on the Congress to develop a 
special resolution regime for systemically critical nonbank financial institutions, analogous to 
one  already  in  place  for  banks,  that  could  be  invoked  when  the  impending  failure  of  such 
institutions threatens financial stability. The rules governing such a regime should spell out 
as precisely as possible the role that the Congress expects the Federal Reserve to play in 
such resolutions. 
The liability side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet 
Having reviewed the main categories of assets on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, let 
me touch briefly on the liability side (slide 6). The two main components of our liabilities are 
Federal Reserve notes (that is, paper currency) and reserves held at the Federal Reserve by 
depository  institutions.  In  addition,  as  the  government's  fiscal  agent,  the  Federal  Reserve 
holds Treasury deposits. 
The  amount  of  currency  in  circulation  is  determined  by  the  public's  demand.  The  "public" 
here  includes  non-U.S.  residents,  as,  by  some  estimates,  more  than  one-half  of  U.S. 
currency by value is held outside the country. Banks are required to deposit with the Federal 
Reserve a certain quantity of reserves, which depends on the amount of customer deposits 
that the banks hold.10 Reserves exceeding the required amounts are called excess reserves. 
As  you  can  see  from  slide  6,  the  large  majority  of  bank  reserves  are  currently  excess 
reserves. 
                                                 
10   Reserves can also be held in the form of vault cash. 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2009
Effectively, the Federal Reserve funds its lending and securities purchases primarily through 
the  creation  of  bank  reserves.  As  you  can  see,  the  quantity  of  bank  reserves  held  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  risen  dramatically  as  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  has 
expanded,  and  reserves  are  likely  to  continue  to  grow  as  the  Federal  Reserve  purchases 
additional agency-backed securities. Currency and bank reserves together are known as the 
monetary base; as reserves have grown, therefore, the monetary base has grown as well. 
However,  because  banks  are  reluctant  to  lend  in  current  economic  and  financial 
circumstances,  growth  in  broader  measures  of  money  has  not  picked  up  by  anything 
remotely like the growth in the base. For example, M2, which comprises currency, checking 
accounts, savings deposits, small time deposits, and retail money fund shares, is estimated 
to have been roughly flat over the past six months. 
Large increases in bank reserves brought about through central bank loans or purchases of 
securities  are  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  unconventional  policy  approach  known  as 
quantitative easing. The idea behind quantitative easing is to provide banks with substantial 
excess liquidity in the hope that they will choose to use some part of that liquidity to make 
loans or buy other assets. Such purchases should in principle both raise asset prices and 
increase the growth of broad measures of money, which may in turn induce households and 
businesses  to  buy  nonmoney  assets  or  to  spend  more  on  goods  and  services.  In  a 
quantitative-easing  regime,  the  quantity  of  central  bank  liabilities  (or  the  quantity  of  bank 
reserves, which should vary closely with total liabilities) is sufficient to describe the degree of 
policy accommodation. 
Although the Federal Reserve's approach also entails substantial increases in bank liquidity, 
it is motivated less by the desire to increase the liabilities of the Federal Reserve than by the 
need to address dysfunction in specific credit markets through the types of programs I have 
discussed. For lack of a better term, I have called this approach "credit easing."11 In a credit-
easing regime, policies are tied more closely to the asset side of the balance sheet than the 
liability  side,  and  the  effectiveness  of  policy  support  is  measured  by  indicators  of  market 
functioning,  such  as  interest  rate  spreads,  volatility,  and  market  liquidity.  In  particular,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  not  attempted  to  achieve  a  smooth  growth  path  for  the  size  of  its 
balance sheet, a common feature of the quantitative-easing approach.  
Exit strategy 
My colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I believe that accommodative policies will likely be 
warranted for an extended period. At some point, however, as economic recovery takes hold, 
we  will  need  to  tighten  monetary  policy  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  an  inflation  problem 
down  the  road.  Looking  at  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  is  useful,  once  again,  in 
helping to understand key elements of the Federal Reserve's exit strategy from its current 
policies (slide 7). 
As  we  just  saw  in  slide  6,  banks  currently  hold  large  amounts  of  excess  reserves  at  the 
Federal  Reserve.  As  the  economy  recovers,  banks  could  find  it  profitable  to  be  more 
aggressive in lending out their reserves, which in turn would produce faster growth in broader 
money and credit measures and, ultimately, lead to inflation pressures. As such, when the 
time comes to tighten monetary policy, we must either substantially reduce excess reserve 
balances or, if they remain, neutralize their potential effects on broader measures of money 
and credit and thus on aggregate demand and inflation. 
                                                 
11   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Crisis and the Policy Response," speech delivered at the Stamp Lecture, 
London School of Economics, London, England, January 13; and Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Federal Reserve 
Policies to Ease Credit and Their Implications for the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at the National 
Press Club Luncheon, National Press Club, Washington, D.C., February 18. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 7
To some extent, excess reserves will automatically contract as improving financial conditions 
lead to reduced use of our special lending facilities and, ultimately, to their closure. Indeed, 
as I have already noted, the amount of credit outstanding in the first two categories of assets 
(short-term  lending  to  financial  institutions  and  targeted  lending  programs)  has  already 
declined  substantially,  from  about  $1.5  trillion  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  to  about  $350 
billion. In addition, reserves could be reduced by about $100 billion to $200 billion each year 
over the next few years as securities held by the Federal Reserve mature or are prepaid. 
However,  even  if  our  balance  sheet  stays  large  for  a  while,  we  have  two  broad  means  of 
tightening monetary policy at the appropriate time – paying interest on reserve balances and 
taking various actions that reduce the stock of reserves. In principle, we could use either of 
these  approaches  alone;  however,  to  ensure  effectiveness,  we  likely  would  use  both  in 
combination. 
The Congress granted us authority last fall to pay interest on banks' balances at the Federal 
Reserve. Currently, we pay banks an interest rate of 1/4 percent. When the time comes to 
tighten policy, we can raise the rate paid on reserve balances as we increase our target for 
the  federal  funds  rate.  In  general,  banks  will  not  lend  funds  in  the  money  market  at  an 
interest rate lower than the rate they can earn risk-free at the Federal Reserve. Moreover, 
they should compete to borrow any funds that are offered in private markets at rates below 
the interest rate on reserve balances because, by so doing, they can earn a spread without 
risk. Thus, the interest rate that the Federal Reserve pays should tend to put a floor under 
short-term  market  rates.  Raising  the  rate  paid  on  reserve  balances  also  discourages 
excessive growth in money or credit, because banks will not want to lend out their reserves 
at  rates  below  what  they  can  earn  at  the  Fed.  Considerable  international  experience 
suggests  that  paying  interest  on  reserves  is  an  effective  means  of  managing  short-term 
market rates. For example, the European Central Bank (ECB) allows banks to place excess 
reserves  in  an  interest-paying  deposit  facility.  Even  as  the  ECB's  liquidity  operations  have 
substantially  increased  its  balance  sheet,  the  overnight  interbank  rate  has  remained  at  or 
above the ECB's deposit rate. The Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and several other 
foreign central banks have also used their ability to pay interest on reserves to maintain a 
floor under short-term market rates. 
Although, in principle, the ability to pay interest on reserves should be sufficient to allow the 
Federal Reserve to raise interest rates and control money growth, this approach is likely to 
be  more  effective  if  combined  with  steps  to  reduce  excess  reserves.  I  will  mention  three 
options for achieving such an outcome. 
First, the Federal Reserve could drain bank reserves and reduce the excess liquidity at other 
institutions  by  arranging  large-scale  reverse  repurchase  agreements  (reverse  repos)  with 
financial  market  participants,  including  banks,  the  GSEs,  and  other  institutions.  Reverse 
repos,  which  are  a  traditional  and  well-understood  tool  of  monetary  policy  implementation, 
involve the sale by the Federal Reserve of securities from its portfolio with an agreement to 
buy the securities back at a slightly higher price at a later date. Reverse repos drain reserves 
as  purchasers  transfer  cash  from  banks  to  the  Fed.  Second,  using  the  authority  the 
Congress gave us to pay interest on banks' balances at the Federal Reserve, we can offer 
term deposits to banks, roughly analogous to the certificates of deposit that banks offer to 
their  customers.  Bank  funds  held  in  term  deposits  at  the  Federal  Reserve  would  not  be 
available to be supplied to the federal funds market. Third, the Federal Reserve could reduce 
reserves by selling a portion of its holdings of long-term securities in the open market. Each 
of these policy options would help to raise short-term interest rates and limit the growth of 
broad measures of money and credit, thereby tightening monetary policy.  
Overall, the Federal Reserve has a wide range of tools for tightening monetary policy when 
the economic outlook requires us to do so. We will calibrate the timing and pace of any future 
tightening,  together  with  the  mix  of  tools,  to  best  foster  our  dual  objectives  of  maximum 
employment and price stability. 
8 
 BIS Review 124/2009
Conclusion 
By  using  our  balance  sheet,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  able  to  overcome,  at  least 
partially,  the  constraints  on  policy  posed  by  dysfunctional  credit  markets  and  by  the  zero 
lower  bound  on  the  federal  funds  rate  target.  By  improving  credit  market  functioning  and 
adding  liquidity  to  the  system,  our  programs  have  provided  critical  support  to  the  financial 
system and the economy. Moreover, we have carried out these programs responsibly, with 
minimal credit risk and with close attention to the exit strategy. Our activities have resulted in 
substantial changes to the size and composition of our balance sheet. When the economic 
outlook  has  improved  sufficiently,  we  will  be  prepared  to  tighten  the  stance  of  monetary 
policy and eventually return our balance sheet to a more normal configuration. 
 
 BIS Review 124/2009 
 9
  10 
   BIS Review 124/2009
 BIS Review 124/2009 
   11
  12 
   BIS Review 124/2009
