Ardian Fullani: Economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the decision of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 25 November 2009. 
 In  its  meeting  of  November  25,  2009,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
analysed “The Monetary Policy Report for November 2009”. After becoming acquainted with 
the  latest  economic  and  financial  developments  at  home,  and  following  the  discussions 
related to their expected performance in the future, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of 
Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 5.25 percent. The Supervisory 
Council assessed that this interest rate is in line with Bank of Albania’s goal to keep inflation 
close to the target over the medium run. 
 Economic  and  monetary  developments  over  the  latest  months  are  featured  by  low 
inflationary  pressures.  Annual  consumer-price  inflation  for  October  recorded  2.3  percent, 
being almost in line with its performance over the last quarter. The steady and low inflation 
rate has been conditioned by moderate pressures from domestic economy, due to: 
• 
• 
Economic activity slowdown during this period;  
Low  exchange  rate  pass-through  of  exchange  rate  depreciation  on  Lek  prices  of 
import goods; and 
Stabilized inflationary expectations. 
• 
Easing  of  monetary  conditions  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  through  key  interest  rate  cut  in 
October and continuation of liquidity injecting operations have provided appropriate impulses 
for  promoting  the  economic  activity  in  the  future.  These  impulses,  as  always,  are 
administered under the conditions of an expected inflation performance close to the three-
percent target of the Bank of Albania, and stabilized expectations of economic agents for it. 
The  key  interest  rate  cut  by  0.5  percentage  point  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  at  end-October 
aimed at strengthening the domestic demand and reviving the lending activity. Its effect on 
the economy is not fully reflected yet, due to the short period of time and the time lags in 
transmitting  the  monetary  policy.  However,  its  pass-through  to  the  money  market,  which 
constitutes the first link in the transmission chain, is a premise for its reflection to credit cost 
in a second round. In the meantime, our liquidity injecting operations have been successful in 
guaranteeing the backup of economy with funds, mainly short-term ones.  
Allow me to make a more detailed description of the economic and monetary developments 
during this period. 
 At  global  level,  the  economic  activity  has  been  supported  by  improved  overall  economic 
climate,  impacting  on  the  improvement  of  the  global  economic  activity,  reduction  of  risk 
premiums  and  stability  of  global  financial  markets.  However,  the  global  economy  and  the 
European  one  continue  to  reflect  economic  vulnerabilities,  which  are  transmitted  to  low 
inflationary pressures. This situation conditions also the pursuit of a stimulating monetary and 
fiscal policy by keeping interest rates at the historical low and by high liquidity injections.  
Back to the domestic economy, we should state that the new economic data were insufficient 
during October. Performance of inflation and of monetary and fiscal indicators, external trade 
data  and  consumer  and  business  indices  confirm  that  the  Albanian  economy  continues  to 
record  positive  growth  rates.  This  growth  is  sustained  by  maintaining  steady  levels  of  the 
consumer demand and fiscal stimulus given during 2009. However, available data from the 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 1
economy speak for an economic activity slowdown during the current year. Foreign demand 
for Albanian products has decreased, being illustrated by export slowdown along this period, 
while investments have declined.  
The steady trend of core inflation and low non-traded inflation rate also indicate the presence 
of  low  aggregate  demand-induced  inflationary  pressures  in  the  country’s  economy  during 
January–October 2009. This performance has contributed to absorption of shocks generated 
from  traded  inflation,  due  to  weakening  of  national  currency’s  position  in  the  domestic 
foreign-exchange market.  
Inflation  during  2009  has  fluctuated  around  the  lower  limit  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target. 
Headline  inflation  in  October  was  2.3  percent,  recording  a  slight  rise  in  comparison  to 
September,  but  resting  below  the  record  of  the  previous  year.  Average  annual  inflation 
recorded 2.1 percent, resting at the same level with that of September. Parallel to demand 
factors,  inflation  performance  is  influenced  even  from  the  development  of  several  supply 
factors,  such  as  slight  downward  trend  in  the  labour  cost  per  unit,  reduced  import  and 
producer prices, statistical effect of administered prices, thus creating an overall environment 
with reduced inflationary pressures.  
Fiscal  policy  during  the  third  quarter  of  2009  has  revealed  signs  of  mitigating  its 
expansionary nature. Revenues have recorded a slight rise related to the previous months, 
while there is noticed a reduction in realised expenditure pace. In annual terms, during the 
first  nine  months  of  the  year  the  budget  revenues  have  recorded  a  growth  of  6  percent, 
whereas  the  budget  spending  has  increased  by  22  percent.  The  budget  deficit  remains  at 
comparably high historical levels, but within the budget limits reviewed lately.  
To  a  great  extent,  this  deficit  reflects  the  high  level  of  public  capital  expenditures  during 
2009.  Public  expenditures  and  fiscal  policy  have  provided  a  tangible  contribution  to  the 
maintaining of the economic activity along this period, but they have been associated with 
increased pressures over the money markets. The Bank of Albania considers that the fiscal 
policy should continue to be prudent towards these balances in the future, and should take 
into consideration the long-term fiscal stability while drafting and implementing mid-term and 
long-term budget plans. 
External trade was featured by weakening in the trade volume during the first nine months of 
the  year.  However,  trade  exchanges  value  recorded  during  September  is  the  highest 
recorded  since  2009.  After  about  three  months  of  constant  narrowing,  the  trade  deficit 
enlarged during this month by about 9 percent in annual terms. Exports dropped by about 18 
percent  in  annual  terms,  though  the  lek’s  weak  position  vis-à-vis  the  Euro  is  a  favourable 
factor for exports. Imports recorded positive growth rates for the first time since January of 
the current year. In annual terms, they grew approximately 1 percent, due to positive growth 
rate  of  consumer  goods  import,  whereas  import  of  intermediate  goods  and  capital  has 
declined. 
Monetary indicators of September presented a slower performance of the banking system’s 
intermediating  activity.  In  annual  terms,  broad  money  recorded  a  nominal  growth  of  2.8 
percent in September, against 4.5 percent in August.  
Foreign  currency  credit  contraction  and  intermediation  of  the  public  sector  credit  by  non-
banking agents have influenced the slowdown of monetary indicators growth rate.  
In  September,  loan  portfolio  of  economy  grew  at  lower  rates  than  in  the  previous  months. 
Annual  credit  growth  rate  decreased  to  13.2  percent.  The  credit  slowdown  is  totally  a 
consequence  of  foreign  currency  credit  tightening,  while  the  ALL  credit  increased  by  31 
percent  in  annual  terms.  The  major  part  of  the  new  credit,  around  85  percent  of  it,  was 
absorbed by businesses and was used mainly for meeting the needs for liquidity, whereas 
credit for long-term investments decreased. Also, household loan portfolio growth decreased, 
chiefly due to consumer credit contraction. Housing loan to households continues to maintain 
positive growth rates, remaining at 5 percent in annual terms.  
2 
 BIS Review 153/2009
Domestic credit intermediation in ALL has raised the need for Bank of Albania’s presence by 
injecting  liquidity.  The  banking  system  needs  for  liquidity  have  been  met  through  open 
market  operations  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  preserving  an  appropriate  time  structure  of  this 
injection.  Short-term  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  have  reflected  decreased 
borrowing  cost  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  have  been  steady.  Furthermore,  the  primary 
market was featured by agents’ response to loan pricing, reducing the T-bill yield. The 12-
month yield, which serves as a reference rate in determining other costs, has decreased by 
0.15 percentage points during November, down to 9.28 percent.  
The  supply  for  financing  the  government  demand  has  been  sufficient,  without  exerting 
upward pressures on interest rates. Interest rate performance of new deposits denominated 
in lek and in Euro has also been stable during September, enabling deposits return to the 
system.  In  the  meantime,  new  ALL  and  Euro  credit  interest  rates  continue  to  carry  over 
tightening lending policies by the banking system in general, and fluctuate around isolated 
preferential policies.  
After  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  agreed  on  keeping  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged. This decision aims at further preservation and consolidation of macroeconomic 
balances,  regarding  the  macroeconomic  stability  as  an  indispensable  precondition  for  the 
long-term  sustainable  growth.  It  also  guarantees  appropriate  monetary  support  for  the 
economy during this stage of its development. In the future, the Bank of Albania is willing to 
operate in line with the actual and expected performance of economic indicators. The shifting 
to the downward side of inflationary risks balance and the consolidation of financial stability 
and  inflationary  expectations  in  the  economy  will  be  taken  into  consideration  in  Bank  of 
Albania’s future decision-making. 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 3
