Guy Quaden: A changing IMF and World Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Annual 
Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank, Istanbul, 6 October 2009. 
 I would like to warmly thank the Turkish authorities for their hospitality shown during these 
annual meetings. 
The past 12 months have demonstrated the importance of a strong and effective IMF. The 
Fund  reacted  appropriately  to  the  unfolding  financial  and  economic  crisis,  by  giving 
substantial  financial  support  and  advice.  In  this  regard,  I  welcome  that  important 
modifications to the Fund’s instruments were implemented, improving its capacity to help its 
members.  
Moreover,  I  welcome  the  major  initiatives  that  are  being  taken  to  improve  the  Fund’s 
surveillance capacity. All members’ full cooperation is needed to ensure surveillance traction. 
The  Fund  must  retain  the  central  surveillance  role  and  should  not  be  subordinated  to  any 
outside process. 
The financial resources of the IMF were significantly enhanced, reassuring its members that 
the Fund has enough ammunition to fight any crisis. I expect that the money raised under the 
bilateral  loan  agreements  and  the  IMF  notes  programme  will  be  folded  into  the  new  and 
expanded NAB. 
The Fund’s legitimacy follows from its almost universal membership combined with adequate 
governance arrangements. As the world changes, the Fund must adapt to those changes. 
The  governance  reform  being  discussed  is  therefore  important  to  improve  the  Fund’s 
legitimacy,  as  well  as  its  effectiveness.  I  fully  support  the  general  quota  review  to  be 
concluded  by  January  2011.  This  review  should  be  based  on  objective  economic  and 
financial  parameters,  relevant  for  the  Fund’s  mandate  and  applied  in  a  uniform  manner.  It 
should be guided by the long term resource needs of the Fund, ensuring the Fund remains a 
quota-based institution and should at the same time realign quotas with countries’ economic 
position  and  their  responsibilities  in  the  world.  This  also  implies  that  there  cannot  be  a 
disconnect between representation and financial contributions. 
The  oversight  role  of  the  Executive  Board  should  be  strengthened  and  the  Board  should 
focus  more  on  the  Fund’s  strategy.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  fundamentally  change  the 
responsibilities of Board and management. 
The current number of seats on the Board, 24, is appropriate for an institution the size of the 
IMF. A reduction by a few seats will not significantly improve its effectiveness. Moreover, the 
freedom of the members to form constituencies should be respected. 
The  strategic  guidance  provided  by  the  IMFC  could  be  improved.  But  more  political 
involvement should not lead to politicized decisions. Also, the composition of the Board and 
the IMFC should remain aligned. 
The  mandate  of  the  Fund  should  be  updated.  I  favour  the  formal  extension  of  the  Fund’s 
jurisdiction over capital account transactions. 
The  World  Bank  Group  has  shown  its  commitment  to  assist  developing  and  transition 
countries  in  dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  the  multiple  crises  they  face  in  a  more  flexible 
fashion, by stepping up its lending capacity and by speeding up the delivery of its assistance. 
However, the World Bank Group’s capacity to respond to crisis situations should be further 
enhanced.  Responding  to  a  rapidly  changing  environment  requires  some  important 
institutional and organizational changes. The Bank needs to evaluate and reshape its lending 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 1
toolkit  and  its  decentralization  policy  in  order  to  be  able  to  respond  more  efficiently  and 
effectively to these challenges. Work is ongoing, but it needs to be accelerated.  
During the past year, the Bank has been stretching the use of its capital in order to increase 
its lending capacity in response to the crisis. The question is whether a capital increase at 
this stage is necessary. Therefore, the Bank should analyze and assess in more detail post-
crisis demand for World Bank lending and explore other options before resorting to a general 
capital increase.  
As  a  result  of  the  crises,  the  number  of  people  living  in  extreme  poverty  has  increased 
significantly. The Bank Group should not lose focus on this vulnerable group.  
In  this  respect  we  call  upon  all  donors  to  secure  a  sufficient  replenishment  of  IDA-16,  for 
which negotiations will start soon. 
The second phase of voice and participation reform should be concluded within the agreed 
timeframe. This reform should be based on a widely accepted measure for countries’ relative 
economic weight, but should also take into account members’ contributions to IDA. 
Other  ongoing  institutional  reforms  related  to  decentralization,  workforce  diversity  and 
country ownership, should receive proper attention in the debate. 
To conclude, a successful reform of the Bretton Woods Institutions is important to keep the 
institutions in the vanguard of the effort for a more prosperous and equitable world. Decisions 
on  the  reform  of  the  institutions  must  be  taken  by  their  members.  No  other  international 
institution is better placed to execute their mandate. 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2009
