Mark Carney: The evolution of the international monetary system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Foreign  Policy 
Association, New York, 19 November 2009. 
 In response to the worst financial crisis since the 1930s, policy-makers around the globe are 
providing unprecedented stimulus to support economic recovery and are pursuing a radical 
set of reforms to build a more resilient financial system. However, even this heavy agenda 
may not ensure strong, sustainable, and balanced growth over the medium term. We must 
also consider whether to reform the basic framework that underpins global commerce: the 
international monetary system. My purpose this evening is to help focus the current debate.  
While there were many causes of the crisis, its intensity and scope reflected unprecedented 
disequilibria.  Large  and  unsustainable  current  account  imbalances  across  major  economic 
areas were integral to the buildup of vulnerabilities in many asset markets. In recent years, 
the international monetary system failed to promote timely and orderly economic adjustment.  
This  failure  has  ample  precedents.  Over  the  past  century,  different  international  monetary 
regimes have struggled to adjust to structural changes, including the integration of emerging 
economies into the global economy. In all cases, systemic countries failed to adapt domestic 
policies in a manner consistent with the monetary system of the day. As a result, adjustment 
was delayed, vulnerabilities grew, and the reckoning, when it came, was disruptive for all.  
Policy-makers  must  learn  these  lessons  from  history.  The  G-20  commitment  to  promote 
strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced  growth  in  global  demand  –  launched  two  weeks  ago  in 
St. Andrews, Scotland – is an important step in the right direction. 
What is the international monetary system and how should it function? 
The  international  monetary  system  consists  of  (i)  exchange  rate  arrangements;  (ii)  capital 
flows;  and  (iii)  a  collection  of  institutions,  rules,  and  conventions  that  govern  its  operation. 
Domestic  monetary  policy  frameworks  dovetail,  and  are  essential  to,  the  global  system.  A 
well-functioning  system  promotes  economic  growth  and  prosperity  through  the  efficient 
allocation  of  resources,  increased  specialization  in  production  based  on  comparative 
advantage, and the diversification of risk. It also encourages macroeconomic and financial 
stability by adjusting real exchange rates to shifts in trade and capital flows.  
To  be  effective,  the  international  monetary  system  must  deliver  both  sufficient  nominal 
stability  in  exchange  rates  and  domestic  prices,  and  timely  adjustment  to  shocks  and 
structural  changes.  Attaining  this balance  can  be  very  difficult.  Changes  in  the  geographic 
distribution  of  economic  and  political  power,  the  global  integration  of  goods  and  asset 
markets,  wars,  and  inconsistent  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  all  have  the  potential  to 
undermine a monetary system. Past systems could not incent systemic countries to adjust 
policies in a timely manner. The question is whether the current shock of integrating one-third 
of  humanity  into  the  global  economy  –  positive  as  it  is  –  will  overwhelm  the  adjustment 
mechanisms of the current system. 
There are reasons for concern. China's integration into the global economy alone represents 
a much bigger shock to the system than the emergence of the United States at the turn of 
the last century. China's share of global GDP has increased faster and its economy is much 
more open.1 As well, unlike the situation when the United States was on the gold standard 
                                                 
1   See Chart 1. In addition, the U.S. economy was fairly closed from 1870 to 1913, as imports/GNP averaged 
roughly 4-7 per cent, and the U.S. share of total world trade remained relatively stable (Lipsey 1994; Rostow 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 1
with all the other major countries, China's managed exchange rate regime today is distinct 
from the market-based floating rates of other major economies. History shows that systems 
dominated by fixed or pegged exchange rates seldom cope well with major structural shocks.  
This failure is the result of two pervasive problems: an asymmetric adjustment process and 
the downward rigidity of nominal prices and wages. In the short run, it is generally much less 
costly, economically as well as politically, for countries with a balance of payments surplus to 
run  persistent  surpluses  and  accumulate  reserves  than  it  is  for  deficit  countries  to  sustain 
deficits.  This  is  because  the  only  limit  on  reserve  accumulation  is  its  ultimate  impact  on 
domestic  prices.  Depending  on  the  openness  of  the  financial  system  and  the  degree  of 
sterilization,  this  can  be  delayed  for  a  very  long  time.2  In  contrast,  deficit  countries  must 
either deflate or run down reserves.  
Flexible exchange rates prevent many of these problems by providing less costly and more 
symmetric  adjustment.  Relative  wages  and  prices  can  adjust  quickly  to  shocks  through 
nominal exchange rate movements in order to restore external balance. When the exchange 
rate  floats  and  there  is  a  liquid  foreign  exchange  market,  reserve  holdings  are  seldom 
required.3  Most  fundamentally,  floating  exchange  rates  overcome  the  seemingly  innate 
tendency of countries to delay adjustment.  
A  brief  review  of  how  the  different  international  monetary  regimes  failed  to  manage  this 
trade-off  between  nominal  stability  and  timely  adjustment  provides  important  insights  for 
current challenges. 
The evolution of the international monetary system 
The gold standard 
Under the classical gold standard, from 1870 to 1914, the international monetary system was 
largely decentralized and market-based. There was minimal institutional support, apart from 
the joint commitment of the major economies to maintain the gold price of their currencies. 
Although  the  adjustment  to  external  imbalances  should,  in  theory,  have  been  relatively 
smooth, in practice it was not problem-free.4 Surplus countries did not always abide by the 
conventions  of  the  system  and  tried  to  frustrate  the  adjustment  process  by  sterilizing  gold 
inflows.  Deficit  countries  found  the  adjustment  even  more  difficult  because  of  downward 
wage  and  price  stickiness.  Once  the  shocks  were  large  and  persistent  enough,  the 
consequences  of  forfeiting  monetary  independence  and  asymmetric  adjustment  ultimately 
undermined the system.5  
                                                                                                                                                      
1978). China, on the other hand, is very open, with imports/GDP around 30 per cent, and it accounts for an 
ever-increasing share of world trade. 
2   There is, however, an important welfare loss in pursuing unbalanced growth. Domestic consumers are made 
worse off by reduced purchasing power, and thwarting adjustment via sterilization leads to mounting quasi-
fiscal costs and distorts the domestic financial system. The important point is that balanced global growth is 
sustainable global growth. 
3   Except in exceptional circumstances, such as a near-term market breakdown, which creates a severe lack of 
liquidity and warrants intervention. 
4   For  example,  under  the  price-specie  flow  mechanism,  if  a  country  ran  a  trade  surplus,  gold  inflows  would 
occur, raising the price level and thus causing imports to increase and exports to decrease until the balance of 
trade was equilibrated. 
5   More generally, the gold standard suffered from the fact that the money supply was dependent on the supply 
of  gold.  Inadequate  gold  supply  led  to  deflation  in  the  1880s,  which  was  only  alleviated  by  major  gold 
discoveries in South Africa, Western Australia, and Canada in the following decade. Even then, concerns with 
respect to the supply of gold remained. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2009
The gold standard did not survive World War I intact. Widespread inflation caused by money-
financed  war  expenditures  and  major  shifts  in  the  composition  of  global  economic  power 
undermined the pre-war gold parities. Crucially, there was no mechanism to coordinate an 
orderly  return  to  inflation-adjusted  exchange  rates.  When  countries,  such  as  the  United 
Kingdom in 1925, tried to return to the gold standard at overvalued parities, they were forced 
to endure painful deflation of wages and prices in order to restore competitiveness. Though 
this was always going to be difficult, it proved impossible when surplus countries thwarted 
reflation. 
During the Great Depression, with an open capital account and a commitment to the gold-
exchange standard, the United States could not use monetary policy to offset the economic 
contraction.6  Fidelity  to  gold  meant  that  the  deflationary  pressures  from  the  United  States 
spread quickly, further weakening the global economy. Unable to adjust to these pressures, 
countries were forced to abandon the system. Though deficit countries experienced the first 
crisis,  all  countries  suffered  from  the  eventual  collapse  –  a  lesson  that  was  repeated  in 
subsequent systems.¨ 
these 
institutional  changes,  surplus  countries  still 
Bretton Woods 
The Bretton Woods system of pegged, but adjustable, exchange rates was a direct response 
to  the  instability  of  the  interwar  period.  Bretton  Woods  was  very  different  from  the  gold 
standard: it was more administered than market-based; adjustment was coordinated through 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF); there were rules rather than conventions;7 and capital 
controls were widespread.  
Despite 
resisted  adjustment. 
Foreshadowing  present  problems,  countries  often  sterilized  the  impact  of  surpluses  on 
domestic money supply and prices. Like today, these interventions were justified by arguing 
that  imbalances  were  temporary  and  that,  in  any  event,  surpluses  were  evidence  more  of 
virtue  than  "disequilibria."  In  contrast,  the  zero  bound  on  reserves  remained  a  binding 
constraint for deficit countries, which eventually ran out of time. 
The Bretton Woods system finally collapsed in the early 1970s after U.S. policy became very 
expansionary, its trade deficit unsustainable, and the loosening of capital controls began to 
put  pressure  on  fixed  exchange  rates.  Once  again,  all  countries  suffered  from  the 
aftershocks. 
The current hybrid system 
After  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  the  international  monetary  system 
reverted  to  a  more  decentralized,  market-based  model.  Major  countries  floated  their 
exchange rates, made their currencies convertible, and gradually liberalized capital flows. In 
recent years, several major emerging markets adopted similar policies after experiencing the 
difficulties  of  managing  pegged  exchange  rate  regimes  with  increasingly  open  capital 
accounts.  The  move  to  more  market-determined  exchange  rates  has  increased  control  of 
domestic  monetary  policy  and  inflation,  accelerated  the  development  of  financial  sectors, 
and, ultimately, boosted economic growth.  
                                                 
6   As the Federal Reserve pursued tight monetary policy in the aftermath of the crash of 1929, it simultaneously 
sterilized the resulting large gold inflows. In 1931, to counteract the outflow of gold (due to the U.K.'s decision 
to leave gold), the Fed sharply raised its rediscount rate. This effort to maintain confidence in convertibility 
resulted in considerable monetary tightening and, consequently, a further wave of bank failures in the ensuing 
six months. 
7   Article IV (iii) states that members should "avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary 
system  in  order  to  prevent  effective  balance  of  payments  adjustment  or  to  gain  an  unfair  competitive 
advantage over other members….". 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 3
Unfortunately,  this  trend  has  been  far  from  universal.  In  many  respects,  the  recent  crisis 
represents  a  classic  example  of  asymmetric  adjustment.  Some  major  economies  have 
frustrated real exchange rate adjustments by accumulating enormous foreign reserves and 
sterilizing  the  inflows.  While  their  initial  objective  was  to  self-insure  against  future  crises, 
reserve  accumulation  soon  outstripped  these  requirements  (Table  1).  In  some  cases, 
persistent exchange rate intervention has served primarily to maintain undervalued exchange 
rates and promote export-led growth. Indeed, given the scale of its economic miracle, it is 
remarkable  that  China's  real  effective  exchange  rate  has  not  appreciated  since  1990 
(Chart 2). 
  BIS Review 147/2009
4 
  
This flip side of these imbalances was a large current account deficit in the United States, 
which was reinforced by expansionary U.S. monetary and fiscal policies in the wake of the 
2001 recession. In combination with high savings rates in East Asia, these policies generated 
large  global  imbalances  and  massive  capital  flows,  creating  the  "conundrum"  of  very  low 
long-term interest rates, which, in turn, fed the search for yield and excessive leverage. While 
concerns over global imbalances were frequently expressed in the run-up to the crisis, the 
international monetary system once again failed to promote the actions needed to address 
the problem. Vulnerabilities simply grew until the breaking point.  
Some  pressures  remain.  The  financial  crisis  could  have  long-lasting  effects  on  the 
composition  and  rate  of  global  economic  growth.8  Since  divergent  growth  and  inflation 
prospects require different policy mixes, it is unlikely that monetary policy suitable for United 
States will be appropriate for most other countries. However, those countries with relatively 
fixed  exchange  rates  and  relatively  open  capital  accounts  are  acting  as  if  it  is.  If  this 
divergence in optimal monetary policy stance increases, the strains on the system will grow.  
Postponed adjustment will only serve to increase vulnerabilities. In the past, the frustration of 
adjustment by surplus countries generated deflationary pressures on the rest of the world. 
Similarly,  today,  the  adjustment  burden  is  being  shifted  to  others.  Advanced  countries  – 
including Canada, Japan, and the Euro area – have recently seen sizable appreciations of 
their currencies.  
The  net  result  could  be  a  suboptimal  global  recovery,  in  which  the  adjustment  burden  in 
those countries with large imbalances falls largely on domestic prices and wages rather than 
on nominal exchange rates. History suggests that this process could take years, repressing 
global output and welfare in the interim.  
                                                 
8   Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 5
The way forward 
To avoid these outcomes, there are several options. 
The  first  is  to  reduce  overall  demand  for  reserves.  Alternatives  include  regional  reserve 
pooling mechanisms and enhanced lending and insurance facilities at the IMF. While there is 
merit in exploring IMF reforms, their effect on those systemic countries that already appear 
substantially overinsured would likely be marginal. As I will touch on in a moment, the G-20 
process may have a greater impact. 
On the supply side, several alternative reserve assets have been suggested. The motivation 
of these proposals is primarily to redistribute the so-called "exorbitant privilege" that accrues 
to the United States as the principal supplier of reserve currency. As such, the United States 
receives  an  advantage  in  the  form  of  lower  financing  costs  in  its  own  currency.  This 
advantage  would  be  shared  (and  possibly  reduced  in  aggregate)  if  there  were  competing 
reserve currencies. In turn, this could marginally reduce the collective imbalances of reserve 
currency countries.9,10  
Over  the  longer  term,  it  is  possible  to  envision  a  system  with  other  reserve  currencies  in 
addition to the U.S. dollar. However, with few alternatives ready to assume a reserve role, 
the U.S. dollar can be expected to remain the principal reserve currency for the foreseeable 
future.  Despite  the  exuberant  pessimism  reflected  in  the  gold  price,  total  gold  stocks 
represent  only  $1  trillion  or  about  10  per  cent  of  global  reserves  and  a  much  smaller 
proportion of global money supply.11 The renminbi's prospects are moot absent convertibility 
and open capital markets, which would themselves likely do much to reduce any pressure for 
a change.  
Increased use of Special Drawing Rights 
At  first  glance,  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDRs)  would  be  an  intriguing  alternative  reserve 
asset.12 Using SDRs appeals to a sense of fairness in that no one country would enjoy the 
exorbitant  privilege  of  reserve  currency  status.  Like  a  multiple  reserve  currency  system,  it 
may reduce the aggregate incentives of countries that supply the consistent currencies of the 
SDR  to  run  deficits.  In  addition,  there  appears  to  be  no  technical  reason  why  the  use  of 
SDRs could not be expanded. 
However, the question must be asked: to what end? Merely enhancing the role of the SDR 
would  do  little  either  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  system  or  change  the  incentives  of 
surplus countries. By providing a ready swap of existing reserve currencies into a broader 
basket,  SDR  reserves  could  also  further  displace  adjustment  onto  other  freely  trading 
currencies,  thus  exacerbating  the  imbalances  in  the  current  system.  Indeed,  by  providing 
instant  diversification,  SDR  reserves  could  entrench  some  of  the  existing  strategies  of 
surplus countries. 
This would change if the proposal were taken to its logical extreme: the SDR as the single 
global currency. Setting aside the fact that the world is not an optimum currency area (not 
                                                 
9   However, network externalities and transactions costs would work against multiple reserve currencies, as they 
did during bi-metallism and the pound/dollar period under the gold standard. 
10   The well-known Triffin (1960) dilemma, which argued that, in order for the global economy to have sufficient 
liquidity,  the  United  States  had  to  run  balance-of-payments  deficits;  but  such  deficits  could  undermine 
confidence in convertibility. Bordo (1993) rightly notes that under flexible exchange rates, the Triffin dilemma 
disappears, as any adjustment could occur through capital flows (for example, India has accumulated desired 
foreign reserves, through capital inflows, despite a current account deficit). 
11   Recall that under the gold exchange standard, 40 per cent of money supply was backed by gold. 
12   Zhou (2009); United Nations (2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 147/2009
least due to the absence of free mobility of labour, goods, and capital), this appears utopian. 
While the level of international co-operation has certainly increased since the crisis, it would 
be  a  stretch  to  assert  that  there  is  any  appetite  for  the  creation  of  the  independent  global 
central bank that would be required.13 As a result, any future SDR issuance is likely to be ad 
hoc.14  
for  SDR-denominated  securities, 
to  exchange  U.S.-dollar  reserves 
A substitution account 
Greater  use  of  SDRs  might  be  best  suited  to  encouraging  a  transition  to  a  more  stable 
international monetary system by facilitating any desired reserve diversification. Establishing, 
on a temporary basis, an enhanced substitution account at the IMF would allow large reserve 
holders 
thereby 
diversifying  their  portfolios.  With  the  IMF  bearing  the  risk  of  changes  in  the  U.S.-dollar 
exchange rate, an appropriate burden-sharing arrangement among its members would have 
to be agreed upon.  
A substitution account would create considerable moral hazard, since reserve holders would 
be tempted to engage in further accumulation. In addition, a substitution account would not 
address  the  fundamental  asymmetry  of  the  adjustment  process.  Thus,  it  would  appear 
essential that a substitution account mark the transition from the current hybrid system to an 
international system characterized by more flexible exchange rates for all systemic countries.  
In general, alternatives to the dollar as the reserve currency would not materially improve the 
functioning of the system. While reserve alternatives would increase pressures on the United 
States  to  adjust,  since  "artificial"  demand  for  their  assets  would  be  shared  with  others, 
incentives  for  the  surplus  countries  that  have  thwarted  adjustment  would  not  change.  The 
common  lesson  of  the  gold  standard,  the  Bretton  Woods  system  and  the  current  hybrid 
system is that it is the adjustment mechanism, not the choice of reserve asset, that ultimately 
matters.  
With  the  adjustments  that  would  arise  automatically  from  floating  exchange  rates  or 
unsterilized intervention muted, the burden is squarely on policy dialogue and co-operation. 
A practical solution: the G-20 and shared responsibility 
The G-20 framework moves in the right direction. It stresses countries' shared responsibility 
to  ensure  that  their  policies  support  "strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth."  Under  the 
framework, members have agreed to a mutual assessment of their monetary, exchange rate, 
fiscal, and financial policies, with the assistance of the IMF and other international financial 
institutions. The implications of these policies for the level and pattern of global growth and 
the  risks  to  financial  stability  will  be  reviewed  by  finance  ministers  and  governors  in 
preparation for  agreement  on  any  common  actions  by  G-20  leaders  in  Canada  and  South 
Korea next year.  
There are several reasons why this mutual assessment process has the potential to develop 
shared  understanding  and  encourage  action  across  a  range  of  countries.  There  is  a  clear 
timetable. A comprehensive set of policies will be considered. Policy-makers at the highest 
levels are directly involved, with international financial institutions in a supportive, rather than 
leading, role. Finally, discussions will take place at the G-20, where all major economies are 
present and where China has assumed a very constructive, leadership role. 
                                                 
13   That  is  not  to  argue  that  the  role  of  SDRs  cannot  be  enhanced,  particularly  among  central  banks  (see 
Williamson 2009). 
14   Under current rules, new SDRs can be issued only with the agreement of members, representing 85 per cent 
of voting share. 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 7
Framework discussions would be complemented by successful implementation of the G-20 
financial reform agenda. These reforms, when combined with the peer review process of the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) and external reviews by the IMF, could increase actual and 
perceived systemic stability and thereby reduce reserve accumulation.  
Canada's macroeconomic strategy and the G-20 framework 
Canada  will  bring  to  these  discussions  one  of  the  soundest  financial systems  in  the  world 
and a macroeconomic strategy that contributes to sustainable and balanced global growth. 
Our economy is one of the most open and our policy response to the crisis has been one of 
the most aggressive. Starting from the strongest fiscal position in the G-7, Canada's fiscal 
stimulus this year and next will total 4 per cent of GDP. Monetary stimulus has been both 
unprecedented and timely.  
As a result of these policy actions, the IMF projects that Canadian domestic demand will be 
the strongest in the G-7 next year. With a current account that has shifted from a surplus of 2 
per cent of GDP in the first quarter of 2006 to a deficit of 3 per cent today, Canada is doing 
its part to rebalance global growth. 
Consistent  with  the  objectives  of  the  G-20  framework,  Canadian  policy  is  guided  by 
transparent and coherent frameworks. The Government of Canada has announced a fiscal 
plan to return its budget to broad balance by 2015. The cornerstone of the Bank's monetary 
policy  framework  is  its  inflation  target,  which  aims  to  keep  the  annual  rate  of  CPI  inflation 
close to 2 per cent. It is in this context that we view the exchange rate. 
A  floating  exchange  rate  is  a  central  element  of  our  monetary  policy  framework.  It  allows 
Canada  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  appropriate  to  our  own  economic 
circumstances. Although there is no target for the Canadian dollar, the Bank does care why 
the exchange rate moves and what the potential impact will be on output and inflation. The 
challenge  for  the  Bank  is  to  understand  the  reasons  behind  currency  movements, 
incorporate those into our assessments of other data, and set a course for monetary policy 
that works to keep total demand and supply in balance and inflation on target.  
In the current environment, such determinations are more important than usual.  
Recent  indicators  point  to  the  start  of  a  recovery  in  Canadian  economic  activity  following 
three consecutive quarters of sharp contraction. This resumption of growth is supported by 
monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  increased  household  wealth,  improving  financial  conditions, 
higher commodity prices, and stronger business and consumer confidence. 
However, heightened volatility and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar are working to 
slow growth and subdue inflation pressures. The current strength in our dollar is expected, 
over time, to more than fully offset the favourable developments since July. 
On 20 October, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the 
overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of June 2010 in order 
to achieve the inflation target.  
To put it simply, the Bank looks at everything, including the exchange rate, through the prism 
of achieving our inflation target. For example, we do see a risk that a stronger-than-assumed 
Canadian dollar, driven by global portfolio movements out of U.S.-dollar assets, could act as 
a significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation. As I 
mentioned  previously,  movements  in  currencies  could  reflect  current  challenges  in  the 
operation  of  the  international  monetary  system,  which  may  result  in  the  displacement  of 
adjustment pressures onto a handful of currencies.  
Whatever happens, the Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy 
at  low  interest  rates,  consistent  with  the  framework  that  we  outlined  in  our  April  Monetary 
Policy Report.  
8 
 BIS Review 147/2009
If downside risks materialize, the Bank will use that flexibility to the extent required in order to 
achieve  our  price  stability  mandate.  If  upside  risks  materialize,  the  Bank  will  also  act  to 
achieve  our  price  stability  mandate.  While  the  underlying  risks  to  our  October  economic 
projection are roughly balanced, the Bank judges that, as a consequence of operating at the 
effective  lower  bound,  the  overall  risks  to  our  inflation  projection  are  tilted  slightly  to  the 
downside. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  this  crisis  was  caused  in  part  by  failures  to  meet  the  same  challenges  that 
bedevilled  previous  international  monetary  systems.  The  common  lesson  of  the  gold 
standard,  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  and  the  current  hybrid  system  is  that  it  is  the 
adjustment  mechanism,  not  the  choice  of  reserve  asset,  that  ultimately  matters.  In  this 
regard, any greater use of SDRs might be best suited to encouraging a transition from the 
current  hybrid  system  to  an  international  monetary  system  characterized  by  more  flexible 
exchange rates for all systemic countries.  
While surplus countries can delay adjustment, in the end, all nations suffer when the system 
breaks down. In the current environment, growing strains could spur protectionism, both in 
trade  and  finance,  or  alternatively,  raise  sanctions.15  The  negative  consequences  for  the 
global economy would be considerable.  
All countries should accept their responsibilities for promoting an open, flexible, and resilient 
international  monetary  system.  Responsibility  means  recognizing  spillover  effects  between 
economies and financial systems and working to mitigate those that could amplify adverse 
dynamics.  It  means  submitting  their  financial  policies  to  peer  review  within  the  FSB  and 
external review by the IMF. Fundamentally, it means adopting coherent macro policies and 
allowing  real  exchange rates  to adjust  to achieve  external  balance  over  time.  Indeed,  in  a 
world  of  global  capital,  all  systemically  important  countries  and  common  economic  areas 
should move towards market-based exchange rates.  
References 
Bergsten, F. 2009. "The Dollar and Deficits: How Washington can Prevent the Next Crisis." 
Foreign Affairs 88 (6) November/December 2009. 
Bordo, M. 1992. "The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical Overview," 
in A Retrospective of the Bretton Woods System. M. Bordo and B. Eichengreen, eds. 1993. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Eichengreen, B. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
1939. New York: Oxford University Press. 
International Monetary Fund. 2009. Articles of Agreement. Washington, D.C.: IMF. 
Lipsey,  R.  1994.  "U.S.  Foreign  Trade  and  the  Balance  of  Payments,  1800-1913."  NBER 
Working Paper No. 4710. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Rostow, W. W. 1978. The World Economy: History and Prospect. Austin, Texas: University of 
Texas Press. 
Triffin, R. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven: Yale University Press.  
                                                 
15   See Bergsten (2009). 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 9
United Nations. 2009. Report of the Commission of Experts of the President of the United 
Nations General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System. 
21 September 2009. Available at 
<http://www.un.org/ga/econcrisissummit/docs/FinalReport_CoE.pdf>. 
Williamson, J. 2009. "Why SDRs Could Rival the Dollar." Peterson Institute of International 
Economics: Policy Brief 09-20. 
Zhou, X. 2009. "Reform the International Monetary System." People's Bank of China, Beijing, 
24 May. Available at <http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/detail.asp?col=6500&id=178>. 
10 
 BIS Review 147/2009
