Bandid Nijathaworn: Update on the Thai economy 
Luncheon address by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at 
the Rotary Club of Bangkok South (RCBS), Bangkok, 20 November 2009. 
 Good afternoon, 
First,  let  me  thank  the  Rotary  Club  of  Bangkok  South  (RCBS)  for  the  invitation,  and 
especially I want to thank Peter Williams for a very warm introduction. It is an honor to be 
speaking to you today, and my topic this afternoon is updating on the Thai economy. 
As you are all aware, this year has been an exceptionally challenging year economically, not 
just  for  Thailand  but  also  for  most  other  economies.  This  year  the  global  financial  crisis, 
which has been with us since August 2007, continues to impart negative impact on economic 
activities, employment, and access to financing worldwide. The good news is that things are 
looking  up.  There  are  better  news  coming  from  the  advanced  economies,  suggesting  that 
economic  situations  are  improving  and  financial  markets  are  stabilizing.  In  Asia  and  the 
Pacific,  signs  of  recovery  are  also  strong  and  lead  those  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  On  the 
homefront, recent economic data for Thailand are also more positive and indicate that the 
economy is slowly returning to growth after a sharp contraction we saw late last year and in 
the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  My  talk  today  is  to  update  you  on  the  recent  economic  and 
financial developments, and to share with you our assessment of the prospect for next year, 
including the challenge for policy. 
Let me begin first with the global economy. 
Recent  economic  data,  especially  of  the  last  few  months,  point  to  a  picture  of  greater 
stabilization and more consistent signs of recovery in the global economy. The severity of the 
early  economic  contractions  has  eased  while  the  levels  of  economic  activities  are  gaining 
traction on a worldwide basis. In most major economies, final demand is showing signs of 
strengthening  along  with  improvements  in  consumer  confidence  and  business  sentiment. 
More importantly, although the financial system in the advanced economies has not returned 
to  normalcy,  financial  conditions  have  improved  markedly  with  lower  market  volatility, 
reduced risk premia, and the unfreezing of interbank and other short-term funding markets. 
These  positive  developments  have  led  to  a  view  that  the  worst  of  the  global  crisis  is  now 
behind us, and forecasts of economic growth have been revised upwards for this year and 
next year. 
On  the  financial  front,  reflecting  these  recent  developments,  appetite  for  risky  assets  has 
returned, leading to a resurgence of capital flows to emerging markets and strong rallies in 
equity  markets  especially  in  Asia.  And  for  economies  that  the  prospects  for  recovery  look 
most certain, policy interest rates have started to increase to return policy accommodation to 
a more normal level, as is the case of Australia and Norway. 
In  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting  held  last  month,  the 
committee also shared the view that the global economy is returning to growth with the main 
impetus being the policy stimulus and a turn in the inventory cycle. Looking ahead, prospect 
for the recovery to continue into next year appears strong given the policy room that exists in 
the  advanced  economies  to  support  growth.  Nonetheless,  it  also  needs  to  be  said  that 
downside  risks  to  recovery  remain,  as  uncertainty  that  can  hold  back  the  recovery 
momentum remains large. 
In the case of the advanced economies, the key uncertainties include: first, the high rates of 
unemployment which could stifle the momentum of consumer spending and private demand 
–  the  US  unemployment  rate  in  October  was  10.2  percent;  second,  the  large  fiscal  debt 
positions  which  could  heighten  investor’s  concern  on  fiscal  sustainability  and  put  upward 
pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates;  and  third,  problems  in  the  advanced  economies’ 
banking systems that could act as a drag on growth because of limited credit availability. 
These are the uncertainties in the advanced economies that could mark down the pace of 
global  recovery  going  forward.  Moreover,  high  and  rising  oil  prices  could  also  act  as  a 
deterrent to economic recovery worldwide. Therefore, notwithstanding the consensus on the 
next  year’s  return  to  growth,  there  remains  a  risk  that  global  economic  recovery  going 
forward could be choppy and sluggish. 
Turning  to  Thailand,  although  the  Thai  banking  sector  is  resilient  and  has  been  largely 
immune to the global financial turmoil, the impact of the crisis on Thailand has been quite 
hard  owing  to  the  economy’s  high  dependency  on  exports.  As  noted  earlier,  economic 
activities contracted sharply in the fourth quarter of last year and in the first quarter of this 
year,  but  the  situation  started  to  stabilize  from  the  second  quarter  onward  as  economic 
activities began to show signs of improvement consistent with the developments observed 
elsewhere.  Latest  data  for  September  point  to  continued  improvements  in  economic 
activities,  both  in  private  consumption  and  investment,  reflecting  largely  the  benefits  that 
domestic demand has gained from fiscal stimulus and supportive monetary policy. Exports in 
September contracted by 8.3 percent year on year, much lower than the contractions of 17.9 
and  25.7  percents  of  the  previous  two  months.  On  the  output  side,  recovery  in  domestic 
demand has been met by stronger activities in production. Index of manufacturing production 
rose  by  0.4  percent  year  on  year  in  September,  while  the  rate  of  capacity  utilization  in 
manufacturing increased to 64.7 percent. 
On economic and financial stability, economic stability remains intact in Thailand with strong 
external positions marked by continued current account surpluses, high level of international 
reserves, and a low and stable external debt. As for inflation, the emerging signs of recovery 
have  not  put  pressure  on  domestic  prices.  CPI  inflation  remains  subdued  at  a  rate  of  0.4 
percent year on year in October, reflecting the sizable output gap and well-anchored inflation 
expectations. On the financial stability front, the banking sector remains resilient with healthy 
balance sheets and the lending capacity largely preserved. And notwithstanding the strong 
resurgence of capital flows, the risk of asset price bubble, either in equity or in housing, for 
now  remains  low  given  the  slow  growth  of  bank  credit  and  the  more  subdued  initial 
conditions.  The  situation  on  asset  prices,  however,  warrants  a  close  monitoring  as  credit 
conditions can change quickly given the ample domestic liquidity. 
In sum, the Thai economy is now in a process of recovery. The economy is poised to return 
to positive growth next year. At this time, however, the momentum of private sector demand 
is still not robust with the momentum largely mirroring the support from policy. Economic and 
financial stability, on the other hand, is intact with subdued inflation and a resilient banking 
sector. Therefore, given weak private sector demand, the Monetary Policy Committee is of 
the view that policy support remains needed as a firm recovery is yet to be established. It 
was in this context that the policy interest rate was kept unchanged at 1.25 percent in the last 
Monetary Policy Committee meeting in October.  
Next, let me share with you our assessment of the outlook for the economy and policy. The 
assessment  I  am  sharing  was  made  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  in  its  meeting  in 
October and is now available in our latest Inflation Report that has just been published. The 
key  point  is  that,  with  the  ongoing  recovery,  the  Thai  economy  is  set  to  return  to  positive 
growth next year, supported by improvements in the global economy and continued policy 
stimulus  to  support  private  sector  demand.  A  key  part  of  the  policy  stimulus  is  the 
expansionary fiscal policy of which a fiscal deficit equivalent to 3.9 percent of GDP is set for 
the 2010/2011 fiscal year. Stronger momentum in exports, continued policy stimulus, and a 
recovery in private sector demand are expected to lift real GDP growth to a range of 3.3 to 
5.3 percent in 2010. 
As the economy returns to growth, a return of domestic inflation is also expected next year 
on the back of a rebound in economic activities and the rise in oil prices. Inflation next year, 
while rising, is forecasted to be within our policy target of 0.5-3.0 percent for core inflation. 
Again, developments on the inflation front is not without uncertainty. With growth, pressure 
on prices could return quickly, not to mention the added pressure to inflation that could be 
coming from the oil price and from the spillovers of the possible rises in asset price linked to 
persistent capital inflows. Hence, the challenge for monetary policy next year will be to help 
foster  a  sustained  economic  recovery  while  maintaining  price  and  financial  stability.  The 
latter will call for a careful assessment of the inflation risk and the recovery strength so that 
the  calibration  of  monetary  policy  going  forward  will  be  well-timed  and  consistent  with  the 
objective of maintaining growth with price and financial stability. 
Also, developments on the growth outlook next year are not without risk. An overarching risk 
is that the global economic recovery could stall. This could occur given the many headwinds 
and  uncertainties  that  remain  in  the  global  economy  as  I  already  noted.  Next,  the  second 
area of risk is the possible effects on business sentiment and consumer confidence at home 
from  our  own  domestic  political  situations  which  could  stifle  the  recovery  in  private  sector 
demand.  If  this  was  to  happen,  the  benefits  that  we  expected  to  have  from  fiscal  policy 
stimulus  to  lead  a  rebound  in  private  sector  spending  would  be  weakened,  rendering  a 
missed  opportunity  for  public  sector  spending  to  ignite  the  needed  rebound  in  private 
investment.  And  finally,  a  resurgence  of  strong  capital  flows  to  Asia  and  a  return  of  asset 
price inflation could pose a risk to financial stability and complicates further the conduct of 
monetary policy. The Bank of Thailand is mindful of these risks and is alert to their possible 
impacts on the economy. 
I hope I have given you a clear enough picture of what can be expected next year in terms of 
the  economic  outlook  and  the  challenge  for  policy.  After  two  years  of  market  stress  and 
decline  in  economic  activities,  we  can  now  cautiously  look  forward  to  a  return  to  growth. 
Looking back, the last two years have also been an important testing time for Thailand as the 
impact from the global financial crisis has been large and quite unprecedented. As it turns 
out, the economy has been able to weather the impact of the global crisis quite adequately. 
This is to say, while the decline in output was unavoidable, economic and financial stability 
was maintained, the banking sector remained resilient, and the economy was able to adjust 
to the impact of the turmoil in an orderly manner, with output growth now recovering. 
In my view, these things were of no accidents. Instead, they manifest a number of inherent 
qualities  embedded  in  the  Thai  economic  system  that  have  contributed  to  the  relative 
resilience of the economy. Such qualities include: first, a strong and resilient banking sector 
resulted  from  good  risk  management  practices  by  financial  institutions  and  careful 
regulators  at  home;  second,  a  disciplined  conduct  of 
supervision  by 
macroeconomic policy that emphasizes prudent fiscal and monetary frameworks with a clear 
focus on maintaining growth with price and financial stabilities; and third, the promotion of 
economic  flexibility  as  a  mechanism  for  the  economy  and  the  private  sector  to  adjust  to 
macroeconomic shocks. To me, these qualities are of no accidents. They are our investment 
returns from past economic restructuring and reforms that were put in place, and they are the 
qualities that we need to preserve and to further expand upon by continuing with economic 
restructuring and reform. 
I probably have used up my allotted time. I hope the talk has been useful, and again I want to 
thank the Rotary Club of Bangkok South for the invitation. Thank you. 
financial 
