Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Thinking small first – how does it apply to the 
financing conditions and payments of small and medium-sized 
enterprises? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Annual  General  Assembly  of  UEAPME,  the  European  Association  of 
crafts and small business, Brussels, 2 December 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
When  I  open  a  financial  newspaper,  the  headlines  are  all  about  large  companies,  their 
activities and annual reports. We tend to be attracted – and distracted – by large things, by 
large companies with large numbers. It is easy to forget that the life-blood of the economy 
runs in smaller companies which are much more important to society than their actual size 
would suggest.  
Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  are  a  fundamental  part  of  the  euro  area 
corporate  sector.  They  account  for  99.8%  of  all  businesses,  roughly  60%  of  gross  value 
added  and  about  70%  of  total  employment.  The  UEAPME  represents  around  12  million 
European  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  employing  some  55  million  people.  These 
are large figures and of great importance to Europe.  
The  importance  of  the  SME  sector  is  being  more  and  more  acknowledged  in  European 
policies.  The  European  Commission  made  the  point  strongly  when  it  launched  the  Small 
Businesses Act last year, stating that “vibrant SMEs will make Europe more robust to stand 
against the uncertainty encountered in the globalised world of today”. According to the Act, 
the  “Think  Small  First”  principle  should  apply  to  all  public  policies,  including  arrangements 
made  to  facilitate  SMEs’  access  to  finance  and  to  support  timely  payment  in  commercial 
transactions.  
In my speech I would like to address two important issues related to the economic situation 
of SMEs. First, I will talk about how SMEs have been affected by the recent crisis and their 
specific  financing  situation.  Given  the  mentioned  importance  of  SMEs  for  the  overall 
economy, this seems to be a crucial issue to look into to assess the future prospects of the 
euro area economy, particularly with respect to where we stand in moving out of the current 
crisis.  
Second, I would like to highlight the many advantages and benefits of more harmonized and 
integrated  payments  markets  specifically  for  SMEs.  Being  the  main  user  of  the  retail 
payments business, SMEs are absolutely key for the further harmonization and integration 
process.  Therefore  –  and  let  me  give  you  this  key  message  already  up  front  –  SMEs  can 
make a crucial contribution by using harmonized payment products to the overall speed of 
the integration process.  
SMEs’ financing conditions under stress 
Let me start, first, with how SMEs have weathered the crisis and would therefore like to take 
a closer look at SMEs’ financing conditions. The resilience of our economy in the period of 
the financial crisis is crucially dependent on the ability of SMEs to appropriately provide for 
their financial needs. Unfortunately, very few quantitative statistics are available. Therefore, I 
am happy that direct evidence regarding SMEs’ access to finance is now available from a 
new, large-scale survey implemented jointly by the ECB and the European Commission, the 
first wave of which was conducted in July this year. 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 1
When asked what type of external financing they would prefer to use in order to fund growth 
opportunities,  70%  of  SMEs  replied  that  they  would  apply  for  a  bank  loan.  Hence,  the 
financing conditions of SMEs are closely linked to the situation of the banking sector, i.e. the 
lending  rates  and  the  availability  of  credit.  For  us  at  the  ECB,  this  aspect  of  the  SMEs’ 
financing structure is absolutely crucial for our assessment of the monetary policy stance and 
the transmission of our monetary policy decisions to the economy at large.  
During  the  crisis,  securing  financing  has  proven  difficult  for  many  SMEs  and  a  source  of 
serious concern for monetary policy. Let me take this opportunity to stress that the decisions 
taken by the Governing Council of the ECB in terms of monetary policy and the support of 
the banking system via our refinancing operations have been instrumental in preventing the 
risk of credit drying up completely.  
Nonetheless, it is clear that SMEs have experienced a severe deterioration in their economic 
environment  over  recent  quarters  and  have  seen  their  access  to  finance  significantly 
constrained.  
SMEs have been widely affected by sluggish demand and a slump in export markets. At the 
same  time,  they  have  also  been  affected  in  their  role  as  suppliers,  sub-contractors  and 
service providers to large firms which themselves were struggling with economic difficulties. 
According  to  the  survey  evidence,  SMEs  experienced  a  significant  deterioration  in  their 
turnover and profits in the first half of 2009, and they were more adversely affected by the 
crisis than large companies. Indeed, a higher net share of SMEs than of large firms indicated 
that  their  capital  base  had  deteriorated.  Of  course,  the  economic  uncertainty  and 
unfavourable outlook was anything but conducive to an increase in firms’ demand for loans. 
At  the  same  time,  the  deteriorating  situation  of  firms  and  particularly  the  uncertainty 
surrounding their economic outlook also made banks increasingly reluctant to grant loans to 
SMEs. Moreover, the financial crisis has put a strain on banks’ balance sheets, leading them 
to increasingly tighten the terms and conditions for granting credit.  
Therefore, the combination of lower demand for loans, on the one hand, and tighter credit 
supply conditions, on the other hand, has led to a decline in the annual growth rate of loans 
to enterprises. In the euro area loan growth declined from 17.5% in the last quarter of 2008 
to about 2% in the third quarter of 2009. 
So  how  bad  has  the  situation  been  for  SMEs?  Let  me  briefly  give  you  the  answer  to  this 
question  based  on  the  evidence  from  our  SME  survey  conducted  on  cooperation  with  the 
European  Commission.  Our  survey  evidence  reveals  that,  amid  exceptionally  adverse 
economic and financial conditions, 77% of SMEs that applied for a bank loan in the first half 
of 2009 received some or whole amount they had applied for. As I mentioned, this is a new 
survey.  So,  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  compare  these  data  over  time,  and  hence,  makes  it 
difficult  to  assess  whether  the  bank  loan  rejection  rates  indeed  indicate  severe  supply 
constraints. In fact, even at times of sound economic growth, some bank loan applications 
will be rejected, for instance owing to the lack of a convincing business plan.  
Nevertheless, the survey has also shown that 43% of euro area SMEs that had applied for a 
bank  loan  reported  a  deterioration  in  the  availability  of  loans  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  This 
seems,  in  particular,  point  to  increases  in  charges,  fees  and  commissions  or  tighter 
procedures,  collateral  requirements  and  other  types  of  required  guarantees.  Interestingly, 
large firms were somewhat more negative in their assessment of bank loan availability, with 
nearly 50% reporting a deterioration. Still, I believe, it has become clear that firms’ access to 
finance came certainly under pressure during the current financial and economic crisis. 
Looking further ahead, we expect that the growth of loans to enterprises is likely to moderate 
further before starting to recover. This, however, is in line with past recession patterns. We 
know that the growth of loans to non-financial corporations normally tends to lag real GDP 
growth by about three quarters. This is usually linked to the fact that firms tend to make use 
of their internal funds first before turning to external financing. So overall, once the severity 
and duration of the economic slowdown are taken into account, recent credit developments 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2009
appear to be broadly in line with historical patterns. As a note of caution, let me emphasize, 
however,  that  there  are  still  uncertainties  ahead  so  that  the  full  impact  of  the  crisis  is  yet 
unknown.  
Let me still mention that we see several positive signals ahead. Indeed, the most recent euro 
area Bank Lending Survey, released last month, confirms that banks’ liquidity position is no 
longer a factor tightening credit conditions, which had been the case up to the first quarter of 
2009. The positive message we can take away from our Bank Lending Survey is that credit 
conditions  –  though  still  tight  –  do  not  show  any  signs  of  further  tightening  as  the  funding 
problems of banks are solved with the support of the ECB policy measures.  
Also  the  evidence  from  the  SME  survey  reveals  some  cautious  optimism  regarding  the 
availability of finance in the second half of 2009, at least in a majority of euro area countries. 
More than one year after the financial crisis intensified dramatically in September 2008, we 
can see increasing signs of economic stabilisation in the euro area and there are reasons to 
believe that a gradual recovery lies ahead. This will mean new opportunities for all of us and 
for all of you to seize. 
The benefits of integrated payment systems in Europe 
In addition to access to finance, the European Commission's Small Business Act identified 
liquidity  constraints  as  a  problem  for  SMEs.  The  integration  of  European  retail  payment 
markets will for one part contribute to eliminating this problem.  
But most importantly, further integration will make payments more efficient and will bring cost 
savings to all firms and citizens in Europe. Around 50% of euro area exports and imports are 
within the euro area countries. When payments for this trade can be made in the same – or 
even more – efficient and low cost way as national payments, the benefit for the European 
economy is evident.  
Indeed, the vision for the Single Euro Payments Area – SEPA – is for all European payments 
to be treated in the same way as domestic payments, with no difference between national 
and cross-border payments in euro. This will be achieved by using a single set of payment 
instruments  which  are  as  simple,  safe  and  efficient  as  those  used  in  the  national  context 
today. Today, we can trade goods and services without borders in Europe; we also use euro 
as  our  single  currency;  we  must  also  have  borderless  and  fully  harmonized  payments  to 
complete the Single Market. 
On  January  2008  we  introduced  the  SEPA  credit  transfers  and  the  European  cards 
framework. Only one month ago, we celebrated the launch of the SEPA direct debit, a truly 
new  payment  service  at  the  European  level.  At  the  same  time,  the  PSD  went  into  effect 
which contributes greatly to the harmonization in the retail payments markets. 
So what does all this mean for the small and medium sized companies? 
At one of the SEPA conferences that I recently attended, a CFO of a medium-sized travel 
agency gave a presentation on her SEPA experience. She told us that when she received 
the  SEPA  brochures,  her  first  reaction  was  rather  hesitant.  She  wondered  whether  new 
burdens  were  being  put  on  small  companies.  But  when  she  started  to  understand  what 
SEPA is all about, she became more and more enthusiastic. She realised how her company 
could directly benefit from cheaper and faster payments, from a simplified account structure 
and from using a single banking software application for all her euro payments.  
I  do  not  think  that  this  company  is  an  exception.  At  first  glance,  the  harmonisation  of 
European retail payments may seem like a mandatory replacement of existing products and 
admittedly  implies  that  we  need  to  get  used  to  new  standards  and  procedures.  But  when 
looked at more closely, the true benefits start to reveal themselves. 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 3
SEPA  is  a  market-driven  process  which  is  strongly  supported  by  the  authorities  like  the 
European  Commission,  the  National  Central  Banks  and  the  ECB.  To  complement  the 
common  payment  instruments,  business  rules  and  standards  developed  by  the  European 
Payments Council (EPC), the European Commission has issued harmonised legislation on 
payment  services  and  euro-denominated  cross-border  payments.  The  combination  of 
common  standards,  common  payment  instruments  and  a  harmonised  legal  framework  will 
benefit small and medium-sized companies in at least four ways: 
First,  it  provides  legal  certainty  all over  Europe.  This  means  that irrespective  of  where  the 
company and its customers are located in Europe, there is no additional risk stemming from 
the  existence  of  different  payment  rules  and  customs.  Hence,  trading  across  borders 
becomes more certain. In my view, this will remove one more important barrier from doing 
business Europe-wide.  
Second,  the  faster  execution  of  payments  will  enhance  the  cash  flow  and  liquidity  of 
companies. In the past it has taken up to five days or even longer for a payment to reach the 
beneficiary’s account. This has been the case for some national payments, let alone cross-
border  payments.  The  SEPA  credit  transfer  will  ensure  that  all  payments  in  Europe  are 
credited to the beneficiary in a maximum of two days and, from 2012, in accordance with the 
Payment  Services  Directive,  in  just  one  day.  In  addition,  no  value  dates  are  lost  as  the 
payment will be credited to the beneficiary’s account as soon as it is received by the service 
provider.  
Third,  fees  for  cross-border  payments  cannot  be  higher  than  those  for  similar  national 
payments. This is ensured by the regulation on cross-border payments. The harmonized and 
integrated  European  payment  market  will  be  a  key  driver  for  more  competition,  leading  to 
lower  costs,  enhanced  services  and  more  innovation.  This  may  also  encourage  the 
development of SME-specific services as there is now a Europe-wide market for them. 
Fourth, standardisation makes the processing of payments simpler. Cross-border payments 
no longer require any additional effort. All companies have the option to make use of more 
inexpensive  banking  software  and  integrated  accounting  and  reporting  applications. 
Evidence from the Nordic market indicates that common standards have enabled even very 
small companies to use e-banking and related applications. The standardisation of payment 
card  transactions  means  that  payment  card  terminals  will  also  conform  to  a  European 
standard.  Merchants  will  benefit  from  competition  between  terminal  manufacturers  and 
between acquirers.  
All these benefits – legal certainty, enhanced liquidity owing to faster payments and no lost 
value dates, competitive services and standardised payment terminals and banking software 
– will be available to all companies – big and small – conducting cross-border business or 
operating locally. 
But this is only the starting point for further developments. The European e-payment solution 
will  offer  further  benefits.  Also  SMEs  are  increasingly  using  the  internet  as  a  channel  for 
doing business. Growing numbers of consumers, especially young people, prefer to use the 
internet  and  e-commerce  to  make  purchases.  In  countries  such  as  Germany,  the 
Netherlands and Austria, safe and efficient e-payment schemes are already available, but in 
many  countries  they  are  still  lacking.  With  a  common  European  e-payment  scheme,  both 
consumers and merchants will have a more secure way to pay. The Eurosystem has strongly 
encouraged the EPC to work on a SEPA solution for e-payments. This will also benefit very 
small enterprises, many of which operate in the services sector and need to use an easy and 
low-cost payment terminal or internet banking.  
But how can we achieve these benefits? Making use of the opportunities that SEPA offers 
may  simply  require  the  use  of  the  IBAN  and  BIC  instead  of  national  account  identifiers. 
Countries such as Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Poland and Romania have already successfully 
switched to using these account identifiers without a problem. Banking software may need to 
be updated, but this can be accomplished in the course of the normal investment cycle of the 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2009
firm  in  question.  In  my  view,  the  transition  costs  are  certainly  outweighed  by  the  benefits 
stemming from faster and cheaper payments, legal certainty and the ease of doing business 
throughout Europe.  
I  sometimes  hear  the  question:  Is  it  really  working?  Are  banks  really  delivering?  All  the 
building  blocks  for  an  integrated  retail  payment  market  are  in  place.  It  is  important  that 
customers too demonstrate demand for SEPA benefits and urge their banks to make SEPA a 
reality. Small and medium-sized companies should aim for the benefits of SEPA. 
Conclusion 
Europe has come far in terms of integration. The Single Market for labour, goods, services 
and capital was fully established 16 years ago with the Maastricht Treaty. This Single Market 
now  requires  a  single  market  for  payments.  The  European  retail  payment  systems  will  be 
integrated  by  means  of  common  standards,  common  payment  instruments  and  common 
business  rules  and  conditions.  The  SEPA  project  is  an  integral  part  of  this  process.  I 
highlighted four main benefits for end-users, which include SMEs. 
• 
The  legal  certainty  regarding  payments  will  remove  another  important  barrier  to 
trade 
faster payments will improve liquidity conditions for all companies 
enhanced competition in payment services will contribute to lower costs and will be 
a key driver of innovation and 
standardisation  will  provide  easier  access  to  banking  software  and  payment 
terminals, including for SMEs. 
  Given these tremendous potential benefits arising from SEPA and the overall harmonization 
process, we need to make a further leap forward in the SEPA implementation. This entails 
existing SEPA instruments, the credit transfers and direct debit, but also innovations in the 
field  of  eSEPA,  such  as  e-payments  which  can  greatly  benefit  the  payments  business  of 
SMEs.  The  take  up  of  the  SEPA  products  –  until  now  –  is  rather  modest.  The  ECB  is 
convinced that a binding migration end date for SEPA is needed. It is in the interest of all 
stakeholders to migrate quickly to the SEPA instruments. 
And let me emphasize – once more – that also SMEs as key users of payment instruments 
can make an important contribution to the successful implementation of a harmonized and 
integrated retail payments market.  
The financial crisis has put severe strains on SMEs and I have mentioned the results of our 
survey on the access to finance of SMEs conducted jointly by the ECB and the European 
Commission in this respect. Therefore, on the one hand, I understand that in difficult times 
changes are not always easy to bring forward. On the other hand, times of distress open up 
new opportunities and make change even more necessary.  
The  lesson  we  learnt  from  the  crisis  is  that  we  need  to  better  safeguard  the  stability  and 
resilience  of  our  financial  system.  I  am  convinced  that  efficient  and  harmonized  financial 
markets  can  make  an  important  contribution  in  this  regard.  Therefore,  we  continue  to 
promote and work intensively on the further integration of payment systems and instruments. 
With  this  successfully  achieved,  the  operating  environment  of  SMEs  can  be  greatly 
enhanced to the overall benefit of the economy. Because, as you know, when SMEs prosper, 
the economy prospers.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 5
