Jean-Pierre Roth: Global and Swiss economic outlook 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 10 December 2009. 
 By  and  large,  our  assessment  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation  is  the  same  as  in 
September  2009,  with  economic  and 
to 
expectations.  Risks  remain  significant,  and  for  this  reason  we  are  maintaining  our 
expansionary monetary policy.  
financial  developments  running  according 
Global economic outlook  
Before I address the outlook for the Swiss economy, allow me to briefly examine economic 
developments at the international level, since they affect the outlook for Switzerland.  
Signs of a recovery in global economic activity gathered strength during the second half of 
2009.  The  ongoing  normalisation  of  conditions  on  the  interbank  and  financial  markets, 
together with the monetary and fiscal stimuli, supported a recovery in production, especially 
in the manufacturing industry.  
However, the legacy of the crisis still weighs heavily. The economic rebound of the past few 
months  is  largely  the  result  of  public  sector  intervention,  and  is  not  yet  anchored  firmly 
enough.  Except  in  emerging  Asia,  the  rebound  has  only  partly  redressed  the  losses 
sustained  in  2008  and  early  2009.  Capacity  utilisation  rates  are  still  generally  low,  and 
access to bank lending remains difficult in some countries. Moreover, both the labour market 
situation  and  the  need  to  restore  savings  levels  are  weighing  on  household  consumer 
spending. Therefore, we still hold the view that the return to global equilibrium will be slower 
and more uncertain than is usually the case at the end of a recession.  
Swiss economic outlook  
The Swiss economy is also on the road to recovery: Swiss GDP growth turned positive in the 
third  quarter.  However,  value  added  continued  to  contract  in  the  manufacturing  industry. 
Overall, demand for labour is still falling and unemployment numbers are on the rise.  
We  are  projecting  a  moderate  recovery  for  2010.  Private  consumption  growth  will  be  held 
back  by  weak  household  income  growth.  Exports  will  benefit  from  a  gradual  return  to 
strength of external demand. This should allow manufacturing production to recover, albeit 
unevenly  across  the  different  segments.  In  particular,  new  orders  in  the  equipment  goods 
segment will probably continue to suffer from the excess capacity at the international level. In 
Switzerland, too, the increase in manufacturing production will not be enough to allow excess 
production capacity to be reabsorbed. Consequently, equipment investment is unlikely to see 
any  improvement  for  several  quarters,  and  there  could  be  a  fall  in  the  number  of 
manufacturing  jobs.  In  the  construction  industry,  on  the  other  hand,  where  the  degree  of 
resource utilisation is more than satisfactory, demand should stabilise.  
For 2010 as a whole, the SNB expects real GDP growth of between 0.5% and 1%, following 
a decline of around 1.5% in 2009.  
Changes in monetary and financial conditions  
Overall,  monetary  conditions  are  a  reflection  of  our  expansionary  policy,  especially  with 
respect to interest rates and the monetary aggregates.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
The Libor is currently at the level targeted since March this year, i.e. 25 basis points, a level 
which can be regarded as a floor. The fact that it was impossible to bring the rate down any 
lower  than  this  led  us,  in  March,  to  introduce  other  instruments  in  order  to  make  our 
monetary policy as expansionary as the circumstances demanded.  
Monetary  conditions  have  become  more  expansionary  via  the  interest  rate  channel  in 
particular.  Indeed,  credit  premia  on  the  capital  markets  have  declined  steadily  since  the 
beginning of the year. As yields on Confederation bonds have remained low, other long-term 
yields  have  also  trended  downwards.  It  has  thus  become  cheaper  for  companies  to  raise 
funds by borrowing on the capital market. In addition, our figures show that financing in the 
form of bank loans has also become more attractive following the decline in the Libor. In real 
terms – i.e. after factoring in expected inflation – interest rates are even lower.  
The Swiss franc has appreciated slightly in trade-weighted terms, as a result of the recent 
weakening of the dollar. However, it has remained stable against the euro, which shows that 
the monetary policy followed since March has been effective. An appreciation of the Swiss 
franc  against  the  euro  would  run  counter  to  the  relaxation  in  monetary  conditions  brought 
about through the interest rate channel. This is why the SNB will continue to act decisively to 
prevent any excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro.  
An assessment of monetary conditions can be misleading if it is based on prices, which, like 
currently  the  libor,  have  reached  a  bound.  For  this  reason,  an  assessment  based  on 
quantities – money and credit – is particularly important in the current circumstances.  
The monetary base has increased substantially since October 2008, when the financial crisis 
entered a new phase following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. We supplied the interbank 
market  with  sufficient  liquidity  to  meet  burgeoning  demand  in  a  climate  of  uncertainty,  in 
order to prevent any increase in money market rates. Since then, precautionary base money 
demand has declined and we have reabsorbed liquidity accordingly. The monetary base has 
thus fallen by 28% compared to the peak recorded in April 2009. The level of sight deposits 
is,  however,  still  almost  ten  times  higher  than  before  the  crisis.  There  is  thus  a  risk  of 
excessive money creation once confidence is restored.  
Monetary conditions should not be judged in terms of banking sector liquidity, but rather on 
the basis of the liquidity available to households and firms – i.e. the monetary aggregates. 
M3 growth, which had been modest for a long time, has accelerated. In October, it reached 
an  annual  rate  of  7.7%.  M1  and  M2  have  shown  strong  growth.  The  significance  of  these 
growth  rates  is  limited  because  the  uncertainty  linked  to  the  crisis  reinforced  the  general 
public’s preference for liquidity, and because interest rates are at extremely low levels. It is 
therefore useful to analyse the transmission of monetary stimuli through the lending channel 
as well. 
Mortgage loans provide a particularly good reflection of the effects of monetary policy. Why? 
Essentially, mortgage loans are used to finance real estate projects. But the yields on these 
investments, which are by their very nature long-term, are heavily dependent on the level of 
interest rates. This relationship has been confirmed once again: no sooner did we cut interest 
rates than the growth rate of mortgage loans began to increase more strongly. Having hit a 
low of 3.2% in November 2008, the growth rate then began to accelerate steadily, reaching 
5.1% in October 2009. In the same month, other lending in Swiss francs declined at a rate of 
–0.3%,  which  is  normal  during  a  period  of  weak  economic  activity.  All  in  all,  lending  to 
households and firms, both large and small, has continued to grow over the past few months, 
as the growth in mortgage lending has largely offset the drop in other lending.  
According to the latest SNB bank lending survey, the phase of tightening lending conditions 
could  be  coming  to  an  end.  The  share  of  banks  reporting  a  further  slight  tightening  of 
conditions for corporate lending has fallen considerably, from 40% at the time of the previous 
quarterly  survey  to  3%  for  this  quarter.  Households  appear  to  be  benefiting  from  a  similar 
trend, as no banks have announced a tightening of their lending conditions for households, 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
whereas in the previous quarter 50% of banks reported a further slight tightening of lending 
conditions for non-mortgage loans and 20% for mortgage loans to households.  
The  survey  also  suggests  that  demand  for  loans  has  stabilised.  The  share  of  banks 
experiencing  increased  household  demand  for  mortgages  has  fallen  from  40%  at  the 
beginning of this year to 10%.  
The situation in Switzerland is thus very different to that observed in other economies. Not 
only  is  there  no  credit  crunch,  but  we  have  also  witnessed  a  substantial  increase  in  the 
volume of mortgages. There are also signs of a relaxation in lending conditions for mortgage 
loans. We would like to sound a note of caution, both to banks and to firms and households, 
as regards the risks inherent in a relaxation of discipline in real estate financing.  
Inflation outlook  
Monetary  policy  influences  the  medium  and  long-term  inflation  outlook.  By  contrast,  it  has 
very  little  effect  on  short-term  developments.  The  past  two  years  have  been  a  perfect 
illustration of this. Inflation peaked at 3.1% in July 2008, before plummeting to –1.2% in July 
this year. This reflects extreme movements in oil prices, which reached USD 145 a barrel in 
July 2008, only to fall to USD 35 in December of the same year. The temporary nature of 
fluctuations  in  inflation  was  correctly  anticipated,  as  evidenced  in  our  previous  inflation 
forecasts. Since it takes time for the impact of monetary policy to feed through, it would have 
been futile to attempt to counter these movements.  
The  path  of  inflation  in  the  near  term  will  be  largely  dictated  by  recent  movements  in  oil 
prices and the associated base effects. Inflation will already return to positive figures from the 
end of this year. This is mainly due to the base effect linked to the USD 35 low reached by oil 
prices  in  December  2008.  Inflation  will  tend  to  decline  thereafter,  despite  the  recovery  in 
growth.  In  fact,  economic  activity  will  remain  subdued  and  will  return  only  gradually  to 
normal.  Inflation  will  nevertheless  remain  positive  throughout  2010.  Assuming  that  our 
monetary  policy  remains  unchanged,  our  new  forecast  shows  that  inflation  will  begin  to 
increase  again  from  the  beginning  of  2011,  to  reach  2%  in  the  first  half  of  2012.  Our 
expansionary  monetary  policy  cannot  be  maintained  indefinitely  without  incurring  inflation 
risks.  
Considerable  uncertainty  remains  attached  to  this  inflation  forecast.  Global  economic 
developments could be less favourable than I described in the first section of my remarks. 
The financial crisis could reappear.  
Monetary policy decision  
The inflation outlook has not changed since the September assessment. It confirms that the 
expansionary monetary policy cannot be maintained for the next three years because price 
stability will be compromised in the long term. However, a swift correction in monetary policy 
would be precipitate since the inflation outlook is still associated with downside risks. If these 
risks  materialised,  we  could  again  be  faced  with  the  threat  of  deflation.  The  uncertainties 
relate to the global economy and to the level of recovery within the financial industry. These 
factors have persuaded the SNB to opt for a cautious stance, and it is leaving its monetary 
policy course unchanged for the time being.  
Strengthening the SNB’s equity capital  
On 4 December, the SNB Bank Council decided to strengthen the SNB’s equity capital by 
doubling the allocation to provisions over the next five years. This decision was prompted by 
the  growth  in  market  and  credit  risks  in  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  (creation  of  the  SNB 
StabFund  and  the  increase  in  currency  reserves).  Given  the  high  level  of  the  distribution 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
reserve and results expected for 2009, this decision should not pose problems in terms of the 
distribution of profits, in the amount of CHF 2.5 billion annually, up to the end of the period 
agreed  with  the  Confederation  and  the  cantons  (2017).  My  colleague  Thomas  Jordan  will 
address these aspects in more detail in his own introductory remarks.  
 
 
      4 
 BIS Review 167/2009
