Glenn Stevens: The conduct of monetary policy in crisis and recovery 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  John 
Curtin  Institute  of  Public  Policy  and  the  Financial  Services  Institute  of  Australasia  Public 
Policy Breakfast Forum, Perth, 15 October 2009. 
 With economic prospects improving, people’s thoughts naturally turn to the question “what 
next for monetary policy?” Financial markets were the first to ask this question. Virtually as 
soon as the cash rate stopped falling, the pundits started to speculate about the timing of the 
first increase. 
Initially, this change in market tone seemed a little premature. But it is now a year since the 
dramatic financial events of September and October 2008 dictated a sharp change of course 
for monetary policy. The question of how monetary policy will be conducted during the next 
phase is therefore a reasonable one. It is understandable if it is also a rather prominent one, 
following last week’s decision by the Board to lift the cash rate by one quarter of 1 per cent. 
The  Bank  has  already  conveyed  a  good  deal  of  its  general  thinking,  through  its  regular 
statements  after  each  Board  meeting,  the  subsequent  minutes,  other  written  material  and 
remarks I have offered previously. Nonetheless, this is an appropriate juncture at which to try 
to bring all this together. 
So  this  morning,  I  intend  to  elaborate  a  little  about  the  sorts  of  issues  that  have  been 
important  for  the  conduct  of  policy  in  the  past  year  and  those  that  look  like  they  will  be 
relevant in the period ahead. 
First, however, it is worth recounting the framework for policy, the process that we go through 
each month in reaching the decision, and the way that decision is implemented. 
The policy framework 
The centrepiece of the framework for monetary policy is a medium-term target for inflation. 
This framework combines two important principles that both theory and practical experience 
about monetary matters have taught us. 
The first is that, in the long run, monetary policy is about the value of money – that is, prices. 
Over long horizons, the size of the economy and its average rate of growth will be driven by 
developments on the supply side – such as the availability of land and labour, the extent of 
accumulation  of  real  capital,  technology,  and  the  efficiency  with  which  we  use  all  those 
factors. Monetary policy can’t make those factors grow faster. 
The second is that, in the short term, monetary policy changes do affect the real economy, 
because  they  affect  aggregate  demand.  If  trend  inflation  has  risen,  for  example,  getting  it 
down  again  usually  requires  a  period  of  slower  growth  in  demand.  But  we  don’t  want  that 
period of slower growth to be any longer or more pronounced than necessary. By the same 
token, if as a result of some shock demand falls below potential supply capacity, the resulting 
downward  pressure  on  inflation  may  provide  scope  for  monetary  policy  to  be  easier  for  a 
time, which will help to limit the cyclical weakness in economic activity. 
Our  objective  of  keeping  consumer  price  inflation  to  2-3  per  cent,  on  average  over  time, 
strikes a good balance between these short-term and long-term considerations. 
The “on average” specification allows deviations from the target in the short term, which are 
often  unavoidable  anyway,  but  still  embodies  a  commitment  that  those  deviations  will  be 
reversed in a reasonable period of time. It allows the economy’s growth potential, determined 
by productivity, labour force growth and so on, to be realised. At the same time, the explicit 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 1
numerical goal for inflation helps to anchor expectations of inflation and works to preserve 
the  value  of  money.  As  such,  it  is  in  our  view  fully  consistent  with,  and  gives  practical 
expression to, the objectives given to the Bank in legislation: the stability of the currency (that 
is, its purchasing power); full employment; and the economic prosperity and welfare of the 
people of Australia. It has bi-partisan support in the Parliament. It has also been, in practice, 
over the 15 years we have been using it, the most effective framework for monetary policy 
Australia has had so far. 
The target is expressed in terms of the Consumer Price Index (CPI). This is, of course, only 
one of a number of price indexes. But the CPI was chosen because: it is the best known and 
accepted published price index; it is pretty reliable; and it presents fewer analytical problems 
for this purpose than other measures of prices. 
I now turn to the decision process. 
The decision process 
The Bank is continually examining a vast amount of statistical and survey information. There 
are thousands of individual data series monitored by the staff in the Bank’s Economic Group, 
covering Australia and a number of other countries. An array of financial information from all 
the major markets around the world as well as in Australia, is monitored on a daily basis. 
This  work  is  complemented  by  an  extensive  program  of  business  liaison.  A  lengthy  list  of 
contacts  is  maintained;  about  100  organisations  are  spoken  with  in  any  given  month.  The 
Financial  Markets  Group  also  maintains  close  contact  with  financial  market  participants  in 
Australia and elsewhere, and the Reserve Bank gains valuable intelligence as a participant in 
both local and offshore markets. 
In the lead-up to the Board’s meeting, all this material is carefully evaluated. At a meeting of 
the most senior officers in the week preceding the Board meeting, discussion occurs about 
what  should  be  recommended  to  the  Board.  Papers  for  the  Board  containing  the  factual 
information  available,  the  staff’s  judgements  about  issues  of  interpretation  in  the  data,  the 
outlook and any topics of special interest are prepared. A four to five page paper, containing 
a high-level summation of the issues for policy and the recommendation, is completed on the 
Thursday afternoon ahead of the meeting. Board members receive the papers on the Friday. 
At  the  Board  meeting,  the  most  senior  staff  present  the  key  messages  from  the  papers. 
There is extensive discussion, and plenty of questions from the members about the material. 
The Board, I can assure you, is no rubber stamp and its members are no group of shrinking 
violets. They come from a diverse set of backgrounds. They bring their own experiences and 
their own independently gleaned pieces of information about what is going on. The analysis 
and arguments put by the staff and management of the Bank are well and truly tested. Any 
weaknesses will quickly become pretty clear. 
This discussion usually takes about three hours. It is, I would think, the most intense regular 
discussion of the state of the economy that occurs anywhere in the country, as of course it 
should be. 
At  the  end  of  the  discussion,  the  Governor,  as  Chairman  of  the  Board,  will  sum  up  and 
introduce the policy question. Each member has an opportunity to give their view and their 
reasoning on the decision at hand. Typically, a consensus emerges, and the decision is then 
taken. 
It  then  remains  to  issue  a  statement.  The  Board  meeting  is  not  a  drafting  session  –  the 
members  are  usually  content  to  leave  the  precise  wording  to  the  Chairman,  on  the 
understanding that the statement will be consistent with the discussion at the meeting. The 
statement  is  then  released  at  2.30pm  and  the  community  is  thereby  informed  very  quickly 
what the decision is and why we have taken it. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2009
Subsequently,  the  draft  minutes  of  the  meeting  are  prepared.  These  are  finalised  after 
members have the opportunity to comment on the draft during the following week, and are 
released  publicly  on  the  Tuesday  two  weeks  after  the  meeting.  A  few  days  after  this,  the 
whole sequence begins over again. In addition to all the above, every three months the Bank 
publishes  an  extensive  analysis  of  the  economy,  financial  markets  and  the  issues  for 
monetary policy. This document, the Statement on Monetary Policy, typically runs to about 
70 pages. 
All of this is already known. The point of recounting it is to reassure people that there is a 
very  careful,  detailed  and  extensive  process  involved  both  in  making  the  monetary  policy 
decision and in explaining it. 
The transmission process 
A lot of effort goes into the policy decision, as I have just described. But that only establishes 
one interest rate in the economy – and a very specialised one at that. (For today’s purposes 
only,  I  am  leaving  aside  the  other  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  the 
economy, such as the exchange rate, inflation expectations, the supply of credit and so on. 
These remain important, but today it is the interest rate channel on which I want to focus.) 
The “cash rate” is the rate for borrowing large parcels of cash, or settlement funds that are 
held in banks’ accounts at the RBA, overnight. This is a very active market, but only a very 
small proportion of borrowing in the economy is actually conducted in this market. To have its 
broader  effect,  monetary  policy  relies  on  changes  in  the  cash  rate  affecting  other  interest 
rates. Both today’s cash rate and its expected value over the next six months to 12 months 
form the anchor for the spectrum of interest rates in the economy. 
But there are other factors at work as well. Term premia – the additional return that must be 
paid when money is tied up for longer periods – and compensation for risk also can affect the 
official yield curve and the structure of private interest rates. 
For some years, these other factors were reasonably stable. Compensation for risk actually 
tended to decline gradually, as a result of a very strong “search for yield” by investors and 
heightened competition among intermediaries to lend. Hence in net terms loan rates slowly 
fell, relative to the cash rate. On the whole, though, changes in the cash rate came to be 
seen as driving most of the important rate changes in the economy quite precisely. 
This was, historically speaking, somewhat unusual. In the past 18 months or so, in contrast, 
a  sharp  reappraisal  by  investors  around  the  world  has  seen  compensation  demanded  for 
accepting  risk  increase.  As  a  result,  the  various  market  interest  rates  that  intermediaries 
have to pay to raise funds have, on occasion, moved independently of the cash rate. 
The Bank has published an analysis of funding costs, which provides a useful framework for 
thinking about these issues, so I won’t go into them in detail.1 I will simply make a couple of 
observations. 
First,  during  the  easing  phase,  interest  rates  for  most  borrowers  still  came  down  quite 
significantly, because the cash rate changes were so large. For mortgages, floating rates in 
the past year reached their lowest level since 1964. At the margin, the cash rate cuts were 
larger  than  otherwise  because  the  Board  could  see  that  spreads  between  intermediaries’ 
rates and the cash rate were tending to widen. Likewise in future decisions, the Board will 
take careful note of any tendency for spreads to change. 
                                                 
1   Davies M, C Naughtin and A Wong (2009), ‘The Impact of the Capital Market Turbulence on Banks’ Funding 
at 
Costs’, 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_jun09/impact-cap-mkt-turb.html> 
Available 
Bulletin, 
1–13. 
June, 
RBA 
pp 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 3
Second, in Australia, housing loan rates came down much more than has been the case in 
many countries. This was partly because of the prevalence of floating rate housing debt here, 
but also because spreads on housing loans (relative to the policy rate) widened by less in 
Australia than other countries. That is to say, monetary policy still works pretty effectively in 
Australia. 
The conduct of policy during the crisis 
Going into the crisis, the global economy had been growing strongly. Global GDP expanded 
by 5 per cent in 2007, which capped off several years of well above average performance. 
The  US  economy  had  been  slowing  for  a  while  as  concerns  mounted  over  the  financial 
problems, but even into the first quarter of 2008 global GDP was still expanding at 4 per cent. 
Prices for most commodities were still rising; oil prices would not reach their peak until July 
that year. 
Our economy was operating at full stretch, with our terms of trade showing their largest rise 
in 50 years and delivering a very large income gain to the community. Confidence was high; 
firms routinely complained of labour shortages; inflation was tending to rise, worryingly so in 
the second half of 2007; and demand for credit was strong. 
In this environment, the Board was running tight monetary policy to contain inflation. We now 
know (but could not know for sure at the time) that CPI inflation was on its way to 5 per cent. 
Measures of underlying inflation, which seek to look through temporary factors, reached over 
4½  per  cent.  These  outcomes  were  well  above  our  target,  and  it  could  not  be  credibly 
claimed that they were just due to temporary or imported factors. In fact, in late 2009, we are 
still to see whether inflation will be consistently back to target over a period of time. We think 
it will be, but, as yet, that remains a forecast. 
The  big  rise  in  energy  prices  in  the  first  half  of  2008  crimped  growth  in  advanced  and 
emerging countries alike, and most showed a significant softening in the June quarter of that 
year.  By  then  it  was  starting  to  emerge  that  demand  in  Australia  was  in  the  process  of 
moderating – though it is worth noting that domestic final spending still rose by 1 per cent in 
the June quarter of 2008 and 5 per cent over the year to June, both very robust outcomes. 
The Board was then in a position to start thinking about when it might be time to begin to 
ease  monetary  policy,  in  anticipation  of  inflation  starting  to  decline  –  even  though  at  that 
stage it had yet to reach its peak. 
The easing phase began in early September. About two weeks later, the simmering financial 
tensions  in  the  northern  hemisphere  erupted  into  the  most  dramatic  sequence  of  financial 
events we are ever likely to see. The failure of Lehman Brothers is usually taken to be the 
signal event. That is a reasonable assessment, even though the US Government takeover of 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac actually preceded the Lehman collapse. 
The  ensuing  sequence  of  crashing  share  markets,  the  huge  financial  strains,  the  need  for 
governments  to  support  struggling  banks,  and  so  on,  had  a  massive  effect  on  confidence 
around the world. As a result demand for goods slumped everywhere. Most economies went 
into recession; in a number of cases these were severe ones. 
This required a change in monetary policy thinking in Australia. Instead of the gradual easing 
of  policy  that  we  had  been  expecting  would  occur,  as  inflation  gently  subsided,  the  Board 
concluded  last  October  that  it  needed  to  be  more  aggressive  in  lowering  rates.  Australian 
households and businesses, understandably, began to react to events abroad. This meant 
that there was likely to be a much weaker outcome for demand and output – and hence a 
greater prospect of falling inflation – than had been expected up to that time. This change to 
the outlook was reflected in revisions to the central forecasts prepared in the Bank. But the 
Board responded to more than just those forecast changes. It responded also to the risk that, 
in an environment of acute global financial strain and deleveraging, there could easily be a 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2009
much  weaker  outcome  for  economic  activity  even  than  the  one  embodied  in  the  reduced 
forecast. 
Accordingly,  the  cash  rate  was  reduced  by  a  total  of  300  basis  points  in  the  four  months 
leading up to the end of 2008. It was lowered further in the early part of 2009. 
This  “risk-management”  approach,  in  which  policy  responds  quickly  to  a  situation  where 
there  is  an  increased  risk  of  a  very  adverse  outcome,  is  fully  consistent  with  the  flexible 
inflation-targeting framework. 
Admittedly,  a  more  conventional  approach  might  have  seen  the  Board  ease  policy  more 
slowly, waiting for more evidence of economic weakness and moderation of inflation. Such 
an approach would have been defensible, particularly given how high inflation became during 
2008. But the loss in economic activity would probably have been greater, and the risk of an 
even larger  contraction would have been unaddressed. Inflation might  well have fallen not 
only faster, but ultimately further, than we needed it to. The Board’s view was that we should 
move to limit the downside risks to economic activity, to the extent it was feasible to do so 
while remaining consistent with the inflation target. 
The Board had some earlier analysis available to it that proved to be helpful in coming to that 
decision.  A  year  earlier,  for  the  September  2007  meeting,  the  staff  had  prepared  some 
scenarios for discussion. One of those was a sketch of what might occur if the financial crisis 
escalated  badly  and  the  global  downturn  turned  out  to  be  much  more  severe  than  then 
expected. The message from that work was that such an event, if it occurred, would probably 
require a very rapid response from monetary policy, in the direction of lower interest rates. 
That  event  did  not  occur  for  another  year,  but  when  it  ultimately  did,  we  were  a  bit  better 
prepared than otherwise might have been the case. 
The conduct of policy in recovery 
Along with the fiscal measures taken by the Government, the recovery in China, and assisted 
by Australia’s better starting point across several dimensions, this approach has had some 
success in heading off the worst effects of a very serious international recession. Australia 
has had an experience that, even if labelled a recession, was a pretty mild one. 
That is, clearly, a good outcome in the circumstances. 
Now that the risks of really serious economic weakness have abated, however, the question 
arises as to how to configure monetary policy for the recovery. We have said that, over time, 
interest  rates  will  need  to  be  adjusted  towards  a  more  normal  setting  as  the  economy 
recovers.  A  step  in  that  direction  was  taken  last  week.  Of  course,  there  are  still  important 
matters of judgement in the timing and pace of how that is done. The global outlook remains 
uncertain and the Board is very conscious of that. 
The Board is also conscious, though, that a risk-management approach requires policy to be 
recalibrated as circumstances change. If we were prepared to cut rates rapidly, to a very low 
level, in response to a threat but then were too timid to lessen that stimulus in a timely way 
when  the  threat  had  passed,  we  would  have  a  bias  in  our  monetary  policy  framework. 
Experience here and elsewhere counsels against that approach. 
None of this is to say that the economy is, at this moment, “too strong”. It isn’t. The point is, 
rather, that the very low interest rate settings were designed for a weaker economy than we 
are in fact facing. Plainly, the downside risks to which the Board was responding earlier have 
not materialised. 
This is not a problem. In fact, it is a very desirable situation. It is a welcome contrast to the 
experience of a number of other countries. It is simply something we need to recognise in 
setting monetary policy – which means not holding interest rates at very low levels when that 
is no longer needed. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
The period of greatest weakness in the Australian economy is probably past. Barring another 
serious  international  setback,  the  economy  is  likely  to  continue  on  a  path  of  gradual 
expansion during 2010. 
That being so, those of us involved in monetary policy must turn our thoughts to encouraging 
the sustainability of that expansion. This is particularly the case for monetary policy given the 
lags in its impact. In conducting monetary policy during this expansion, our objectives will be 
the same as they were in the previous one: to keep inflation low; to react in a measured but 
prompt fashion to changes in the risks facing the economy; and, in so doing, to play our part 
in  fostering  a  long,  sustainable  period  of  growth.  Australia  faces  many  challenges  in  the 
future, but we can have confidence that these can be met. A sound monetary framework is 
one of the foundations for doing so.  
6 
 BIS Review 126/2009
