Jean-Claude Trichet: The regulatory and supervisory reform in Europe 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eurofi 
Financial Forum 2009, Gothenborg, 30 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  among  you  and  to  say  a  few  words  of  introduction  before  this 
distinguished  panel.  The  purpose  of  my  intervention  is  to  lay  out  the  main  issues  for  our 
discussion. 
• 
investment 
that  alternative 
fund  managers  be  subject 
Substantive progress has been made in the regulatory and supervisory reform as a 
response  to  the  financial  crisis.  A  remarkable  amount  of  technical  work  has  been 
undertaken in a demanding timeframe. 
All relevant initiatives have been coordinated globally, and the European Union has 
been  a  frontrunner  in  a  number  key  areas.  Let  me  mention  three  of  them:  credit 
rating agencies, hedge funds and compensation practices.  
On credit rating agencies, the EU has already adopted regulation that will subject 
credit  rating  agencies  to  mandatory  registration  and  oversight,  to  increase 
transparency and reduce conflicts of interest in the rating process.  
With regard to hedge funds, the European Commission has proposed a Directive on 
alternative  investment  fund  managers.  This  proposal,  which  is  currently  under 
debate,  provides 
to 
authorisation  and  harmonised  regulatory  standards,  including  minimum  capital,  as 
well as disclosure requirements.  
On  compensation  practices,  the  European  Commission  was  among  the  first  to 
incorporate in a Directive the Principles developed by the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB)  for  sound  compensation  practices.  Moreover,  the  EU  has  been  driving  the 
international  agenda  in  developing  further  implementation  standards  that  will  align 
compensation  practices  with  long-term  value  creation,  and  discourage  excessive 
risk-taking  in  the  short-term.  As  a  result,  the  G20  Summit  in  Pittsburgh  calls  on 
banks  to  defer  bonus  payments,  disallow  guaranteed  bonuses,  and  introduce  a 
claw-back clause. 
Overall, agreement has been reached globally on a comprehensive set of measures 
in  response  to  the  crisis.  The  capital  framework  has  been  strengthened  by 
introducing  stricter  requirements  for  the  treatment  of  securitisation  exposures  and 
off-balance sheet vehicles, as well as for credit risk in the trading book. Disclosure 
requirements  have  been  improved,  to  reduce  uncertainty  about  banks’  overall 
exposures 
the 
shortcomings in banks’ risk management practices. Finally, international cooperation 
has  been  very  strongly  reinforced  and  supervisory  colleges  for  large  complex 
financial groups have been established. 
these  areas.  Guidance  has  been  published 
to  address 
in 
     While a lot has been achieved, a lot remains to be done. This is no time for complacency. 
Looking ahead, legislative proposals should fully reflect the ongoing work at international and 
EU level aiming at enhancing the resilience of the financial system and protect consumers 
and investors against the impact of excessive risk taking and irresponsible market practices. 
Main priorities include: strengthening the prudential framework; addressing the risks posed 
by  systemically  important  institutions;  and  setting  a  framework  for  macro-prudential 
supervision. 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 1
       2 
 First, future regulatory reform will aim at improving the level and quality of capital for 
credit institutions as well as developing a framework for liquidity risk. The quality of 
capital, especially the so called Tier-1 capital which is of utmost importance for loss-
absorption on going concern and crisis situations, will significantly improve. Capital 
buffers  will  be  introduced  to  mitigate  the  inherent  procyclical  nature  of  financial 
activities.  A  leverage  ratio  will  be  introduced  as  a  supplementary  measure  to  the 
Basel  II  risk  control  framework  curb  excessive  balance  sheet  growth.  Finally,  a 
harmonised  treatment  for  liquidity  risk  is  also  upcoming,  requiring  banks  to  hold 
sufficient  high-quality  liquid  assets  to  withstand  financial  stress.  These  measures, 
when  implemented,  will  address  many  of  the  shortcoming  highlighted  by  the 
financial  crisis,  and  will  increase  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  withstand 
shocks and thus the resilience of the financial system.  
Second, legislative reform also needs to address the moral hazard stemming from 
systemically important financial institutions. In a resilient financial system it cannot 
and should not be taken for granted that authorities will always come to the rescue. 
Financial institutions, whatever their size and interconnectedness should not cause 
undue distress to the functioning of the financial system and to the economy as a 
whole, if and when mismanagement drive them to bankruptcy. 
We  also  need  to  review  resolution  regimes  and  bankruptcy  laws  in  light  of  recent 
experience  to  ensure  an  orderly  winding-down  of  systemic  cross-border  financial 
institutions. In this respect the legislative work planned by the Commission is very 
important.  The  EU  Commission  will  soon  launch  a  public  consultation  on  a  new 
Communication  in  which  policy  options  to  set-up  an  EU  banking  resolution 
framework  will  be  highlighted.  In  addition,  it  will  be  relevant  to  enhance  the 
framework  for  coordination  among  the  relevant  authorities  for  financial  stability  in 
case of crisis.  
The  third  area  relates  to  macro-prudential  supervision.  One  of  the  key  lessons 
stemming  from  the  financial  crisis  relates  to  the  importance  of  understanding  and 
assessing  the  degree  of  “interconnectedness”  between  market  participants.  In 
particular,  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  systemic 
risk in the financial sector is related not only to the potential illiquidity or insolvency 
of large banks or other major regulated financial institutions, but it also depends on 
the close intertwining between financial institutions, markets and infrastructures. The 
financial stability framework needs to be able to identify and assess systemic risks 
corresponding  to  the  degree  of  “interconnectedness”  I  just  mentioned.  In  this 
context, macro-prudential oversight would focus on factors and risks that can affect 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  therefore  would  complement 
micro-prudential  supervision,  which  looks  at  the  stability  of  individual  financial 
institutions. 
Macroprudential oversight will be the key task of the European Systemic Risk Board 
(ESRB),  which  is  built  on  the  proposals  of  the  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de 
Larosière.  
What will be the activities of the ESRB and what is its value added? The ESRB will 
be expected to actively monitor the various sources of risk to financial stability in the 
EU  –  across  countries  and  across  financial  sectors,  and  also  taking  into  account 
global developments. As a result of this monitoring, the ESRB can identify the risks 
and analyse in-depth how they could impact the financial system. Stress-testing and 
other methodologies could assist the risk prioritisation exercise.  
The  value-added  to  be  provided  by  the  ESRB  is  to  link,  in  particular,  macro-
economic  conditions,  structural  developments,  and  key  vulnerabilities  of  financial 
institutions. This will permit to identify system-wide risks for the benefit of regulatory 
and supervisory policies. The monitoring, assessment and collection of information 
BIS Review 120/2009
  important 
It  will  be 
information,  as 
financial  stability  assessments. 
on sources of risk to be conducted by the ESRB, at the level of the entire EU, is of 
the  essence,  given  the  advanced  financial  integration  of  the  internal  market.  In 
addition,  the  risks  for  Europe  stemming  from  global  sources  will  also  need  to  be 
considered, also in coordination with the IMF and the FSB.  
The  financial  stability  monitoring  in  the  EU  as  a  whole  will  provide  significant 
analytical  and  informational  challenges.  A  large  part  of  the  effectiveness  of  the 
ESRB will rely on the quality and solidity of the analysis and information underlying 
its 
to  set-up  efficient 
arrangements between the ESRB and the new European Supervisory Authorities for 
the  mutual  cooperation  and  exchange  of 
the 
Commission’s  legislative  proposals.  This  would  allow  avoiding  multiple  reporting 
from financial institutions. 
In order to support the new European macro-prudential function, as decided by the 
Ecofin,  the  ECB  will  provide  analytical,  statistical,  administrative  and  logistical 
support,  also  drawing  on  the  technical  advice  from  national  central  banks  and 
supervisors. Accordingly, we will optimise our present capabilities and infrastructure 
in the areas of financial stability monitoring, macro-economic analysis, and collection 
of  statistical  information,  to  the  benefit  of  the  ESRB.  This  aims  at  reaping  the 
maximum  synergies  in  terms  of  expertise,  resources  and  infrastructures  with  the 
existing central bank activities in the EU. 
The  next  few  years  are  crucial  for  building  up  a  strong,  competitive  and  less 
leveraged  financial  system  which  will  be  subject  to  proper  regulation  and 
supervision, both at micro and macroprudential level. Europe should play a leading 
role  in  these  developments.  The  panel  discussion  could  help  identify  the  most 
pressing priorities.  
Thank you for your attention. 
foreseen 
in 
 BIS Review 120/2009 
 3
