Axel A Weber: Institutional responses to the crisis and thoughts on 
regulatory issues 
Introductory remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the Central Bank of Luxembourg conference “Financial Stability and Banking Regulation in 
Germany and Turkey”, Luxembourg, 3 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
1  
President Mersch 
President Yilmaz 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  here  today  on 
financial stability and banking regulation from both a German and a euro-area perspective. I 
would like to focus on two issues. First, the institutional responses to the crisis, especially 
from  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  and  second  some  thoughts  on  the  regulatory  issues 
currently being debated, in particular capital requirements. 
Institutional implications of the financial crisis 
2  
One  of  the  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  is  that  a  more  systemic  approach  to  financial 
markets is needed. But what does that mean for central banks? I would like to raise three 
topics. 
Firstly, the pursuit of financial stability will have to be taken into greater consideration in the 
operation  of  monetary  policy.  The  mandate  of  central  banks  is  usually  to  maintain  price 
stability. In the case of the Eurosystem, this is our primary objective. The same applies to the 
Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey.  However,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are 
interconnected.  Disruptions  to  the  financial  markets  have  negative  implications  for  price 
stability  as  they  have  adverse  effects  on  the  economic  cycle  and  distort  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism. 
That is not to say that financial stability should become an explicit target of monetary policy. 
It  is  still  true  that  monetary  policy  is  a  rather  blunt  tool  when  it  comes  to  combating  asset 
price bubbles. Furthermore, one should not over-estimate central bankers’ ability to identify 
asset price bubbles in advance and to determine whether asset price booms have benign or 
malign  reasons.  However,  financial  market  developments  should  be  given  greater  weight 
when  assessing  risks  to  price  stability.  Financial  crises  increase  the  volatility  of  macro-
economic variables such as inflation and growth. For this reason, it is of the essence to use a 
suitable  analytical  framework.  The  two-pillar  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy 
with  its  prominent  role  for  long-term-oriented  monetary  analysis  is  certainly  a  good  basis. 
Especially  during  the  financial  crisis  the  often-criticised  and  sometimes  ridiculed  monetary 
and credit analysis has proved valuable in monetary policy analysis. 
Nevertheless, the analysis of monetary and credit aggregates must be developed further in 
order  to  identify  undesirable  developments  on  financial  markets.  Eurosystem  staff  are 
currently working towards this goal. Recent IMF research, for example, has shown that, since 
1985, house price busts have typically been preceded by significant upward deviations of the 
credit-to-GDP ratio from its long-term moving average. 
Monetary  policymakers  should  also  consider  the  impact  their  actions  have  on  financial 
market  participants’  appetite  for  risk.  This  is  why  I  have  repeatedly  called  for  a  more 
symmetrical approach that would treat boom and bust episodes not as isolated events but 
would try to look through the financial cycle in order to steady policy. 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 1
While  I  am  opposed  to  enhancing  the  mandate  of  monetary  policy  and  setting  financial 
stability as an additional and independent target, I am in favour of strengthening the role of 
central  banks  in  this  area.  This  is  the  second  topic  I  would  like  to  raise.  Calls  for  a  more 
systemic  approach  are  mainly  addressed  to  central  banks.  Taking  into  account  the  wide 
range  of  information  and  data  central  banks  collect  in  fulfilling  their  mandate,  no  other 
institution  is  better  suited  for  taking  the  systemic  macro-prudential  view.  Central  banks 
combine  macroeconomic  analysis  with  deep  insights  into  the  financial  markets  stemming 
from  monetary  policy  as  well  as  payment  operations  and  –  in  many  cases  –  data  from 
banking  supervision.  It  is  therefore  obvious  that  central  banks  are  key  when  it  comes  to 
macro-prudential supervision.  
In the Bundesbank, we have decided – as have many other central banks – to establish a 
financial  stability  department  in  order  to  give  this  area  of  increased  importance  an 
organisational home. The new department commenced its work in the middle of this year. 
Reflecting  the  pivotal  part  central  banks  play  in  macro-prudential  supervision,  the  ESCB, 
consisting of the ECB and the national central banks, will play a leading role in the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which is to be established in the next few weeks. The ESRB 
will be responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system of the European 
Union in order to prevent or to mitigate systemic risks to financial stability. 
Thirdly,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  central  banks  are  partly  or  fully  in  charge  of  banking 
supervision  in  many  countries.  The  central  banks  of  Luxembourg  and  Turkey  do  not  have 
responsibility  for  banking  supervision.  However,  in  Germany  the  responsibility  for  banking 
supervision  has  traditionally  been  shared  by  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Financial 
Supervisory Authority, or BaFin for short. BaFin was created some years ago by the merger 
of  the  federal  offices  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  banking,  securities  trading  and 
insurance. The operational tasks have mostly lain within the Bundesbank’s remit, while BaFin 
is responsible for all sovereign measures. 
As  you  probably  know,  the  new  coalition  of  Christian  Democrats  and  Liberals  recently 
decided  to  entrust  the  Bundesbank  with  banking  supervision.  Incidentally,  giving  central 
banks  more  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  is  currently  being  debated  in  other 
countries, too. I would like to take this opportunity to make some remarks on this issue in the 
German context:  
Firstly, collaboration between the Bundesbank and BaFin has worked well, both before and 
during  the  crisis.  Secondly,  the  Bundesbank  did  not  ask  to  be  given  full  responsibility  for 
banking  supervision.  Rather  it  was  an  objective  of  the  political  parties  that  have  won  the 
federal elections.  
However, the Bundesbank recently declared its readiness to take on more responsibility for 
financial  supervision  if  this  is  politically  desired.  Still,  it  is  of  the  essence  that  the  future 
system be compatible with the independence of the Bundesbank, which is laid down by the 
EU  treaty.  We  believe  this  is  possible.  Nevertheless,  in  our  opinion,  the  new  German 
government would be well advised to closely consult the Bundesbank in the decision-making 
process at an early stage. In any case, the Eurosystem will have to be consulted before the 
law is changed. 
Supervision  of  the  financial  system  will  have  to  become  more  systemically-oriented  in  the 
future.  This  implies  that  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  must  be  taken  into 
consideration.  
Regulatory issues 
3  
Institutions  matter.  However,  it  would  be  very  unwise  to  believe  that  the  creation  of  new 
bodies at the European or global level and some institutional reform alone will prevent the 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2009
reoccurrence  of  a  similar  crisis.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  regulation  of  financial  markets  that 
matters when it comes to creating a more resilient financial system. 
Basically, making the financial system more stable is a manageable task. The real challenge 
is to make it more stable without significantly hurting economic productivity. Remuneration 
schemes,  currently  a  hot  topic  among  the  public,  are  a  good  example.  The  disincentive 
effects of bonuses in terms of short-termism and excessive risk-taking might be prevented by 
imposing statutory caps on salaries or limiting tax deductibility. However, if interventions are 
too  far-reaching,  they  may  have  other  disincentive  and  adverse  effects.  Therefore  it  is 
important  to  find  the  right  balance.  The  principles  of  sound  compensation,  which  were 
formulated by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and are now being transposed into national 
legislation in the G20 and other countries, strike this balance, in my opinion. 
Creating  level  playing  fields  is  another  important  demand  when  it  comes  to  seriously 
improving  regulation.  Therefore  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  further  promote  the 
convergence of international and US accounting standards, unless we want to continue to 
compare  apples  and  oranges.  However,  in  this  context  I  appreciate  that  the  IASB 
(International Accounting Standards Board) has recently agreed to refrain from broadening 
the Fair value principle in the IFRS. 
Strengthening banks’ capital base is certainly the most important, but also the most difficult, 
task  on  the  regulatory  reform  agenda.  Being  involved  in  the  processes  of  the  Basel 
Committee and the FSB, the Bundesbank appreciates the decision by the G20 to improve 
the  quality  and  quantity  of  banks’  capital  once  the  financial  system  has  stabilised  on  a 
sustainable  basis  and  the  economy  has  recovered.  However,  we  should  refrain  from 
unsettling the markets with precise schedules. Getting it right is important.  
The  impact  study  of  the  new  capital  measures  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,  which  is  planned  for  2010,  should  provide  some  enlightening  information.  As 
regards  the  introduction  of  a  leverage  ratio,  we  are  afraid  of  competitive  distortions,  in 
particular owing to differences in accounting standards. We therefore welcome  the plan to 
apply this risk-insensitive measure (at least temporarily) under pillar 2 of Basel II. Basically, 
we are against deviating from the principle of risk-sensitivity in the Basel framework. In this 
regard,  the  commitment  of  all  G20  financial centres  to  adopt  Basel II  by  2011  has  been  a 
very positive outcome of the Pittsburgh summit. 
The implementation of a high level, and better quality, of capital requirements in the long run, 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  and  higher  capital  requirements  for  risky  products  and  off-
balance sheet activities are not only in the interest of the public, they should also be in the 
interest  of  the  banks  themselves.  On  top  of  that,  banks  should  make  greater  use  of  the 
options  they  already  have  to  strengthen  their  capital  base,  be  it  by  withholding  profits  or 
raising private or sovereign capital.  
Conclusions 
4  
Let me conclude. 
Financial  stability  is  not  just  a  buzzword  as  some  critics  suggested  a  few  years  ago.  The 
financial crisis has proven them wrong. Policymakers have shown their commitment to take 
decisive steps in order to make the financial system more stable. Now it is up to the central 
banks  and  the  other  players  in  macro-prudential  supervision  to  enhance  the  analytical 
instruments needed to recognise risks to financial stability earlier and more accurately. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 136/2009 
 3
