José Manuel González-Páramo: Non-standard monetary policy: five 
questions about the exit 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Seminar  at  the  European  Economics  and 
Financial Centre, London, 6 November 2009. 
 Introduction1  
I would like to thank the European Economics and Financial Centre (EEFC) for organising 
this  conference  and  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished 
audience. This is the second time I have had the honour of participating in the EEFC series 
of seminars; the first time being back in September 2006. It is always a pleasure to be invited 
to address an audience again because it allows you to resume the dialogue already started. 
Back  in  2006  my  speech  focused  on  the  many  challenges  that  uncertainty  poses  for  the 
design of monetary policy. Today, I would like to focus on some questions related to the exit 
from the ECB’s non-conventional monetary policy.  
There is no need for me to recall the start of the crisis in early August 2007, when tensions 
originating in the US sub-prime mortgage market spread to international money and credit 
markets,  nor  its  intensification  in  mid-September  2008,  following  the  filing  for  bankruptcy 
protection by Lehman Brothers. While the full cost of the crisis has yet to be assessed, the 
output  contraction  and  job  destruction  observed  so  far  (as  well  as  the  less  readily 
measurable social costs) have been on a scale unseen for more than half a century.  
In order to contain the impact of the crisis on the real economy and preserve price stability, 
central  banks  have  engaged  in  an  aggressive  cutting  of  policy  interest  rates  and  have 
introduced  a  number  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures.  At  the  same  time, 
governments  have  adopted  large  fiscal  stimulus  measures,  while  also  making  vast  public 
funds available to provide support to their banking and financial industries.  
Recent data suggest that the massive response to the crisis by public authorities is bearing 
fruit. The threat of a continuing free fall in activity in our economies has now receded and 
there  are  signs  that  the  global  slowdown  may  be  bottoming  out.  However,  the  crisis  has 
certainly  not  come  to  an  end:  uncertainty  remains  high  and  the  economic  data  remain 
volatile. Based on the information currently available, we expect the recovery to be gradual 
and, at least in the short term, to continue to rely on a number of temporary factors, such as 
past discretionary stimulus.  
Even  though  the  crisis  is  not  yet  over,  during  the  last  year  we  have  developed  the  set  of 
principles and contingent courses of action that will govern the gradual and progressive exit 
from the set of non-standard measures currently in place. Indeed, no orderly departure from 
the  current  set  of  policies  can  be  achieved  in  the  absence  of  a  well-designed  and  clearly 
communicated  exit  framework.  Moreover,  if  current  public  policies  are  ultimately  to  be 
successful, the development of a credible exit strategy is almost as important as the nature 
and  magnitude  of  the  policies  themselves.  It  goes  without  saying  that  discussing  the 
appropriate  design  of  an  exit  strategy  should  not  necessarily  be  interpreted  as  signalling 
imminent policy actions.  
I would like to structure my speech today around five specific questions related to the exit 
from  the  set  of  non-conventional  monetary  policy  measures.  First,  I  would  like  to  discuss 
                                                 
1  
I  am  grateful  to  John  Beirne,  Ulrich  Bindseil,  Alessandro  Calza  and  Simone  Manganelli  for  inputs  and 
comments. 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 1
“whence” we are exiting. For this purpose, I will briefly recall the main characteristics of the 
Eurosystem’s approach to non-conventional monetary policy. Then, I would like to elaborate 
on “why” we need to exit such policy. I will then say a few words on “whither” we will exit, 
particularly  as  regards  the  monetary  policy  implementation  framework.  I  will  then  discuss 
“how” we are going to exit the set of measures currently in place and, finally, “when” we will 
do so.  
Whence?  
Following  the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  inflationary 
pressures rapidly receded, prompting the ECB to undertake a series of aggressive cuts to its 
official policy rates. Between October 2008 and May 2009, the ECB’s central policy rate – the 
interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  –  was  lowered  by  a  cumulative  325  basis 
points.  The  speed  and  extent  of  the  monetary  loosening  experienced  over  this  period  are 
without precedent since the ECB took responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy in the 
euro area. This is, of course, a rather short period, just over a decade. However, even if we 
look  at  the  much  longer  historical  experience  of  the  national  central  banks  forming  the 
Eurosystem, such as the Deutsche Bundesbank, it is not possible to find anything similar.  
The severity of the economic contraction, with the ensuing downside risks for price stability, 
prompted  the  ECB  to  introduce  additional  measures  that  allowed  it  to  ease  monetary 
conditions  above  and  beyond  what  could  be  achieved  through  the  interest  rate  instrument 
alone.  Thus,  the  ECB  adopted  the  comprehensive  set  of  non-standard  liquidity  measures 
that together form what we call our “enhanced credit support” approach.  
The enhanced credit support programme relies on four key types of measures, which I would 
like to describe briefly:  
1) 
Full  accommodation  of  private  banks’  demand  for  central  bank  liquidity  at  a  fixed 
rate (determined by the central policy rate) and the conduct of additional longer-term 
refinancing operations (LTROs), in particular – and for the first time – six and twelve-
month refinancing operations.  
The outstanding amount of LTROs increased from €150 billion in June 2007 to over 
€600  billion  at  the  end  of  2008.  Over  the  same  period  the  total  amount  of 
outstanding liquidity almost doubled, peaking at €850 billion on 2 January 2009. The 
12-month operation conducted in June 2009 was, at €442 billion, the largest single 
refinancing operation ever conducted by a central bank. It attracted the widespread 
participation  of  counterparties,  namely  1,100  financial  institutions,  which  may  also 
have been a record. 
The regular provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, notably the US dollar. Since 
October 2008, these operations have been conducted with full allotment at a fixed 
rate.  
Again,  this  is  unprecedented  in  central  banking  history,  and  illustrates  the  close 
coordination  and  effective  cooperation  between  major  central  banks  over  the  last 
two years.  
The expansion of the list of assets eligible to be used as collateral in Eurosystem 
credit operations.  
In this respect, the Eurosystem was very different from other major central banks, as 
it  entered  the  financial  turmoil  with  a  broad  list  of  eligible  collateral.  This  also 
explains why a further extension of collateral eligibility was not required until October 
2008, i.e. after the collapse Lehman Brothers. In a financial crisis, the importance of 
the ample availability of eligible collateral accepted by central banks can hardly be 
overstated – after all, the most forthcoming of central bank refinancing operations 
can be used by counterparties only to the extent that they hold eligible collateral.  
2) 
3) 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2009
4) 
Outright purchases of covered bonds.  
The  covered  bond  market,  which  has  historically  been  an  important  source  of 
funding  for  banks  in  large  parts  of  the  euro  area,  had  suffered  heavily  from  the 
financial  crisis.  The  total  sum  allocated  to  the  purchase  programme  –  €60  billion, 
representing about 5% of eligible outstanding covered bonds – may appear modest 
compared with the size of the portfolios of government and private sector securities 
built up by other central banks. However, it reflects the ECB’s purpose to support 
market functioning and to act as a catalyst for this market rather than as a market-
maker  of  last  resort.  As  is  widely  recognised,  the  goal  of  market  reactivation  has 
been achieved, and maybe even more rapidly then expected. During the first four 
months, the Eurosystem bought covered bonds for a total of over €20 billion, with 
the total of up to €60 billion being targeted for June 2010. 
These measures were designed with the objective of providing support to the banking sector 
by: (a) helping the functioning of the money market, (b) easing funding conditions for banks, 
and  (c)  improving  market  liquidity  in  segments  of  the  private  debt  securities  market 
(specifically, the market for covered bonds) that represent an important source of funding for 
euro area banks. Through these measures, the ECB aimed to mitigate the risk of systemic 
illiquidity in the euro banking sector and to guarantee a steady flow of banking credit to euro 
area households and firms.  
It is sometimes said that the secret of success for a policy stimulus is that it must be T-T-T: 
timely, temporary and targeted. Let me briefly elaborate on these three Ts. 
It is generally recognised that since the start of the tensions, the ECB’s response to the crisis 
has been timely. Indeed, when widespread tensions threatened to bring the money market to 
a halt in early August 2007, the ECB reacted rapidly by injecting €95 billion in an overnight 
operation. After taking a number of additional measures in the course of the following year, 
the  ECB  again  responded  swiftly  to  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  October  2008,  by 
announcing  further  exceptional  measures.  Similarly,  the  rapid  and  pronounced  cuts  in 
interest rates after October 2008 represented a timely response to the occurrence of large 
contractionary shocks. 
While repeatedly recalling its commitment to maintaining non-standard measures for as long 
as needed, the ECB has always stressed the temporary nature of its non-conventional policy. 
The  temporary  character  of  these  measures  reflects  their  extraordinary  nature  and  scale. 
Indeed,  the exceptionally  disruptive  effects  of  the  crisis  required  equally  exceptional  policy 
responses. However, measures that prove effective and appropriate in a crisis may not be 
needed when normal conditions are restored. Even more importantly, the temporary nature 
of  the  non-conventional  measures  is  an  important  device  to  ensure  the  anchoring of  long-
term inflation expectations. 
Finally, the ECB’s liquidity measures were specifically targeted to the banking sector. While 
in the course of the crisis some central banks have decided to bypass the banking system 
and lend directly to the real sectors of their economies, the Eurosystem has chosen to use 
the banking sector as an intermediary in order to support the euro area economy as a whole. 
The  reason  for  concentrating  on  the  banking  sector  stems  to  a  very  large  extent  from 
structural features of the euro area economy, particularly the fact that its financial system is 
still predominantly bank-based.  
Indeed, bank loans account for a much larger share of financing to households and firms in 
the euro area than in the Anglo-Saxon countries, where non-bank financial institutions and 
capital markets provide alternative sources of funds. For instance, in 2007 the ratio of bank 
lending to the private sector to GDP amounted in the euro area to almost 150%, compared 
with 63% in the United States. By contrast, the ratio of outstanding debt securities issued by 
the euro area private sector relative to GDP was about 80% in the euro area, while it was 
more than twice as much in the United States.  
BIS Review 138/2009 
 3
The  fact  that  the  euro  area  financial  system  is  predominantly  bank-based  implies  that  the 
health  of  the  banking  sector  plays  a  major  role  in  determining  the  orderly  functioning  of 
economic  activity  and  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability.  Thus,  by  easing  funding 
conditions  in  the  banking  sector,  the  central  bank  can  effectively  pursue  its  target  of 
guaranteeing steady access to credit for households and companies. Moreover, disruptions 
to  the  inter-bank  money  market  and  to  the  banking  system  may  have  implications  for  the 
stability  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  potentially  preventing  the  central 
bank from implementing its desired policy stance.  
Following  the  implementation  of  the  enhanced  credit  support  framework,  the  size  and 
complexity of the Eurosystem balance sheet has significantly increased. In June 2007, just 
before  the  start  of  the  crisis,  total  assets  of  the  Eurosystem  amounted  to  around  10%  of 
area-wide  GDP.2  By  January  2009,  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  had  almost  doubled, 
reaching 19% of GDP. Subsequent improvements in money market conditions have led to a 
reduction in the amount of total assets, but they remain at a higher level (16% of GDP) than 
in  the  pre-crisis  period.  The  expansion  of  the  Eurosystem  balance  sheet  was  driven  by 
changes in autonomous factors, as well as by the introduction of non-standard measures.  
It is difficult to assess the impact of our non-conventional policy precisely, but there are some 
clear signs that the measures are having positive effects. In particular, the spreads between 
unsecured term interest rates and overnight interest rate swaps in the money market have 
declined  significantly  since  last  autumn  and  are  now  back  at  levels  last  seen  before  the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. Together with the policy rate cuts, this has contributed to a 
substantial  decline  in  interest  rates  on  loans  to  households  and  firms.  Also,  banks  have 
benefited from the tightening of spreads in the market for covered bonds, while issuance in 
the primary market has increased dramatically since the summer.  
At the same time, we have to admit that growth in aggregate lending has not turned around. 
Although there have been recent signs that the slowdown in lending to households has come 
to a halt, the growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations has continued to moderate. 
Seen in context, the recent developments in loans to firms appear to be broadly in line with 
past  regularities  in  bank  lending  behaviour,  particularly  at  turning-points  in  the  business 
cycle. Indeed, loans to firms tend to lag GDP growth by about three quarters. This may be 
related to the fact that non-financial corporations usually see their cash flows improve early in 
an  economic  upturn  and  thus  tend  to  finance  working  capital  and  fixed  investment  with 
internal funds first, and only later with external financing. In addition, when macroeconomic 
conditions  are  weak,  the  dynamics  of  bank  loans  are  affected  by  demand-side  factors. 
Having said this, it is important to closely monitor developments in credit in order to assess to 
what extent supply-side constraints may play a role in limiting credit availability.  
Why?  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  exceptionally  disruptive  impact  of  the  crisis  has  required 
extraordinary  responses  from  public  authorities.  However,  as  economic  and  financial 
conditions normalise, it is important to withdraw the currently exceptional degree of monetary 
accommodation,  implemented  through  both  historically  low  key  policy  rates  and  enhanced 
credit support measures.  
                                                 
2   Data  derived  from  the  simplified  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  Eurosystem.  For  an  analysis  of 
developments in the balance sheet of the Eurosystem and other major central banks see the article “”Recent 
developments in the balance sheets of the Eurosystem, the Federal reserve System and Japan”, ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, October 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2009
Indeed,  should  a  significant  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  not  be 
accompanied by an adequate adjustment in the policy stance, the current monetary stance 
may become excessively accommodative, thereby giving rise to risks to price stability.  
The  experience  of  the  past  decade  has  led  many  economists  to  conclude  that  protracted 
accommodative monetary conditions, especially when they become widespread at the global 
level,  may  make  access  to  credit  in  international  financial  systems  too  easy.  Easy  credit 
availability  can  in  turn  depress  interest  rates  across  the  maturity  spectrum  and  lead  to 
severely  distorted  financial  asset  prices  as  agents  engage  in  increasingly  speculative 
behaviour.  Thus,  preventing  the  monetary  policy  stance  from  becoming  excessively 
accommodative is important not only to directly preserve price stability, but also to avoid the 
emergence of financial imbalances that may – if they prevail for too long – eventually give 
rise to episodes of macroeconomic instability. 
Moreover, the long-term success of non-conventional policies depends on the policy-maker’s 
ability to pull off a difficult balancing act: to provide massive stimulus to the economy in the 
short-term, while keeping long-term private sector inflation expectations firmly anchored. The 
failure to preserve the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations would be self-defeating 
for non-conventional policies. In such a case, the beneficial effects on the economy of the 
latter  policies  could  be  neutralised  by  an  array  of  adverse  factors,  including  increased 
inflation risk premia, interest rate volatility and Ricardian effects on consumer spending.  
In  addition  to  these  considerations  of  a  more  macroeconomic  character,  there  are  other 
reasons – related to distortions in the functioning of markets and the behaviour of individual 
agents – why central banks should not retain non-standard liquidity measures once financial 
and market conditions render them unnecessary.  
First,  the  protracted  provision  of  central  bank  liquidity  may  reduce  the  incentives  for 
commercial banks to resume their market-based funding activities. Indeed, as a result of the 
non-standard liquidity provision in euro and other currencies (notably, the US dollar) during 
the  crisis, 
financial 
intermediation in the euro area.  
In  fact,  the  Eurosystem  effectively  intermediates  liquidity  flows  between  banks  in  order  to 
mitigate the effects of dysfunctional money markets on the funding liquidity of solvent banks. 
While justified by the severity of the crisis, this increased intermediation role is, of course, not 
fully consistent with the principles under which a market-oriented economy like the euro area 
should normally operate. Thus, with the return of the economic and financial preconditions 
for  normal  market  functioning,  incentives  for  interbank  lending  should  be  restored,  so  that 
banks can resume their core functions. 
More generally, the protracted provision of central bank liquidity at favourable conditions may 
end up propping up banks that are unable to fulfil their funding needs, even under normal 
market conditions. This may give rise to concerns about whether the necessary adjustments 
and restructuring in the banking system have taken place.  
Some considerations can also be made with regard to the collateral framework and to certain 
practices on collateral use that have emerged over the past two years. As mentioned earlier, 
the  Eurosystem  has  always  accepted  a  broad  range  of  public  and  private  securities, 
including  unsecured  bank  bonds  and  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  as  collateral  in  its 
refinancing operations. Having an extensive definition of eligible collateral has proven very 
useful during the crisis to mitigate refinancing risks for several classes of assets.  
Indeed,  in  the  course  of  the  crisis  counterparties  have  made  active  use  of  the  refinancing 
opportunities  provided  by  the  Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations  and  have  deposited  as 
collateral some eligible assets for which market liquidity had basically dried up. In particular, 
many ABS transactions have not been placed in the public market, but have been retained 
onto the balance sheet of the originator and/or privately placed to be used as collateral in 
central  bank  facilities.  At  the  same  time,  banks  have  economised  on  the  use  of  the  most 
the  Eurosystem  has  significantly 
involvement 
increased 
its 
in 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 5
liquid  categories  of  assets  (such  as  central  government  bonds)  in  order  to  save  them  for 
private repo transactions. As market conditions normalise, banks will need to make efforts to 
overcome  the  present  large-scale  use  of  self-originated  ABS  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem 
credit operations, and instead place these securities with investors. This requires efforts to 
meet  investor  standards,  in  particular  by  improving  the  transparency,  simplicity  and  the 
degree of standardisation of transactions.  
The  Eurosystem  is  prepared  to  contribute  as  far  as  it  can  to  the  reactivation  of  the  ABS 
markets.  The  eligibility  criteria  and  risk  control  measures  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral 
framework are an important tool in this respect. Reactivating ABS markets would be, first of 
all, in the interest of banks as it would restore a major source of funding. It would also benefit 
the Eurosystem, as it would reduce the extra financial risks resulting from the inevitable links 
between  counterparties  and  the  self-originated  ABS  submitted  as  collateral.  The  ECB  is 
aware  of  these  risks,  and  has  already  mitigated  them  through  a  number  of  specific 
measures,  such  as  the  prohibition  of  some  types  of  close  link,  the  raising  of  the  rating 
threshold  for  ABS,  an  increase  in  valuation  haircuts  and  the  phasing-out  of  multi-layer 
securitisations. Still, we consider that the reactivation of the ABS market and the associated 
reduction in the use of self-originated ABS would be ultimately the only way forward in this 
context.  
Whither 
Interest rates are currently at historically low levels, reflecting rapid and deep cuts between 
the  autumn  of  2008  and  the  spring  of  2009.  Once  economic  activity  normalises  and  the 
outlook  for  price  stability  starts  pointing  to  upward  risks,  adjustments  in  the  stance  of 
monetary  policy  in  line  with  the  maintenance  of  medium-term  price  stability  are  to  be 
expected. 
While  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  return  to  normality  of  our  economies  will  need  to  be 
accompanied by a normalisation of monetary conditions, the key question is what we mean 
by  “normal”  in  the  post-crisis  environment.  Indeed,  there  is  significant  empirical  evidence 
showing that financial crises tend to have large and long-standing costs in terms of output 
and  employment  and  tend  to  be  followed  by  persistent  declines  in  asset  prices.3  In  the 
specific case of the current crisis, there are increasing concerns that its cost in terms of lost 
financial,  physical  and  human  capital  all  over  the  world  may  prove  very  substantial.  As  a 
result, the crisis may end up having a protracted impact on the rate of potential growth of a 
number of economies, including the euro area.  
Therefore, in the post-crisis world, we may operate in an environment in which the dynamic 
properties of our economies are persistently affected, so that returning to “normality”, as we 
knew it before, will take a long time. As a side effect, the statistical regularities underlying the 
estimates of models and indicators (e.g. the output gap and the interest rate gap) often used 
for policy analysis may not be as stable as in the past. At the ECB we have traditionally been 
reluctant  to  rely  exclusively  on  models  and  summary  indicators  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance, so we are not concerned about the reliability of any specific indicator. Yet, we share 
the  more  general  concern  that  in  the  future  decisions  will  be  taken  in  an  environment 
characterised  by  high  uncertainty  and  reduced  reliability  of  the  monetary  policy  maker’s 
conventional information set. 
Faced with increased uncertainty, central banks are at their best when they clearly commit to 
a well-defined goal and pursue it consistently and independently. In the case of the ECB, our 
strategy includes a specific quantitative definition of price stability: annual inflation of below, 
                                                 
3   See, for instance, Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009), “The aftermath of financial crises”, American Economic 
Review, Vol. 99 No. 2, 466-472. 
6 
 BIS Review 138/2009
but close to, 2% in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices over the medium term. This 
definition sets a clear benchmark against which decisions must be made.  
Thus,  in  a  period  of  increased  uncertainty  it  is  crucial  for  the  ECB  to  set  its  interest  rate 
instrument at any point in time at the level which is appropriate to ensure the achievement of 
its primary objective. The assessment of the risks to medium-term price stability based on a 
comprehensive  and  robust  set  of  indicators  will  prove  essential  in  guiding  monetary  policy 
decisions in the future. In this respect, the ECB’s choice of a full-information approach resting 
on  two  complementary  pillars  (an  economic  analysis  and  a  monetary  analysis),  with  its 
advantages  in  terms  of  robustness  is  likely  to  prove  very  beneficial  in  providing  insurance 
against increased model and paradigm uncertainty. 
Turning now to the monetary policy implementation framework, we should recall that prior to 
the escalation of the financial crisis in September 2008, the operational framework worked 
well. Hereafter, many exceptional measures were taken to support the availability of liquidity 
and  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Looking  ahead,  as  conditions  in  the  financial 
markets normalise further, not all these liquidity measures will be needed to the same extent 
as during the crisis. Therefore, one should envisage a situation in which the main operational 
features  that  were  in  place  prior  to  the  crisis  are  restored,  while  of  course  also  bearing  in 
mind the lessons learned from the crisis. 
In  particular,  we  seek  to  revert  to  a  situation  in  which  the  one-week  main  refinancing 
operation is the main tool for steering money market rates and we act as “rate-takers” in the 
longer-term money market. In addition, under normal circumstances, central banks also do 
not provide liquidity in foreign currency. This does not mean, however, that contingency or 
emergency measures to be activated under extraordinary conditions cannot remain in place. 
Finally, the use of using self-originated paper as central bank collateral should be considered 
as an anomaly under normal market conditions.  
How?  
The  stance  of  monetary  policy,  as  reflected  in  short-term  interbank  interest  rates,  can 
obviously be tightened through an increase in key policy rates, or through a tighter liquidity 
supply, or through a combination of both. It is too early at present to say which approach, or 
combination  of  approaches,  should  be  followed,  as  it  will  depend  on  the  circumstances 
prevailing at the relevant moment in time.  
With regard to the withdrawal of non-standard liquidity measures, it is useful to distinguish 
again between the main different types of measure.  
First, for the non-standard refinancing operations, there is an obvious built-in mechanism that 
facilitates  their  removal,  as  the  operations  mature  at  pre-specified  dates  and  can  then  be 
replaced by conventional refinancing operations, if needed.  
Second, as with non-standard euro refinancing operations, the provision of foreign currency 
liquidity does not need to be renewed when it is considered that it is no longer warranted. In 
this context, let me remind you that the exit from this specific measure has already started: 
owing  to  lack  of  demand,  we  have  already  discontinued  foreign  currency-providing 
operations with longer maturities. 
Third,  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the  widening  of  the  collateral  framework  is  temporary. 
More  precisely,  its  remaining  into  effect  is  linked  to  the  conduct  of  12-month  LTRO  in 
December 2009. Hence, the widening of the collateral framework will be naturally phased out 
in December 2010, unless otherwise decided.  
Finally, in relation to the covered bond portfolio, there is no particular need to dispose of the 
purchased bonds at any future moment in time, as it does not interfere with monetary policy 
implementation.  We  could  therefore  decide  to  hold  the  portfolio  until  maturity  and  let  it 
gradually  shrink  over  time  as  a  result  of  redemptions.  Alternatively,  the  portfolio  could  be 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 7
disposed of in a gradual way that would make it possible to avoid market distortions. In any 
case,  the  alternative  options  can  be  considered  again  once  the  entire  portfolio  has  been 
established. 
Regardless of the specific modalities adopted for the exit strategy, key principles of “how” to 
phase out existing measures should in any case be timeliness and gradualism. Indeed, the 
stance of monetary policy should be normalised and the non-standard measures withdrawn 
in parallel with the gradual improvement in economic and financial conditions.  
Let  me  also  stress  that  there  are  no  technical  obstacles  to  the  implementation  of  our  exit 
strategy.  In  any  case,  we  have  the  instruments  to  allow  us  to  actively  withdraw  liquidity. 
Longer-term liquidity-absorbing operations could be envisaged in a scenario where it is clear 
that  the  need  to  absorb  persists  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  and  where  a  significant 
tightening in monetary policy is needed. In this case, long-term liquidity absorption could be 
used to quickly restore a deficit situation along with an increase in interest rates. It may be 
recalled that many central banks worldwide constantly and successfully implement monetary 
policy through liquidity-absorbing operations.  
When? 
In  discussing  when  to  exit  non-conventional  monetary  policy,  we  may  distinguish  here 
between  the  traditional  interest  rate  instrument  and  the  multiple  non-standard  liquidity 
measures. For the stance of monetary policy, the answer to this question is simple – at least 
in theory. Given the institutional policy of the ECB, the obvious point in time to tighten the 
policy  stance  is  when,  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
inflation,  there  is  evidence  of  emerging  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  At  that  stage,  the 
interest  rate  should  be  increased  at  the  pace  necessary  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the 
medium  term.  However,  identifying  the  right  moment  in  time  to  start  a  tightening  phase  is 
difficult under normal conditions and even more so when the assessment of risks is, as in the 
current environment, surrounded by heightened uncertainty. 
Besides  being  technically  difficult,  identifying  the  exact  moment  when  the  balance  of 
inflationary risks shifts could be complicated by the “noise” introduced by public utterances 
and pressures aimed at influencing the decision of the central bank. At the ECB, we still have 
memories of the difficult environment we faced in 2005 when, after leaving the central policy 
rate  unchanged  at  2%  for  two  and  a  half  years,  we  decided  to  start  tightening  the  policy 
stance. With hindsight, it is generally recognised that our decision was appropriate and that it 
served to anchor long-term inflation expectations.  
A  past  record  of  getting  turning-points  right  is,  however,  no  guarantee  of  success  in  the 
present  context.  Exceptionally  high  uncertainty  implies  that  the  exit  from  the  current  non-
conventional monetary policy measures will need to be based on the analysis of a broader 
set  of  indicators  than  usual.  Nevertheless,  no matter  how  large  the  number  and  variety  of 
indicators,  one  cannot  exclude  the  risk  of  exiting  from  the  non-conventional  measures  too 
soon or too late. Both situations would be dangerous. 
If a central bank starts exiting prematurely, it will be hard for it to reverse its course, should a 
deterioration in economic conditions materialise again. Indeed, historical experience shows 
that there is a certain element of irreversibility in the removal of non-conventional measures. 
This is because the effectiveness of non-conventional policy depends to a large extent on 
how long the policy is expected to stay in place. For instance, if an exceptional measure to 
increase  liquidity  supply  to  the  banking  sector  is  expected  to  be  short-lived,  banks  are 
unlikely to extend additional credit to the private sector.  
More  generally,  even  the  appearance  of  a  lack  of  commitment  to  its  non-conventional 
measures (or simply of being uncomfortable with them) can prove self-defeating. It has been 
argued that, despite the announcement that the zero interest rate policy introduced in 1999 
would  be  maintained  until  deflation  was  over,  signs  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  was 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2009
uncomfortable  with  this  policy  (culminating  in  a  25  basis  point  increase  in  the  call  rate  in 
August 2000) prolonged the Japanese deflation unnecessarily.4  
At the same time, and here is the tricky issue, if the commitment is to be credible, it must 
also be realistic. Indeed, unless severe deflationary pressures become deeply entrenched in 
expectations,  the  public  may  not  believe  that  public  authorities  are  seriously  committed  to 
pursuing non-conventional measures when these measures are of such a large magnitude 
as to appear untenable for the balance sheet of the central bank or for the sustainability of 
public finances.  
So much for the risk of exiting too early. There is also the opposite risk of exiting too late. 
Exiting  too  late  is  dangerous  because  the  public  may  lose  faith  in  the  central  bank’s 
commitment to low inflation. We know – from our own historical experience in the 1970s and 
early 1980s – that, once public sector inflation expectations have become destabilised, it is 
extremely  difficult  and costly  (in  terms  of  output  and  job  losses)  to  bring  them  back  under 
control. By contrast, a credible commitment to an explicit inflation objective helps to anchor 
inflation expectations to the desired level of inflation, and this anchoring contributes in itself 
to delivering price stability. It is clear, then, that, as long as they remain well-anchored at the 
desired level, expectations can greatly facilitate the task of a central banker.  
A recent survey among market participants shows that only a small minority of respondents 
(less than 20%) are at present concerned about the implications of excess liquidity for future 
inflation  in  the  euro  area.  This,  together  with  the  fact  that  long-term  inflation  expectations 
remain  well-anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability,  suggests  that  market 
participants are confident in the ability of the ECB to withdraw its non-conventional measures 
at the right point in time and at the appropriate pace. 
In  this  context,  let  me  mention  that,  when  assessing  whether  or  not  the  non-conventional 
liquidity measures have achieved their objectives, we need to be aware that such measures 
have  been  introduced  for  systemic  purposes  and  not  to  address  problems  at  individual 
institutions, which fall within the sphere of competence of national governments. Therefore, 
concerns about the costs or difficulties faced by individual institutions, once the exceptional 
provision  of  liquidity  is  discontinued,  should  not  act  as  a  constraint  on  the  timely 
implementation of an exit strategy from non-conventional monetary policy. 
It should be recalled, though, that a necessary condition for central banks to be able to do 
their job of delivering price stability is the sustainability and credibility of public finances. In 
the institutional set-up of European Monetary Union, this requires full compliance by national 
governments with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, a fundamental component of the 
policy framework for area-wide macroeconomic stability.  
The fiscal costs of the crisis – stemming from discretionary stimulus measures, the use of 
automatic  stabilisers  and  measures  in  support  of  the  financial  sector  –  are  likely  to  be 
considerable.  These  costs,  together  with  the  expected  adverse  fiscal  impact  of  population 
ageing, pose considerable risks to future fiscal sustainability. In the aftermath of the crisis, 
many countries may not be able to rely on sustained GDP growth to smoothly reduce their 
debt burdens. This means that ambitious plans for structural fiscal consolidation need to be 
developed and communicated in order to guarantee the public’s trust in the sustainability of 
public finances.  
                                                 
4   See, for instance, G.B. Eggertsson and M. Woodford (2003), "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal 
Monetary Policy", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003-1, 139-211. 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 9
Conclusions 
Over  the  past  year  our  economies  have  undergone  a  period  of  severe  financial  crisis  and 
major disruptions to economic activity. While the full cost of the crisis has yet to be assessed, 
the  magnitude  of  output  and  job  losses  experienced  so  far  is  considerable.  In  order  to 
contain  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  real  economy  and  preserve  price  stability,  central 
banks  have  aggressively  cut  policy  interest  rates  and  introduced  a  number  of  exceptional 
liquidity measures. 
Although the financial crisis is not yet over, we have carefully and thoughtfully developed the 
strategy that will govern the progressive exit from the set of non-standard measures currently 
in  place.  This  should  not  be  seen  as  a  none-too-subtle  signalling  device  about  imminent 
policy actions, but rather as a demonstration of the central bank’s commitment to engineering 
a  smooth  and  orderly  departure  from  the  current  extraordinary  and  unprecedented  policy. 
Indeed, developing, communicating and eventually implementing in a timely manner a well-
designed  exit  strategy  is  essential  to  preserve  the  contributions  from  the  non-conventional 
policies to the maintenance of macroeconomic and financial stability. 
10 
 BIS Review 138/2009
