Ewart S Williams: Preparing enhanced insurance regulations for Trinidad 
and Tobago 
Speaking  notes  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  for  the  “Public  Consultation  of  the  Draft  Insurance  Bill  &  Accompanying 
Regulations”, Port-of-Spain, 10 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  
My role is to make a few introductory remarks to get the main discussion going. Obviously 
we  all  would  like  this  to  be  a  serious  working  session  and  not  an  opportunity  for  speech-
making.  
Let me start by saying  how delighted I am to be with you this morning as today’s Public 
Consultation which marks the final phase of a process that started roughly five years ago. As 
you would recall the regulation of the insurance sector was transferred from the Office of the 
Supervisor of Insurance in the Ministry of Finance, to the Central Bank in 2004.  
The process of preparing a new Insurance Act has been a collaborative approach between 
the  Central  Bank  and  a  stakeholders’  Committee,  comprising  members  of  ATTIC,  the 
Brokers Association and other industry consultants.  
This collaborative approach bears testimony to the firm commitment of the Central Bank to 
ensuring that the legislation for the sector strikes the right balance between international best 
practices and local market conditions and circumstances.  
Prior to April 2004, the Central Bank had oversight of 6 commercial banks and 15 non-banks. 
After  the  shift  in  regulatory  authority,  the  Bank  took  on  responsibility  for  51  insurance 
companies,  and  256  registered  pension  plans.  This  was  a  major  undertaking  and 
necessitated  a  significant  increase  in  staffing  and  infrastructural  requirements,  including 
training.  
The  insurance  sector,  as  you  know,  is  a  major  contributor  to  the  domestic  economy.  It 
accounts for close to $40 billion, second only to the $88 billion for commercial banks. The 
sector  is  a  major  repository  for  private  savings  and  by  covering  risks  and  unexpected 
developments; it facilitates private and public sector activity. In short, the industry is one of 
enormous economic and social value and critical to our developmental efforts.  
The legislation that underpins insurance activity in Trinidad and Tobago is grossly outdated. 
The basic Act dates back to 1966 and was modified in 1980. As all of you know better than I, 
the insurance industry of today bears little resemblance to that of 1966 or even 1980.  
As I am sure you know, inadequate financial regulation or regulatory failure has been widely 
cited  as  one  of  the  factors  behind  the  international  financial  crisis  of  2008–2009.  As  a 
consequence of this global financial crisis comprehensive reforms are underway to address 
the weaknesses which were exposed in the regulatory regimes of most developed countries.  
On the domestic front, the events of early 2009, which saw the Central Bank intervening in 
two insurance companies and an investment bank in the same group, served to reinforce 
the need for enhanced regulation of the sector. These events propelled the enactment of 
few amendments to the Insurance Act in February 2009. These amendments were needed to 
treat with some urgent immediate issues and covered: 
(i) 
quarterly reporting; 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
(ii) 
(iii) 
replacing  a  cumbersome, 
ensuring that the Statutory Fund is sufficient to provide policyholder protection on 
an  ongoing  basis,  rather  than  only  at  the  end  of  the  year  as  required  by  the 
previous legislation; 
time  consuming 
timely  corrective  action  by 
intervention regime with a more flexible and effective process that allowed for the 
issuance of compliance directions, and 
authorizing the sharing of information with other regulators. 
(iv) 
It  is  absolutely  vital  that  our  laws  and  regulations  keep  abreast  of  wider  market 
developments.  Indeed,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  problems  there  is  always  a  need  for 
legislative review. In most developed jurisdictions, periodic reviews are written into legislation 
to  ensure  that  it  remains  current  since  financial  innovation  will  eventually  outpace  and 
weaken legislative provisions.  
As  noted  earlier,  the  Bank  has  engaged  in  extensive  consultation  with  stakeholders  in  the 
insurance industry. This process began in October 2004 and was a major departure from the 
way the legislation was formulated in the past. The close collaboration and consultation 
with the industry has served to enhance the quality of the draft legislation which we 
are discussing today.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  important  to  emphasize  that  in  the  first  instance,  the  most 
important  reason  for  upgrading  our  insurance  legislation  is  to  protect  the  policy 
holder.  That  is  why,  for  example,  the  draft  legislation  requires  an  increase  in  capital  for 
insurance companies. Obviously, something must be wrong when companies are required to 
hold only $1–3 million in capital, while they mobilise policy-holders’ funds totalling hundreds 
of millions or billions of dollars. We recognise that many companies have held way beyond 
the statutory minimum capital. 
The draft legislation also seeks to ensure that insurance companies correctly value their 
liabilities  so  that  they  could  hold  adequate  reserves  to  protect  their  policy-holders. 
Currently there are no prescribed actuarial standards for insurance in Trinidad and Tobago. 
This has resulted in serious under-estimation of liabilities and reserves and also makes it 
difficult to make inter-company comparisons. 
The draft legislation recognises that some insurance companies would be content with more 
traditional and safer modes of operations, while others would engage in more risky activities. 
For this reason, the draft proposes a risk-based capital regime. The greater the level of 
risk, the larger the capital requirement.  
And very importantly the draft legislation seeks to give some authority to the Central Bank to 
promote  compliance.  Thus  it  is  proposed  that  the  Central  Bank  be  given  the  authority  to 
require  timely  corrective  action  and  to  impose  sanctions  including  fines,  when  these  are 
deemed appropriate. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  regulation  is  a  continuously  evolving  process.  The  reforms  to  the 
insurance legislation, which we propose to discuss with you today, will bring our regulatory 
framework  closer  in  line  with  international  standards  and  will  promote  a  more 
transparent and reliable regulatory structure.  
It has been a long journey to reach to this point but the journey has been paved with a great 
deal  of  healthy  dialogue  and  “give  and  take”  between  the  insurance  industry  and  the 
Central  Bank.  I  believe  this  was  possible  because  at  the  end  of  the  day,  we  share  a 
common goal as we strive towards a more robust and better regulated industry. Similar 
to  past  consultations  I  anticipate  that  today’s  dialogue  will  be  fruitful  and  will  occur  in  an 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
atmosphere of mutual trust and respect so that at the end of the process, the result would be 
legislation of which we can all be proud.  
I will now pass you back to the Moderator who will introduce Mr. Carl Hiralal, the Inspector of 
Financial Institutions, to discuss the highlights of the draft Bill in greater detail. 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
