Heng Swee Keat: The next stage – policy challenges in Asia 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  International  Financial  Forum,  Singapore,  26  October 
2009. 
 Governor Noyer, 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning 
It gives me great pleasure to join you today at this Paris Europlace International Financial 
Forum. Let me warmly welcome Governor Noyer and our overseas visitors to Singapore, and 
welcome Mr Bresson and your team for holding this Forum in Singapore.  
Policy challenges ahead 
A year ago, the global financial community was grappling with a severe crisis that hit every 
part of the globe and every sector. We were on the edge of an abyss. The timely and forceful 
action by authorities, including the use of unconventional monetary policy tools, helped avert 
the worst. In recent months, the global economy and financial markets are showing signs of 
stabilization. Though we are yet to see a firm or sustainable rebound in final demand, there is 
a sense of relief, even optimism. 
Now,  what’s  next?  What  will  be  the  shape  of  the  recovery,  and  what  policy  actions  are 
appropriate? It is difficult enough to make policy judgments in normal cyclical downturns. It is 
even  harder  now  that  this  downturn  is  not  a  garden  variety  recession.  The  impact  of  a 
financial  crisis  emanating  from  the  largest  economy  in  the  world  that  also  serves  as  the 
world’s  economic  locomotive  and  provides  the  global  reserve  currency  is  likely  to  be 
pervasive and longer-lasting. There are no easy precedents, and we have to remain alert to 
new surprises.  
Moreover, the key pillars of economic theories that underpin much of our policy thinking are 
now being vigorously questioned.  
We need much more thinking and empirical work on how economies and people behave to 
draw  out  the  critical  lessons  from  this  crisis.  But  based  on  what  we  know,  we  need  to 
undertake policy changes to build a more stable, sustainable and resilient global economic 
and  financial  system.  Much  of  this  has  to  be  globally  coordinated,  given  the  extensive 
linkages among economies and the financial system.  
In Asia, we face many policy challenges, and I will touch on three of these: managing the 
recovery,  economic  restructuring,  and  the  regulation  and  development  of  the  financial 
services sector. My main theme is that we must be cognizant that many Asian economies 
enter this crisis with different starting conditions, and going forward, face different challenges 
from those in advanced economies. Understanding these differences, and avoiding a one-
size-fits-all approach, will be critical to the design of policies appropriate to each country and 
region.  
Managing the economic recovery 
First, the economy. The financial crisis hit Asia with unexpected speed and force. From peak 
to trough, stock prices fell by more than 60% and a group of Asian economies contracted by 
an average of about 6.2%, not far from the 8.3% fall during the Asian Crisis. Exports fell by 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 1
over 30%, and intra-Asian exports fell even more sharply, by over 48%. These are far worse 
than even during the Asian Crisis. There was no de-coupling. 
Just  as  the  fall  was  swift  and  sharp,  the  initial  rebound  has  been  rapid  and  strong.  One 
quarter  after  the  trough  in  the  present  cycle,  Asia’s  GDP  grew  by  9.4%  on  a  quarter-on-
quarter  basis,  more  than  twice  of  the  4.3%  rise  after  the  Asian  Crisis.  Exports  have  also 
rebounded swiftly, lifted in part by the sharp increase in shipments to China. 
While the outlook has improved, the sustainability of the recovery is not clear at this point. 
With this uncertainty, managing the cyclical recovery of Asian economies presents several 
challenges.  A  withdrawal  of  government  stimulus  measures  too  early  risks  stifling  the 
recovery,  while  a  withdrawal  too  late  could  result  in  inflationary  conditions.  A  series  of 
carefully calibrated actions will be needed. 
Moreover, many analysts and fund managers now hold the view that emerging economies, 
while not de-coupled, will still grow significantly better than advanced economies for some 
years to come. Hence, there has been a re-rating of assets in emerging economies. Coupled 
with extremely accommodative monetary conditions globally, we can expect increasing inflow 
of funds to many emerging economies, including those in Asia, in search of yields. Managing 
this  inflow  so  that  it  supports  growth,  and  not  drive  excessive  asset  inflation,  will  be 
challenging. Policymakers will need a variety of tools.  
Economic restructuring in Asia 
Beyond  the  immediate  challenges,  the  second  set  of  issues  that  Asian  policymakers  will 
have to grapple with relates to the re-structuring of their economies. Business-as-usual policy 
will  not  work.  The  world  has  enjoyed  a  positive  supply-shock  with  the  entry  of  emerging 
economies  into  the  global  economy.  We  have  had  a  period  of  Great  Moderation.  But  this 
supply  shock  also  creates  new  competitive  dynamics,  which  will  drive  changes  in  the 
patterns  of  trade,  production  and  growth  in  the  coming  years.  The  adjustments  to  these 
changes will be neither easy nor smooth. As unemployment in some advanced economies 
mount, the risk of trade and financial protectionism rises. Rapid changes in the real economy 
will generate greater uncertainty, and potentially greater volatility in financial markets. 
Over the next few years, Asia is likely to grow more slowly compared to pre-crisis days, when 
external demand from advanced economies weakens. To sustain growth, Asian economies 
with  big  domestic  markets  will  need  to  continue  with  structural  reforms  to  boost  domestic 
demand.  Smaller  Asian  economies  will  have  to  re-orientate  their  economies  to  respond  to 
new opportunities in these markets. The cross-border production and supply-chain networks, 
which  have  been  so  efficient  in  raising  Asia’s  exports  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  remains 
valuable  but  will  have  to  be  increasingly  re-orientated  towards  raising  domestic  and  intra-
Asian consumption of final goods and services. Measures to encourage new investments in 
the corporate sector and in public infrastructure, as well as in education and healthcare, will 
be necessary for most Asian emerging economies in order to realize their growth potential. 
The basic outline of changes is well understood, but crafting the details of these changes, 
and  calibrating  the  pace  of  implementation,  will  need  thoughtful  work.  The  build  up  of 
domestic  demand  would  probably  be  a  gradual  process,  as  experiences  of  Japan  and 
Germany  suggest  that  reducing  a  nation’s  export  dependence  involves  major  structural 
changes that evolve over an extended period of time. Nevertheless, I am optimistic that Asia 
will be able to respond to these challenges, to achieve its longer term growth potential and 
contribute towards more sustainable global growth.  
Financial regulations and development 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  third  set  of  challenges:  financial  regulations  and  development. 
Financial authorities are now working intensely in various fora, such as the Financial Stability 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2009
Board and Basel Committee, on regulatory reforms and cross-border cooperation. The major 
themes  relate  to  new  capital  and  liquidity  frameworks  and  linking  these  to  systemic  risks; 
dealing with the moral  hazard problem of individual institutions becoming “too big”, or “too 
connected”  to  fail;  cross-border  coordination  and  resolution  regimes;  redefining  accounting 
rules  and  building  counter-cyclical  buffers  to  address  pro-cyclicality;  adherence  to  global 
standards  and  others. 
In  many  areas,  measures  have  already  been  agreed  and 
implemented. 
Many of these changes will be relevant to Asia, and we need to abide by global standards. 
However,  following  the  Asian  Crisis,  significant  financial  sector  reform  has  taken  place  in 
many  parts  of  Asia.  In  many  economies,  the  rules  have  become  more  conservative.  For 
instance, many jurisdictions here in Asia have  strict loan-to-value ratios in mortgage loans 
and provisioning requirements. There is therefore less need for Asia to have to make drastic 
changes to meet the new norms.  
In  fact,  Asia’s  bigger  challenge  lies  less  in  having  more  stringent  regulations,  but  more  in 
development and innovation of financial services to complement its economic development. 
Saving  rates  in  Asia  are  high,  but  these  have  to  be  efficiently  intermediated  to  support 
productive  investments.  In  most  parts  of  Asia,  the  banking  system  dominates  the 
intermediation channel. 
Developing  a  stronger  second  channel  through  the  capital  markets,  venture  funds  and 
private  equity  to  support  a  range  of  entrepreneurial  activities  can  raise  the  efficiency  and 
resilience of the system. This will also provide a wider range of asset classes to meet the 
investment  needs  of  a  rising  middle  class.  Similarly,  the  insurance  and  risk  management 
markets will have to be developed further to meet corporate and individual needs. There is 
already  a  momentum,  with  capital  markets  in  China,  India  and  ASEAN  economies 
developing  well.  In  bigger  economies,  micro-finance,  mobile  finance  and  rural  finance  are 
also being developed. Cross-border financial activities within Asia are also showing signs of 
increase. These are positive changes, as the development of a deep and integrated financial 
system provides a vital support for structural adjustments in the region.  
Economic and financial linkages between France and Singapore 
Let me now say a few words on how Singapore is responding to these challenges, and how 
the  French  business  and  financial  community  can  collaborate  with  those  in  Singapore  to 
promote growth in Asia.  
The Singapore government has set up an Economic Strategies Committee to identify policy 
changes to strengthen Singapore’s value as a vibrant global economic node in the heart of 
Asia. Singapore’s connectivity enables it to facilitate the flow of goods, services, capital and 
ideas. The value of Singapore as a stable, trusted hub that respects the rule of law, and its 
value  as  a  consistent  regulatory  regime  are  our  core  strengths.  But  these  will  need  to  be 
enhanced  with  new  capabilities  in  knowledge  creation  and  innovation,  as  well  as  the 
development  of  deeper  talent  pool,  in  order  for  the  business  community  to  seize  new 
opportunities. 
The  connectivity  and  ease  of  doing  business  is  well  acknowledged  by  global  businesses. 
Today, over 26,000 international companies use Singapore as a base for their operations. 
Between  France  and  Singapore,  economic  and  trade  ties  are  deep  and  growing.  In  2008, 
total  trade  between  France  and  Singapore  stood  at  more  than  eight  billion  Euros,  making 
Singapore the third largest Asian export market for France, after China and Japan. France, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  the  sixth  largest  European  investor  in  Singapore.  Some  800  French 
companies 
including  petrochemicals,  electronics, 
telecommunications,  aerospace,  biomedical  sciences,  education,  and  luxury  goods  are 
located in Singapore. 
from  a  wide  range  of 
industries 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 3
French  financial  institutions  have  a  significant  presence  here.  BNP  Paribas  is  one  of 
Singapore’s  earlier  Qualifying  Full  Banks.  SocGen  celebrated  its  30th  anniversary  in 
Singapore  recently.  Credit  Agricole  would  count  as  the  oldest  French  bank  in  Singapore, 
through  its  acquisition  of  Indosuez  which  was  set  up  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago  in 
Singapore in 1905. Natexis has been here for 27 years, while CIC just celebrated its 25th 
anniversary in Singapore this year. These institutions carry out significant banking and fund 
management activities here. There are also insurance firms like AXA with a major presence 
in Singapore. 
We appreciate the contribution of French financial institutions. Mr Claude Bebear, Honorary 
Chairman of AXA, was  recently awarded the Public Service Star (Distinguished Friends of 
Singapore)  Medal  during  our  44th  National  Day  celebration.  Mr  Bebear  is  the  first 
representative of the financial sector to receive such an award. This is a special award that 
recognizes individuals who have contributed significantly to Singapore in business, industry, 
technology and science.  
I hope French financial institutions, with strengths in particular areas of finance, will continue 
to find ways to serve investors, corporates and governments in the region. Your strengths in 
Islamic  finance,  project  finance,  trade  and  structured  finance  are  very  relevant  to  Asia’s 
growing needs in building infrastructure, facilitating trade and developing enterprises. Asset 
managers  and  insurance  firms  can  serve  the  growing  class  of  Asian  investors,  as  well  as 
global investors who look towards Asia to grow their assets and diversify risks. We hope that 
Singapore will continue to serve as a useful base for you to understand and serve the region, 
and that you will find many valuable partners here. 
In  this  regard,  the  close  collaboration  between  Singapore  and  France  in  research  and 
education in the areas of finance and business will contribute to a deeper understanding of 
the region. Last year, HEC Paris and the National University of Singapore celebrated their 
10th  year  of  collaboration.  Two  well-known  institutions  –  INSEAD  and  ESSEC  Business 
School – have established their Asia campuses in Singapore. INSEAD has also set up the 
Asia-Pacific  Institute  of  Finance  in  Singapore  to  conduct  regional  executive  education 
programmes, as well as conduct Asia-specific financial research.  
Financial  institutions  like  AXA  and  BNP  Paribus  have  also  set  up  training  and  research 
centres  in  Singapore.  I  understand  that  there  is  also  well-established  financial  research 
infrastructure under the ambit of Paris Europlace and the Europlace Institute of Finance. We 
look  forward  to  greater  collaboration  between  French  and  Singapore  institutions.  In 
particular,  given  the  importance  of  risk  management  in  finance,  I  hope  that  French 
institutions specializing in this area can bring their expertise to this region.  
Conclusion 
In closing, the global financial crisis has presented many lessons for the financial community 
and  policymakers.  In  Asia,  the  crisis  has  accelerated  structural  reforms.  There  are  many 
challenges ahead, including the development of the financial services sector in appropriate 
ways  to  support  economic  restructuring.  I  hope  that  financial  institutions  in  France  and 
Singapore  will  contribute  meaningfully  to  this  development  and  help  bring  about  a  more 
resilient and robust global economy. 
I wish Paris Europlace every success in hosting this Forum, and look forward to many more 
such exchanges in the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2009
