Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance and global financial stability 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Seminar on Islamic Finance: During and After the Global Financial Crisis – "Islamic finance 
and global financial stability", Istanbul, 5 October 2009. 
 "The  unfolding  events  during  this  global  financial  crisis  have  brought  to  the  forefront  the 
issues concerning the stability of financial systems and the robustness and resilience of the 
international  financial  architecture.  At  the  heart  of  the  crisis  is  the  breakdown  of  the 
functioning of the financial intermediation process and the loss of confidence in the financial 
system. As the world continues to struggle with the consequent global economic recession 
and the continued fragile financial system, it has intensified the search for solutions. Indeed, 
wide ranging reforms are now currently being discussed. The future financial landscape in 
the aftermath of this crisis is, therefore, likely to be significantly different from the present. In 
the search for the appropriate reforms, there is a general consensus that we need to return 
banking  to  its  basic  functions  –  to  provide  financial  services  that  adds  value  to  the  real 
economy.  This  in  fact  represents  the  very  essence  of  Islamic  finance.  These  are  the  very 
elements that are espoused in the Shariah principles that underpin Islamic finance and which 
explains its resilience during this international financial crisis. As the role and relevance of 
Islamic finance in the global financial system gains significance, it will not only increase its 
potential  to  contribute  to  global  financial  stability  but  also  towards  strengthening  global 
growth." 
It is my honour to be invited to speak at this Seminar on Islamic Finance: During and After 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  jointly  organised  by  the  World  Bank,  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board (IFSB), the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and the Institute of International 
Finance (IIF). This seminar takes place at a time in world history that is characterised by an 
unprecedented  global  financial  instability,  that  has  now  precipitated  a  synchronised  global 
economic recession. Although signs of an impending recovery in the world economy have 
appeared in the horizon, the pervasively virulent and far reaching repercussions unleashed 
by the crisis has shaken the foundations of the global financial system. This damage has yet 
to  be  repaired  and  rebuilt.  This  has  sparked  the  international  call  for  the  reform  of  the 
financial  architecture  to  one  that  will  best  serve  the  world  economy,  to  one  that  is  more 
resilient to shocks and to one that would reduce the prospect for future financial crises.  
History has shown that there have been more than a hundred distinct banking crises in this 
recent  three  decades.  There  is  therefore  an  even  more  urgent  need  to  find  an  enduring 
solution to ensure the stability of financial systems. The challenge before us is to build a new 
financial architecture that would allow for the more efficient functioning of not only financial 
intermediation  within  national  economies  but  also  across  borders.  Islamic  finance,  with  its 
emphasis on a strong linkage to productive economic activity, its inbuilt check and balances 
and  its  high  level  of  disclosure  and  transparency  offers  this  prospect.  Indeed,  inherent  in 
Islamic finance is the explicit elements that address several of the issues that have surfaced 
in the conventional financial system during the current crisis. 
Given the global dimension of the current crisis, the accelerated pace at which it has spread 
and  the  severity  of  its  repercussions,  it  has  called  for  a  higher  degree  of  collective 
determination by the international community to work together towards developing a global 
strategy  that  will  evolve  a  financial  system  that  is  stable  and  sustainable  over  the  entire 
business  cycle.  As  Islamic  finance  continues  to  become  an  integral  part  of  the  global 
financial system, it will increasingly be exposed to risks of financial stress arising from global 
financial  instability  and  global  economic  activity.  This  necessitates  a  greater  global 
engagement between those that are driving the reform agenda given that it will result in new 
structures, standards  and  regulatory  regimes  for  the  industry.  This  is  particularly  important 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 1
when  such  standards  become  the  basis  on  which  assessments  are  made  by  multilateral 
agencies,  rating  agencies  and  the  market  at  large.  Such  engagement  also  facilitates 
cooperation and collaboration in achieving our shared interest of preserving global financial 
stability. 
The  combination  of  indiscriminate  lending,  excessive  risk-taking  and  overzealous  financial 
innovation  were  at  the  root  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  The  financial  turmoil  that  first 
originated  in  the  mortgage  market  in  a  number  of  the  advanced  economies  triggered  a 
broad-based  meltdown  and  subsequent  breakdown  in  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets.  Despite  these  developments,  the  Islamic  financial  industry  has  been  able  to 
weather this first wave of the global financial crisis, demonstrating its robustness as a stable 
form of financial intermediation. 
The  resilience  of  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  during  this  crisis  epitomises  the  intrinsic 
strengths  embedded  in  Islamic  finance  that  are  underpinned  by  forces  of  the  Shariah 
principles.  This  arises  from  two  essential  requirements  of  Islamic  finance  –  firstly,  that  the 
financial  transaction  must  be  accompanied  by  an  underlying  productive  economic  activity 
that will generate legitimate income and wealth, thereby establishing a close link between the 
financial  transactions  and  productive  flows.  Thus,  in  the  Islamic  finance  business  model, 
financing or equity participation can only be extended to activities in the real sector that have 
economic values. Hence, Islamic financial assets are expected to grow in tandem with the 
growth of underlying economic activities.  
Secondly, that it is based on profit sharing in which there is a mutual risk sharing. Islamic 
finance, therefore, impels the Islamic financial institutions to undertake the appropriate due 
diligence  on  the  viability  of  business  proposals  and  by  enforcing  the  requirement  for 
transparency  and  disclosure.  The  role  of  the  Shariah  board  in  ensuring  that  all  aspects  of 
business  operation  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  in  accordance  with  the  Shariah 
principles, adds another level of oversight which inherently safeguards against irresponsible 
practices.  Embraced  in  its  entirety,  these  in-built  dimensions  of  governance  and  risk 
management contributes to safeguarding Islamic finance from the potential risks of financial 
stress arising from excessive leverage or speculative activities.  
Despite  the  uncertainties  and  challenging  environment  posed  by  the  current  crisis,  the 
expansion and development of Islamic financial services industry in global financial system 
have continued unabated. The dynamic nature of the Islamic financial system is reflected by 
its solid growth, the increased range of financial products and services and the establishment 
of new Islamic financial service providers from the different parts of the world including from 
the  non-Muslim  world.  This  increased  participation  is  particularly  pronounced  in  the  sukuk 
market whereby funds have been raised by issuers from various parts of the world. Recent 
sukuk issuances both in domestic and in foreign currency have attracted interest from a wide 
investor  base  from  Asia,  Europe  and  the  Middle  East.  These  positive  developments  have 
been achieved despite the more challenging global financial market environment.  
As  Islamic  finance  evolves  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  businesses  and 
consumers, innovation is integral to the development of new Islamic financial products and 
services. It is also recognised, however, that unfettered financial innovation can become a 
major source of instability in the financial system. In Islamic finance, financial innovation must 
be  tested  against  the  “Maqasid  al-Shariah”  (objectives  of  the  Shariah),  where  the  primary 
objective  is  the  realisation  of  benefit  to  the  people.  This  demands  the  internalisation  of 
Shariah principles in Islamic financial transactions, both in form and substance. Indeed, the 
move to embrace Shariah-based innovation brings with it a strong Shariah-compliant culture 
in Islamic financial institutions. This in turn serves to ensure that the product development 
process  in  Islamic  finance  is  grounded  within  Shariah  injunctions  which  also  incorporates 
ethical value propositions.  
Financial  innovation  also  needs  to  be  supported  by  robust  risk  management  and  strong 
governance  practices.  It  is  recognised  that  sophisticated  and  complex  financial  structures 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2009
very often result in the failure of consumers, investors and even regulators to understand the 
risks  and  leverages  embedded  in  the  instruments  which  in  turn  results  in  the  lack  of 
transparency and inadequate risk management. In Islamic finance, a prerequisite under the 
risk-sharing arrangements is having the necessary information to understand the risks that 
are to be borne by Islamic financial institutions. The explicit risk sharing element between the 
financier and customer in Islamic finance obligates its participants to evaluate risk profile of 
the product or investment proposition, the underlying trends in earnings and cash flows, and 
its income-producing potential. This process also allows the pricing of funds to be adjusted 
accordingly. 
Equally  important  is  the  risk  management  capability  of  the  Islamic  financial  institution  to 
manage the risks that are peculiar to Islamic financial transactions. Additional capital is for 
example required to cushion the inventory risks of underlying assets and equity positions that 
are embedded in partnership contracts, therefore bringing the capital requirements closer to 
the  true  economic  risks  in  portfolio  of  the  financial  institutions.  To  manage  depositors' 
expectations and sustaining market confidence, Islamic banks are also permitted to set aside 
a portion of income derived from assets funded under Mudarabah contracts, in the form of 
profit equalisation reserves (PER), as a mechanism to address the impact of pro-cyclicality of 
their  returns.  This  is  reinforced  by  a  combination  of  stronger  governance  and  enhanced 
transparency  to  address  the  trust-based  relationships  which  is  a  fundamental  hallmark  of 
Islamic finance.  
With increased globalisation and greater integration of Islamic finance with the international 
financial system, the higher will be the risk of the contagion effects from other markets and 
jurisdictions.  In  addition,  Islamic  finance  will  also  be  affected  by  the  second  round  effects 
arising  from  slower  economic  growth  and  the  reduction  in  global  liquidity.  An  essential 
infrastructure in this environment is a well functioning liquidity management infrastructure to 
enhance  the  capacity  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  effectively  manage  their  liquidity 
positions.  Of  importance,  is  the  wide  availability  of  Shariah-based  Islamic  financial  market 
instruments to facilitate liquidity management. Such facilities for adjusting portfolio balances 
in a Shariah compliant manner ensure that the liquidity risks can be effectively managed.  
As  part  of  the  global  collaborative  efforts  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions in managing liquidity at both national and across borders, a Liquidity Management 
Task Force has been established by the IFSB and the IDB early this year. This work is being 
further  supplemented  by  ongoing  market  initiatives  by  the  International  Islamic  Financial 
Market (IIFM) which focus in the advancement and the standardisation for Islamic financial 
instruments for the Islamic capital and money markets. More recently, Malaysia established 
the Bursa Suq Al-Sila' under the concept of commodity murabahah. This multi-currency and 
multi-commodity  is  an  electronic  exchange  traded  platform  to  facilitate  the  trading  and 
settlement  of  commodity  using  crude  palm  oil  (CPO)  for  liquidity  management  between 
Islamic financial centres. Although Malaysia already has a well functioning Islamic inter-bank 
money market, this platform provides a further alternative for liquidity management, through 
which  global  interlinkages  in  the  international  Islamic  financial  system  can  also  be  further 
enhanced.  
Integral to the efforts in the development of Islamic finance has been the strengthening of the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  Islamic  finance.  In  the  area  of  international 
prudential  standards  for  Islamic  finance,  the  IFSB  that  was  established  in  2002  has 
developed  a  number  of  standards  ranging  from  capital  adequacy  requirements  to 
governance  and  risk  management  to  assist  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  adopting 
international best practices and standards.  
While  the  basic  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  takes  into  account  the 
distinctive features of Islamic finance are already in place, there is a need to have a more 
comprehensive  infrastructure  to  meet  the  present  challenges.  Looking  beyond  the  current 
crisis,  there  needs  to  be  an  integrated  crisis  management  framework  as  part  of  this 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 3
infrastructure  to  ensure  that  any  emerging  crisis  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  will  be 
promptly and efficiently managed. More facilitative and modernised legal framework is also 
required to make business more conducive for Islamic finance. In addition, the boundaries of 
the regulatory framework for Islamic finance would also have to be regularly adapted to keep 
pace with the evolution and transformation of the financial system. In the case of Malaysia, 
the comprehensive legal, regulatory and supervisory framework for Islamic finance is further 
supported  by  a  financial  safety  net  framework  that  encompasses  the  lender  of  last  resort 
facility and a deposit insurance system.  
Moving forward, in the aftermath of this global financial crisis there is also a need to have in 
place the institutional arrangements for resolution of troubled international Islamic financial 
institutions. In Malaysia, we have also in place a mandated resolution mechanism to provide 
for  expedient,  effective  and  cost  efficient  resolution  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The 
current  crisis,  however,  has  highlighted  the  need  to  have  in  place  a  mechanism  for 
cooperation between regulators across jurisdictions for resolution and for containing potential 
systemic  risks  beyond  the  national  boundaries.  To  promote  global  financial  stability  in  the 
Islamic  financial  system,  the  Taskforce  on  "Islamic  Finance  and  Global  Financial  Stability" 
was  established  in  2008  by  the  IDB  in  collaboration  with  the  IFSB,  together  with  the 
participation  of  industry  leaders  and  international  experts  to  examine  the  development  of 
further building blocks in Islamic financial infrastructure to strengthen its resilience and ability 
to meet future challenges. Substantive progress has been achieved by the Taskforce and a 
report  including  major  recommendations  is  planned  for  submission  to  the  IFSB  Council  in 
November  this  year.  Among  the  areas  covered  by  the  report  include  the  effective 
implementation and enforcement of the prudential standards, the supervisory framework, the 
strengthening  of  the  financial  safety  net  mechanisms  and  the  development  of  an  effective 
crisis management and resolution framework. Among the recommendations in the report will 
be the establishment of a Financial Stability Forum to address issues of financial stability in 
the Islamic financial system.  
The  internationalization  of  Islamic  finance  requires  the  industry  to  progress  into  the  next 
stage  of  international  acceptance,  with  mutual  recognition  of  financial  standards  and 
products  across  jurisdictions.  Indeed  in  the  area  of  Shariah,  there  has  already  been 
progressive  convergence  of  Shariah  views  and  rulings,  and  the  mutual  recognition  of 
financial standards and products across jurisdictions. As this continues to occur, it would be 
a  major  driver  towards  greater  convergence  and  harmonization.  This  has  been  facilitated 
through  greater  engagement  among  the  regulators,  practitioners  and  scholars  in  Islamic 
finance across jurisdictions. This interface is important given the common interest of global 
financial stability. 
The announcements following the recent G20 Summit and the associated announcements of 
the Financial Stability Board reflect the international economic regulatory cooperation that will 
set the agenda for the conventional standard setting bodies to put in place a framework to 
strengthen  the  international  regulatory  standards.  It  will  also  form  the  basis  by  which 
assessments will be made by multilateral agencies such as the IMF. It is therefore important 
for there to be engagement with the prudential standard setting entities for Islamic finance, 
not only to raise awareness of whether the new standards being introduced can be applied to 
Islamic finance and whether modifications need to be made but there could also be possible 
consequences  that  are  unintended.  Equally  important  is  for  there  to  be  recognition  of  the 
standards  that  have  been  issued  for  Islamic  finance  specifically  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board. As a growing component of the international financial system, it becomes 
important for the interface and engagement with the international standard setting entities to 
take place given the common interest of global financial stability.  
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  While  the  inherent  strengths  of  Islamic  finance  have 
contributed to its viability and resilience, going forward into the future, the foundations for its 
sustainability  as  a  competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation  will  continue  to  be 
strengthened.  Concerted  efforts  are  underway  focusing  on  the  further  development  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2009
Islamic  financial  markets,  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  investment  in  research  and 
development  to  support  innovation,  and  enhancing  further  the  legal,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  Tapping  on  the  advances  in  technology  and  the  development  of 
human capital are also an important part of the development of Islamic finance. Finally, with 
greater  liberalisation,  effective  infrastructure  is  also  being  put  in  place  for  enhancing 
interlinkages across jurisdictions. An important part of these developments will be for a more 
inclusive  arrangement  that  would  allow  for  greater  interface  with  the  current  reform  efforts 
being undertaken in the international financial system. Our vigorous pursuit and commitment 
to  strengthening  the  resilience  of  Islamic  financial  industry  would  enhance  the  potential  to 
contribute  towards  global  financial  stability  and  in  turn  enhance  the  prospects  for  global 
growth.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 5
