Yi Gang: Global cooperation, China’s economy and the IMF 
Statement of Dr Yi Gang, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Twentieth 
Meeting of the IMFC, Istanbul, 4 October 2009. 
 The global economy and financial markets – prospects and policy response 
I.  
The outlook of the global economy and financial market has improved, thanks to the stimulus 
policies  and  financial  sector  support  measures.  However,  the  recovery  remains  to  be 
established  as  the  effect  of  the  manufacturing  sector  rebounds  and  inventory  adjustment 
may be short-lived. The lingering deleveraging, credit crunch, and financial market instability, 
as well as weak private demand, all point to a slow recovery.  
The global economy is confronted with the risks of rising trade and investment protectionism, 
delayed  restoration  of  the  normal  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  and  uncoordinated 
macroeconomic policies. The pressing task is to join efforts to fight protectionism, stabilize 
the financial markets, and restore growth. It is essential for the major markets to accelerate 
financial  reforms,  strengthen  supervision,  remove  toxic  assets,  and  enhance  capital 
adequacy. Coordination of macroeconomic and financial sector policies is also crucial. 
At  the  critical  stage  of  global  recovery,  the  IMF  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  policy 
coordination.  It  needs  to  monitor  more  closely risks  and  policy  implementation,  particularly 
the  progress  of  financial  sector  restructuring  and  supportive  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
implementation in developed countries, as well as capital flows, to promote relative stability 
of the exchange rates of major reserve currencies. 
Our attention must focus appropriately on the areas where policy action and coordination are 
most critical and urgently needed. Global cooperation is needed to secure a more open trade 
system, accelerate comprehensive structural reforms and improve allocation of resources. It 
is of particular importance to remove impediments to productivity growth, particularly in the 
labor, product, and service markets. Such actions are fundamental to strong and sustainable 
global  growth.  We  also  call  on  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  to  explore  ways  to  reallocate 
more  resources  to  developing  countries,  raise  their  potential  growth,  and  accelerate  their 
income convergence with the developed world.  
Chinese economic developments and policies 
II.  
The  Chinese  economy  outperformed  the  expectations  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  With 
acceleration of investment growth, the real GDP grew 7.1 percent. In the first eight months, 
fixed asset investment grew by 33 percent in urban areas, retail sales by 15.4 percent, and 
industrial output by 12.3 percent. Although the monthly average CPI declined by 1.2 percent 
in the same period year-on-year, the August CPI registered a 0.5 percent increase from the 
previous month. Money growth accelerated in the first eight months, with M2 and M1 up 28.5 
percent  and  27.7  percent  respectively,  resulting  in  a  credit  growth  of  34.1  percent.  The 
renminbi exchange rate remained stable. 
The  domestic  demand  has  become  the  dominant  source  of  growth.  The  package  of 
macroeconomic measures in response to the global financial crisis – suited to the Chinese 
circumstances – has proven to be timely, forceful, and effective, and has helped reverse the 
sharp decline in growth. The projected growth target for this year is within reach.  
Efforts are also being made to contain fiscal and financial risks. The government intends to 
limit  the  fiscal  deficit  and  public  debt  to  around  3  percent  and  20  percent  of  GDP, 
respectively.  The  banking  system  has  improved  its  asset  quality  and  resilience  to  shocks. 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 1
is  committed 
The nonperforming loan ratio of the banking sector declined by 0.64 percentage points in the 
first six month to 1.8 percent at end-June. And their capital adequacy stood at 11.1 percent. 
The  Chinese  government  is  faced  with  an  uncertain  global  environment.  In  the  first  eight 
months,  exports  dropped  by  22.2  percent  while  imports,  by  22.7  percent.  The  task  for 
structural  adjustment  remains  formidable.  While  the  effect  of  the  supportive  policies  is 
expected to phase out, the measures aimed at addressing longer-term issues will take time 
to  yield  results.  The  government 
to  maintain  stable  and  consistent 
macroeconomic  policies  while  accelerating  structural  adjustment.  Promotion  of  domestic 
demand, particularly consumption, will remain a top priority. In this regard, the government is 
committed  to  maintain  a  reasonable  investment  growth,  improve  investment  structure,  and 
enhance  efficiency  by  eliminating 
inefficient  capacity  and  encouraging  merger  and 
restructuring.  
It will continue to restructure and revitalize key industries, encourage innovation, and improve 
the people’s livelihood. It will monitor closely the developments in the domestic as well as the 
global  economy  and  stand  ready  to  take  contingent  actions,  as  necessary.  China  will  also 
remain  vigilant  against  various  potential  risks,  including  the  risk  of  inflation,  and  sustain 
strong economic growth. 
Against  the  economic  rebound  in  mainland  China  and  easing  of  the  downside  risks  in  the 
global economy, the Hong Kong SAR economy in the second quarter recorded a 3.3 percent 
rebound over the previous quarter, and the decline in exports moderated. Total employment 
stabilized  and  the  unemployment  rate  was  5.4  percent.  The  underlying  consumer  price 
inflation eased to 1.2 percent in the second quarter over a year ago. For 2009 as a whole, 
real  GDP  is  projected  to  contract  by  3.5-4.5  percent  and  CPI  inflation  is  projected  at  0.5 
percent. 
Hit by the global recession, the economy of Macao SAR contracted 12.8 percent in the first 
half  of  2009,  with  pronounced  declines  in  both  exports  and  investment.  However,  labor 
market  performance  remained  stable,  with  the  latest  unemployment  rate  remaining  at  3.7 
percent.  Inflationary  pressures  were  quickly  alleviated.  As  the  tourism  industry  income 
stabilizes, economic activity is gradually improving, and the decline in GDP is expected to 
moderate gradually in the second half of the year. 
through 
the  acceleration  of 
fundamental  reforms  will 
Reform and future mandate of the Fund 
III.  
The  current  financial  crisis,  which  originated  in  developed  countries,  has  resulted  in 
substantial losses for the countries of the world. The failure of major international financial 
institutions  to  issue  timely  early  warnings  highlights  the  consequences  of  its  misfocused 
surveillance.  Only 
the  major 
international  financial  institutions  be  able  to  discharge  the  mandate  assigned  to  it  by  its 
member countries. 
The persistently misaligned quota shares and underrepresentation of emerging market and 
developing countries hamper Fund governance and even-handed surveillance. It undermines 
Fund  legitimacy  and  effectiveness.  The  traditional  unreasonable  quota  allocation  and 
adjustment method have intensified the misalignment. It is critical that the Fund complete in a 
timely manner the reform objective announced by the G-20 leaders, namely a shift of at least 
five percentage points of the quota shares in favor of the emerging market and developing 
country members.  
We support increasing Fund resources through a variety of means. However, the Fund is a 
quota-based  institution  and  quotas  should  be  its  primary  resource.  From  the  long-term 
perspective, the Fund should introduce a reasonable automatic quota adjustment process in 
order to reflect changes in the relative economic positions of its members and avoid serious 
quota share misalignment. We join in the call for prompt approval of the 2008 quota reforms. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2009
Building on the quota reform, we support the broader reform of Fund governance, which will 
result in a strengthened role of the Executive Board, better oversight over the management, 
and  a  transparent,  competitive,  and  merit-based  process  of  management  selection. 
Emerging  market  and  developing  countries  should  also  have  greater  participation  in 
management and staff. 
Even-handed  surveillance  is  an  important  condition  for  Fund  legitimacy  and  effectiveness. 
The Fund needs to strengthen surveillance over major financial markets. Its policy analysis 
needs  to  be  balanced,  giving  full  regard  to  members’  circumstances.  The  2007  Decision 
distracted the attention of the Fund and the international community from real systemic risks, 
and delayed policy responses. The revision of the operational guidance in May was a small 
step in the right direction. We call for a timely thorough review of the 2007 Decision in order 
to avoid a recurrence of past mistakes. 
We welcome the progress achieved with the Early Warning Exercise (EWE), and support the 
continued  cooperation  with  the  FSB  to  improve  EWE  methodology  and  enhance  EWE 
capabilities.  With  regard  to  EWE  communication  issues,  the  Fund  needs  to  ensure  both 
communication  effectiveness  and  confidentiality  of  sensitive  information.  The  analytical 
results  of  the  EWE  should  be  integrated  with  multilateral  and  bilateral  surveillance.  It  is 
particularly important to ensure that the developed countries with significant vulnerability and 
potential  spillover  risks  implement  appropriate  measures  to  address  such  risks  and  that 
policies are implemented in the areas that require joint efforts. 
We welcome the package of reform measures adopted by the Fund with respect to lending 
facilities  and  financing  mechanisms  for  low-income  countries.  The  international  community 
should pay close attention to and minimize the damage to low-income countries caused by 
the current financial crisis. We call on the international community to provide greater support 
to help low-income countries weather the crisis. We welcome the Fund’s increased flexibility 
with  nonconcessional 
for 
development  financing,  we  call  on  the  Fund  to  work  with  other  international  financial 
institutions to explore new financing mechanisms for more effective reallocation of productive 
resources to low-income countries. 
The current crisis has caused severe damages to the current international financial system. 
Restoration of international monetary and financial order is the shared responsibility of the 
Fund and the whole membership. The result of our efforts will be critical to the future of the 
Fund  and  the  world  economy.  And  the  capacity  of  the  Fund  to  deliver  depends  on  the 
outcome of the reforms currently under way. A significant quota realignment along with other 
governance  reforms  could  help  it  go  a  long  way  toward  enhancing  its  legitimacy  and  its 
effectiveness  in  promoting  global  financial  stability  and  sustainable  growth  through 
independent, even-handed, and effective surveillance. 
low-income  countries.  Given 
large  gap 
financing 
the 
to 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 3
