Hans-Helmut Kotz: Deutsche Bundesbank Financial Stability Review 
2009 
Speech  by  Prof  Hans-Helmut  Kotz,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  press  conference  of  the  presentation  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank 
Financial Stability Review 2009, Frankfurt am Main, 25 November 2009. 
 German financial system stabilised 
I 
In  early  autumn  of  2008,  the  international  financial  system  was  on  the  verge  of  collapse. 
Activity in interbank money markets was severely impaired, with virtually no turnover at all in 
the longer maturities. Enormous uncertainty prevailed. Premiums for unsecured loans soared 
to 50 times above their pre-crisis levels. All indicators of risk – whether in the equity, bond, 
credit or derivatives markets – were standing at all-time highs. There was a danger that the 
international financial crisis, interacting with the severest slump in global growth in more than 
half a century, would lead to a more or less uncontrollable downward spiral. 
A  perceptible  stabilisation  has  been  under  way  since  the  spring  of  2009,  however,  even 
though  this  predominantly  reflects  the  unprecedented  measures  taken  by  fiscal,  monetary 
and financial market policymakers. A worse outcome was averted only thanks to these non-
standard policy measures, which were applied throughout the world. The international and 
German  financial  systems  were  only  stabilised  when  the  public  sector  –  in  Germany  as 
elsewhere – assumed the role of “risk-taker of last resort”. This is the backdrop against which 
we present this year’s Bundesbank Financial Stability Review. 
At the current juncture, domestic credit institutions are benefiting from a more benign global 
economic  outlook.  Prospects  have  improved  markedly,  and  this  applies  especially  to  the 
strongly export-oriented German economy. This is having an immediate positive impact on 
the conditions in which the financial sector operates. 
Nevertheless, the road before us is strewn with obstacles. Major challenges for the German 
banking system still lie ahead. The purpose of our Financial Stability Review is therefore to 
assess possible risks going forward as well as the German financial system’s resilience in 
the light of potential, but not unrealistic adverse developments. 
Recent  upward  revisions  of  growth  forecasts  should  not  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  the  more 
benign  global  economic  climate  is  mainly  the  outcome  of  the  large-scale  fiscal  stimulus 
programmes.  Concurrently,  extraordinary  monetary  policy  measures  were  deployed  to 
underwrite the financial system’s stability. The process of restructuring the financial sector, 
which  was  made  possible  by  these  unprecedented  policy  initiatives,  remains  vulnerable, 
however, to setbacks in the recovery of the real economy. The upturn is still far from being 
self-sustaining.  The  coming  year  will  show  how  far  fading  public-sector  stimuli  can  be 
replaced  by  endogenous  private  sector  activity  –  in  Germany’s  case,  this  is  typically 
generated  by  the  interplay  between  net  exports,  capital  expenditure  and  household 
consumption. It is still open to doubt, however, whether such a stylised or typical upswing will 
actually  materialise  this  time  round.  Hence,  it  would  be  premature  to  regard  the  financial 
crisis, and the economic crisis directly linked to it, as having already run their course. 
Clearly, a protracted period of stagnation in the major economies would pose a substantial 
risk  to  financial  stability.  The  detrimental,  self-reinforcing  feedback  loop  between  an 
unprecedented and globally synchronous reduction in the level of real economic activity and 
an essentially dysfunctional financial system, which has been unravelling since the summer 
of  this  year,  might  then  tighten  again.  It  follows  from  this  that  exiting  the  broad-based 
stabilisation policies should be predicated on and calibrated to a sustained improvement in 
the underlying market conditions as well as in financial sector resilience.  
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
in  many 
industrial  countries. 
At the same time, it is important to bear in mind the implications which the highly unorthodox 
measures taken to support and stimulate the economy inevitably entail. They inherently carry 
considerable  risks  over  the  medium  and  long  term.  A  prime  example  of  such  risks  is 
ballooning  government  debt 
to  already 
acknowledged,  explicit  public  debt,  the  bank  rescue  packages  obviously  impose  an 
additional, implicit potential burden on the public sector. Transparent and credible strategies 
are  therefore  crucial  for  unwinding  and  managing  the  fiscal  –  and,  of  course,  monetary  – 
policy support measures. Should the policy-making process lose its credibility, this would be 
reflected in rising risk premiums and interest rates. Higher interest rates, in turn, would tend 
to depress capital expenditure and, therefore, potential growth. In addition, they would further 
hamper  the  already  onerous  task  of  consolidating  public  finances,  which  is  vital  to  ensure 
sustainable debt containment. It is therefore crucial to keep market participants’ expectations 
of a stability-focused monetary policy as well as a sound fiscal policy firmly anchored.  
In  addition 
Ongoing challenges 
II 
The government and other public support measures have bought the financial system time to 
cope  with  losses  and  to  prepare  for  potential  financial  strains  lurking  on  the  horizon. 
Moreover, public-sector intervention has had a decisively positive impact on the outlook for 
earnings.  Short-term  interest  rates  are  at  very  low  levels  indeed.  The  yield  curve,  ie  the 
spread between long-term and short-term rates, is exceptionally steep. This naturally allows 
substantial income to be generated from maturity transformation (see Chart 1). Income from 
commissions  and  fees  has  also  soared  recently,  partly  on  the  back  of  the  large-scale 
issuance  of  government  bonds  which  the  public  sector  has  been  obliged  to  launch  in 
response to the financial crisis. Income from commissions and fees is being further boosted 
by  vigorous  corporate  issuance  activity.  This  has  also  begun  to  boost  equity  and  credit 
markets  since  the  spring  of  2009,  thus  improving  banks’  earnings  form  brokering  and 
proprietary trading. Nonetheless, this development is fragile. It is being buoyed by the non-
standard public sector support packages which – being extra-ordinary – have to be phased 
out at some point. Quite clearly, the current conjuncture does not represent a new post-crisis 
normality. 
Yet this by no means implies that German banks have not recognised the seriousness of the 
situation.  They  have  consolidated  their  balance  sheets  and  also  bolstered  their  capital 
buffers (see Chart 2). For instance, the average tier 1 capital ratio rose by 2.4 percentage 
points  between  mid-2007  and  mid-2009.  Another  positive  aspect  is  that,  by  international 
standards,  Germany  is  in  a  comparatively  favourable  starting  position  for  weathering  the 
financial crisis. For one thing, domestic enterprises and households have relatively moderate 
levels of debt. Consequently, the percentage of non-performing loans is correspondingly low. 
For another, real estate prices in Germany have been flat for a long time, and have thus in 
no  way  decoupled  from  fundamentals.  Obviously,  this  is  limiting  credit  risk  in  property 
financing.  
Nonetheless,  even  in  case  a  lasting  economic  recovery  is  underway,  German  banks  will 
have  to  tackle  some  sizeable  problems.  For  instance,  their  balance  sheets  will  have  to 
accommodate substantial further value adjustments. Based on our empirical assessment, for 
the 17 banks mostly involved, with some €90 billion of impairments already recognised, the 
peak  of  write-downs  on  securitisations  is  behind  them.  Given  current  prospects,  additional 
write-downs on structured products of some €10 billion to €15 billion are to be expected (see 
Charts 3 and 4). If, however, the price recovery in evidence since mid-2009 continues, losses 
in the overall portfolio will be lower. 
The outlook for the evolution of assets in the loan book is, however, quite different. Here, the 
well-established stylised fact is that write-downs lag the real economy’s cycle This also holds 
in the current situation. Loan losses will be a drag on banks’ earnings going forward. Using 
the  information  from  a  time  series  as  well  as  a  cross-section  dimension  for  the  whole 
German  banking  system,  we  conclude  that  further  write-downs  of  between  €50  billion  and 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
€75 billion are to be expected. It goes without saying that, particularly at this juncture, these 
estimates (see Charts 5 and 6) are subject to significant uncertainty. Statistical relations are 
likely  to  be  less  robust  than  they  have  typically  been  in  the  past.  We  should  add  that  our 
assumption  for  economic  growth  is  significantly  less  benign  than  the  current  consensus. 
Therefore, if the economic recovery accelerates, as assumed in recent forecasts, banks’ re-
valuation  requirements  would  be  correspondingly  lower.  Needless  to  add,  the  projected 
potential  write-downs  will  not  automatically  translate  into  additional  capital  requirements. 
Current income as well as loan-loss provisions can obviously also be used to cover potential 
losses. 
Nevertheless,  banks  would  be  well  advised  to  steel  themselves  against  possible  negative 
developments.  They  have  won  time  to  tackle  their  accumulated  problems  and  prepare  for 
future contingencies. They should use the capacity to adjust that has been created, first and 
foremost,  to  bolster  their  risk  provisioning,  shore  up  their  capital  and  enhance  their  cost 
efficiency.  Currently,  the  low  level  of  lending  largely  reflects  German  enterprises’  weak 
demand for credit, hence access to credit is currently not impaired by capital scarcity. But 
looking ahead, fatter capital cushions would strengthen banks’ capacity to cater to the rising 
corporate borrowing demand which typically accompanies an upswing. At the same time, the 
pricing of this credit supply should be commensurate with the underlying risks.  
Macroprudential approach – a new focus for supervisors and regulators 
III 
After  having  successfully  stabilised  the  financial  system,  governments,  central  banks  and 
prudential  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world  now  face  the  challenge  of  drawing  the 
appropriate conclusions to prevent a crisis of such a magnitude from recurring. By its nature, 
financial stability is a public good. It cannot therefore be ensured solely on a private basis. 
There  is  a  significant  difference  between  private  and  social  rationality.  Actions  that  are 
reasonable  from  an  individual  perspective  may  generate  unintended  externalities  which 
produce  adverse  implications  for  systemic  stability.  Consequently,  financial  stability  cannot 
be  expected  to  arise  spontaneously  from  the  interactions  of  private  players.  At  the  same 
time,  the  absence  of  financial  stability  may  well  entail  enormous  costs  to  society  –  as  we 
have  just  painfully  experienced.  Therefore,  together  with  national  and  international 
institutions,  we  are  working  hard  to  draw  the  right  lessons  in  order  to  contain  potential 
vulnerabilities.  As  the  reasons  for  the  crisis  are  multifaceted  and  complex,  there  are  no 
simple  answers  or  quick  fixes.  What  is  needed,  rather,  is  a  set  of  specific  changes  and 
concrete  amendments  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Thoroughness  has  to 
take priority over speed.  
One key insight gained from – or perhaps it is more accurate to say reaffirmed by – the crisis 
is  that  the  traditional  microprudential  perspective,  focusing  largely  on  individual  institutions 
only,  is  no  longer  appropriate.  To  address  financial  stability  issues  appropriately  the 
microprudential approach has to be supplemented by macroprudential supervision. Naturally, 
microeconomic supervision remains indispensable. It is, however, far from adequate for the 
effective  prevention  of  crises  which  are  the  upshot  of  systemic  stress.  A  failure  to  take  a 
holistic, system-wide view logically implies a danger of ignoring systemic risks that emanate 
from the interaction of the financial market  players. Systemic risk is created endogenously 
rather than having exogenous origins beyond the remit of financial markets. It can arise, for 
example, in the form of herding behaviour. Systemic stress may also result from excessive 
homogeneity,  which  generally  renders  systems  vulnerable.  Liquidity  risk  is  a  special  and 
important  case  in  point.  Here,  feedback  effects  –  between  difficult  funding  conditions  and 
problematic  market  liquidity  –  may  bring  about  a  systemic  downward  spiral.  In  particular, 
repo  markets  will  be  affected  most  severely.  The  systemic  perspective  therefore  has  a 
particular 
those 
characterised by a higher degree of bank intermediation). 
The  design  of  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation  hence  raises  a  host  of  complex 
issues.  Procyclical  elements  of  regulation  –  whether  they  relate  to  capital  requirements  or 
for  market-oriented 
financial  systems 
(as  opposed 
relevance 
to 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
accounting  principles  –  may,  for  instance,  aggravate  the  inherent  ups  and  downs  of  the 
financial system. If the impact of these regulations in an upturn is different from their impact 
in a downturn, this will have an immediate effect on the real economy. Such generators of 
procyclicality may, for example, favour a build-up of credit-financed imbalances in an upturn. 
In  the  same  vein,  these  mechanisms  might  also  potentially  amplify  feedback  effects  of 
negative market developments during a crisis. To contain these destabilising effects, greater 
importance should be attached in future to adequate and, in particular, counter-cyclical risk 
buffers. 
A  second  challenge  arises  from  the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  system.  This  is 
obviously  a  necessary  feature  of  any  modern  financial  system.  But  this  interdependence 
entails  consequences  –  macroeconomic  costs  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  at  the 
microeconomic level. These systemic externalities increase as institutions become larger and 
more  interconnected.  The  macroprudential  perspective  therefore  provides  arguments  for 
treating  financial  intermediaries  differently  according  to  their  position  in  the  system  as  a 
whole. This functional view also justifies regulating market participants outside the traditional 
banking  system  identically  insofar  as  they  fulfil  similar  functions  or  roles.  The  appropriate 
regulation  and  supervision  of  big  or  highly  interconnected  institutions  poses  a  particular 
difficulty as their collapse would jeopardise the financial system as a whole (“too big or too 
interconnected to fail” problem). A logical corollary of this is the need for a greater intensity of 
supervision. Moreover,  additional capital requirements make sound analytical sense. Yet it 
should  be  noted  that  the  practical  implementation  of  these  theoretically  advisable  ideas 
involves some difficulties as does, incidentally, formulating anticyclical capital requirements. 
However, this must not lead to the issue being ignored, as the potential opportunity costs to 
society would be too grave. 
It  is  clear  from  these  brief  comments  that  adding  a  macroprudential  perspective  to 
microprudential  oversight  poses  major  challenges  for  central  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities.  The  Bundesbank  is  seeking  to  face  these  challenges  by  devoting  particular 
attention to macroprudential analysis. Since May 2009, all work on these issues has been 
focused within our newly created Financial Stability Department. This department was also 
mandated to write this year’s Financial Stability Review. 
Getting macroprudential supervision right is indeed very much a work in progress. We are in 
the middle of a period of intense debate. Nevertheless, concrete progress has already been 
achieved  in  some  areas.  In  this  regard,  the  reform  agenda  which  is  being  implemented 
through the G20 summit process, largely under the guidance of the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB),  deserves  special  mention.  Given  significant  mutual  interdependence  as  well  as 
substantial cross-border effects, there is good reason to establish rules at the international 
level.  Inconsistencies  encourage  regulatory  arbitrage  and  thus  tend  to  heighten  systemic 
vulnerability.  Therefore,  the  Bundesbank  is  very  much  involved  in  the  work  of  the  FSB.  I 
would  like  to  restrict  myself  to  highlighting  just  two  aspects  which  enjoy  a  very  broad 
consensus in the international debate.  
First,  there  is  consensus  on  one  of  the  points  mentioned  earlier,  namely  the  need  to 
strengthen  financial  institutions’  resilience;  the  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  for  weathering 
crises  have  to  be  increased.  More  robust  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  as  well  as  an 
improved measurement of exposures to risks are also necessary so that risks arising from 
excessive leverage can be better controlled in the future. Due account should be taken when 
devising  and  implementing  rules  of  the  particularities  and  peculiarities  of  national  financial 
systems. This is especially important with regard to the aspired improvement in the quality of 
banks’  capital  base.  Here  it  is  essential  to  focus  on  the  targeted  function  –  the  ability  to 
absorb  losses  –  rather  than  on  legal  form.  In  view  of  the  ongoing  difficult  economic 
environment,  it  is  also  evident  that  appropriate  transition  periods  have  to  be  granted. 
Overhasty  implementation  would  pave  the  way  for  a  likely  capital-induced  credit  supply 
failure. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
Second, we must ensure that the incentive structures of participants in the financial system 
are aligned with the objective of fostering a sustainable development. This will be facilitated 
by enhanced transparency, which strengthens market discipline, even though it is obviously 
not  sufficient  on  its  own.  This  applies  especially  to  the  securitisation  process.  Significantly 
improved  standards  of  quality  and  integrity  are  a  key  precondition  for  reviving  the 
securitisation  market.  Originators  should  have  a  direct  interest  in  ensuring  that  all  risks 
(including those of correlated defaults) are captured adequately – for instance by retaining a 
vertical slice of securitisations. Provided the instruments are designed in a way which makes 
microeconomic risk-taking compatible with sound macroeconomic outcomes, they can play 
an  effective  role  as  a  source  of  funding  for  the  banking  sector.  They  will  thereby  also 
contribute to reliable and properly priced lending to enterprises – which is the most important 
aspect from an economic perspective. 
In  a  nutshell,  the  internationally  coordinated  reforms  should  substantially  increase  the 
stability of the financial system. On balance, they will probably imply more moderate earnings 
prospects  in  the  financial  sector.  However,  earnings  are  also  likely  to  be  less  volatile  and 
therefore  more  robust.  Given  the  considerable  negative  externalities  that  may  arise  if 
financial institutions run into distress, that seems a price worth paying to safeguard financial 
stability.  After  all,  in  the  long  run  banks  themselves  will  also  benefit  from  a  more  stable 
financial system. 
 
Chart 1 
  BIS Review 164/2009 
 5
Chart 2 
Chart 3 
 6 
   BIS Review 164/2009
Chart 4 
Chart 5 
   BIS Review 164/2009 
 7
Chart 6 
 8 
 BIS Review 164/2009
