Masaaki Shirakawa: Deleveraging and growth – is the developed world 
following Japan’s long and winding road? 
Lecture by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the London School of 
Economics  and  Political  Science,  co-hosted  by  the  Asia  Research  Centre  and  STICERD, 
London School of Economics, London, 10 January 2011. 
 Introduction 
“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times...” 
Thus begins A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens, the bicentennial of whose birth we will 
celebrate  next  month.  While  this  famous  opening  sentence  of  the  novel  refers  to  the  year 
1775, it also strikes a chord with us in 2012. On the one hand, with all due respect to the 
frustration vented by the Occupy protesters, the people of today’s developed nations enjoy a 
living  standard  far  higher  than  the  harsh  realities  of  Dickensian  England.  One  of  the  few 
luxuries available to young David Copperfield, the alter ego of Dickens, was to take a plunge 
in the cold spring water at the old Roman Bath just a few hundred yards from this hall. On the 
other hand, it is also true that people feel as if the economy is in the worst possible shape. 
Difficult  issues  in  their  own  right,  such  as  mounting  government  debts,  aging  of  the 
population  and  challenges  brought  about  by  globalization,  are  exacerbated  by  stagnant 
growth. 
These days, when people discuss the grim economic outlook for developed countries, I find 
that  Japan’s  experience  is  often  cited.  In  the  past  twenty  years,  Japan’s  growth  rate  has 
been  very  low,  at  1.0  percent  annually  in  real  terms  and  0.4  percent  in  nominal  terms 
(Chart 1). People ask whether their economies are going to experience a lost decade – or 
more recently two lost decades – like Japan. As the governor of Japan’s central bank, I have 
mixed feelings when I hear Japan’s experience referred to in such a negative context, and I 
should also note, for the reasons I explain later, that it is not appropriate to bunch the two 
decades together. Nevertheless, I cannot deny that this question also provides much food for 
thought 
talented 
Liverpudlians and a song that they wrote over 40 years ago, I would like to share with you 
some of my thoughts today on the theme “Is the Developed World Following Japan’s Long 
and Winding Road?” It will be my great pleasure if my speech can be of some benefit to you. 
for  other  developed  countries.  Therefore,  with  apologies 
two 
to 
Change in how Japan’s experience is discussed 
I. 
To me, the question of whether other developed countries will repeat Japan’s experiences is 
itself surprising and appears to indicate that a significant intellectual change is under way. At 
various international meetings I have attended in the past ten years or so, policy makers and 
academics often have not seriously discussed the issue of stagnant growth in Japan, simply 
dismissing it as “an idiosyncratic failure of Japan’s society and its policy makers to respond 
to problems in a swift and bold manner”. Even after U.S. housing prices started to decline in 
the  spring  of  2006  this  tendency  remained.  The  following  is  a  comment  made  by  a  U.S. 
official in January 2007.1 
“The financial instability that many countries experienced in the 1990s, including Japan, was 
caused  by  bad  loans  that  resulted  from  declines  in  commercial  property  prices  and  not 
                                                 
1  Mishkin, Frederic S., “The Role of House Prices in Formulating Monetary Policy”, Speech at the Forecasters 
Club of New York, January 17, 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
declines  in  home  prices.  ...  Many  have  learned  the  wrong  lesson  from  the  Japanese 
experience. The problem in Japan was not so much the bursting of the bubble but rather the 
policies that followed.” 
What  I  see  behind  this  comment  is  a  gross  underestimation  of  the  extent  of  the  balance 
sheet repair – or deleveraging – required after a bubble bursts, as well as an overconfidence 
the  effectiveness  of  aggressive  policy  measures.2  However,  comparing  Japan’s 
in 
experiences in the early 1990s after the bubble burst to what happened in the United States, 
the euro area, and the United Kingdom in the past few years, it is my impression that the 
similarities far outweigh the differences. What happened in Japan was not unique to Japan. 
The first similarity is economic performance. For example, the paths of real GDP since the 
peak  of  the  respective  bubbles,  1990  in  Japan  and  2006  in  the  United  States,  are  similar 
(Chart 2).3 Some may say that the selection of the base year is somewhat arbitrary but the 
same conclusion can be drawn if we choose as a starting point the year in which the financial 
crisis occurred, 1997 for Japan and 2008 for the United States (Chart 3). Comparisons with 
experiences in the euro area and the United Kingdom also show similarities, despite some 
differences  in  degree  (Chart  2  and 3  as cited  above).  Some  interesting  similarities can  be 
also found in other bubble-related variables. For example, the pace of decline in real estate 
prices in the U.S. after its bubble burst was almost the same as in the Japanese case (Chart 
4).  Despite  some  differences  among  countries  and  regions,  overall  developments  in  long-
term  interest  rates  were  similar  (Chart  5).  Cross-country  similarity  was  also  evident  in 
developments in bank lending (Chart 6). 
The  second  similarity  is  initial  responses  from  the  authorities  and  economists.  When  a 
bubble is being formed or even soon after it bursts, they underestimate the problem or deny 
its very existence. In Japan, after real estate prices started to decline, people talked about a 
reversal and subsequent upturn. Even after property prices continued to fall for some time, 
society denied the possibility that the decline would lead to a financial crisis or stagnation of 
the macro economy. In the case of the bursting of the housing bubble in the United States 
and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, the initial reaction was also underestimation of the 
problem.  Even  at  a  later  stage,  when  experts  agreed  on  the  need  for  public  support  for 
financial institutions, such measures met with opposition from the general public, influenced 
by the lingering effects of the underestimation, which was also seen in the case of Japan. In 
particular,  injecting  public  funds  into  financial  institutions  was  universally  unpopular  across 
countries.  Likewise,  the  provision  of  financial  support  from  core  countries  to  peripheral 
countries in the euro area is politically unpopular. 
The third similarity is the policies adopted by central banks (Chart 7). In developed countries, 
short-term interest rates declined to close to zero and central bank balance sheets expanded 
enormously. Since the second half of the 1990s, the Bank of Japan successively introduced 
various unorthodox policy measures including zero interest rates, a commitment to maintain 
zero interest rates, quantitative easing, and the purchase of risk assets, including stocks held 
by  financial  institutions.  After  the  subprime  loan  problem  materialized,  the  U.S.  Federal 
Reserve adopted various policy measures that were often described as innovative, but in fact 
many of them are essentially similar to measures previously adopted by the Bank of Japan. 
This  fact  demonstrates  the  unsurprising  truth  that  central  banks  act  similarly  when 
                                                 
2  At the press conference in February 2009, President Obama said, “[I]f you delay acting on an economy of this 
severity, then you potentially create a negative spiral that becomes much more difficult for us to get out of. We 
saw  this  happen  in  Japan  in  the  1990s,  where  they  did  not  act  boldly  and  swiftly  enough,  and  as  a 
consequence they suffered what was called the ‘lost decade’ where essentially for the entire ’90s they did not 
see any significant economic growth…” 
In the case of Japan, stock prices peaked at the end of 1989 and real estate prices, based on “Published Price 
of Land”, peaked on Jan. 1, 1991. The peak of the U.S. housing prices, based on “Case-Shiller Index”, was 
the second quarter of 2006. 
3 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that 
confronting similar problems. If there was any major difference, it was that the Bank of Japan 
was a lonely forerunner and had to feel its way forward, making decisions in the uncharted 
territory of unorthodox policy.  
The fourth similarity is the decline of the effectiveness of monetary policy in an economy that 
is deleveraging, or in other words, that needs to address the problem of balance sheet repair. 
When it comes to the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, in Japan, lower interest 
rates had previously induced an increase in banks’ lending to small- and medium-sized firms. 
This  in  turn  increased  business  fixed  investment  by  such  firms,  which  drove  economic 
recovery.  This  mechanism  did  not  work,  however,  after  the  bubble  burst.  Similarly,  in  the 
United States, a decline in long-term government bond yields has not been fully transmitted 
to a decline in the effective rates of mortgage loans because borrowers with low credit scores 
have not refinanced at lower interest rates. In Europe – Spain is a prime example – bank 
lending  rates  have  risen  due  to  higher  interest  rates  for  covered  bonds,  reflecting  a 
deterioration in the quality of real estate collateral. 
I have gone through some similarities between the current state of the U.S. and European 
economies and Japan’s experiences. Needless to say, there are also differences. 
The first difference is the fact that Japan never became the epicenter of a global financial 
crisis. The most important reason for this is that the Japanese authorities did not allow the 
disorderly failure of financial institutions. In this regard, the most challenging time for Japan 
was 1997, when the brokerage Yamaichi Securities, with assets of 3.7 trillion yen or 19 billion 
pounds  at 
time,  collapsed.  Yamaichi  Securities  also  had  sizeable  presence 
internationally,  especially  in  the  European  capital  markets.  At  that  time,  as  was  the  case 
when Lehman Brothers failed, Japan did not have a bankruptcy law that enabled the orderly 
resolution of securities companies. Given such circumstances, the Bank of Japan decided to 
provide  an  unlimited  amount  of  liquidity  to  Yamaichi  Securities.  This  measure  essentially 
enabled an orderly resolution by replacing all exposures to the securities company held by 
market participants both domestic and overseas with exposures to the Bank of Japan and so 
prevented the materialization of systemic risk. This was truly a tough decision for the Bank of 
Japan.  It  was  made  without  knowing  whether  the  institution  was  solvent  or  insolvent,  and 
eventually  resulted  in  some  losses.  I  would  say,  however,  that  the  benefit  of  preventing 
systemic  risk  from  materializing  far  exceeded  such  costs.  As  a  result,  Japan  did  not 
experience a sharp and significant plunge in economic activity like the one that followed the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and  negative  impact  from  financial  turmoil  in  Japan  did  not 
spread to the rest of the world (Chart 8). 
The  second  difference  is  the  length  of  time  before  the  economy  was  exposed  to  acute 
market  pressure  after  the  bubble  burst  (Chart  9).  In  the  Japanese  case,  non-performing 
assets were mainly loan assets, which were not marked to market. For that reason, it took 
more time before unrealized losses were recognized and correspondingly it took longer for 
the financial institutions involved to be exposed to acute market pressure. On the other hand, 
in the recent cases of the United States and Europe, the problem started in the securitized 
products market, which enabled the recognition at a relatively early stage of losses based on 
mark-to-market  valuation,  and  therefore  market  pressures  intensified  earlier  than  in  the 
Japanese  case.  As  a  result,  a  financial  crisis  materialized  at  an  early  stage  and  financial 
system stability measures were introduced in a relatively prompt manner. 
Examining these differences further, however, the plunge in output might have been limited 
in the case of Japan simply because the scope of the crisis was confined within the country. 
Even if financial system measures are introduced at an earlier stage, these measures do not 
mark  the  end  of  deleveraging  that  characterizes  an  economy  after  a  bubble  bursts.  What 
happened in Japan, the United States and Europe was basically the same: the paying down 
of excess debt, or deleveraging. For the purpose of considering policy responses after the 
bursting of a bubble, I believe that examining similarities and differences in this way shows 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
that it is more constructive to focus on similarities instead of differences, and then consider 
factors peculiar to each country. 
Facts about low growth in Japan 
II. 
In  order  to  explain  these  similarities  and  differences,  I  would  like  to  comment  on  Japan’s 
economy in a little more detail. Specifically, I will explain some facts about economic growth 
in Japan by looking at three different time horizons. 
Economic growth in Japan: long-term, medium-term, and short-term 
First,  examining  the  long-term  growth  trend,  Japan  is  known  as  a  country  which  once 
recorded surprisingly high growth rates, just like China has done in recent years. The peak 
period  of  Japan’s  high-growth  era  was  the  15  years  from  1956  to  1970,  during  which  real 
GDP  grew  at  9.7  percent  annually  (Chart  10).  Incidentally,  this  growth  rate  is  exactly  the 
same as that recorded by China in the period starting in the early 1990s. However, the good 
times inevitably come to an end, sooner or later, for any country enjoying such high growth. 
This is because some of the conditions that support high growth, especially the labor supply 
from rural areas to cities and the high rate of increase in labor force, will eventually reach 
their peak.4 
Second is the medium-term time horizon. Although Japan’s high-growth period ended in the 
1970s,  its  rate  of  economic  growth  continued  to  be  much  higher  than  in  other  developed 
countries. Since the 1990s, however, Japan has ceased to be a high-growth economy, even 
in  a  relative  sense.  In  the  past  twenty  years,  Japan’s  growth  rate  has  been  very  low,  at 
1.0 percent  annually  in  real  terms  and  0.4  percent  in  nominal  terms.  That  is  why  the  past 
twenty years are sometimes called “Japan’s two lost decades” (Chart 1 as cited above).5 
Third  is  very  short-term  growth  developments.  Japan’s  economic  activity  plunged  after  the 
tragic earthquake and tsunami on March 11 last year, but recovery proceeded at a higher-
than-expected  pace  thanks  to  the  efforts  made  by  companies,  individuals,  and  the  public 
sector.  Although  Japan’s  economy  is  not  immune  to  a  slowdown  in  the  global  economy, 
compared  to  the  United  States  and  Europe,  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system  and 
financial markets is notable, as evidenced by the risk spreads observed in funding markets 
and corporate bond markets (Chart 11). 
Reasons for low growth over medium term 
Of the three time horizons that I have just explained, hereafter I will focus on medium-term 
economic developments. Although I have used the phrase “the two lost decades”, the causes 
of low growth in Japan in the 1990s and 2000s were different and it is somewhat misleading 
to discuss the two periods together. In the 1990s, low growth was mainly brought about by 
the deleveraging associated with the unprecedented bursting of the bubble. In the 2000s and 
thereafter, the major causes of low growth in Japan have been rapid population aging and 
population decline. 
                                                 
4  For  Japan’s  high  growth  period  including  a  comparison  with  the  current  state  of  the  Chinese  economy,  see 
Masaaki Shirakawa, “The Transition from High Growth to Stable Growth: Japan’s Experience and Implications for 
Emerging Economies”, Remarks at the Bank of Finland 200th Anniversary Conference in Helsinki, May 5, 2011. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2011/ko110506a.htm 
5  For Japan’s experience after the bubble burst, see Masaaki Shirakawa, “Way Out of Economic and Financial 
in  New  York,  April  23,  2009. 
Crisis:  Lessons  and  Policy  Actions”,  Speech  at  Japan  Society 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2009/ko0904c.htm 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Regarding  the  impact  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  in  the  first  half  of  the  two  periods  in 
question, I do not have much to add to what I have already explained. If I can point out one 
difference,  the  rise  in  the  unemployment  rate  in  Japan  was  relatively  limited  (Chart  12). 
Japan’s unemployment rate peaked at 5.4 percent, significantly lower than the double digit 
figures reached in the United States and major European countries. This is attributable to the 
fact  that  wage  levels  were  adjusted  in  a  reasonably  flexible  manner,  reflecting  society’s 
preference  to  prioritize  employment.  That  people’s  jobs  were  preserved  was  a  positive  in 
terms of social stability. At the same time, it also had a negative consequence. Wage levels 
were  adjusted  but  not  sufficiently  for  the  magnitude  of  the  shock  to  the  economy,  and  a 
situation arose in which effectively unemployed people retained their jobs at companies. This 
delayed  the  necessary  reallocation  of  resources  to  respond  to  demand  and  cost  changes 
after  the  bubble  burst.  The  decline  in  wage  levels  also  contributed  to  deflation  through  a 
decline in the prices of services which are labor intensive. In fact, a significant portion of the 
inflation differential between Japan and the United States reflects changes in service prices 
rather than goods prices. 
As  for  the  second  of  the  two  lost  decades,  low  growth  was  mainly  attributable  to 
demographics, or more specifically, a rapid aging of the population. Japan’s real GDP growth 
rate  has  declined  and  growth  has  been  subdued  compared  to  other  developed  countries. 
However, comparing the average real GDP growth rate per capita over the past ten years, 
Japan’s growth rate is almost the same as other developed countries. Moreover, Japan is 
highest in terms of real GDP growth rate per working-age population (Chart 13). As indicated 
by these figures, the most significant challenge confronting Japan is how to adjust to a rapid 
demographic  change  that  is  unprecedented  in  developed  countries  (Chart  14).  To  a 
significant  extent,  the  decline  in  growth  rates  and  deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions  are 
attributable to a failure to adjust to the rapid change in demographics. Although forecasts by 
economists almost always involve a large margin of error, demographic trends are one of the 
few economic variables that can be projected with relatively high accuracy. The implications 
of  population  aging  and  decline  are  also  very  profound,  as  they  contribute  to  a  decline  in 
growth potential, a deterioration in the fiscal balance, and a fall in housing prices. Given that 
other  developed  countries  will  face  the  same  problems  despite  some  differences  in  timing 
and magnitude, the economic effects of demographics deserve further study. 
Is the developed world following Japan’s long and winding road? 
III. 
Now I would like to focus on the key question which I posed at the start of my speech. Is the 
developed world following Japan’s long and winding road? Of course, this is not the kind of 
question that can be answered with a simple yes or no. Policy measures are shaped by not 
only economic factors but also the response of society and the political world. Every country 
has its own unique complexity, both in social and political terms, of which outside observers 
have  only  a  limited  knowledge.  Therefore,  instead  of  providing  a  direct  answer  to  the 
question,  I  would  like  to  list  three  factors  that  define  the  length  of  time  necessary  for 
adjustment. 
The first factor is the size of excess debt accumulated before a crisis. And if we simply look 
at rough estimates of excess debt, it appears that a lengthy period of adjustment is inevitably 
required. The scale of the global credit bubble formed toward the middle of the 2000s was 
indeed gigantic. 
The second factor is growth potential. In the end, whether the amount of debt assumed by an 
economy is excessive or not can be judged by considering it in proportion to the economy’s 
size. For two economies with the same amount of debt, the one with higher growth potential 
can lighten the burden of excess debt faster. Having said that, growth potential is not fixed 
and can change as a result of policy measures and the response of the society after a bubble 
bursts.  In  that  sense,  avoiding  collateral  damage  from  the  bursting  of  a  bubble  becomes 
extremely important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Collateral damage could materialize in various ways. For example, in a low-growth economy 
that is in the process of deleveraging, social stress tends to intensify and is more likely to 
result in a rise in protectionism and excessive government intervention. When lending to non-
viable  firms  continues  for  political  or  social  reasons,  the  resultant  decline  in  productivity 
growth will lower growth potential. 
Furthermore,  monetary  policy  can  also  distort  economic  incentives.  Low  interest  rates  and 
abundant  liquidity  are  necessary  but  if  they  continue  for  a  long  time,  they  may  lower 
productivity  by keeping  inefficient firms alive.  Necessary adjustment will also be delayed if 
low interest rates discourage the government from making efforts to restore fiscal balance. 
Population  decline  will  also  prolong  the  adjustment  of  excess  debt  by  lowering  growth 
potential.  Although  these  are  common  problems  for  the  developed  world,  the  decline  in 
population growth and aging of the population profile are most serious in Japan. The rate of 
population growth is lower in Japan than in the United States, the euro area, and the United 
Kingdom. More importantly, the fast pace of decline in the population growth rate has been 
placing burden on Japan’s economy and society. Also, compared to Japan, the contribution 
to population growth from immigration is significant in the United States and many European 
countries.  However,  this  contribution  from  immigration  could  diminish  if  the  stagnation  of 
economic activity is prolonged (Charts 15 and 16). 
The  third  factor  is  the  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy.  Since  the  early  2000s,  Japan’s 
economy gradually overcame the post-bubble effects of deleveraging. However, Japan was 
also greatly helped by the high growth in the global economy at that time, growth that was 
almost unprecedented in the past several decades (Chart 17 and 18). In retrospect, during 
that period, the global economy was in the very process of creating a global credit bubble 
and  also  led  by  strong  performance  of  emerging  economies.  Given  that  growth  rates  in 
developed countries are currently restrained by post-bubble deleveraging effects, it is now of 
prime  importance  that  emerging  economies  continue  growing  without  causing  inflation  or 
bubbles of their own. 
Of these three factors that define the length of time needed for deleveraging, the first one  
– the initial size of excess debt – is a given once a bubble bursts, but we can still influence 
the  remaining  two  factors:  the  growth  potential  of  individual  economies  and  growth 
momentum  in  the  global  economy  as  a  whole.  After  the  bubble  burst,  the  priority  is  to 
maintain the stability of the financial system. At the same time, it is also important to adapt 
the  economy  to  a  new  environment  and  resist  to  pressures  that  would  lead  to  collateral 
damage. This requires strong will and determination. 
The role of Central Banks 
IV. 
Given the limited time remaining, I would like to wind up my remarks by briefly explaining my 
thoughts on the role of central banks in this difficult period. 
In addition to the aforementioned four similarities, there is another similarity between Japan, 
the United States and European countries after the bursting of their respective bubbles. That 
is,  opinions  are  sharply  divided  with  regard  to  the  roles  central  banks  should  play.  In  the 
United States, criticism of aggressive central bank measures seems to prevail, as evidenced 
by  negative  reactions  by  politicians  to  the  QE2  measures.  In  other  developed  countries, 
however,  central  banks  apparently  face  rising  expectations  and  demands  to  deal  with  the 
situation  against  a  background  of  sluggish  growth.  The  recent  discussion  about  the 
responses  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  confirms  this  point.  Maintaining  price 
stability and financial system stability are important goals of central banks, but central banks 
are not able to solve all problems, especially in an economy characterized by zero interest 
rates and deleveraging. Central bank governors including myself have made this point clear 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
recently.6 I would like to concur with the assessment of my respected colleague, Sir Mervyn, 
who said that “There’s a limit to what monetary policy can hope to achieve”.7 
What  can  be  accomplished  by  central  banks?  Or,  what  are  central  banks  expected  to 
accomplish? Conversely, what cannot be accomplished by central banks? Looking back at 
the process of how bubbles form and burst, and the financial crises that ensue, I would like to 
make the following four points. 
My first point concerns the role of central banks in providing liquidity to banks as “a lender of 
last resort”, which is extremely important in maintaining financial system stability. If there is a 
sharp  financial  contraction,  it  becomes  more  likely  that  the  economy  will  experience  an 
abrupt and significant downturn in a short period of time. Given the current circumstances 
where  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  been  worsening,  this  lesson  is  particularly 
important to all of us. At the same time, we need to bear in mind that providing liquidity as “a 
lender of last resort” is, in essence, a policy to “buy time”. It is essential that the necessary 
structural  reforms  take  place  while  time  is  being  bought,  as  the  time  that  we  can  buy 
becomes progressively more expensive. 
My second point concerns the conduct of monetary policy after a bubble bursts. Monetary 
easing can affect the economy either through bringing forward future demand or bringing in 
overseas  demand.  In  the  former  case,  available  future  demand  gradually  decreases  as 
monetary  easing  is  prolonged.  In  the  latter  case,  when  economic  growth  in  developed 
countries  is  generally  weak,  monetary  easing  in  individual  countries  aiming  at  bringing  in 
overseas demand may increasingly lead to a zero-sum game, which is not desirable for the 
sustainable growth of the global economy as a whole. Such diminishing returns, however, do 
not release responsible central banks from the need to act. That is why, at the present time 
when  short-term  interest  rates  in  major  economies  have  declined  to  almost  zero,  central 
banks, including the Bank of Japan, have been making efforts to generate monetary easing 
effects by implementing various unorthodox measures to lower long-term interest rates and 
credit spreads. While central banks are buying time with these measures, it is still essential 
to pursue the necessary structural reforms. 
My third point concerns the paradox of success in the conduct of monetary policy. The goal 
of  monetary  policy  is  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  This  is  a  well-
established principle that is shared in Japan, the United Kingdom and globally, regardless of 
whether  an  inflation  targeting  framework  is  adopted.  The  more  successful  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy is, however, the more stable prices become and the less volatility is seen in 
economic  activity  and  financial  markets.  When  the  expectation  prevails  that  a  stable 
economic  and  financial  environment  will  continue  for  a  long  period  of  time,  it  is  likely  to 
encourage leverage and maturity mismatches between the assets and liabilities of financial 
institutions. The  greater  the  leverage  and  maturity  mismatches  are,  the  more  exposed  the 
economy  is  to  a  possible  unwinding  triggered  by  a  given  event,  so  the  more  fragile  it 
becomes. The bursting of bubbles is the materialization of such fragility. Before the global 
financial crisis, there was a debate over how to deal with bubbles, with one camp stressing 
ex-ante prevention and another emphasizing the importance of ex-post measures to resolve 
the situation in the aftermath. Following the global financial crisis, however, all now appear to 
agree that the cost of a bubble bursting is unbearably enormous. Most past bubbles were 
formed while economies enjoyed low inflation rates. Focusing obsessively on the short-term 
stability of the consumer price index as a way to ensure economic stability will actually have 
                                                 
6  See the following comments. Bernanke, Ben S., Testimony at the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, 
October 4, 2011: “Monetary policy can be a powerful tool, but it is not a panacea for the problems currently 
faced  by  the  U.S.  economy”.  Draghi,  Mario,  Interview  with  the  Financial  Times,  December  14,  2011: 
“Monetary policy cannot do everything”. 
7  This comment was made at the press conference on November 16, 2011 after presenting the Inflation Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the opposite effect of increasing instability. Needless to say, bubbles are not caused by low 
interest  rates  alone.  However,  when  the  expectation  prevails  that  low  interest  rates  will 
continue for a long period of time, it is likely to encourage leverage and maturity mismatching 
between the assets and liabilities of financial institutions. In that sense, I believe that in the 
conduct  of monetary  policy  central  banks  also  need  to  be  attentive  to  the  accumulation  of 
financial imbalances. 
My  final  point  concerns  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Looking  back  at  how 
bubbles  are  formed,  the  bottom  line  is  that  it  comes  down  to  aggressive  activity  by  both 
borrowers  and  lenders.  Financial  institutions’  activities  are  influenced  not  only  by  the 
expectation  that  a  stable  environment  will  continue  but  also  by  incentives  created  by  the 
regulatory and supervisory framework. As for the background to such aggressive activities by 
financial  institutions,  almost  without  exception  regulation  and  supervision  did  not  prevent 
them from getting involved in risky lending, which was, in retrospect, an attempt to improve 
their  low  profitability.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Japanese  bubble  period  and  European 
financial institutions did the same thing during the formation of the global credit bubble in the 
middle  of  the  2000s.  Central  banks  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  in 
individual  jurisdictions  are  currently  working  to  reform  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
frameworks. One important issue in this regard is how to find the right balance between two 
important  tasks:  restraining  excessive  risk  taking  and  securing  the  profitability  of  financial 
institutions. 
Closing words 
The recent financial crisis has certainly left not one, as the Beatles song said, but many a 
pool of tears. As a result, if I may return to the Dickens quote, it feels for many of us like the 
worst of times. It may be a bit of a stretch to say that we are in the best of times, but it is too 
early to despair. Our economies have the resources, not only money but also the intellectual 
and institutional capabilities, to resolve the issues we face. If we can adapt the economy to a 
new environment and resist pressures that would lead to collateral damage, even after the 
bursting of the bubble, we should still be able to find a path leading to renewed growth. What 
we need is the determination and will. Ultimately, if we have this determination and will, we 
can shorten the long and winding road. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 