Barbro Wickman-Parak: Economic analysis requires a cool head – my 
view of developments in Sweden and abroad 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting, Luleå, 15 May 2012. 
 I would like to thank Magnus Wiberg at the Monetary Policy Department of the Riksbank for help with writing this 
speech. 
When we at the Riksbank decided on the repo rate almost exactly one month ago, I was one 
of the majority who wanted to hold the repo rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent and to keep the 
repo-rate path set at the February meeting. With regard to developments abroad, I pointed 
out  that  there  was  every  reason  to  express  caution  with  regard  to  international  economic 
activity  in  the  coming  period.  I  also  pointed  out  that  we  should  continue  to  expect  fairly 
sudden and dramatic changes on the financial markets. At the time of the April meeting we 
had seen the financial unease accelerate after a period of stabilisation at the beginning of the 
year.  The  focus  was  on  concerns  regarding  Spain.  Now  the  outcome  of  the  elections  in 
Greece has sent even larger shockwaves through the global financial markets, and this leads 
to other debt-ridden countries, such as Spain, being hit by greater unease. 
Let me say right now that neither I nor anyone else can know with any degree of certainty 
what this will entail. We have assumed in our forecasts that the euro crisis will be resolved in 
an  orderly  manner  so  we  can  avoid  the  abrupt  downturn  that  came  in  the  wake  of  the 
Lehman Brothers crash in autumn 2008. Personally, I am not prepared to entirely abandon 
this  assumption.  Monetary  policy  must  be  based  on  forecasts,  and  basing  these  on 
disaster  scenarios  is  not  reasonable.  We  must  continue  in  the  same  way  as  before, 
making  forecasts  that  are  based  on  incoming  statistics  and  giving  consideration  to  the 
risks of a poorer development in the euro area. Our forecasts for the Swedish economy 
and monetary policy need to be gradually adjusted to this. If there is a sharp downturn in 
the economy we are prepared to act quickly and forcefully. We demonstrated this during 
the crisis period 2008–2009. 
There is currently considerable focus on the euro crisis, but there is reason to point out that 
there are other risks, albeit less dramatic, to take into account. I will come back to these.  
There are also possibilities that growth in the world around us will be better in the slightly 
longer run than we are now envisaging. We are currently experience a confidence crisis with 
political overtones. This also means that if the political measures gradually gain credibility, 
confidence  may  return  quickly  and  the  economy  may  recover  more  strongly  than  we  are 
predicting. This has happened before. 
With regard to Sweden, in April we could see some positive signs in economic developments 
after the unexpectedly severe fall in GDP in the last quarter of 2011. The statistics we had for 
the  beginning  of  the  year  pointed  towards  the  fall  being  temporary.  We  did  not  make  any 
major  changes  to  the  forecast  for  growth  we  had  made  in  February.  Nor  was  there  any 
reason to change the forecast for inflation. So far, we have not seen any new statistics that 
should cause us to change the economic outlook we presented in April, in my opinion. 
I  am  one  of  those  people  who  closely  scrutinise  the  statistics  to  form  an  opinion  of  the 
economic situation and driving forces behind developments. My long experience in this field 
has taught me that it is important not to have blind faith in the accuracy of the measures we 
use  to  assess  the  economic  situation.  It  is  important  not  to  read  too  much  into  individual 
figures, but to gradually adjust our forecasts as new statistics justify this. This approach to 
making forecasts reduces the risk of going in the wrong direction. The experiences of recent 
years provide a good illustration. But of course one should also be prepared to make larger 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
adjustments  if  the  circumstances  so  require.  Our  actions  in  autumn  2008  provide  a  good 
example of this. I have on many occasions expressed my view that monetary policy should 
normally be conducted on the basis of gradual adjustment. This is based on my reasoning as 
described above. 
In  other  words,  I  believe  it  is  always  a  good  idea  to  “keep  a  cool  head”  in  the  context  of 
forecasting, even when the storm winds are blowing. 
Meagre growth in the euro area, but better elsewhere 
Developments in the euro area are subject to the problems with sovereign debt and growth is 
currently weak. In our most recent Monetary Policy Update we assume there will be a small 
decline in euro area GDP growth this year and a weak increase next year. It is these meagre 
prospects  and  concern  that  developments  could  be  even  worse  that  affect  a  lot  of  the 
economic reporting at present. However, we assume in our forecasts that it will be possible 
to  resolve  the  problems  with  public  finances  and  banking  systems  in  an  orderly  manner, 
without  an  aggravated  crisis  causing  an  even  sharper  fall  like  the  one  we  saw  after  the 
Lehman Brothers crash in autumn 2008. Even if the situation does not deteriorate so much, 
the necessary deleveraging in the euro area may take longer than we are assuming. I shall 
return later to the risk of a more prolonged debt reduction that would involve postponing the 
weak recovery we are expecting to see in the euro area. 
Since the monetary policy meeting there has been considerable focus on Spain. Standard & 
Poor’s  have  downgraded  the  credit  rating  for  Spain  and  GDP  has  fallen  for  the  second 
quarter in a row. The main concern is the problems in the banking system, and the need for 
capital injections from the public sector has been highlighted. This type of support measure is 
complicated by the need to address the budget deficit. The outcome of the election in Greece 
and the uncertainty over whether a government can be formed, and if it would then be able to 
present the savings needed for the next payment of the support loan from the EU and the 
IMF, have also sent shockwaves through the financial markets. This means that the unease 
on the financial markets has increased once again. 
With  regard  to  the  statistics  reflecting  real  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the 
confidence  indicator  showed  weaker  confidence  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The 
purchasing  managers’  index  for  Germany  has  also  weakened,  but  at  the  same  time  other 
German statistics have been stronger than expected. This applies, for instance, to the IFO 
indicator, as well as to production in industry. 
It is natural for us to focus on the parts of the world that are facing major problems regarding 
growth. But it is also important to remember that the situation is not as gloomy in all of the 
euro  area  countries,  as  illustrated  by  Germany.  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  the  US 
economy  has  continued  to  strengthen,  albeit  at  a  slow  rate.  The  situation  on  the  labour 
market  is  improving  slowly  but  surely  and  this  has  contributed  to  increased  confidence 
among US households. Although the most recent labour market statistics for April point to 
weaker growth in jobs, at the same time the statistics on job growth were revised upwards for 
the previous months. 
In Japan, fiscal policy investments in rebuilding after the tsunami last year will contribute to 
growth in Japan being slightly higher than we thought in February. In China, the economy is 
expected to grow by more than 8 per cent in 2012. 
The overall picture we saw ahead of us in April looked fairly good. Personally, I emphasised 
the improved prospects for the United States as a possible reason for feeling slightly greater 
confidence  in  our  international  forecast.  Global  GDP  is  expected  to  grow  at  a  rate  that 
roughly  corresponds  to  the  historical  average.  The  statistics  received  since  the  repo-rate 
decision  in  April  have  so  far  not  had  any  dramatic  effect  on  this  picture.  But  the  risk  of  a 
poorer  development  remains  and  at  present  there  is  greater  nervousness  on  the  financial 
markets than there was in April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
International risks 
Even if the euro crisis does not trigger a total collapse in the international economy, there are 
a number of risks in the world economy that could lead to poorer economic prospects than 
we predict in our April Update. The first risk is that the deleveraging in the euro area will take 
longer  than  expected,  and  affect  the  Swedish  export  industry  through  lower  demand.  The 
second risk is that the United States will not rise to its fiscal policy challenges, which could 
hamper  the  continued  strengthening  of  the  global  economy.  Let  me  discuss  these  risks  in 
more detail. 
A third risk that is often discussed concerns the slowdown on the Chinese property market. I 
shall not go into this in any great depth here; I shall merely note that if property prices were 
to  fall  uncontrollably,  China  has  the  scope  to  implement  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
stimulation, in that they have a low national debt of around 25 per cent of GDP and a high 
policy  rate  of  almost  7  per  cent.1  The  debate  on  the  Chinese  economy  is  otherwise  often 
fairly  categorical.  It  concerns  either  overheating  or  an  imminent  crash.  If  we  look  back  at 
earlier  developments,  we  can  see  that  they  have  successfully  managed  to  avoid  both  of 
these extremes. My assessment is that there is good scope for them to do so this time, too. 
The euro area – prolonged deleveraging 
In the euro area, it is mainly the Greek debt that has received attention. But, as well all know, 
other euro area countries have also suffered debt problems; for instance, Ireland, Portugal 
and Spain. Italy also has a high national debt, but this is a problem it has had for a long time. 
The following figure shows how public debt as a percentage of GDP has developed in these 
countries and the IMF’s forecast until the end of 2017. 
Figure 1 
Development of public debt ratio 
Percentage of GDP 
Greece
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Italy
180
140
100
60
20
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
Note. Public debt is shown as a percentage of GDP on the vertical axis. 
Source: IMF Fiscal Monitor. 
                                                 
1 
IMF Fiscal Monitor (April 2012), “Balancing Fiscal Policy Risks”. 
180
140
100
60
20
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Given the high level of debt, the need for deleveraging in the euro area has recently become 
a question that is much discussed in various contexts.  
Deleveraging – course of events and earlier experiences 
Experiences of the Swedish and Finnish banking crisis in the 1990s show that the process of 
deleveraging  can  take  more  than  a  decade.  It  can  generally  be  divided  into  two  phases.2 
During  the  first  phase,  the  consolidation  phase,  households  and  companies  reduce  their 
debts.  This  means  that  households  reduce  their  consumption  and  companies  reduce  their 
investment,  which  entails  a  weak  or  negative  GDP  growth.  As  a  result,  public  debt 
increases,  as  the  expenditure  for  social  welfare  increases  and  tax  revenue  declines.  In 
Sweden, for instance, public debt increased from 46 per cent of GDP to 83 per cent during 
the  period  1990–1994,3  that  is,  the  period  when  households,  banks  and  companies 
reduced their debts. During the second phase, the recovery phase, GDP growth increases 
and public debt then also decreases, as higher growth leads to lower public expenditure 
on social welfare and to higher tax revenue. In Sweden, for example, the higher growth 
after  1996  contributed  to  reducing  the  public  debt  ratio  by  as  much  as  28  percentage 
points during the period 1996–2008.4 
However, there are major differences in the conditions for the Swedish deleveraging and the 
consolidation of public finances in the euro area that has now begun. Swedish public debt 
amounted to only 46 per cent of GDP during the initial phase of the debt consolidation. The 
average  for  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal  and  Spain,  on  the  other  hand,  is  still  a  good 
112 per  cent.5  The  Swedish  recovery  phase  was  also  driven  to  a  large  extent  by  strong 
growth in exports, which was in turn partly due to the krona being allowed to float and quickly 
depreciating in this period. As a large percentage of trade in the euro area is internal, and 
they have a single currency and therefore cannot depreciate in relation to another currency in 
the euro area, there is a risk that the recovery in the debt-ridden euro countries will be more 
prolonged.  The  recovery  in  Sweden  was  also  facilitated  by  international  growth  that  was 
stronger than it is now. 
I would like to point out that our cautious forecasts for growth in the euro area are because 
we are assuming there will be tangible effects from the tightening that is necessary to bring 
down the public debt ratio. However, there is a risk that the deleveraging will take longer than 
we have assumed. A prolonged debt consolidation with savings imposed simultaneously in 
several euro area countries would have a negative effect on the surrounding world through 
lower trade and demand. This would have effects on the Swedish export industry, which is 
dependent on trade with the euro area. 
Good competitiveness – lower public debt 
At  the  same  time,  deleveraging  at  present  involves  a  difficult  balancing  act,  as  extensive 
savings measures risk strangling consumption and leading to a downward trend, with a fall in 
growth. It is a major challenge to find an appropriate balance between reducing expenditure 
and  raising  taxes  to  alleviate  the  effects  on  growth.  Structural  reforms  of  the  product  and 
labour  markets  are  also  necessary  to  improve  competitiveness  and  ultimately  growth 
potential. This is easier said than done, however, as such measures may be painful in the 
short  term  and  politically  difficult  to  implement.  But  countries  that  can  create  the  right 
conditions  for  better  competitiveness  can  hopefully  also  reduce  the  pressure  on  public 
                                                 
2   “Debt and deleveraging: Uneven progress on the path to growth”, McKinsey Global Institute (January 2012). 
3 
4   “Debt and deleveraging: Uneven progress on the path to growth”, McKinsey Global Institute (January 2012). 
5  
IMF Fiscal Monitor (April 2012), “Balancing Fiscal Policy Risks”. 
IMF Fiscal Monitor, Debt Database Fall 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
finances.  If  one  studies  Figure  2,  there  appears  to  be  a  connection  between  good 
competitiveness and a lower public debt ratio. 
Relationship between competitiveness and public debt ratio 
Figure 2 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sweden
Denmark
Finland
Germany USA
Norway
Spain
Ireland
Italy
Portugal
Greece
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180  
Note. The public debt ratio is shown as a percentage of GDP on the horizontal axis. 
Sources: World Economic Forum 2011 and IMF Fiscal Monitor April 2012. 
The vertical axis measures the respective country’s competitiveness as defined by the World 
Economic Forum 2011,6 while the horizontal axis measures the current level of public debt 
as a share of GDP. A higher value on the vertical axis means that a country has a better 
competitiveness. There may, of course, be many factors that affect the public debt ratio, but 
according to the figure it would appear that countries with good competitiveness also tend to 
have a lower public debt ratio. 
At the same time as it will take a while for the euro area countries to bring down their debt 
levels,  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  these  countries  are  not  alone  in  facing  budget 
consolidation. The United States is also facing the challenge of improving its public finances. 
USA – fiscal policy challenges 
The US public debt amounted to 103 per cent of GDP in 2011, and is expected to rise to 
107 per cent in 2012 and 110 per cent in 2013. As a comparison, the average public debt for 
the 14 largest euro area countries amounted to 80 per cent in 2011, while the forecast for 
2012 and 2013 is 82 and 84 per cent respectively.7 The well-known economists Reinhart and 
                                                 
6   The  World  Economic  Forum  weighs  together  a  number  of  indicators  of  a  country's  competitiveness,  for 
instance,  the  quality  of  the  infrastructure,  the  level  of  education,  financial  development,  etc.  See 
http://gcr.weforum.org/gcr2011/ for a more detailed definition. 
IMF Fiscal Monitor (April 2012), “Balancing Fiscal Policy Risks”. 
7  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Rogoff  conclude  in  an  extensive  study  that  a  public  debt  exceeding  90  per  cent  of  GDP 
entails  risks  to  long-term  growth  and  stability.8  When  public  debt  reaches  these  levels, 
economic growth is rarely sufficient to reduce the debt, in their opinion. 
The US economy is thus facing substantial fiscal policy challenges. At the same time, there 
is  great  uncertainty  surrounding  fiscal  policy  as  there  is  a  political  deadlock  between  the 
Democrats and the Republicans in Congress that may remain after the presidential election 
in 2012. The uncertainty has caused analysts to talk about the US economy facing a fiscal 
cliff next year. The concern applies on the one had to whether earlier income tax cuts and 
reductions  in  payroll  taxes  will  be  extended  beyond  the  end  of  the  year,  and  on  the  other 
hand is linked to the automatic expenditure cuts that will come into force at the turn of the 
year  unless  Congress  can  agree  on  long-term  sustainable  budget  consolidation.  All  in  all, 
these automatic tax increases and cuts in public expenditure entail a tightening during 2013 
of  3–4  per  cent  of  GDP.  A  further  element  of  uncertainty  is  the  result  of  the  presidential 
election in November. If the results of the election are inconclusive and no party gains a clear 
majority, there is a major risk that the political deadlock will persist. 
The  lack  of  credible  budget  solutions  at  present,  and  the  low  confidence  in  the  political 
system’s  ability  to  deal  with  the  fiscal  policy  challenge,  could  led  to  companies  and 
households  beginning  to  act  with  greater  caution.  This  would  subdue  growth  in  the  world 
economy.  We  have  given  consideration  to  these  risks  in  our  forecast,  but  it  is  of  course 
possible that the situation will be more problematic than we have assumed.  
Realistic to believe in an orderly resolution of the euro crisis? 
The risks I spoke of earlier are ones that monetary policy normally faces and has to relate to. 
Forecasts change over time and monetary policy has to be adjusted accordingly. We would 
have a completely different situation, however, if the euro crisis were to worsen dramatically, 
and  there  was  substantial  turmoil  on  the  financial  markets  and  economic  activity  suddenly 
dived. In these situations monetary policy needs to adjust to a crisis situation, and we are 
prepared for this. 
As a central bank, we need to be prepared to deal with many unexpected events. And we 
must  make  an  assessment  in  our  forecasts  of the  probability  of  these  events  occurring.  A 
central  assumption  in  our  forecasts  is  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  will  gradually 
decline and that confidence will gradually improve in the corporate and household sectors. 
This does not mean that we believe that the road ahead will be straight and narrow. We have 
to  assume  that  confidence  in  the  countries’  ability  to  resolve  their  problems  will  vary  over 
time, and during the process different countries will come under focus. 
When we summarise the measures taken since the worst phase of the crisis last autumn, the 
European Central Bank’s two three-year loans to European banks were one measure that 
provided  immediate  relief.  An  acute  liquidity  crisis  was  avoided  and  the  loans  have  also 
prevented a tighter credit crunch than would otherwise have been the case. However, they 
do not solve the long-term problems faced by many euro area countries, which was not really 
their  aim,  either.  The  loans  have  given  many  countries  the  breathing  space  to  implement 
reforms, however, and it is important that they make use of this. 
At the same time the EU countries have agreed on a number of measures for stricter budget 
discipline. For example, reforms have been decided on that will strengthen the current fiscal 
policy  regulations.  These  are  measures  that  do  not  have  an  immediate  effect,  but  which 
nevertheless manifest a political will that should create long-term confidence in a crisis that 
has largely political overtones. 
                                                 
8  Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”, New 
Jersey: Princeton University Press (2009). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
When  we  held  our  monetary  policy  meeting  in  April,  Greece  had  been  granted  a  second 
support package by the EU and the IMF, and had reached an agreement with private lenders 
on  a  debt  write-down  in  return  for  promises  of  fiscal  policy  tightening.  The  euro  area 
countries had also agreed to increase the capacity of their rescue funds, which was a step in 
the  right  direction.9  After  that,  an  agreement  was  reached  at  the  IMS  spring  meeting  to 
reinforce  the  IMF’s  resources  with  USD  430  billion  for  lending  to  crisis-torn  countries. 
Building  up  these  financial  “firewalls”  is  an  important  step  in  creating  confidence  in  the 
financial system. 
There is often impatience with regard to the sluggishness of the political processes dealing 
with type of problems we are now seeing in the euro area. But the different steps that have 
been gradually taken on a political level should, as I see it, be able to alleviate a confidence 
crisis  that  is  largely  political.  This  would  point  to  an  orderly  resolution  of  the  euro  crisis.  It 
then remains to be seen whether the crisis flaring up around Greece now can have more far-
reaching consequences. In a worried, nervous climate even a problem that only affects one 
small country can have contagion effects. 
Could things go better than we are forecasting? 
I  have  earlier  listed  various  downside  risks.  Are  there  any  conditions  under  which  growth 
might be better than we are forecasting? My assessment is that this is the case, although 
things look uncertain right now and we cannot expect any rapid improvements. I think it is 
worth pointing out that we only expect a cautious recovery in growth in the euro area from 
the  end  of  2012  and  onwards.  What  we  are  now  seeing  is  a  confidence  crisis  of  gigantic 
proportions, but it also means that if political measures can build up confidence step by step, 
the  economy  in  the  euro  area  can  recover  with  greater  force  than  we  are  predicting.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, there are countries in the euro area with good fundamental conditions for 
a stronger recovery. 
In the United States there are good conditions for a better outcome. In this situation growth 
can  be  somewhat  stronger  than  the  fairly  modest  growth  we  are  predicting.  Particularly  if 
housing  construction  picks  up  again,  after  several  years  of  adjustment.  The  driving  force 
behind growth can be very strong, as earlier economic upswings have shown. 
The situation in Sweden – some positive signs 
What is the situation in Sweden? The weak growth abroad at the end of last year led to an 
unexpectedly severe slowdown in Swedish exports. This means that the fall in GDP growth 
in the fourth quarter of last year was larger than we had predicted. The weak year-end has 
an  impact  on  GDP  growth  for  2012,  which  was  revised  down  in  April  in  relation  to  the 
forecast made in February. 
At first glance, the GDP figure may appear ominous. But unlike exports, domestic demand 
during the fourth quarter was in line with the Riksbank’s forecast. Developments in the retail 
trade sector and indicators of confidence in the corporate and household sectors pointed to 
demand  beginning  to  increase  again.  In  addition,  exports  of  goods  increased  strongly  in 
January and recovered a large part of the fall that took place in the fourth quarter of 2011. 
                                                 
9   The  support  facilities  currently  available  consist  of  three  parts.  The  largest,  the  EFSF  (European  Financial 
Stability  Facility),  was  established  in  spring  2010  and  has  been  built  using  guarantees  from  the  euro  area 
countries themselves. The second part is the EFSM (European Financial Stability Mechanism) which is based 
on a guarantee from the EU. The third part, which was also announced in spring 2010, was that the IMF could 
provide loans of up to EUR 250 billion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
When I weighed together the figures received since the monetary policy meeting in February, 
my  assessment  was  that  Sweden’s  economic  prospects  had  brightened.  This  may  appear 
strange if one looks at the growth forecast in the Monetary Policy Update and sees that the 
growth forecast for 2013 and 2014 is slightly weaker than in February. But this is because at 
the end of February Statistics Sweden revised up the number of hours worked, which leads 
to a lower productivity trend and a lower growth trend for GDP. This means that the outlook 
for economic activity and resource utilisation remained largely the same as in February. 
The same applied to inflation prospects. The actual CPIF inflation rate, that is, the CPI with a 
fixed  mortgage  rate,  has  undershot  the  inflation  target,  but  one  should  also  look  at  the 
reasons  for  this.  The  strong  appreciation  of  the  krona  that  followed  in  the  wake  of  the 
Lehman crash is one important reason. Low unit labour costs are another reason, but here 
there is now a turnaround, with labour costs being expected to rise faster during the forecast 
period  than  in  the  past  two  years.  If  one  looks  at  the  CPI,  the  most  recent  figures  are 
moreover in line with the inflation target. In this context, I think that a little too much focus 
may be given to current inflation in the monetary policy debate, particularly given that it takes 
time for monetary policy to have an impact on inflation. 
My overall assessment in April was therefore that the repo-rate path from February was still 
appropriate. This entails a very expansionary monetary policy with a negative real repo rate 
for most of the forecast period. 
As I have mentioned, we saw indications at our meeting in April that the fall in growth at the 
end  of  last  year  was  temporary,  and  we  revised  up  our  assessment  of  growth  in  the  first 
quarter of this year. Since the monetary policy meeting we have received quite a lot of new 
information.  For  example  we  now  know  that  Swedish  exports  of  goods  increased  slightly 
during  the  first  quarter  after  the  steep  fall  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  According  to 
Statistics  Sweden’s  figures,  employment  was  higher  and  unemployment  lower  than  in  our 
most  recent  forecast.  The  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  Economic  Tendency 
Survey also showed a large increase during the first quarter and the retail trade index, which 
rose  strongly  in  February,  continued  to  rise  in  March.  All  in  all,  new  information  received 
since the most recent monetary policy meeting shows no tendency to revise the forecast for 
Swedish growth during the first quarter. Still, I will wait to make an overall assessment of the 
new statistics until our next monetary policy meeting in July. 
Monetary policy in uncertain times 
I have described my views of the situation in Sweden and abroad. I have also pointed to a 
number of risks that could lead to a different development than the one we forecast in the 
Monetary  Policy  Update.  We  try  to  determine  the  probability  of  the  risks  on  the  basis  of 
incoming statistics. This gives us a picture of what can be regarded as a main scenario and 
what can be regarded as an alternative scenario. How should a monetary policymaker weigh 
up new and often contradictory information about the economy that indicates different paths 
of development? I shall conclude with a few reflections on this. 
As an economic forecaster, one is confronted by a constant flow of new statistics that often 
point in different directions. Let me illustrate this by describing the circumstances of our most 
recent  monetary  policy  decision  in  April.  Statistics  Sweden  had  scarcely  published  a  GDP 
figure for the fourth quarter that was weaker than expected, when the National Institute of 
Economic Research published a very strong Economic Tendency Survey for March. Nor is it 
unusual for statistics to be revised in a way that changes history and throws new light on the 
initial  situation  in  the  economy.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  Statistics  Sweden  revised  up  the 
figures  for  the  number  of  hours  worked  in  connection  with  the  publication  of  the  GDP 
statistics  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011.  This  revision  entails  lower  productivity  growth  for 
2010 and 2011 than was reported earlier, and thus a new outlook on the future productivity 
growth trend, which has significance for monetary policy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
New and contradictory statistics and revisions of this type create uncertainty regarding the 
current economic climate. Personally, I am one of those people who closely scrutinise the 
statistics  to  form  an  opinion  of  the  economic  situation  and  the  driving  forces  behind 
developments. But my long experience in this field has taught me that it is important not to 
have blind faith in the accuracy of the measures we use to assess the economic situation. As 
economic  statistics  are  very  uncertain,  it  is  important  not  to  read  too  much  into  individual 
figures and to keep a cool head when sentiment fluctuates after an unexpectedly high or low 
figure. This slightly conservative approach to forecasting has been, and is, my guiding star as 
an  economic  forecaster.  Gradual  adjustments  to  the  forecast  reduce  the  risk  of  taking  a 
wrong  turn  and  being  forced  to  repeatedly  revise  the  forecasts.  As  monetary  policy  is 
governed  by  forecasts,  this  can  lead  to  fluctuations  in  the  interest-rate  policy.  This  in  turn 
creates uncertainty for participants in the economy  when they make their own decisions. I 
consider  that  the  forecasts  we  have  made  in  recent  years  are  a  good  illustration  of  the 
gradual changes in the forecasts that I have mentioned. But of course one should always be 
prepared to make larger adjustments if the circumstances so require. Autumn 2008 is a good 
example of this. 
I  have  on many  occasions,  at  monetary  policy  meetings  and  in speeches,  put  forward  the 
view  that  policy  rate  adjustments  should  normally  be  made  gradually  as  a  result  of  the 
uncertainty  connected  to  forecasts  and  economic  statistics.  The  well-known  economists 
Orphanides and Williams say in an essay that this uncertainty indicates that one should not 
allow  monetary  policy  to  be  influenced  by  contradictory  information  and  statistics  that  are 
constantly revised.10 Instead, one should normally allow monetary policy to change gradually. 
This limits the impact of contradictory information and statistics that are often revised. 
Former  Federal  Reserve  Chairman,  Alan  Greenspan,  said  “Uncertainty  is  not  just  an 
important  feature  of  the  monetary  landscape;  it  is  the  defining  characteristic  of  that 
landscape.” I can only agree with him. 
                                                 
10   Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates”, 
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity (2002), pp. 63–118. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
