Patrick Honohan: “More Europe” in the financial arena – good for 
Ireland? 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Institute for 
International and European Affairs, Dublin, 29 June 2012. 
 Thanks once again to the Institute for International and European Affairs for arranging such 
an interesting event and for inviting me to speak at it. It is almost 18 months since I spoke 
here last, in the immediate aftermath of the bailout deal with the Troika, that combination of 
the European Commission and the IMF “in liaison with” the ECB. The engagement with the 
Troika has certainly generated a lot “more Europe” in the financial affairs of Ireland and I will 
come back to that in a few minutes, but first I want to harken back to earlier days. 
European bank supervision 
One of the two inaugural publications of the Institute back in 1991, a study entitled Economic 
and Monetary Union, explored the implications of the freshly minted draft Maastricht Treaty 
which  laid  the  constitutional  foundations  for  EMU.  The  study  goes  into  the  question  of 
whether bank supervision should remain at the national level in the new monetary union and 
concludes that “an opportunity may be missed […] arguably, a centralised bank supervision 
authority (whether a department of the ECB or a separate entity) with wide powers would be 
more  able  to  operate  above  national  political  pressures  in  acting  decisively  to  prevent  a 
failing  bank  from  continuing  to  operate  in  an  unsound  manner.”  “There  would  [the  study 
astutely goes on to observe], of course, be a need to retain a local-based inspection system 
for supplying the local feel which is essential for detecting the early warning signs of distress. 
But, so far as action to restrain unsound banking practices is concerned, here again, as in 
the case of monetary management, it may be worthwhile for national governments to cede 
power to the centre in order to ‘save them from themselves’”. 
Well,  it  seems  from  the  banking  part  of  the  4  Presidents’  report1  (remarkably  entitled 
“Towards  a  Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”)  and  from  this  morning’s  Summit 
statement that this two-decade old idea’s time has finally come. At last there is a clear push 
towards  integrated  banking  supervision  with  ultimate  authority  at  the  European  level 
enforcing  a  common  rule  book.  Of  course  a  significant  national  component  of  supervisory 
activity  would  continue,  and  probably  extensive  cross-border  use  of  national  supervisory 
capacity – for Ireland both outward and inward – would likely be a conspicuous part of the 
supervision in the years ahead.   
The  other  two  banking  elements  of  the  4  Presidents’  proposed  “integrated  financial 
framework” (formerly known as a “banking union”), namely the establishment of a European 
bank resolution scheme fund and a European deposit insurance scheme, could help break, 
for the future, the damaging link between bank failure in smaller countries and the taxpayer 
burden in those countries. In particular, centralised resolution, combined with the European 
Commission’s recent proposals on bailing-in uninsured bank creditors would clearly ensure 
that what happened in Ireland would not be repeated elsewhere in the future.  
It may not be popular these days in some circles here to speak favourably of “more Europe”, 
but in this arena of financial integration at least, I therefore believe there is very little by way 
of  threat  to  Ireland  in  moving  forward;  rather  there  is  quite  a  lot  to  gain.  Indeed,  the  Irish 
experience points rather clearly to the need for measures along these lines.  
                                                
1   http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131201.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
An opportunity for coherence in system design was missed in 1991 by the architects of the 
euro area; it should be seized now. Of course there will be practical and political difficulties, 
and  the  4  Presidents’  report  leaves  many  critical  decisions  unanswered,  but  the  broad 
direction is established. 
Debt yield spreads in Europe – too high 
It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  initiatives  in  this  direction  (banking  supervision,  deposit 
insurance  and  resolution)  will  be  enough  in  themselves  to  reassure  markets,  sufficiently 
narrowing  again  the  spreads  on  Government  debt  to  the  tight  range  that  was  observed 
throughout almost all of the first decade of the euro. There is, of course, much more in the 4 
Presidents’ report than just the proposals on financial integration: specifically that report also 
covers the large areas of integration for budgetary and economic policy frameworks and a 
strengthening  of  democratic  legitimacy  and  accountability.  I  will  not  go  into  those  matters 
here, but all in all it is to be expected that, while designing and adhering to such a road-map 
is  surely  necessary  to  rebuild  both  market  and  especially  intergovernmental  confidence,  it 
may take time for market yields to converge to the extent desired. 
Recall that one of the Maastricht criteria for admission to the euro area is that a country’s 
long-term bond yields should not be more than 200 basis points (2 percentage points) above 
the average for the three countries with the lowest inflation rates. Yesterday Spanish long-
term yields reached about 550 basis points above those of Germany; the figure for Italy was 
more than 450 basis points. Clearly these market conditions – relating to three of the four 
largest countries – are not what was envisaged by the Delors committee way back then and 
are not consistent with the integrated monetary transmission called for in the Treaty. This has 
to be corrected, and quickly. 
What has been going on to generate these high spreads? Here’s one oversimplified take on 
it but one that I think conveys some of the reality. Even very high national debt ratios in the 
euro area can be seen by the markets as tolerable as long as interest rates are low – and 
interest rates were indeed low throughout the euro area before the crisis. The low interest 
rate environment owed much to the effective and credible control over inflation rates that had 
come into effect and represented such a welcome relief for many countries relative to what 
had been experienced in the 1970s and 1980s. Introduction of the euro ensured low interest 
rates  in the  low  debt  countries,  but  low  yields  also  prevailed  in  the  high  debt  countries  as 
long as markets thought that the debt levels were tolerable and that the debt would be repaid 
without  any  doubt.  Even  for  countries  to  which  the  ratings  agencies  did  not  attach  a  high 
credit rating, sovereign debt traded for most of the first decade of EMU as if it was AAA or 
close.  
The  same  very  high  debt  ratios  do  not  appear  so  tolerable  if  interest  rates  are  high.  And, 
alas, markets will demand higher interest rates if debt does not appear tolerable. This vicious 
circle  has  gripped  half  a  dozen  euro  area  countries  with  a  vengeance.  (Now  the  spreads 
again seem out of line with credit ratings – but this time the range of spreads is wider than 
the ratings would normally imply.) 
A sense that countries in trouble would eventually be bailed out despite Treaty prohibitions 
may also have been at work in keeping debt yields low in the past: but that belief too has 
been eroded by the market’s experience with the Greek PSI debt exchange. 
Of course, by piling up debt in many euro area countries (some of which were already high; 
some  not  so  high),  the  fiscal  and  banking  policy  responses  to  the  crash  of  2008–9 
(countercyclical  fiscal  policy  and  the  assumption  of  the  obligations  of  failing  banks)  have 
contributed to moving countries from safety into the risk zone where the good equilibrium – 
low  interest  rates,  low  perceived  default  risk,  could  flip,  and  has  flipped,  into  the  bad 
equilibrium  of  high  interest  rates  and  less  certainty.  Getting  debt  ratios  back  to  moderate 
levels is the medium-term solution, but that takes time. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Breaking  this  vicious  circle  should  be  possible  even  in  the  short-run  –  a  number  of 
techniques is available – but to do so in a way that is broadly acceptable across Europe and 
in a way that maintains overall stability in other dimensions requires the steps adumbrated by 
the 4 Presidents; this morning’s Summit pushes the process forward. Until this vicious circle 
is  convincingly  broken,  and  a  more  sustainable  configuration  of  bond  yields  is  restored, 
financial  market  conditions  will  continue  to  appear  fragile.  That  is  why  there  is  increasing 
recognition that it is not something to be left on the long finger. 
Europe and Ireland’s finances: the programme 
Ireland’s  financial  interactions  with  Europe  also  relate,  of  course,  more  specifically  to  the 
Troika financing and the Programme of adjustment which is now about half way through.  
When  I  spoke  to  the  Institute  last  in  January  2011  it  was,  as  I  have  mentioned,  with  an 
analysis of where the Programme at its introduction situated Ireland. I pointed out that Ireland 
faced  a  serious  problem  of  excessive  indebtedness,  public  and  private,  and  that  the 
Programme would not solve this, but would give time for Ireland to deal with the level of debt. 
I pointed out that tail risk in the banks remained high, and that the EU and IMF had not been 
able to include in the Programme any financial instruments that would help insulate Ireland 
from tail risk. The hope had to be that tail risks would not materialise. 
These two issues: high public debt and the working out of the banks’ distressed loans remain 
central. Progress has been made but more is needed. Let me speak first about the public 
finances  and  public  debt,  and  then  about  the  banks.  In  both  aspects,  Ireland’s  interaction 
with  Europe  and  the  Rest  of  the World generally  is  a  crucial  part  of  the  story,  but  a  lot  is 
home-grown also. 
With regard to the public finances, clearly the aftermath of the bank-driven boom and bust is 
the  context for  everything.  Still,  it  is  convenient  in  turn  to  separate  in  our  minds  the  sums 
arising  directly  from  the  recapitalization  of  the  banks,  and  those  related  to  the  rest  of  the 
evolution of the public finances. 
Recapitalising the banks 
The Government has now injected sums equivalent to over 50% of this year’s GNP into the 
Irish-controlled banks. About a half of this has been a cash injection – much of it from the 
NPRF, which had to sell the bulk of its external investments in equities and bonds, etc. to 
provide this – and the rest in deferred form: promissory notes and conventional Government 
bonds  provided  to  IBRC,  the  successor  bank  to  Anglo  and  INBS.  Until  these  deferred 
amounts are settled in cash, the cash needs of IBRC are being met with some €42 billion of 
exceptional liquidity assistance from the Central Bank of Ireland. The drawings of the Central 
Bank on the Eurosystem that, in effect, meet this ELA is subject to remuneration at the ECB 
policy rate, currently 1 per cent. 
As long as these arrangements continue, then, they have a sizable impact on the gross – 
and especially the net – debt of the State, but the overall running cost to Ireland has been 
relatively low,2 thanks to the indulgence (in this matter at any rate) of the locally oft-maligned 
ECB!  Although  this  financing  arrangement  continues  for  the  time  being;  still,  from  the 
market’s point of view, the lack of any explicit commitment to long-term low cost financing of 
IBRC’s  cash  needs  no  doubt  has  represented  one  of  the  obstacles  to  Ireland  regaining 
market  access  on  the  necessary  scale  in  the  immediate  future.  With  last  night’s  Summit 
statement,  it  may  not  be  unrealistic  to  hope  that  this  important  loose  end  can  be  tied-up 
relatively soon.  
                                                
2   Less than €1½bn compared to total servicing costs of the National Debt of €7½ bn in 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
At the Central Bank of Ireland, our initial approach to the recapitalization of Irish banks back 
in late 2009 was to imagine putting in not just enough capital, but so much capital as to fully 
dispel any market concerns. The rapidly mounting actual and prospective public debt ratios 
coming from the non-banking deficit meant that, given the scale of the prospective losses, 
(as announced in September 2010 following the painfully prolonged process of determining 
the  first  full  analysis),  put  paid  to  that  idea.  Overcapitalising  the  banks  under  such 
circumstances  would  simply  destabilise  the  State.  That  is  why  we  were  reluctant  (as 
indicated  in  my  January  2011  speech)  to  endorse further  accumulation of  indebtedness of 
the State in order to recapitalise the banks to insulate the financial system and the economy 
against tail risks. Even if external insurance was not available, direct injection of the capital 
from external sources would have been a much better solution. However (as has been seen 
again  with  the  case  of  Spain)  this  was  simply  not  on  offer,  limiting  the  possibility  for 
decoupling the pressures of the banking system from those of the sovereign.  
Global  upward  pressures  have  increased  the  amount  of  capital  banks  are  expected  to 
maintain  as  both  market  participants  and  regulators  reassess  the  uncertainty  and  volatility 
surrounding bank asset valuations. And it’s not just a question of ratios: upgraded regulatory 
requirements  will  soon  disallow  some  elements  of  what  used  to  be  counted  as  capital, 
placing  further  upward  pressure.  For  Ireland,  the  agreement  with  the  Troika  requires  Irish 
guaranteed banks to hold sufficient capital not only to meet the CRD (international regulatory 
requirements), but to have enough to absorb prospective losses over the period 2012–2014, 
based  on  the  independent  calculations  of  BlackRock  Solutions,  and  the  cost  of  selling-off 
non-core  assets  sufficient  to  bring  the  loan-to-deposit  ratios  of  the  banks  back  into  a 
plausible  range  (not  more  than  122½%),  and  to  maintain  the  higher  threshold  of  10½% 
capital (even excluding elements of capital that are not regarded as “core tier 1”) in the base 
case scenario. 
This is what determined the additional capital requirements announced in March 2012. Our 
assessment  of  the  capital  needs  of  the  banks  will  evolve  over  the  coming  years.  As  I 
stressed  here  eighteen  months  ago,  loan-loss  projections  following  a  big  bust  involve  an 
irreducibly  large  element  of  uncertainty.  At  the  Central  Bank,  we  continue  to  research  the 
determinants  of  loan  losses.  Economic  conditions  (including  house  prices)  facing  the 
borrowing firms and households are not the only determinants. As we have been stressing in 
other fora, the effectiveness of the banks’ engagement with their stressed borrowers, as well 
as the legislative and administrative framework for dealing with insolvency (details of which 
are  being  announced  by  the  Government  today)  are  important  factors.  It  should  not  be 
thought a paradox that a more engaged and holistic approach by banks, and a less rigid and 
costly insolvency framework can help reduce loan losses over time.  
Meanwhile, given the final view of the Troika lenders that only the holders of subordinated 
debt  –  and  not  of  senior  debt  –  could  be  required  to  share  in  the  losses,  these  additional 
capital requirements brought the total state injection from €47bn to €64bn.3 By now, the Irish 
Government has provided about a half of the capital requirements generated by the crisis. 
The  original  shareholders  of  the  Irish  banks,  the  subordinated  debt  holders  and  the 
shareholders of the foreign-owned banks split the remainder between them.  
Europe and the Irish fiscal adjustment 
So far I have not spoken much about the adjustment of Government spending and taxation, 
i.e. what is now being called “austerity”. Let’s be clear about this. When Ireland lost access to 
the markets, the availability of borrowed funds depended on the foreign official lenders. They 
have authorized sufficient funds for what has to be described as a rather gradual glide-path 
                                                
3   Almost all of the unguaranteed senior bonds of IBRC have now been repaid. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the Government deficit, certainly relative to the alternative of no access, but also relative to 
what is being implemented in other countries such as Britain, Spain, and the US, despite the 
much lower debt ratios in those countries. Indeed, the striking fact is that, right through to the 
end of the Programme, there is a resource transfer from the official lenders to support non-
interest  net  spending  of  the  Irish  Government. It  is  only  after  the  end  of the  Programme’s 
scheduled term that Ireland is expected to be actually reducing the Government debt ratio. 
As such, it can fairly be said that the higher taxes and cuts in public spending are, thus far, 
not being used to pay off the banking debt. The scale of fiscal adjustment needed even then 
is an indication of how badly-skewed our public finances had become in the boom, with what 
proved  to  be  transitory  revenues  used  to  increase  the  level  of  spending  well  above  what 
could be sustained.  
Achieving fiscal targets is easier when the economy grows; more important, there are more 
jobs  and  more  income  to  go  around  when  the  economy  grows.  In  the  face  of  weakening 
economic activity in many parts of the euro area there has been a tendency for international 
comment to consider the Irish economy’s current performance as rather good. Export growth, 
the current account surplus in the balance of payments, compliance with budgetary targets 
and  improvements  in  cost  competitiveness  are  rightly  emphasised.  But  emphasis  is 
sometimes placed on indicators such as aggregate productivity and unit labour costs which 
in  Ireland  can  flatter.  In  fact,  after  the  very  steep  fall  during  the  crash  of  2008–9,  the 
economic activity has been broadly unchanged since early 2009. Growth in export-oriented 
sectors  has  been  offset  by  shrinkage  in  domestic  demand.  Only  in  2013  does  the  Central 
Bank expect the domestic demand to stop falling. Aggregate employment has been falling for 
five years now. Bank lending, despite all of the policy efforts, remains timid. Despite the fact 
that exports have held up, adverse external factors have been holding the Irish economy – 
one of the most open in the World – back. For example, the fact that economic activity in 
Ireland  in  2012  is  almost  2  per  cent  below  what  was  expected  at  the  outset  of  the 
Programme gels with an average underperformance of the rest of EU economy of about the 
same  percentage.  The  continued  high  rate  of  personal  savings  and  the  fiscal  adjustment 
have also been adverse factors – though as I mentioned the latter factor has been minimised 
thanks to the availability of Troika funding. 
Any  overall  assessment  that  must  therefore  by  highly  qualified.  Though  there  have  been 
several setbacks in the euro area and some missed opportunities, step by step actions have 
been  taken  to  build  the  conditions  needed  to  ensure  a  stronger  recovery  of  the  Irish 
economy. According to the forecasters, a return to output and employment growth is in sight, 
and, while there will no doubt be some more setbacks on the way, it is not unreasonable to 
hope that the balance of negative and positive surprises will be better than it was. However, 
the high and still-growing debt is reflected in the yield spreads: financing conditions do need 
to be improved, as has been acknowledged at the latest Summit.  
While  some  may  have  hoped  for  more  from  Europe  in  the  past  couple  of  years,  any  fair-
minded assessment must acknowledge that the official financing received has been a lifeline. 
If  financial  markets  and  growth  conditions  in  Europe  can  indeed  be  stabilised,  if  financing 
conditions  for  Ireland  can  be  improved,  and  if  restraint  remains  the  policy  watchword  at 
home, the corner can soon be turned. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
