Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing corporate governance practices in the 
Malaysian financial sector 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
official launch of the Financial Institutions’ Directors Education (FIDE) Forum, Sasana Kijang, 
Bank Negara Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 12 June 2012. 
 in 
the 
the 
financial 
industry  notably  on 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the  launch  of  the  Financial  Institutions’ 
Directors  Education  (FIDE)  Forum.  The  establishment  of  this  Forum,  an  initiative  by  the 
founding  directors  of  the  FIDE  program  will  contribute  to  further  the  efforts  to  enhance 
corporate governance practices in the Malaysian financial sector. Many  of you have made 
invaluable  contributions  to  the  conception  and  development  of  the  FIDE  program  and  its 
ongoing refinement. The program is not only unique and highly effective, but it is delivering 
palpable  change  and  contributing  to  higher  standards  of  corporate  governance  in  our 
financial industry. This in turn is supporting stronger, and more resilient financial institutions. 
Following  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  corporate  governance  practices  in  the  financial 
industry  have  come  under  significant  scrutiny.  There  has  been  increased  pressure  on  the 
management,  boards  of  financial  institutions  and  on  regulators  to  significantly  improve  the 
governance  practices 
incentive  systems, 
accountability  and  controls.  The  problems  that  led  to  the  build-up  to  this  however,  are  not 
new. Issues around misaligned incentives and an over-emphasis on short term performance 
which  encouraged  reckless  risk-taking,  in  addition  to  the  lack  of  transparency,  and  the 
pervasive  conflict  of  interests  have  long  been  the  focus  of  public  attention  especially  in 
relation to companies with dispersed shareholding structures. These same issues however, 
are  far  more  serious  when  they  involve  the  financial  institutions  given  the  significant 
externalities  inflicted  on  society  following  the  failure  of  such  financial  institutions.  Banks  in 
particular  are  especially  vulnerable  to  the  consequences  of  governance  failures  given  the 
critical importance of public confidence to their very survival. 
Since the crisis, substantial work on several fronts have been devoted to strengthening the 
resilience of financial institutions. New capital and liquidity standards have been a key focus 
of  the  global  regulatory  reforms  and  the  work  to  transpose  these  global  standards  into 
national regulations are now well underway in many countries, including in Malaysia. While 
this will deliver significantly improved frameworks for risk-taking by financial institutions, they 
remain, at best, poor substitutes for good governance. Evidence of this can be drawn from 
the  contrast  between  institutions  that  operated  under  the  same  regulatory  framework,  but 
that experienced very different outcomes during and after the crisis.  
The comparisons are revealing. Of significance has been the observation – including in the 
most  recent  cases  of  massive  bank  losses  –  that  behaviour  and  culture  had  a  more 
significant part in the recent governance failures. Despite having independent directors and 
elaborate  control  structures  in  place,  firms  have  failed  because  of  decisions  by  their 
management and when boards have not effectively performed their oversight role. This has 
been  principally  attributed  to  the  lack  of  sufficient  collective  knowledge  of  the  board  and 
inadequate competence of individual directors which in turn have led to poor judgements that 
hampered the ability of the board to rein in excesses at an early stage. Competency gaps 
generally allow for individuals on boards or from senior management to exert a dominant and 
undue influence over the decision making process, without being subject to sufficient scrutiny 
and effective challenge. This occurs when Boards are not able to grasp the risks associated 
with  inordinately  complex  activities  that  their  institutions  are  engaged  in.  This  is  generally 
further  compounded  by  the  failure  to  provide  an  effective  countervailing  influence  to  an 
overzealous risk-taking culture among front-liners who are principally driven by the pressure 
to deliver short term returns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Of course, sound processes and structures will continue to have a central role in any good 
governance framework. This provides the parameters within which decisions can be made. 
However, the growing significance of behavioural, cultural and ethical issues suggests that 
governance frameworks must give greater attention to the “softer” aspects of governance. A 
clear reason for this is that the more challenging and fluid operating environment demands 
greater exercise of judgement by management. Behavioural, cultural and ethical norms, are 
likely as a consequence, to assume more importance in defining the boundaries within which 
management will make such judgements. As institutions become larger and more complex, 
boards  themselves  must  also  have  the  ability  and  confidence  to  assess  the  nature  of  the 
risks  to  the  financial  institution’s  strategic  plan  and  business  direction.  This  will  entail 
behavioural and cultural changes within the boardroom that will involve changes to the board 
dynamics and the ability to effectively harness the collective knowledge and expertise of the 
board. It will involve the courage to break away from the status quos that promotes “group 
think” over diversity. 
Developments in supervisory approaches will also reinforce this trend. The bar on corporate 
governance continues to be raised through more intensive supervision that focuses on board 
effectiveness.  Supervisors  are  increasingly  looking  for  evidence  of  a  mix  of  technical  and 
strategic competencies on the board that will support meaningful engagements both within 
the  board,  and  between  the  board  and  management.  Assessments  are  also  made  on 
whether  boards  function  in  a  manner  that  promotes  independence  of  judgement,  and  the 
extent to which boards are able to define the acceptable risk appetite for the institution and to 
oversee its translation into appropriate policies and behavioural norms.  
Following the Asian financial crisis, strengthening the governance of financial institutions was 
a  key  priority  which  culminated  in  a  number  of  regulatory  reforms  that  established  the 
framework of governance practices that exist today. In many respects, the financial sector in 
Malaysia has progressed ahead of current developments. A set of governance principles and 
rules were introduced in the early part of this recent decade. This included the parameters for 
sound practices with respect to risk-aligned compensations – an issue that has been a focus 
of the current global regulatory reforms. This was followed closely by the implementation of 
an improved risk-based supervisory approach which places board and senior management 
oversight at the centre of an effective control environment within financial institutions. A more 
rigorous  process  for  assessing  individuals  nominated  to  assume  the  roles  of  director, 
chairman and chief executive of financial institutions have also been introduced. As part of 
the  efforts  to  bring  about  behavioural  and  cultural  changes  to  strengthen  the  governance 
practices in the financial industry, FIDE was developed and introduced in 2008.  
We have been encouraged by the resulting improvements observed in governance and risk 
management  practices  among  financial  institutions  in  Malaysia.  Our  supervisory  oversight 
has shown that directors have exercised a more active role in ensuring effective alignment 
and implementation of risk policies, business strategy and capital management. The quality 
of  engagement  between  boards  and  management  has  also  improved  substantially  in 
particular,  on  major  strategic  decisions  and 
risk  developments.  Our  supervisory 
engagements with boards have also benefited from the issues raised on areas of concern 
and material developments. There has also been increased efforts to strengthen the mix of 
skills, experience and expertise of the Board composition to improve the overall effectiveness 
of boards. This has resulted in more independent directors being appointed to the boards in 
most of the financial institutions. 
The environment confronting financial institutions will continue to be immensely challenging, 
particularly  in  the  coming  years  as  global  financial  conditions  remain  highly  volatile  and 
uncertain,  and  as  regulatory  reforms  start  to  take  effect.  In  this  environment,  a  number  of 
areas  will  become  more  important  to  reinforce  the  effectiveness  of  boards  and  sound 
governance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, board-level engagements on risk issues will need to be strengthened further. This can 
only be achieved if boards have a sound understanding of the institution’s business model, 
and a strong grasp of the changing complexion of risks in which the institution is exposed. 
Committed  resources  should  therefore  be  available  to  the  board  to  support  their 
understanding of material developments affecting the institution, and to hone their judgement 
on  matters  concerning  risk  strategy.  This  should 
include  relevant  and  meaningful 
management of information flows and risk analysis to the board, the ability to retain talent 
including  external  expertise  where  required,  the  ability  to  attract  individuals  with  relevant 
competencies  and  experience  to  serve  on  boards,  and  the  budget  for  board  development 
and education.  
Second, with the growing expansion of financial institutions in scale and complexity, there is 
a need to inject greater diversity into boards to enable the board collectively to deal with the 
broader range of issues across the institution’s activities. This needs to be embedded within 
the  framework  for  board  renewal  and  succession.  As  institutions  expand  across  borders, 
diversity  can  also  enhance  the  board’s  appreciation  of  regional  and  global  trends,  and 
improve the ability of the board to provide strong leadership in response to cultural nuances 
and  competitive  dynamics  in  different  markets. This  will  also  be  important for  the  effective 
oversight of group-wide risks and strategies.  
Third, with increased expectations placed on boards, boards will need to have the means to 
objectively evaluate their own performance and examine ways in which board effectiveness 
can be improved. Overcoming cultural norms that impede more formal processes for open 
and  honest  engagement  among  peers remains a  challenge.  In the  same  way  that  a  weak 
process for the evaluation of management performance would be a cause for concern, the 
same would hold true for the board. Guided self-evaluation frameworks are reinforced by an 
environment  that  encourages  candour  and  openness,  and  supplemented  by  third-party 
independent reviews, have worked well for some of our institutions. More progress in these 
areas for maintaining high-performing boards rather than the more prescriptive approaches, 
which would most likely yield results that fall short of the desired outcomes.  
Let me  take  this  opportunity  to  discuss  some  of  the key  initiatives  that are  currently  being 
pursued by the Bank in the area of governance of financial institutions. The Bank has made 
proposals in the new financial services legislation which will augment the general duties and 
responsibilities  of  the  board  under  the  Companies  Act  so  as  to  provide  emphasis  to  the 
specific  key  considerations  in  the  responsibilities  of  boards  of financial  institutions.  Boards 
would  now  need  to  have  regard  to  the  interests  of  depositors  and  policyholders,  the  long 
term viability of the institution and to have in place reasonable standards of fair dealings in 
the oversight of the implementation of the business and risk strategies of the institution. The 
statutory  duties  would  also  include  an  explicit  duty  to  ensure  and  oversee  the  effective 
design and implementation of a sound control environment.  
Work  has  also  commenced  to  update  and  streamline  the  current  regulatory  guidelines  on 
corporate  governance  for  banks,  insurers  and  takaful  operators  with  a  view  to  reduce  the 
duplication across different standards and to sharpen the focus on the overall responsibility 
of  the  board  for  risk  and  control.  Existing  prescriptive  rules  would  give  way  to  broader 
principles  of  behaviour. The review  will  also  better  align  the  regulatory framework  with  the 
current  supervisory  approach.  A  thematic  review  of  the  remuneration  practices  in  the 
financial  sector  is  also  planned  to  take  into  account  how  it  might  influence  risk-taking 
behaviours. 
Also in train is a review of the supervisory process for assessing the suitability of persons 
that can serve on boards of financial institutions. This review will leverage on the work by the 
FIDE  Forum.  Looking  further  ahead,  the  Financial  Sector  Blueprint  sets  out  additional 
recommendations  to further  strengthen  incentives  and  enablers for  sound  governance  and 
risk  management  standards  in  anticipation  of  the  growing  complexities  of  our  financial 
landscape.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  me  draw  my  remarks  to  a  close.  The  task  of  providing  stewardship,  direction  and 
oversight of financial institutions essentially falls squarely on the board. The responsibilities 
that  go  with  this  are  great  and  I  believe  that  we  need  the  best  directors  in  the  financial 
industry – not just because of the importance of the financial sector to the broader economy, 
but  because  financial  institutions,  through  their  pervasive  role  in  supporting  economic 
activity, can be a powerful influence in raising the standards of corporate governance across 
corporate Malaysia. I expect that the FIDE Forum will have an instrumental role is realising 
this  vision  by  professionalising  the  role  of  directors,  and  showing  the  way  in  the  best 
governance  practices.  On  our  part,  the  Bank  greatly  welcomes  this  initiative  which  will 
facilitate new opportunities for greater engagement with directors in the financial sector as a 
collective body, on regulatory issues and developments. On that note, it is my great pleasure 
to officially launch the FIDE Forum. I wish it every success.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
