Yandraduth Googoolye: Developing the custody market in Mauritius 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the official launching of HSBC Global Custody Services, Port Louis, 12 April 2012. 
 Good morning to you all. 
It gives me great pleasure to be present this morning at the launching of the HSBC Global 
Custody  Services.  This  is  yet  another  initiative  of  HSBC  towards  broadening  the  range  of 
services  that  it  offers  to  its  customers.  I  have  been  given  to  understand  that  with  this 
proposition, the bank, with the intrinsic support of its parent Group, aims at increasing the 
size of the custody market in the Mauritian jurisdiction. “HSBC Security Services” hopes to 
create  a  hub  for  tapping  of  both  developed  and  emerging  markets  in  over  a  network  of 
90 countries worldwide, including 25 African states. 
It  is  a  known  fact  that  the  custodian  industry  has  been  dominated  by  a  handful  of  largest 
banks worldwide, and HSBC has, in this regard, secured a privileged position among these 
big players. No doubt, your bank can view its track record in the global custodian industry 
with immense pride today. 
Having  been  ranked  number  one  globally  for  its  Global  Custody  Product  in  the  Global 
Custodian 2011, your bank has been top rated in 8 out of 10 categories as published recently 
in  the  magazine.  This  outstanding  performance  clearly  demonstrates  your  commitment  to 
deliver a market leading product and maintain the position of number one service provider by 
the industry. While looking at the history of HSBC Group in Mauritius as far back as in the 
year 1859, it is remembered with pride and nostalgia of the assistance provided by the bank 
in  the  financing  of  railway  construction  in  1864.  And  today,  it  is  acknowledged  that  HSBC 
Bank is moving on the fast track, bringing new life and strength to our banking sector. 
Role of a custodian bank  
The traditional responsibility of a custodian bank has been the holding and safe keeping of 
the various assets of either institutional or individual investors. These assets included stocks 
and  bonds.  While  having  its  origins  from  the  physical  safekeeping  of  share  certificates, 
custody  has  now  been  transformed  into  a  technology-intensive  information  processing 
business. With the globalization of capital markets, more specialization is coming along with 
the constant growth of cross-border investment and collective investment schemes. Global 
custodians  are  therefore  able  to  capture  cross-border  custody  business  without  incurring 
substantial set-up costs and on-going fixed costs. 
There is no doubt that the global custodian model is most appealing to institutional investors 
and asset managers, and rightly so, HSBC is well-placed to serve this industry by capitalizing 
on its network of branches across the globe and by leveraging effectively on its worldwide 
resources with local expertise. HSBC Bank is creating a one-stop shop service by providing 
from its globally connected business, whether for fund accounting, valuation, global custody 
and  transfer,  foreign  currency  exchange,  cash  management,  or  securities  lending.  In 
addition, the proposition of HSBC Bank incorporates the creation of a central flow of data on 
the  current  status  of  assets  which  would  enable  the  owner  of  the  assets  to  easily  obtain 
documentation  that  provides  information  about  the  holdings  that  he  has  entrusted  to  the 
bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Supervisory issues relating to provision of custody services  
As is the case for any financial product, there are a number of risks associated in the delivery 
of  custody  services.  These  risks  can  be  broadly,  classified  into  operational,  financial  and 
legal risks. Focus is therefore being laid on financial risk management, capital adequacy, and 
operational  risk  mitigation.  While  it  is  viewed  that  there  might  not  be  any  systemic 
implications which emanate directly from custody services, vigilance is nonetheless required 
on  the  part  of  financial  institutions  and  supervisory  authorities  alike,  since  cross-border 
investment flows might have an impact on domestic financial system stability. 
In the aftermath of the global crisis which has been of unprecedented magnitude, banks have 
been called to become leaner and fitter. Alongside, the job of regulators has become even 
more  complex  given  their  mandate  to  maintain  soundness  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  Presently,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  engaged  in  constantly  upgrading  its  prudential 
and supervisory norms to keep pace with international best practices in the regulation and 
supervision of financial institutions falling under its purview. The recent financial crisis bears 
witness to the fact that a mere slackening of vigilance can give rise to devastative snowball 
effects.  As  supervisor,  we  do  maintain  that  prudential  and  supervisory  norms  have  to  be 
constantly revamped to chase up and keep pace with financial innovation. And in the wake of 
the rapid integration of financial markets, there is a dire need for refinement in early warning 
system  tools  that  can  further  enhance  the  supervisory  framework.  Concurrently,  the 
upholding  of  the  basic  principles  of  sound  corporate  governance  remain  crucial  for 
withstanding speculative appetites and curbing excessive market volatility. And so much so, 
as banking per se requires the fundamental ingredient of instilling trust and confidence. 
Supervisors and authorities responsible for financial stability are presently contemplating the 
best  options  for  strengthening  of  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  prudential  framework,  in  the 
expectation of the emergence of a new financial architecture. One area remains that in the 
best interest of one and all, there should be increased trust-based cooperation between the 
financial service provider and the oversight authority. This basic ingredient is no doubt key to 
a  continued  successful  development  of  an  efficient  and  secure  market  infrastructure  that 
meets the fast-changing needs of our financial sector. Mutual cooperation can but benefit our 
financial system. While HSBC Bank is engaged in marketing its custodian service provider 
role,  our  economy  shall  certainly  gain  in  the  process  –  our  jurisdiction  is  projected  in  the 
global business arena as a credible International Financial Centre. Allow me to congratulate 
this initiative of HSBC Group and convey my best wishes to the Management and staff of 
HSBC Bank (Mauritius) Limited. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
