Ewald Nowotny: European Monetary Union – lessons from the debt crisis 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Austria, at the 40th Economics Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria 
“European Monetary Union – lessons from the debt crisis”, Vienna, 10 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  warmly  welcome  you  to  the  40th  Economics  Conference  of  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank. 
In  particular,  I’d  like  to  welcome  Austrian  Federal  Chancellor  Werner  Faymann  and  this 
year’s keynote speakers, Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board and Chief Economist 
at the European Central Bank, and Klaus Regling, CEO of the European Financial Stability 
Facility. And it is a great pleasure to welcome all other high-level speakers, representing the 
European economic and financial architecture, academia and European institutions. 
Over the past four decades this conference has offered a platform for discussion between 
policymakers and economists with an institutional and academic background. It has played a 
useful  role  in  creating  new  ideas  and  stimulating  political  reactions  to  ever-changing 
economic environments.  
This year’s conference, entitled “European Monetary Union: Lessons from the Debt Crisis” 
focuses on economic developments in Europe and the corresponding policy reactions from 
2007  until  today.  Recent  developments  in  international  bond  markets  indicate  that 
unfortunately,  the  fiscal  problems  in  the  euro  area  cannot  be  considered  to  be  completely 
solved yet. The aim of the conference is to identify possible further policy responses to the 
crisis and to offer a forum for discussion on how to tackle future challenges. 
From a historical perspective, sovereign debt crises are clearly recurrent phenomena. Going 
back  to  the  pre-World  War  II  period,  various  European  states  ran  into  difficulties  servicing 
their debt and some of them defaulted. (Reinhart, C.M. and K.S. Rogoff (2008). This Time is 
Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises). 
Since  World  War  II,  however,  there  have  been  no  cases  of  sovereign  default  in  Western 
Europe. 
Rather,  sovereign  default  became  a  phenomenon  typical  of  emerging  and  developing 
countries.  Due 
their  high 
responsiveness  to  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  of  creditor  countries,  fluctuations  in 
exchange 
these  –  mostly  African  or  
Latin  American  –  countries  encountered  severe 
financing  problems.  Hence,  debt 
restructurings  in  Latin  American  countries  has  been  the  topic  of  numerous  economic 
publications. 
Thus,  it  was  quite  an  unhappy  innovation  when,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  market 
turmoil, which had resulted in a severe recession, a sovereign debt crisis emerged in several 
– by international standards comparatively wealthy – EU countries from spring 2010 on. 
In early 2010, Greece’s increasing financing problems marked the beginning of a previously 
“unthinkable” development, a sovereign debt crisis of a euro area country. Financial market 
players started to reconsider the “habit” of demanding undifferentiated risk premiums for the 
sovereign  bonds  issued  by  different  euro  area  countries.  By  the  way,  this  lack  of 
differentiation  is  not  stipulated  in  the  EU  Treaty,  which  includes  several  provisions  to 
enhance “market discipline” in public finances, such as the prohibition of monetary financing, 
the  prohibition  of  privileged  access  of  public  finances  to  financial  institutions,  and  the 
no-bailout rule. But as we know with the benefit of hindsight, for a long time market forces did 
rates  and  commodity  prices,  many  of 
their  high  dependency  on 
lending  and 
international 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
the  market  underestimated 
not perform the desired function of signalling concerns about fiscal sustainability to borrowing 
governments  at  an  early  point.  But  once  sustainability  was  doubted,  markets  –  as  
usual  –  reacted  collectively  and  very  abruptly,  driving  up  risk  premiums  and  the  financing 
costs in the countries considered as vulnerable. 
As a result, the Greek debt crisis quickly spread to other euro area countries. This happened 
through  various  channels,  including  trade  links,  cross-border  financial  exposures,  but  also 
fire  sales,  flight  to  quality,  emergency  reform-induced  political  instability  and  expectation 
effects.  By  the  end  of  2010,  Ireland  (on  November  21,  2010)  and,  shortly  afterwards, 
Portugal  (May  17,  2011)  required  emergency  lending,  which  was  provided  by  financial 
assistance  packages  negotiated  by  the  IMF,  the  EU  and  the  ECB.  By  mid-2011,  the 
confidence  crisis  spilled  over  to  Spain  and  Italy.  Their  sovereign  yields  rose  to  pre-EMU 
levels.  Prior  to  EMU,  in  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  exchange  rate  expectations  were  the 
major drivers of interest rate spreads between EU countries, and both inflation and real GDP 
growth  tended  to  be  higher  in  Southern  Europe.  In  the  current  crisis,  by  contrast,  the 
assessment  of  a  country’s  political  reform  capacity  and  stability  as  well  as  perceived 
sovereign default probabilities were drivers of yield spreads.  
While  before  2009 
importance  of  heterogeneous 
developments  within  the  euro  area,  since  the  onset  of  the  EU  debt  crisis,  markets  have 
tended  to  exaggerate  and  amplify  their  importance.  The  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
sustainability of public finances led to a situation where short-term developments or negative 
economic  surprises  caused  strong  market  reactions.  From  a  medium-term  to  long-term 
perspective,  the  size  and  intensity  of  the  reactions  appear  to  be  –  in  part  –  unjustified. 
Recent  sovereign  bond  auctions  that  led  to  negative  interest  rates  on  German  short-term 
bonds  (the  same  development  can  be  observed  for  Austrian  government  bonds  with  very 
short  maturities)  are  market  distortions  triggered  by  a  massive  flight  to  quality.  The  strong 
reactions  to  the  political  developments  in  Italy  during  the  summer  of  2011  highlighted  the 
new regime of extremely nervous financial markets. 
In  such  a  sensitive  environment,  both  policy  reactions  and  the  absence  of  such  reactions 
may lead to severe consequences. During the different stages of the crisis, a great variety of 
economic policy measures were implemented.  
Confronted with a global economic downturn in 2008, European governments took massive 
expansionary fiscal policies to stimulate economic growth. While the discretionary measures 
were  of  significant  magnitude,  a  large  part  of  the  following  deterioration  in  public  finances 
was caused by automatic stabilizers. Corporate tax revenues collapsed throughout Europe. 
Countries  which  had  experienced  significant  property  bubbles  before  the  crisis  were  also 
faced with a strong decline in tax revenues related to property (such as transaction taxes, 
capital gains taxes, VAT on newly-built houses, etc.). Both factors revealed the reliance on 
large  windfall  revenues  before  the  crisis,  which  were  previously  mistakenly  judged  as 
structural. This development was exacerbated by a strong increase in unemployment, which 
in turn reduced revenues from income taxes and social contributions and at the same time 
raised  expenditures  on  social  transfers.  Unfortunately,  especially  in  the  most  affected 
countries,  these  strong  increases  in  unemployment  and  the  implied  deterioration  in  public 
finances  via  automatic  stabilizers  have  persisted  until  now,  and  the  growth  prospects  for 
many  euro  area  economies  have  been  revised  downward  substantially  (implying  also  a 
deterioration  in  governments’  revenue  prospects).  Furthermore,  governments  throughout 
Europe had to tackle problems in the financial sector by providing capital and taking over bad 
assets (via “bad banks”); in several countries, this also contributed substantially to growing 
government  debt  (and  deficit)  figures  and  further  weakened  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances. 
Apart  from  national  governments,  international  institutions  –  the  IMF,  the  EU  and  
the  ECB  –  also  reacted  to  the  crisis.  Key  interest  rates  were  slashed  and  unprecedented 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  were 
tackle  unconventional 
launched 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The IMF and the U.S.A. promote a growth strategy, 
the EU and the ECB advocate austerity.  
developments.  The  EU  reacted  by  creating  the  temporary  European  rescue  mechanisms 
EFSM  and  EFSF.  In  December  2010,  it  was  decided  to  replace  these  temporary 
mechanisms  by  a  permanent  one,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  which  will  become 
effective already in the second half of this year. The severe financing problems of Greece, 
Ireland  and  Portugal  furthermore  forced  the  EU  and  the  IMF  to  provide  a  joint  support 
package with strict conditionality.  
As a reaction to the lack of compliance with existing rules in the past, and in order to tackle 
substantial  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  heterogeneous  economic  developments  within 
the  EU,  the  economic  governance  framework  was  substantially  revised  in  2011.  The 
so-called  “Six  Pack”  introduced  stricter  rules  for  public  finances  and  addressed  structural 
heterogeneities  via  a  new  scoreboard  evaluating  structural  developments  and  emerging 
imbalances. The fiscal compact signed by all EU member states with the exception of the 
UK and the Czech Republic went one step further, requiring the structural balance and debt 
rules  to  be  incorporated  into  national  law  “of  binding  force  and  permanent  character,” 
preferably constitutional. 
The  unfolding  of  the  economic  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  and,  in  particular,  the  limitations 
experienced  in  stopping  the  spillovers  to  other  EU  countries  have  sparked  criticism  of  the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the euro area’s and the EU’s economic governance and the 
decisions taken over the past three years. However, an adequate assessment must consider 
the constraints and limitations that the decision-making bodies were faced with.  
At the recent IMF meeting, there was an intense debate, the bottom line of which the press 
described in the following – overly simplified – way:  
 
 
In fact, the discussion as such was and is more differentiated in Washington; and I expect 
that we will see a similar debate also at this conference. 
Let me share with you some personal remarks: 
As to fiscal consolidation, 
a first and basic aspect refers to meeting refinancing needs: 
 
 
In  “normal  times”  markets  would  be  able  to  refinance  even  such  impressive  amounts.  In 
“nervous” times, as we are experiencing now, much depends on the credibility of borrowers 
in the eyes of private lenders. 
However, “credibility” is a difficult concept, based on many ingredients. One element, clearly, 
is the trust of investors in the political stability of a country and its preparedness to undertake 
the  necessary  reforms.  Another  aspect  concerns  the  credibility  of  fiscal  consolidation 
programs.  This  is  not  only  a  political  challenge,  but  also  an  economic  issue.  Fiscal 
consolidation  is  not  just  an  accounting  procedure,  it  has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of 
macroeconomic developments and potential repercussions. If consolidation programs have 
to  be  revised  because  of  overly  ambitious  timetables  or  the  failure  to  take  into  account 
macroeconomic effects, investor confidence may dwindle. One lesson that had to be learned 
the hard way is that consolidation programs must be seen in the context of growth prospects.  
As to economic growth: 
It  is  true  that  some  fiscal  consolidation  measures  may  have  negative  effects  on  economic 
growth  in  the  short  term,  but  positive  ones  in the  long  term.  Still,  it  is  important  to  have  a 
clear idea of what constitutes a “short term”, because if this implies too long a period, there 
sovereign rollover needs (Q2 – Q4 2012) in the euro area: EUR 912 billion, 
sovereign rollover needs (Q1 – Q4 2013) in the euro area: about EUR 880 billion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
may be lasting negative effects on potential output growth via hysteresis effects, the aging of 
capital stock, etc. 
In any case, there is a growing consensus that successful stabilization programs will need 
not  only  an  “austerity  part”  but  also  a  “growth  part.”  The  latter  may  encompass  “structural 
reforms”  with  regard  to  the  labor  and  the  goods  and  services  markets  or/and  special 
measures  to  fight  youth  unemployment,  e.g.  by  enhancing  vocational training  or  launching 
special  job  programs.  Experience  shows  that  in  emerging  or  “quasi-emerging”  economies 
foreign direct investment may play a special role as a vehicle for export-led growth, obviously 
implying  the  need  for  competitive  unit  labour  costs  and  a  well-functioning  physical  and 
institutional infrastructure. 
Summing up, it is possible and necessary to combine consolidation and growth strategies. 
But  one  has  to  be  aware  that  there  may  be  different  time  lags  as  to  when  the  different 
strategies are showing effects. This could create “credibility gaps.” To overcome these gaps 
is the role of external policy intervention, e.g. by the ESRB. But it is important, as has been 
underlined  frequently,  also  by  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi,  that  strategies  to  restore 
confidence  and  to  ensure  refinancing  are  consistent,  oriented  toward  the  long  term  and 
based on a reliable political support by the country concerned. 
As to politics: 
Financial assistance packages that include guarantees and the provision of funding through 
the  European  rescue  facilities  impose  a  financial  burden  or  at  least  a  financial  risk  on  the 
citizens of the guarantee-providing or creditor countries. Obviously, it is not always easy to 
find  a  majority  of  voters  (taxpayers)  willing  to  shoulder  the  financial  liabilities  of  another 
country. It seems that the citizens in the EU still do not identify themselves strongly enough 
with  the  –  still  relatively  young  –  project  of  European  integration  to  fully  support  unlimited 
supranational  financial  assistance  to  individual  Member  States.  In  the  end,  we  are  still 
dealing  with  sovereign  democracies  in  the  EU  and  in  the  euro  area.  The  heterogeneity  of 
income levels within the euro area creates additional obstacles. Solidarity among EU nations 
continues to be limited. 
As a result, in contrast to inter-regional transfers that we see in a number of fiscally federal 
countries, the EU seeks to overcome the present divergences in the euro area by providing 
loans subject to strict and controlled conditions, which supplement the general system of EU 
regional and structural funds. 
To the recipient countries this might seem to be an infringement of important aspects of their 
political  independence.  However,  I  do  not  see  a  credible  alternative  to  the  procedures 
developed  in  the  context  of  specific  aid  programmes.  But  this  leads  us  to  the  broader 
problem  of  the  political  legitimacy  of  EU  and  euro  area  action  during  the  crisis,  e.g.  with 
regard  to  the  role  of  external  control  of  fiscal  policy  decisions  by  national  parliaments  or 
decisions regarding the operational structure of instruments like the EFSF and the ESM. 
Of course, all these problems are part of the age-old question of how to combine relatively 
short-term election cycles with the need to ensure sustainable long-term economic growth. 
One traditional way of dealing with this problem is, for instance, requiring a two-third majority 
for  certain  decisions.  In  the  EU,  this  is  the  case  by  including  certain  provisions  in  the 
EU Treaty that are extremely difficult to change. In this context the ECB can be seen as the 
most  independent  central  bank  in  the  world,  as  its  independence  is  enshrined  in  the  EU 
Treaties. 
However, in the current institutional structure of the EU it is still unclear as to who has the 
mandate – and obligation – to take binding decisions in economically difficult times like the 
ones  we  are  currently  experiencing.  The  current  crisis  has  shown  the  need  for  close 
cooperation within the EU, but also a tendency of re-nationalization of important aspects of 
crisis  management,  where  a  number  of  actions  are  based  on 
intergovernmental 
arrangements rather than Community law. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This is not the place to discuss these problems in more detail. But to me it is obvious that the 
process of European integration has reached a crossroads where the future form and degree 
of European cooperation are up for decision. 
The  current  debt  crisis  heralds  a  new  era  for  the  European  economic  and  political 
architecture.  The  difficulties  are  hard  to  overcome  but  certainly  also  imply  enormous 
potential.  
The  strong  interdependence  of  markets  within  the  euro  area  facilitates  financial  contagion 
and spillovers. To safeguard the financial and macroeconomic stability of the euro area the 
problems of individual countries have to be tackled by common supranational political and 
economic initiatives. An important lesson to be learned from recent developments is that a 
currency union in the end also amounts to some form of political union. This understanding 
has led to a revision of the European economic governance framework. Stricter rules and the 
more  immediate  threats  of  financial  sanctions  were  formulated  to  prevent  unsustainable 
public  finances  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  in  the  future.  While  such  rules  have  the 
ability to give guidance and to deliver benchmarks, it will never be possible to force countries 
to fully comply with them as long as the countries involved are sovereign nations. In the end, 
what  it  all  boils  down  to  is  that  a  political  union  needs  more  than  a  tight  set  of  rules  and 
restrictions,  namely  central  decisions-making  in  fiscal  policy,  or,  at  least  a  strong  say  for 
Community  institutions  in  recipient  countries’  budget  policies.  The  developments  over  the 
past two or three years indicate that even in the face of a severe sovereign debt crisis with 
potentially devastating consequences for the euro area as a whole, the time is not (yet?) ripe 
for such a far-reaching change in governance and sovereignty. 
Let me in this context also briefly touch on the often raised call for “solidarity.” In the context 
of  the  EU  debt  crisis,  for  most  people  the  picture  that  comes  to  mind  is  “rich”  European 
countries paying for transfers to the troubled “poor” countries. However, this is only one side 
of  the  coin.  Solidarity  also  implies  the  willingness  of  the  recipients  of  transfers  to  take 
maximum effort to improve their own financial situation.  
Whatever  decisions  governments  make,  it  is  vital  that  the  majority  of  voters  ultimately 
support  these  decisions.  This  applies  both  to  recipient  and  to  creditor  countries.  Rescue 
packages  or  intergovernmental  transfers  that  do  not  have  public  support  certainly  lead  to 
unsustainable  political  developments,  which  in  turn  have  the  potential  to  trigger  a  new 
confidence crisis. The potential of the current crisis lies in the momentum for change. The 
crisis  could  be  used  to  overcome  the  dominance  of  national  interests  and  create  an  even 
more strongly integrated EU. 
The debt crisis also reminds us of the importance of maintaining financial stability. Banking 
crises have a strong potential for seriously harming the real economy. In order to reflect their 
probability  and,  if  they  occur,  their  negative  real  impact,  the  provision  of  sufficient  liquidity 
and an adequate capitalization of the banking sector as well as mechanisms to facilitate the 
liquidation of insolvent banks are key. The first requirement has to be met through backstop 
facilities  by  the  central  bank  while  the  second  and  the  third  issues  have  to  be  addressed 
through financial market regulation and supervision.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have certainly not been able to cover all aspects relevant in the context of the debt crisis or 
to do justice to the complexity of the issue at hand. But this is the very reason why we need 
this  conference.  I  am  confident  that  the  broad  diversity  of  speakers  –  ranging  from 
representatives  of  academia  and 
to  policy  advisors  and 
decision-makers  –  will  be  able  to  provide  a  broad  picture  of  the  relevant  issues,  possible 
trade-offs and options for solutions. 
international 
institutions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
