Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on the 
Monetary Policy Decision of the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 January 2012. 
 Today, on 25 January 2012, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to cut the key interest rate 
by  0.25  percentage  points.  Following  this  decision,  the  rate  for  One  Week  Repurchase 
Agreement  fell  to  4.50%.  The  key  rate  is  reduced  under  the  conditions  of  contained 
inflationary pressures over the monetary policy horizon as well as expectations for a more 
prudent fiscal policy in the period ahead. The Supervisory Council deemed that this decision 
provides  the  appropriate  monetary  conditions  to  meet  the  inflation  target  over  the  medium 
run.  Moreover,  this  movement  increases  the  monetary  stimulus  and  encourages  the 
economic activity in Albania.  
(Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.) 
 The  Albanian  economy  faced  challenges  in  2011  as  regards  economic  growth  and 
maintaining  of  macroeconomic  balances.  Additional  attention  to  public  finance  stability  in 
euro-area countries is reflected in added risk premiums in international financial markets and 
reduced  willingness  to  invest  in  emerging  economies.  Measures  for  addressing  financial 
markets  concerns  have  led  to  economic  activity  slowdown  of  our  trade  partners  and  are 
reflected in progressive deceleration of our exports growth rates.  
Moreover,  higher  food,  fuels  and  primary  commodity  prices  are  translated  into  stronger 
foreign  inflationary  pressures,  expansion  of  trade  deficit  and,  potentially,  weaker  domestic 
demand as a result of negative effects on Albanian households’ financial balances.  
Additionally, negative developments in the global arena are reflected in added uncertainties 
in the Albanian economy and negative impact on domestic consumption and investments. In 
spite of these shocks, the Albanian economy continued to grow in 2011, albeit at lower rates.  
This growth has reflected structural improvements of the Albanian economy, overall sound 
balances of economic agents, as well as utilisation of available capacities for macroeconomic 
stimulus and success to maintain macroeconomic balances.  
Average  annual  inflation  in  the  second  half  of  2011  was  2.9%,  down  by  1.1  percentage 
points  compared  with  the  first  half  of  2011.  Downward  inflation  emerged  in  the  second 
quarter  and  was  then  reinforced  during  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This  resulted  from 
reduced  contribution  of  processed  food,  unprocessed  food,  and  administered  prices.  In 
particular, food prices deviated from their seasonal behaviour in December, producing rapid 
curbing of annual inflation to 1.7%.  
From  the  macroeconomic  perspective,  the  downward  inflation  was  influenced  by  both 
demand  and  supply  factors,  at  the  same  time.  On  the  supply  side,  slowdown  of  primary 
commodities price inflation in global markets and relative stability of the exchange rate were 
materialised in lower imported inflation.  
On the demand side, the below-potential growth of the Albanian economy continued to keep 
spare capacities in output factors – labour and capital – materialising in downward pressures 
on  wages,  output  costs  and  inflation.  Economic  agents’  expectations  remain  anchored 
around the Bank of Albania’s target, owing to its reliable monetary policy, as well. Anchored 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
expectations  in  the  economy  have  reduced  the  so-called  second-round  effects,  in  other 
words,  transmission  of  temporary  shocks  from  higher  primary  commodity  prices  in  global 
markets and output costs and higher consumer prices at home. They have provided higher 
flexibility  for  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  pursue  its  stimulating  monetary  policy.  Overall,  these 
tendencies are expected to continue in the period ahead.  
Reduction  of  inflationary  pressures  in  2011  and  expectations  for  low  inflation  rates  during 
2012,  motivated  further  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011.  The 
Bank of Albania cut the key interest rate twice, namely in September and November, down to 
the historic low 4.75%.  
The Bank of Albania holds that the monetary stimulus increase will provide suitable financial 
conditions for compliance with its medium-term inflation target.  
Furthermore,  eased  monetary  conditions  serve  to  boost  domestic  demand,  which  remains 
fragile  in  the  presence  of  higher  uncertainties  in  the  economy.  In  addition,  it  factorizes 
prudent  fiscal  policy  for  2012  and  expected  curbing  of  public  spending  contribution  to 
economic growth.  
According  to  latest  data  from  INSTAT,  the  Albanian  economy  posted  0.5%  growth  in  the 
second quarter, apparently slower compared with growth rates in the first quarter.  
By  sector,  economic  growth,  in  this  period,  was  sustained  mainly  by  the  positive 
performance of agriculture and individual branches of industry and services sectors. Value-
added  in  agriculture  was  up  3.4%,  providing  significant  contribution  by  this  sector  to  the 
overall economic growth during the second quarter. On the other hand, the services sector’s 
annual  value-added  was  up  by  1.8%,  slowing  down  significantly  from  previous  quarters’ 
rates.  
Transport and financial intermediation were the main drivers of this sector, whereas most of 
other branches of the services sector contracted, year on year. Likewise, the industry sector 
shrank by 8.5% in the second quarter, after its positive performance in the last six quarters. 
Industry sector deceleration during this quarter was largely influenced by slashed output in 
“Energy, water and gas”, whereas extraction and processing industry continued their upward 
value-added.  After  its  surge  in  the first  quarter  of  2011,  the  construction  sector  contracted 
again in the second quarter, posting annualised downgrade of 1.7%.  
As  regards  aggregate  demand,  during  the  first  half  of  the  year,  economic  growth  was 
supported  mainly  by  the  public  sector  and  foreign  demand  contributions,  whereas  internal 
demand was lacklustre. Available data suggest that private consumption and investments 
were sluggish during the first half of the year, thus conditioning the below-potential growth of 
the economy during this period.  
Private  consumption  continues  to  reflect  consumers’  reluctance  to  spend  and  their 
inclination to save. Domestic consumption has not totally reflected higher available income 
generated by higher wages and employment rates, or expansion of funding resources, in the 
form of consumer loan growth during 2011. In particular, remittances shortfall during the first 
nine months of the year may have lessened consumption for a part of Albanian households. 
In addition, relatively high import prices, which burdened Albanian households’ budget in the 
first half of the year, may have impacted consumption negatively. Against this performance of 
consumption during the first half, improved balances for large purchases – as suggested by 
the consumer confidence survey – and more consumer loans granted during the second half, 
suggest for higher consumption in the third and fourth quarters of 2011.  
Subdued consumer spending and presence of spare capacities in the economy dampened 
businesses’  demand  for  new  investments.  In  parallel,  higher  lending  prudence  by  banks 
may have discouraged, in part, the demand for investment loans.  
Foreign  Direct  Investments  were  down  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  Higher  capital 
expenditures  in  the  last  quarter  are  expected  to  generate  higher  contribution  of  this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
component to aggregate demand at year-end. In the mean time, improved lending terms in 
2012 are expected to be translated into higher support for the system with investment loans 
and higher contribution to economic growth by this component of aggregate demand.  
Fiscal policy was stimulating in 2011, materialised in positive contribution of public spending 
to aggregate demand. Public spending and budget deficit growth rates moderated after the 
first  quarter,  settled  at  low  levels  in  the  second  and  third  quarters,  and  recorded  obvious 
acceleration in the last quarter of the year. At the end of November, budget deficit was ALL 
38  billion,  reflecting  5.4%  public  spending  increase  and  0.7%  budget  revenues  increase 
during this period. Acceleration of annualised budget expenditures in the last two months of 
the year owes primarily to higher capital expenditures during this period.  
Added prudence to fiscal stability, which characterises the 2012 budget, is expected to be 
reflected in lower contribution by the public sector to economic growth for 2012. Nonetheless, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  this  is  an  appropriate  step  to  maintain  macroeconomic 
stability and reduce risk premiums in the economy. Budget deficit narrowing in 2012 and its 
funding with domestic resources would generate more room for expansion of lending to the 
private sector in this period.  
Albanian  economy  continued  to  benefit  from  foreign  demand  in  2011,  though  at  more 
moderate levels than in 2010. Annual growth of Albanian exports in value for the first eleven 
months  of  the  year  was  19.9%,  implying  slower  rates  compared  with  the  corresponding 
period of a year earlier. On the other hand, imports accelerated their annual growth to 12.2%. 
Trade deficit widened by 8.1%, year on year, largely illustrating negative effects of price rise 
in global markets. A more detailed analysis of the trade deficit reveals that about 50% of its 
increase is created by the balance of electric energy exchange.  
Moreover, in real terms, according to third quarter’s data, net exports deficit narrowed and 
contributed positively to aggregate demand. 
Annualised  contraction  of  net  exports  deficit  is  assessed  to  be  resulting  from  imports  of 
goods and services decline by about 4.2% in real terms and exports upsurge by about 8.6%.  
Monetary  indicators  were  in  line  with  developments  in  the  economy’s  real  sector.  Our 
analysis  and  assessments  suggest  that  higher  monetary  supply  is  in  accordance  with 
economic  agents’  demand  for  real  money,  while  monetary  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy  are  contained.  Growth  of  M3  aggregate  was  slower  in  the  second  half  of  2011, 
influenced  by  lower  money  creation  in  foreign  currencies.  During  July–October,  annual 
average  growth  of  monetary  assets  in  the  economy  was  10.4%.  Contribution  of  private 
sector’s  demand  for  loans  remained  unchanged.  At  the  end  of  November,  its  annualised 
growth was 10.9%. Crediting remains under the influence of low demand for loans and more 
prudent lending policies by banks. Economic agents’ behaviour continues to be conditioned 
by  uncertainty  for  the  future,  which,  in  turn,  conditions  spending  and  investments  in  the 
economy.  
On the other hand, credit supply is tight, as lending standards performance shows.  
Financial  markets  during  the  second  half  of  2011  were  calm  and  reflected  relatively 
downward  premiums  on  liquidity  risk  and  inflation.  Successive  key  rate  cuts  were  swiftly 
reflected in the interbank market. In the primary market, government security yields dropped, 
reflecting the key interest rate cut as well as the low demand of the public sector for loans. 
Moreover,  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  is  expected  to  be  extended  fully  to  the 
deposits and loans market, in accordance with the transmission mechanism time lags.  
The Bank of Albania deems that a good part of above-analysed tendencies would be present 
during 2012, as well. According to our core projections, the Albanian economy will continue 
to grow during the year ahead, albeit below its potential. The country’s economic activity will 
be conditioned by the solution of the crisis in the euro-area countries, economic growth of 
partner countries, and foreign investor’s attitude to risk.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
On the other hand, economic challenges in our partner countries may be transformed into 
positive opportunities for the Albanian economy.  
Albanian  economy  attractiveness  with  low  unit  labour  costs,  macroeconomic  stability  and 
financial soundness of businesses, households and the banking system may be reflected in 
more  foreign  direct  investments.  While  our  projections  factorize  lower  foreign  demand 
contribution,  in  baseline  scenarios,  the  widening  of  Albanian  exports  market  remains  a 
potential scenario, as well. Economic growth projections presume positive consumption and 
investments  growth  at  home,  in  response  to  improvement  of  lending  terms.  The  latter  are 
expected  to  reflect  the  eased  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  reduced  risk 
premiums  in  the  financial  system.  Moreover,  reduction  of  room  for  fiscal  stimulus  and 
maintaining of stable fiscal parameters will enable the private sector to create spare funds 
and cut down risk premiums for the economy.  
Factorising  our  expectations  for  below-potential  economic  growth  and  lower  imported 
inflation, as well as in the presence of the economy’s expectations on inflation around the 
target, our projections suggest that, with 90% probability, consumer price inflation will range 
1–3% during 2012.  
 Taking  into  consideration  the  information  set  out  above,  in  the  Supervisory  Council 
assessment,  inflationary  pressures  remain  controlled  over  the  monetary  policy  relevant 
horizon. Moreover, economic agents’ expectations on inflation remain anchored to the Bank 
of  Albania’s  target  band.  At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council 
decided to cut the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points to 4.50%. This decision 
serves to comply with the medium-term inflation target and provides the appropriate 
monetary conditions to stimulate Albania’s economic activity.  
Monitoring the conformity of monetary conditions with its inflation target, in this development 
scenario,  Bank  of  Albania’s  monetary  policy  is  expected  to  continue  to  stimulate  the 
economy over 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
