Anand Sinha: Financial inclusion and urban cooperative banks 
Edited transcript of the comments by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the launch of the Financial Inclusion program of Cosmos Bank, Pune, 6 January 
2012. 
 Inputs provided by Nandakumar, S. Sankar and Bipin Nair are gratefully acknowledged.  
Shri  Shashikant  Bugde,  Chairman,  Shri  Krishnakumar  Goyal,  Vice-Chairman,  Dr.  Mukund 
Abhyankar  and  other  Directors  of  the  Cosmos  Bank,  Shri  Sudhir  Thakre,  Secretary,  Rural 
Development, Govt. of Maharashtra, all the aspiring women entrepreneurs present here this 
evening and ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here this evening amongst all of you 
on the occasion of the launch of the Cosmos Bank’s Financial Inclusion Programme. I would 
like to thank the Cosmos Bank for inviting and giving me an opportunity to be a part of this 
initiative which seeks to address one of the most pressing issues of our times. 
Cosmos  Bank  is  one  of  the  oldest  banks  in  the  country  and  has  recently  completed 
106 years  of  service.  While  nurturing  the  traditional  values  it  has  inherited,  of  serving  the 
small customer, the bank has also moved with times and has prepared itself for the future, by 
adopting new technologies and advanced banking tools to add value to its services.  
Today’s  initiative  by  the  bank  in  launching  this  ambitious  program  of  financial  inclusion  is 
very commendable. Huge participation by women entrepreneurs in today’s program, bodes 
well for the financial inclusion initiatives being undertaken by the bank. Like charity, virtues 
like thrift and discipline begin at home and what could be a better way than involving women 
in this ambitious program aimed at inculcating thrift and including, into the financial fold, the 
hitherto excluded. I am happy to note that the bank is not only helping the women by opening 
accounts and granting loans but has also undertaken the task of imparting training, educating 
them  in  preparing  their  own  accounts,  helping  them  sell  their  produce,  etc.  I  am  sure  this 
initiative by the Cosmos Bank would be a great success and would turn a new leaf in the 
financial inclusion program. 
Today’s conference offers me a wide canvas to speak on. Both Urban Cooperative Banks 
and the Financial Inclusion are two interesting topics in themselves. Combination of the two 
is, by extension, a more interesting topic. In my speech today, I would touch upon the issues 
related  to  financial  inclusion  program  and  the  role  of  cooperatives  in  taking  forward  the 
objectives of financial inclusion. 
Cooperative banking 
The cooperative movement involves autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to 
meet  their  common  economic,  social  and  cultural  needs  through  a  jointly  owned  and 
democratically  controlled  enterprise.  Cooperatives,  as  business  enterprises,  are  different 
from other firms, in view of the fact that their ownership and control are directly vested in the 
hands of the members. The cooperative structure is designed on the cooperative principles 
of mutual help, democratic decision making and open membership. As remarked by Mr. Ban 
Ki-moon,  the  UN  Secretary  General,  Cooperatives  are  a  reminder  to  the  international 
community  that  it  is  possible  to  pursue  both  economic  viability  and  social  responsibility. 
Incidentally,  the  current  year  2012  is  declared  by  the  UN  as  the  International  Year  of 
Cooperatives. Voluntary and open membership, democratic control, economic participation, 
autonomy, training and concern for the community are some of the overarching values with 
which the cooperatives have been associated with. 
The Cooperative movement has a long history in India. Cooperative societies were set up in 
India  towards  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century  drawing  inspiration  from  the  success  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
experiments  related  to  the  cooperative  movement  in  Britain  and  the  cooperative  credit 
movement in Germany. Since inception, the UCBs have been playing an important role in the 
socio-economic  development  of  the  country  by  making  available  institutional  credit  at 
affordable  cost,  particularly,  in  the  urban  and  semi-urban  areas.  The  extension  of  the 
Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949  to  cooperative  societies,  with  effect  from  1st  March,  1966, 
brought  the  cooperative  banks  within  the  ambit  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  regulation  and 
supervision. Correspondingly, deposit insurance cover was also extended by DICGC to the 
co-operative banks. While there has been a gradual growth in the UCB business over the 
period,  with  deposits  growing  from  Rs  167  crore  to  Rs  2,  12,  031  crore  and  advances 
growing from Rs. 153 crore to Rs. 1, 36,341 crore during the period 1966 to 2011, the growth 
of UCBs in the total banking business has not been commensurate with the overall growth of 
the banking sector. Despite their large number, UCBs constitute a very small market share 
with 3.5 per cent (as of March 31 2010) of the total banking sector.  
Having  briefly  touched  upon  UCBs  let  me  now  draw  your  attention  to  the  other  important 
topic of the day, Financial Inclusion. 
Financial inclusion 
Financial Inclusion is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and 
services  needed  by  all  sections  of  the  society  in  general,  and  vulnerable  groups  such  as 
weaker sections and low income groups in particular, at an affordable cost and in a fair and 
transparent manner by regulated mainstream institutional players. 
Financial inclusion for an inclusive growth  
Traditionally, we have observed that the poor are not welcomed to the banking fold with a 
misconception that they are not bankable and that there is no business opportunity in offering 
services to the under-privileged and poor people in the semi-urban rural areas and to slum-
dwellers in the metropolitan cities. Banks and financial institutions had been, till recent times, 
financially excluding these people on the pretext that;  
They have no or few assets,  
 
They have nothing to offer as collateral,  
 
They have no business experience,  
 
They cannot be trained for availing financial services,  
 
They have no credit history, and  
 
They cannot understand the nuances of banking due to illiteracy or lower education.  
 
The misconceptions are slowly giving way to the belief that inclusive growth is necessary for 
the overall growth and development and that the excluded need to be brought into the fold of 
financial  system.  Given  the  belief  that  credit  is  a  basic  human  right,  as  advocated  by  the 
Nobel Laureate, Professor Muhammad Yunus, and that the poor can overcome poverty by 
generating  their  own  employment  and  income,  we  have  to  develop,  on  an  urgent  basis,  a 
financial  system  which  takes  care  of  the  needs  of  the  poor.  Access  to  affordable  financial 
services – especially credit and insurance – enlarges livelihood opportunities and empowers 
the poor to take charge of their lives. Such empowerment aids social growth of the economy 
on a sustainable basis. Apart from these benefits, Financial Inclusion imparts formal identity, 
provides access to the payments system and to safety nets such as deposit insurance.  
Financial Inclusion is critical for achieving inclusive growth in the country. To achieve that, we 
have to expand our scope of financial inclusion initiatives to reach out to people at the grass-
root level. We have adopted a two pronged strategy to achieve this objective:  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(a) 
(b) 
Through voluntary effort by the banking community by evolving various strategies to 
bring  unbanked  people  within  the  ambit  of  the  banking  sector,  and,  more 
importantly;  
By  creating  a  demand  by  the  people  themselves  to  pull  the  banks,  financial 
institutions and other service providers towards them to offer banking and financial 
services at a competitive and affordable rate.  
The  Financial  Inclusion  initiatives  will  go  a  long  way  in  not  only  financially  including  and 
empowering the people but also as an avenue of providing excellent business opportunities 
for the financial market participants. Contrary to common perception, financial inclusion is a 
potentially viable business proposition because of the huge untapped market that it seeks to 
bring into the fold of banking services. Financial inclusion, prima facie, needs to be viewed as 
“money at the bottom of the pyramid” and business models should be so designed to be at 
least self-supporting in the initial phase and profit-making in the long run. It is important to 
keep in mind that service provided should be at an affordable cost. 
Self help groups: 
The  SHG-bank  linkage  model  draws  inspiration  from  the  co-operative  movement  and 
involves  an  intensive  effort  to  move  away  from  traditional  reliance  on  concessionary 
refinance from financial institutions and envisages making the rural poor self-supporting and 
self-sustaining. This delivery mechanism is indeed a blend of the proximity, responsiveness 
&  flexibility  of  an  informal  system  and  the  financial  &  infrastructural  back-up  of  a  formal 
system.  Self  Help  Groups  are  playing  a  very  important  role  in  the  process  of  financial 
inclusion. SHGs are groups of people who get together and pool money from their savings 
and lend money among themselves. The SHG is given loans against the group members’ 
guarantee. Peer pressure within the group helps in improving recoveries. 
The  SHG-Bank  linkage  program,  in  India,  which  commenced  in  1992,  has  grown 
phenomenally.  The  program  which  started  with  a  target  of  500  SHGs  in  1992  now  has 
74.62 lakh  SHG  covering  over  97  million  rural  households.  Of  the  total  74.62  lakh  SHGs, 
over 47.8 lakh SHGs have access to direct credit facilities from banks with an outstanding 
loan amount of Rs. 31,221 crore as at end of March 2011. One of the most distinguishing 
features of the program is that a majority (81.7 per cent) of the SHGs are exclusive woman 
groups. Women SHGs have accounted for 75.5 per cent of the total savings and 83.7 per 
cent of the total loan outstanding of SHGs in 2010–11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
SHGs have also proven to be profitable propositions for rural and semi-urban bank branches 
with over 95% of recovery and aggregated transactions (one SHG means 10 to 20 individual 
members).  Unlike  the  majority  of  agriculture  and  rural  clients,  SHGs  operate  their  saving 
accounts  on  a  regular  basis,  and  they  maintain  credit  balances  in  their  accounts.  It  is  a 
unique model with many challenges and many more opportunities. Above all, the SHG has 
given the poor women an identity, access to information, and bargaining power.  
Poor  women  have  always  had  to  bear  the  double  burden  of  being  poor  and  women.  The 
SHG  model  opens  up  new  possibilities  for  the  member-borrowers  especially  women. 
Interaction among members affords an insight into the inter & intra-household dynamics with 
women  gaining  a  greater  say  in  household  decision-making.  Economic  upliftment  through 
this  linkage  gives  a  sense  of  purpose,  direction  and  new  meaning  to  lives  of  member-
borrowers. 
It is a well known fact that every individual, howsoever poor he/she may be, has the potential 
to  save.  SHGs  have  become  effective  instruments  in  realizing  that  potential.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  SHG  model  generally  requires  compulsory  savings  from  members.  SHGs 
have  inculcated  the  saving  habit  among  the  poor  and  it  is  observed  that  the  SHG  saving 
amounts and their corpuses are growing at very high rate year after year.  
To achieve better results, banks purveying micro credit would have to strive to graduate from 
enterprise formation orientation to enterprise transformation orientation in terms of providing 
technical assistance and training to help the existing micro-enterprises make a quantitative 
and qualitative leap in terms of scale of production and marketing.  
An extremely important benefit of this model is the empowerment effect. Broad indicators of 
poverty such as vulnerability, physical & social isolation, powerlessness, insecurity and lack 
of self-respect have always been major roadblocks in the development of the poor. Interface 
with member-borrowers has revealed that the impact of SHG interactions on the borrowers’ 
sense of self has been remarkable and this transformation is bound to result in many other 
significant  socio-economic  changes.  In  fact,  the  courage  with  which  some  of  the  women 
today spoke on the stage, is a manifestation of the empowerment brought about by SHG. 
Now let me come to the crucial part of my talk today – Role of banks, particularly UCBs, in 
furthering financial inclusion, the facilitating role played by the Reserve Bank and the road 
ahead. 
It is well recognized that there are many supply side and demand side factors impeding the 
inclusive growth, such lack of awareness about the financial products, unaffordable products, 
high  transaction  costs,  and  products  which  are  not  convenient  or  inflexible.  Addressing 
demand side factors are as much important as addressing the supply side factors. Opening 
of more bank branches, offering of customized products etc address the supply side factors 
while  the  financial  literacy  initiatives  address  the  demand  side  factors  by  sensitizing  the 
people of the need for and benefits of joining the formal financial system.  
UCBs,  by  their  structure  and  nature  of  clientele,  are  well  designed  to  cater  to  financial 
inclusion. The very basis of co-operative structure is mutual help and thrift. Considering the 
specific features of UCBs such as their organizational structure (member driven), clientele, 
easy  access  and  reputation  as  a  friendly  neighbourhood  bank,  these  highly  localised 
institutions have the potential for widening and deepening financial inclusion in their area of 
operation.  
Measures undertaken to promote financial inclusion 
It  has  been  RBI’s  endeavour  to  remove  all  hurdles  in  the  way  of  its  regulated  entities  in 
achieving  financial  inclusion  objectives.  Some  of  the  salient  measures  undertaken  in  this 
regard are: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Introduction of new products 
(i) 
Opening  of  “No-Frills”  accounts:  A  “No  Frills”  account  is  one  for  which  no 
minimum balance is insisted upon and for which there are no service charges for not 
maintaining the minimum balance, introduced as per RBI directive in 2005. Banks 
have been advised to provide small Over Drafts in these “no frill” accounts.  
General Credit Cards (GCC)/Kisan Credit Cards (KCC): GCCs/KCCs help purvey 
credit where the credit facility is in the nature of a revolving credit entitling the holder 
to withdraw up to the limit sanctioned., Limits are sanctioned without insistence on 
security or purpose, based on the assessment of household cash flows. Interest rate 
on the facility is completely deregulated.  
Relaxed regulatory requirements  
i. 
Relaxed regulatory dispensation on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms: KYC 
requirements  for  small  accounts  were  relaxed  in  August  2005,  by  stipulating  that 
introduction by an account holder, who has been subjected to full KYC drill, would 
suffice  for  opening  such  accounts,  or,  that  the  bank  can  take  any  evidence  to  its 
satisfaction as to the identity and address of the customer. During the year, it has 
been further relaxed to include job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer 
of the State Government or the letters issued by the Unique Identification Authority 
of  India  containing  details  of  name,  address  and  AADHAAR  number  as  a  valid 
identity proof.  
Simplified  branch  authorisation:  To  increase  the  reach  of  banking  network, 
domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks  have  earlier  been  permitted  to  freely  open 
branches in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centres (with population of less than 1,00,000) under 
general  permission,  subject  to  reporting.  Recently,  incentives  have  been  provided 
for  opening  branches  in  Tier  2  centres  also.  Further,  domestic  scheduled 
commercial banks have been permitted to open branches in rural, semi urban and 
urban  centres  in  the  North  Eastern  States  and  Sikkim,  without  the  need  to  take 
permission from Reserve Bank in each case, subject to reporting.  
Business  Correspondent/  Business  Facilitator:  In  January  2006,  the  Reserve 
Bank permitted banks to engage Business Facilitator and Business Correspondent 
(BC) as intermediaries for providing financial and banking services. The BC model 
allows banks to provide door step delivery of services especially “cash in – cash out” 
transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing the 
last mile problem. The list of eligible individuals/entities who can be engaged as BCs 
is being enlarged from time to time. For-profit companies have also been allowed to 
be  engaged  as  BCs.  As  on  Sep  2011,  banks  have  reported  deploying  75316 
BCs which covered 97979 villages. 
Opening of branches in unbanked rural centres: A need was felt for opening of 
more brick and mortar branches, besides the use of BCs, to further improve banking 
penetration and, more importantly, financial inclusion. Accordingly, banks have been 
mandated in the Monetary Policy Statement – April 2011, to allocate at least 25 per 
cent of the total number of branches to be opened during a year in unbanked rural 
centres. 
Special  Dispensation  scheme  for  opening  of  branches  in  NER-  To  improve 
banking  penetration  in  hitherto  unbanked  North-East  region,  the  Reserve  Bank 
asked the State Governments and banks to identify centres where there is a need 
for setting up either full-fledged branches or those offering forex facilities, handling 
government  business  or  for  meeting  currency  requirements.  It  has  also  offered  to 
fund  the  capital  and  running  costs  for  five  years  provided  the  State  Government 
(ii) 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
vi. 
vii. 
concerned  is  willing  to  make  available  the  premises  and  put  in  place  appropriate 
security arrangements.  
Financial Inclusion Plan for Banks: In our effort to achieve a sustained, planned 
and structured financial inclusion, all public and private sector banks were advised 
to put in place a Board approved three year Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP). These 
plans  broadly  include  self  determined  targets  in  respect  of  rural  brick  and  mortar 
branches to be opened; business correspondents (BC) to be employed; coverage of 
unbanked villages with population above 2000 as also other unbanked villages with 
population below 2000 through branches/BCs/other modes; no-frill accounts opened 
including  through  BC-ICT;  Kisan  Credit  Cards  (KCC)  and  General  Credit  Cards 
(GCC);  and  other  specific  products  designed  by  them  to  cater  to  the  financially 
excluded  segments.  Banks  were  advised  to  integrate  Board  approved  FIPs  with 
their business plans and to include the criteria on financial inclusion as a parameter 
in  the  performance  evaluation  of  their  staff.  The  implementation  of  these  plans  is 
being closely monitored by the Reserve Bank.  
Measures  specific  to  UCBs:  UCBs  have  been  advised  to  step  up  their  financial 
inclusion efforts by utilizing appropriate technology. Certain other measures such as 
enhancing maximum limits on unsecured loans and advances, revising credit limits 
permitted  for  individual  housing  loans,  extension  of  area  of  operations  for  UCBs, 
permitting  lending  to  SHGs  and  JLGs  and  permitting  the  use  of  BCs  have  been 
undertaken to further the financial inclusion drive.  
Untapped potential for the UCBs – financial inclusion 
The client profile of UCBs today predominantly consists of priority sector segments viz. small 
business  establishments,  SSI,  retail  traders,  self-employed  etc.,  who  would  not,  normally, 
find it easy to access commercial banks. The priority sector loans of the sector are today at 
46  %  as  against  the  prescribed  target  of  40  %.  Nearly  90  %  of  the  loan  accounts  of  the 
sector  are  less  than  Rs  five  lakh  in  value.  To  this  extent,  UCBs  are  already  into  financial 
inclusion. However, there remains a huge hidden potential waiting to be tapped. Given the 
large  number  of  small  urban  co-operative  banks,  and  with  271  districts  not  having  any 
presence  of  UCBs,  there  exists  a  huge  potential  for  UCBs  to  increase  their  spread  and 
business  and  also  participate  in  the  national  mission  of  financial  inclusion.  Given  their 
respective  sizes,  it  may  well  appear  to  be  a  David  vs.  Goliath  contest  as  UCBs  need  to 
compete with larger commercial banks in vying for the unbanked pie. However, there exists a 
distinct first mover advantage which the UCBs have, in addition to their vast customer base. 
UCBs need to capitalise on this advantage, else their potential customers will be covered by 
the  commercial  and  regional  rural  banks  and  UCBs  will  lose  a  good  business  opportunity. 
Initially, it may appear that taking banking services to the sections constituting the “bottom of 
the pyramid” may not be possible or viable, but as various studies reveal, even the relatively 
low margins on high volumes can be a profitable proposition. 
In semi-urban and rural areas, there are a number of unbanked and under banked districts 
inhabited by people like artisans, migrant labour, small businessmen, retailers etc., who find 
it difficult to join the formal financial sector and make use of various opportunities. It is highly 
desirable on social as well as economic grounds that members of this class are brought into 
the banking fold and the UCBs can certainly take a lead in this. UCBs should design their 
business  model  to  be  self-supporting  initially,  and  profitable  in  the  long  run.  They  should 
integrate  their  financial  inclusion  plan  into  their  annual  business  plans.  UCBs  should  give 
wide publicity to their services to connect with large population segments. It is also important 
to keep in mind that the service provided should be at an affordable cost and in this regard, 
technology will play a big part. With the wide reach of mobiles, mobile banking as an avenue 
for  furthering  financial  inclusion  has  to  be  explored.  Adoption  of  appropriate  and  effective 
technology, therefore, could be the key for financial inclusion efforts to succeed. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
The  current  policy  of  inclusive  growth  with  financial  stability  cannot  be  achieved  without 
ensuring  universal  financial  inclusion.  Though  the  efforts  for  universalisation  of  financial 
inclusion are already underway, there are a number of challenges in this endeavour going 
forward with about 480000 villages yet to be provided with banking services. The financial 
inclusion for the underprivileged will lead to host of downstream opportunities such as jobs 
for the participants to work as BCs at remote villages, technology providers etc., not to speak 
of  the  huge  economic  growth  the  financial  inclusion  measures  trigger.  Banks  need  to 
perceive  Financial  Inclusion  as  a  profitable  business  model  and  not  as  an  obligation.  This 
would  be  possible  only  if  banks  strive  towards  offering  more  and  more  credit  products  to 
customers  captured  as  part  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  Plan  and  lower  transaction  cost  by 
leveraging  technology.  The  key  is  to  establish  an  appropriate  business  delivery  model 
through the involvement of all stakeholders to make Financial Inclusion a reality. 
With regard to financial education, it is crucial to harness the power of women. Just as it is 
said  that  a  woman  getting  educated  would  educate  the  family,  a  woman  being  financially 
literate and included, would pave way for inclusion of all members in the family. Given that 
levels of general and financial literacy are fairly low among women, the effort should be to 
devise innovative programmes of financial literacy targeted towards women. In this context, it 
would  be  useful  to  study  successful  experiments  from  NGOs  such  as  Self-Employed 
Women’s Association (SEWA) which has started a financial counselling training service for 
poor  self-employed  women,  including  training  for  trainers,  and  identify  how  these  one-off 
successes can be replicated on a larger scale in a cost effective way. 
Financial inclusion will act as a source of empowerment and allow people to participate more 
effectively in the economic and social process. Banking on the poor could turn out to be a 
rich  banking  proposition.  Financial  inclusion  is  a  win-win  opportunity  for  the  poor,  for  the 
banks and for the nation. Urban Co-operative Banks have a duty to rise up to meet these 
aspirations,  convert  the  perceived  weakness  into  exciting  opportunities  and  facilitate 
inclusive growth. I wish the Cosmos Bank the very best in their Financial Inclusion initiatives. 
Thank you. 
References: 
1. 
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2011), “Financial Inclusion – A road India needs to travel”, Article 
published in www.livemint.com on Oct 22, 2011  
Rangarajan, C. (2008), Report of the Committee on Financial Inclusion  
Status of Microfinance in India: 2010–11, NABARD 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
