Ardian Fullani: Albania’s economic and financial developments in 2011 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  presentation  of  the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  Annual  Report  2011  to  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economy  and 
Finance, Tirana, 30 April 2012. 
 Honourable Chair,  
Distinguished Members of the Committee, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Before starting my speech, I would appreciate your kind understanding about the fact that the 
period after the submission of the Report has enriched the 2011’s economic data inventory 
with new information. It is understandable why this information is not incorporated into the 
submitted material. In the following, I will address overall economic developments based on 
the latest information, trying to also identify the differences between the latest data and the 
version available to you.  
 Our  annual  meeting  on  introducing  Bank  of  Albania’s  Annual  Report  remains  a  special 
pleasure for me. More than a legal obligation, the Bank of Albania considers this Report as 
an  important  step  to  enhance  institutional  transparency,  foster  accountability  and  intensify 
the  dialogue  with  all  economic  policy-makers  and  stakeholders.  Let  me  now  start  with  an 
overview of main conclusions of the Report.  
The  economic  activity  recorded  positive  growth  rates,  while  the  macroeconomic  balances 
remained stable or were further strengthened. It should be emphasized that this activity was 
conducted  against  the  backdrop  of  deteriorating  global  economic  and  financial  situation  in 
2011.  
INSTAT’s data reveal that Albania’ s economy grew 3.1% in 2011, supported mainly by the 
increased external demand for goods and services, whilst the domestic demand performed 
sluggishly.  
The  economic  growth  was  materialised  into  a  better  performance  of  services  sector  and 
individual branches of industry, while construction continues to suffer from sluggish demand 
and high inventory, especially of residential buildings.  
These developments reflect the internal restructuring of the economy and Albanian business, 
in  response  to  changed  aggregate  demand  composition  and  the  need  for  enhancing  the 
economic competitiveness in the region and world-wide.  
Consumer  price  inflation  appeared  volatile  in  2011,  due  to  upward  prices  in  international 
markets  and  other  supply-side  shocks.  However,  the  past  year’s  average  annual  inflation 
was 3.5%, i.e., in line with Bank of Albania’s target. The meeting of inflation target was driven 
by  low  inflationary  pressures  from  the  domestic  economy,  controlled  monetary  expansion 
and  anchored  inflationary  expectations.  Meeting  inflation  target  amidst  a  challenging 
environment,  full  of  unexpected  developments,  reflects  the  effectiveness  and  credibility  of 
Bank of Albania’s monetary policy. Our unwavering commitment to maintaining price stability 
has led to anchoring inflationary expectations. 
Inflation anchoring has brought about direct benefits to the economy, in the form of mitigating 
economic fluctuations and reducing the intermediation cost of macroeconomic policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Year 2011 was featured by an increasing harmonization of macroeconomic policies. These 
policies  stimulated  the  Albanian  economy,  but  were  prudent  in  terms  of  maintaining 
macroeconomic and financial stability in the country.  
In particular, the tightening fiscal policy made room for increasing monetary stimulus in the 
economy  over  the  second  half  of  the  year.  Along  with  continuous  liquidity  injection,  key 
interest rate cuts were soon passed on to the short-term financial market segment, while the 
easing monetary policy direction was followed by long-term interest rates.  
Fiscal policy indicated an upward orientation towards consolidation over the past year. This 
commitment was reflected in maintaining the budget deficit at about 3.5% of GDP and the 
public debt at about 58.1% of GDP.  
Although the prudent fiscal policy has a short-term cost in the form of absent fiscal stimulus, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  long-term  benefits  deriving  from  reduced  risk  premia 
make the pursuit of this policy necessary in the short and medium run.  
Albania’s  trade  and  financial  relations  with  foreign  partner  countries  increased  in  2011, 
reflecting mainly the satisfactory growth of Albanian exports and the increased import bill as 
a consequence of upward prices in international markets. Current account deficit accounted 
for 12.1% of GDP, continuing to illustrate a structural vulnerability in the economy. 
The handling of this issue requires ongoing and speeded-up structural-reforms, in order to 
promote  competitiveness  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  establish  appropriate  balances 
among consumption, savings and investments in the economy.  
The  banking  system  supported  the  economic  development  in  2011  with  loans,  liquidity, 
financial products and payment instruments. Unlike the experience of many other countries, 
loan portfolio of the economy increased over the past year; banking supervision framework 
was  improved  and  financial  stability  was  further  strengthened.  Although  non-performing 
loans  increased,  the  Albanian  banking  system,  responding  to  strengthened  prudential 
regulations  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  our  initiatives  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  its 
balance,  remains  solid,  with  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  to  support  the  economic 
development.  
I  will  proceed  with  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  foregoing  issues,  focusing  on  Bank  of 
Albania’s main directions.  
  Economic and financial highlights for 2011  
1. 
GDP expanded by 3.1% in 2011. Likewise in 2010, external demand was the main driver to 
economic  growth,  though  its  impact  pursued  a  moderating  trend  due  to  the  slowdown  in 
partner  countries’  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  domestic  demand  remained  relatively 
sluggish.  
Consumption and private investments remained under the impact of consumers and private 
businesses.  These  significant  aggregate  demand  components  did  not  reveal  any  strong 
signs of recovery over the past year, despite the improving financial conditions. The sluggish 
consumer spending reflected the continuation of consumers’ high propensity to save and 
the heightened uncertainty surrounding the future.  
On the other hand, the presence of spare production capacities and tight lending conditions 
gave  rise  to  a  slow  performance  of  private  investments.  Judging  from  the  distribution  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit flows, these investments were mainly allocated to industry and services sectors, which 
benefited the most from the external demand performance.  
In 2011, fiscal policy was oriented towards further consolidation of fiscal indicators in order 
to preserve the public debt thresholds. This approach established a mild fiscal stimulus in the 
economy, concentrated mainly in the first and fourth quarters of the year. Budget deficit was 
3.5% of GDP, up by 0.5 percentage points, y-o-y. The budget deficit was determined by the 
slow increase in fiscal revenues and expenditures. Revenues increased by 1.8% y-o-y, due 
to decelerated economic activity. Their performance also determined the prudent approach in 
carrying out expenditures, which rose by 7% from the previous year.  
The  budget  deficit  was  financed  by  domestic  borrowing  with  an  increasing  orientation 
towards longer maturities, thereby improving the public debt maturity structure and lowering 
the  refinancing  risk.  The  low  public  sector  demand  for  financing  was  reflected  in  the 
decreased  yields  on  government  securities  and  also  made  more  room  for  higher  private 
sector financing.  
Adverse  developments  in  external  economy  were  also  reflected  in  the  balance  of 
payments. The curbed economic growth in Albania’s trade partner countries was reflected in 
decelerated exports, which reduced their annual growth rate to 20.0%. On the other hand, 
high global market prices materialized into 12.4% increase in import expenditures, in 2011. 
These  developments  reversed  the  adjustment  trend  of  the  current  account  deficit  pursued 
over the past two years. Current account deficit reached 12.1% of GDP, up by 12.5% from 
2010.  Net  flows  in  capital  and  financial  account  increased  by  5.6%  and  contributed  to 
financing 80.4% of the current account.  
Bank  of  Albania’s  international  reserve  remained  almost  unchanged  at  EUR  1.9  billion, 
sufficient to cover 4.4 months of imports of goods and services.  
In line with the economic activity performance, employment figures showed gradual signs of 
recovery  in  2011.  According  to  INSTAT’s  data,  the  average  number  of  employed  people 
increased by 1.7%, mainly as a result of higher employment in the private non-agricultural 
sector, while the number of people employed in the public sector maintained the downtrend 
that  had  begun  in  the  last  quarter  of  2010.  The  number  of  unemployed  people  remained 
almost unchanged from the previous year. Despite the higher employment in the economy, 
unemployment  rate  dropped  slightly  by  only  0.2  percentage  points  to  13.3%  at  end-2011. 
The presence of the negative output gap and the incomplete utilization of capacities kept the 
unemployment  rate  above  13%  over  2011,  thereby  conditioning  the  dynamics  of  nominal 
wage increase in economy.  
Monetary indicators in 2011 were in line with the real-economy developments, featured by 
a moderate monetary supply growth, low demand of the economy for funding and steadily 
high  propensity  of  consumers  to  save.  The  broad  money  increased  by  9.2%,  y-o-y. 
Stimulating measures taken by the Bank of Albania, along with good liquidity condition and 
well capitalisation of the banking system, supported the increase of lending to the economy 
in 2011.  
Private  sector  credit  was  up  by  11.7%  on  average,  improving  from  a  year  earlier. 
Nonetheless,  the  increase  in  bank  lending  remains  contained  due  to  supply  and  demand 
factors. The sluggish consumption and investments were reflected in a low demand for loans 
and mainly oriented towards shorter-term maturities. On the other hand, higher prudence by 
banks in crediting was reflected in tighter terms of credit supply.  
Financial  markets  were  generally  stable  and  evidenced  improved  liquidity  conditions  and 
controlled risk premia. Money market interest rates pursued a downward trajectory, due to 
easing policy of the Bank of Albania and satisfactory liquidity levels.  
While  costs  for  the  private  sector  credit  were  lower  than  a  year  earlier,  the  sluggish 
performance of the economy and uncertainties about its outlook made the trend appear more 
moderate in interest rates applied on lending to this sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Pressures  on  foreign  exchange  market  were  low  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  national 
currency  against  the  major  foreign  currencies  was  stable,  being  a  supporting  factor  to 
controlling  inflationary  pressures  at  home  and  increasing  the  certainty  in  foreign  trade 
relations.  
in 
Inflation and monetary policy  
2. 
In 2011, average annual consumer price inflation was 3.5%, remaining close to the previous 
year’s average inflation rate. The performance of inflation was featured by a high volatility in 
the past year. Over the first and second quarters, annual inflation rate approached the upper 
limit of the targeted band, mainly driven by rapid and sharp price rise for food and primary 
commodities 
international  markets.  These  pressures  were  short-term  and  soon 
moderated; over the second half of the year, inflation started to fall gradually, marking 1.7% 
in December. Besides the mitigation of imported inflation, the cancelling out of the effect of 
regulated price increases in the previous year and the lack of any further increase in them 
are factors impacting on the downward trend of the annual inflation rate.  
From the viewpoint of macroeconomic factors, the annual inflation volatility was induced by 
supply-side factors, while the demand-side inflationary pressures remained low.  
Anchored  inflation  expectations  prevented  transmission  of  supply  shocks  to  the  cost 
structure of the Albanian economy, dwarfing the effect of the supply shocks only on the first 
round effects. On the other hand, below-potential growth of the Albanian economy led to an 
incomplete utilization of production capacities, generating moderate pressures on wages and 
production costs in the economy. Also, the sluggish aggregate demand reduced businesses’ 
ability to dictate prices in the economy and hence their profit margins remained at historically 
low levels.  
These  developments  were  also  reflected  in  the  performance  of  core  inflation,  which 
fluctuated  around  the  lower  half  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  band.  Finally,  the  Bank  of 
Albania prudentially supplied the economy with liquidity and monetary expansion was in line 
with the economy’s needs for monetary assets, thus preventing the generation of inflationary 
monetary impulses.  
Bank of Albania’s monetary policy maintained its expansionary nature in 2011, responding 
to the performance of inflationary pressures balance and taking into account the contained 
fiscal stimulus. The sharp price increase in international markets and its rapid pass-through 
to domestic consumer prices in early 2011, led to key interest rate rise by 0.25 percentage 
points in March. Such a move aimed at anchoring inflationary expectations and preventing 
second-round  effects  on  inflation,  against  the  setting  of  projections  for  further  international 
price increases. Over the second half of the year, upon moderation of inflationary pressures 
and  inflation’s  falling  back  within  the  target,  as  well  as  upon  the  shifting  of  expected 
inflationary pressures balance downward, the monetary policy became strongly stimulating. 
The Bank of Albania carried out two consecutive key interest rate cuts, taking the key interest 
rate in the economy to the lowest historical level (to 4.75%).  
The stimulating policy through the key interest rate was accompanied by continuous liquidity 
injections  into  the  financial  market.  Overall,  the  monetary  policy  pursued  in  2011  and  the 
sluggish demand for public sector financing helped in controlling the risk premia, leading to 
lower  financing  costs  and  increased  financial  intermediation  in  the  national  currency.  The 
latter was also helped by a change to the required reserve instrument, by means of which the 
foreign 
to  discourage 
foreign-currency intermediation and improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
The issue of financial euroization in Albania will continue to be on the focus of the Bank of 
Albania’s monetary policy in the future.  
remuneration  was  abrogated. 
It  aimed 
required 
reserve 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Banking system and supervision  
3. 
The Albanian banking system has faced numerous challenges over the recent years and has 
succeeded  in  overcoming  them,  always  maintaining  sound  parameters  of  liquidity  and 
capitalisation.  Even  in  2011,  banking  system  activity  was  conducted  in  an  unfavourable 
context of international financial markets and the sluggish demand for loans and economic 
growth at home. Regardless of these factors, banks in Albania remained well capitalised and 
healthy. Economic growth slowdown was reflected in moderate performance of crediting and 
increase in non-performing loans, whereas bank  liquidity condition improved. During 2011, 
prudence  for  monitoring  the  banking  system  was  heightened  for  early  identification  of 
potential risks, and the regulatory framework was consolidated.  
Stress-test  results  show  that  the  banking  system  remained  stable  and  resilient  to  large 
shocks on macroeconomic indicators and parameters.  
Following, I would like to focus on several main indicators of the banking system in 2011, as 
this system remains the main actor of financial intermediation in Albania.  
Banking system highlights  
At end-2011, the banking system assets accounted for about 85% of GDP, from about 81% 
at  end-2010.  Financial  profit  of  the  banking  system  was  downward,  with  a  significant 
increase in provisioning expenses playing a determinant role. In the framework of absorbing 
any potential losses from credit risk, the banking sector increased the provisioning by about 
52.4%  from  a  year  earlier.  By  contrast,  net  operating  profit  was  up  by  about  7.7%,  which 
shows that the banks have generally achieved a stable net profit and volume from their core 
activities.  
The banking system profitability, which is estimated through return on assets and return on 
equity, is positive but lower than a year earlier, whereas the effectiveness indicator is higher.  
As at end-2011, the capital adequacy ratio of the banking system was about 15.6%, being 
higher than in 2010 and significantly higher than the 12 % minimum regulatory requirement.  
Supervision  
During 2011, the supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions was strengthened 
in  accordance  with  international  standards  and  dynamic  requirements  that  the  financial 
situation in European market has brought about. On-site examinations aimed at a complete 
evaluation of institutions’ risk profile, followed by examinations initiated from appearance of 
specific issues at licensed institutions. Overall, the system operated in accordance with the 
requirements of the legal and regulatory framework. Year 2011 recorded the finalisation of a 
number of new regulations and amendments to some other banking supervision regulations, 
aiming  at  alignment  with  Basel  Committee  standards,  European  Union  directives  and  best 
practices on banking regulation and supervision.  
I would highlight here, regulations on: credit risk, liquidity and operational risk management; 
enhancement  of  financial  institutions’  transparency  to  their  clients;  and,  expansion, 
diversification and well functioning of business processes of financial institutions. In order to 
address the liquidity risk, at end-2011, some regulatory amendments were made, including 
re-definition  of  liquid  assets,  increase  in  the  minimum  regulatory  threshold  liquid  assets  to 
short-term liabilities ratio to 25%, and the start of implementation of two separate limits for 
the indicator in the national currency and in foreign currency at the minimum level of 20%. 
Banks responded swiftly to this decision of the Bank of Albania by increasing their liquidity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The supervision of the banking system and assessment of the financial system stability show 
that exposure to credit risk has increased, as a consequence of increased non-performing 
loans to outstanding loans in 2011.  
As a result, loan portfolio quality indicator – non-performing loans to total outstanding loans 
of the banking system – increased by 4.8 percentage points, settling at 18.8%. Nonetheless, 
stress-tests have revealed that the banking system is resilient to shocks that may come from 
extreme deterioration of this indicator.  
Concerning the foreign-exchange risk, the indicator of open foreign-exchange position of the 
banking system shows a long position at 3.94% to the regulatory capital. Compared with the 
maximum  regulatory  threshold  of  30%,  this  figure  depicts  a  low  level  of  exposure  of  the 
Albanian banking system to the foreign exchange risk.  
As regards exposure to interest rate risk, the spread between assets and liabilities repricsed 
up to three months, accounted for 5.1% of earning assets, which shows a low exposure to 
interest rate fluctuations at system level.  
Moreover, during 2011, the banking system performed positively in terms of compliance with 
new standards and regulations on operational risk management approved over the year.  
Issues related to transparency and money laundering prevention were an important part of 
supervision  in  2011.  To  monitor  them,  a  number  of  examinations  on  banks  and  non-bank 
financial  institutions,  including  bureaux  de  change,  have  been  conducted.  They  have 
revealed that the entities have generally taken preventive measures.  
Transparency and publication of information were subject to reforms in 2011 and aimed at 
establishing a more appropriate business climate for banks and providing higher protection to 
the  public.  Banks,  on  their  side,  have  responded  positively  by  adapting  their  internal 
regulatory framework in line with these changes.  
Further  improvement  is  needed  to  enhance  the  transparency  with  regard  to  credit 
agreements, which have been a source of customer complaint and on focus of examinations 
on  transparency  and  corrective  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  The  practices  for 
deposit and account estimation, as well as disclosure and addressing of customer complaints 
are generally regarded as less problematic.  
Supervision of non-bank financial institutions is also a functional part of the Bank of Albania. 
Their  number  amounted  to  19,  from  17  a  year  earlier;  their  specific  share  remained 
unchanged, accounting for 3.1% of banking system assets. During 2011, their activity posted 
moderate growth with regard to total assets, loan portfolio and financial profit.  
Overall,  non-bank 
framework  and 
supervision  standards.  However,  on-site  examinations  have  identified  several  problems, 
thereby making appropriate recommendations related to them.  
Among  them,  we  would  highlight  the  need  to:  improve  lending  process;  revise  internal 
regulatory framework; enhance transparency to clients, etc.  
The expansion dynamics of the financial sector activity is reflected in the licensing process. 
During 2011, additional activities requested by banks and non-bank financial institutions were 
approved,  consisting  in  introducing  new  market  products  and  diversifying  the  existing 
products of financial institutions. Moreover, a preliminary approval was granted to new bank 
branches and agencies (10), but at low paces, whereas the activity of some bank branches 
and agencies was closed (11). As at year-end, there were 528 bank branches and agencies 
operating in the country and 1 branch operating abroad.  
Regarding supervision of the financial activity under the jurisdiction of the Bank of Albania, 
allow  me  to  reiterate  that  it  remains  within  the  security  parameters  and  is  resilient  to 
unexpected shocks.  
institutions  have  adhered 
to  regulatory 
financial 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  committed  to  monitoring  the  Albanian  financial  system 
rigorously and vigilantly, aiming at identifying early the potential risks and taking corrective 
measures to prevent them.  
Besides the foregoing directions of Bank of Albania’s work, I would proceed with some other 
activities  of  our  work,  which  contribute  not  only  to  fulfilment  of  our  legal  tasks,  but  also  to 
development of the financial system and market economy in Albania.  
Promoting payment system  
Other Bank of Albania activities  
Bank of Albania’s role in the European integration  
4. 
 
In  the  light  of  the  objective  for  Albania’s  integration  in  the  European  Union,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  has  strived  for  aligning  its  activities  and  regulations  with  the  European  Union 
directives and standards.  
Conform  to  institutional  commitments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  regularly  contributed  to 
reporting  according  to  respective  chapters  of  the  acquis  communautaire,  reflecting  the 
progress achieved on the approximation of Albanian regulatory framework to EU legislation 
and attainment of European standards. With regard to Bank of Albania’s activity, the EC in its 
Progress Report of October for Albania, inter alia, commented positively that the monetary 
policy  has  successfully  helped  in  keeping  inflation  stable  and  the  banking  sector  remains 
well-capitalised and liquid.  
Implementation of the EU-funded Twinning Project of the Bank of Albania with the Bank of 
Italy in partnership with the Bank of France started in 2011. This project, which covers the 
major  part  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  activities,  will  help  in  enhancing  institutional  capacities, 
approximating the regulatory framework and work practices of the Bank of Albania to those 
of  the  EU  and  ECB,  as  well  as  promoting  the  development  of  financial  market  and 
instruments at home.  
 
Fulfilling  its  legal  responsibility  for  a  smooth  functioning  of  payment  systems,  in  2011,  the 
Bank of Albania actively worked to strengthen the payment systems oversight, improve the 
technology infrastructure and develop new payment products in Albania. Both main payment 
systems,  AIPS  (for  settling  large-value  payments)  and  AECH  (for  settling  and  clearing 
small-value payments) operated with full efficiency, reflecting the stability of the systems.  
In March, the Bank of Albania made several amendments to regulations on the operation of 
both payment systems, aiming to promote the use of payment service and reduce the use of 
cash. Also, in fall 2011, the Bank of Albania submitted to the Ministry of Finance a draft-law 
“On Payment Systems”, which is in line with the basic principles of EU directives. Also, the 
Bank  of  Albania  is  preparing  draft-regulations  necessary  for  implementing  the  provisions 
provided under this draft-law.  
Improving statistics  
 
In 2011, the Bank of Albania worked intensively to identify new requirements on statistical 
production  structure,  in  line  with  EU  requirements  for  candidate  and  member  countries. 
Constructing a reporting model, reviewing and improving the reporting forms, and applying 
best practices for publication of statistics were on the focus of our work. 
Also,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  started  the  project  for  “Regulatory  Reporting  Automation”, 
which aims to establish an electronic reporting system for institutions that report data to the 
Bank  of  Albania.  This  electronic  reporting  system  would  alleviate  the  reporting  burden  of 
institutions, shorten the reporting time, automate process control, generate statistical tables 
and  significantly  improve  the  quantity  and  quality  of  statistics  produced  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Improving research capacity  
Improving communication with the public  
 
In recent years, the Bank of Albania has paid special attention to increasing the level of study 
and  research  in  the  institution  by  investing  significantly  in  human  and  technical  resources. 
During  2011,  seminars  and  round-tables  were  organised,  aiming  at  training  and  sharing 
scientific novelties among economists at local and international level, thus making the Bank 
of Albania a point of reference for researchers of economics and finance.  
The main focus of Bank of Albania’s research papers was on issues pertaining to: financial 
stability,  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy,  regional  integration  and  trade  relations,  study  of 
uncertainties arising from estimation of econometric models, etc. At the same time, with the 
assistance of foreign experts, we worked for constructing and improving macroeconomic and 
statistical  models,  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Bank  of  Albania  builds  its  projections  for 
macroeconomic and financial indicators.  
 
Establishment  of  transparent  and  productive  relations  with  the  public  is  an  integral  part  of 
Bank of Albania’s development strategy. The conduct of activities for financial education of 
the public was a priority of the communication strategy in 2011.  
In  order  to  achieve  Bank  of  Albania’s  objectives  in  this  area,  we  carried  out  a  number  of 
educational activities in 2011. Among them, we would highlight the project for integrating the 
financial education into high-school curricula in Albania.  
A  working  group  with  Bank  of  Albania’s  experts,  assisted  by  experts  of  curricula  from  the 
Institute for Educational Development, worked for compiling the curricula and preparing the 
text  in  the  form  of  a  free-choice  module,  which  was  incorporated  into  the  high-school 
curricula for the first time in the 2011/2012 academic year.  
Also, the Bank of Albania’s Annual International Conference on “Building our Future through 
Financial  Literacy”,  attended  by  senior  representatives  of  public  and  private  authorities  at 
home and abroad, contributed to enhancing the awareness of financial education importance 
and drawing the attention of respective authorities and institutions.  
 Honourable Members of the Committee,  
Both  current  and  previous  year  were  filled  with  challenges  posed  from  the  external 
environment and the internal structure of the economy. I listed above only some of the main 
accomplishments of the Bank of Albania and issues the Bank was faced with in 2011, while 
the Annual Report contains more detailed information.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to  work  to  rigorously  fulfil  its  legal  mandate  and  render 
maximum contribution to growth of welfare in Albania. 
Concluding my introduction on the Report, I would like to share with you some reflections on 
Albania’s economic outlook. Recent years, have brought to the fore certain fragilities of the 
Albanian economy. Against this backdrop, economic policies should intensify their efforts to 
ensure a stable economic growth. 
In  particular,  increased  productivity,  ongoing  restructuring  and  strong  economic  growth 
require  the  compilation  and  implementation  of  structural  reforms  to  support  domestic 
production and enhance its competitiveness in the national and international markets. 
Also,  economic  policies  should  aim  at  further  improving  the  free-market  terms  and 
conditions,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  structure  of  the  market  economy  and  enhance 
efficiency in our economy.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lastly, the world experience, and ours as well, gained during these development decades, 
have  shown  that  the  coordination  of  policies  of  various  institutional  actors  with  market 
operations is an indispensable requirement to ensure ongoing progress of a country’s society 
and economy.  
In  light  of  this,  only  continuing  cooperation  and  coordination  of  efforts  among  all  players 
would guarantee sustainable economic growth and welfare in Albania.  
Concluding  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  in  addition  to  Bank  of  Albania’s 
Annual Report 2011, the financial statements, certified by auditors, are also submitted. 
Thanking you for your attention, I remain available to your questions and comments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
