Ravi Menon: Financial advisory services – putting the customer first 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Life  Insurance  Association  50th  Anniversary  Gala  Dinner,  Singapore, 
26 March 2012. 
 LIA President, Mr Tan Hak Leh 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
Role of life insurance and financial advisory services 
Saving  for  the  future,  investing  for  returns,  and  protecting  against  risk  –  these  are  the 
fundamentals  of  managing  our  finances.  Yet  so  few  of  us  do  it  well.  We  are  far  better  at 
earning an income than investing it and protecting against risk.  
To make matters worse, many life insurance and investment products are often not easy to 
understand. Many people are not financially savvy. And many of those who are, do not have 
the time to review the range of insurance and investment products available, and understand 
what  is  best  suited  for  their  needs.  This  is  where  financial  advisory  service  comes  in. 
Financial advisers can help people identify their insurance and financial planning needs and 
recommend suitable products. 
The  roles  of  insurers  and  financial  advisers  are  intimately  intertwined.  It  must  be  so. 
Insurance  protects  dependants.  Investments  grow  savings  and  wealth.  How  can  we  buy 
insurance without regard to our broader investment portfolio? Likewise, how can we invest 
without considering how well we are protected against death or disease? Life insurance and 
financial advisory services go hand in hand. 
This was why MAS introduced the Financial Advisers Act, or FAA, ten years ago. The FAA 
was  a  landmark  regulatory  reform,  providing  for  consistency  in  the  regulation  of  persons 
engaged in advisory activities: 
 
across sectors: in insurance companies, banks, stockbrokers, and financial advisory 
firms; and 
across products: life insurance, securities, futures, and unit trusts. 
 
Two  years  before  the  FA  Act,  an  industry-led  committee,  the  Committee  for  the  Efficient 
Distribution of Life Insurance, or CEDLI, made far-reaching recommendations on minimum 
standards for the advisory process, and the competency of insurance agents. 
The FAA and CEDLI together helped transform the landscape for financial advisory services 
in Singapore. They have contributed to greater consistency and better quality in the advisory 
services provided on both life insurance and investment products. Disclosure practices have 
also improved. 
Life  insurance  coverage  and  financial  investments  among  Singaporeans  have  grown  over 
the last decade. 
 
Life  insurance  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  assets  of  Singaporeans  has  nearly 
doubled from about 4% in 2000 to 7% in 2011. 
Financial  investments  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  assets  of  Singaporeans  has 
increased from about 14% in 2000 to 17% in 2011. 
 But there are important gaps to fill. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We need to do better 
We have a large protection gap. The average Singaporean is still grossly underinsured. 
 
A 2009 study by the Nanyang Technological University found that the existing life 
cover of the average Singaporean is only about a third of what his dependants will 
need in the event of his early death. 
The insurance industry should reflect on these findings and take up the challenge to narrow 
the shortfall in protection coverage. 
Likewise, there is room to do more within the financial advisory industry. 
 
According  to  a  study  by  the  Nielsen  Company,  which  issued  the  Global  Ageing 
Report in February 2011, only 14% of Singapore consumers surveyed felt that they 
were financially ready for retirement. This is lower than the Asia Pacific and global 
averages of 22% and 18% respectively. 
Financial planning has to go beyond advising on investment products to evaluating the life 
cycle needs of an individual, including for retirement. 
Raise the competence of financial advisory representatives 
Raise the quality of financial advisory firms 
Make financial advice a dedicated service 
Lower distribution costs of insurance products 
Promote a culture of fair dealing 
Putting the customer first 
We must build the customer’s trust and confidence in life insurance and financial advisory 
services. MAS has been working closely with the industry to help bring this about. The key 
thrusts of our approach are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
Let me share with you the actions we have taken to-date in each of these areas. I will also 
announce the steps MAS intends to take, as part of a comprehensive review of the financial 
advisory  industry  that  we  are  launching.  We  call  this  new  effort,  “FAIR”,  or  the  Financial 
Advisory Industry Review. 
FAIR will essentially build on the foundations laid by CEDLI and the FA Act ten years ago. It 
has two main objectives: 
 
first,  to  enhance  the  professional  standing  and  competence  of  financial  advisers; 
and 
second, to create a more competitive and efficient system for the distribution of life 
insurance and investment products. 
 The overriding aim of FAIR is to protect and benefit the consumer. Putting the customer first 
– that must be at the heart of all our efforts. 
Raising the competence of FA representatives 
Let  me  begin  with  the  competence  of  financial  advisory  representatives.  MAS  has  been 
working with the FA industry to raise the skills, knowledge and expertise of representatives to 
serve customers better. The two aspects of this effort are: 
 
 
improving the product knowledge of FA representatives; and 
raising the entry requirements for FA representatives 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  explain 
the  advantages  and  disadvantages  and 
Product knowledge of FA representatives 
We  have  introduced  new  examination  modules  to  ensure  that  FA  representatives  have 
sufficient knowledge of the wide and complex range of investment and insurance products 
currently available in the market. Most firms and FA representatives understand and support 
the need to raise knowledge and skill levels through a set of common examinations. 
Some representatives have questioned why they need to pass these new exams when all 
they sell are simple products. MAS takes the view that a good financial adviser should be 
able 
the  risks  of  competing  
products – both simple and complex.  
The reality is that consumers today are faced with a wide range of choices. For example, a 
consumer  wishing  to  invest  and  buy  insurance  protection  has  a  few  options.  He  may 
consider  a  participating  policy  or  a  regular  premium  investment-linked  policy  or  simply 
purchase an insurance term policy and invest separately. He could build a portfolio of just 
plain vanilla stocks and bonds or include ETFs and futures or simply buy unit trusts. Each 
option  has  its  own  set  of  risk-return  and  cost  considerations.  The  increasingly  educated 
consumer  will  expect  his  representative  to  help  him  make  sense  of  the  complexity  of  the 
products  and  their  suitability,  even  if  he  eventually  settles  on  simple  life  insurance  and 
investment products. 
Some  other  FA  representatives  feel  that  their  academic  qualifications  are  sufficient  and 
should  allow  them  an  exemption  from  the  exams.  But  consumers  should  have  some 
assurance that the qualifications of the FA representatives meet a common standard. The 
examinations  are  industry-certified,  and  set  a  common  standard  and  benchmark  for 
FA representatives.  
It is important that all representatives, even those who have been in the industry for many 
years, stay abreast of latest market developments and products. Only then can they provide 
holistic advice and comprehensive recommendations on what to buy, and – more importantly 
– what not to buy.  
But we understand the concerns that some representatives have raised. MAS is prepared to 
adjust its requirements subject to the companies putting in place proper controls to ensure 
that only simple products are sold by the selected FA representatives who do not take the 
new examinations. 
Entry requirements for FA representatives 
Next, as part of FAIR, MAS will review the minimum level of qualifications that we expect of 
our  FA  representatives,  to  ensure  they  stay  relevant  to  the  needs  and  expectations  of 
consumers. 
The  current  entry  requirement  for  FA  representatives  is  four  GCE  “O”  level  passes.  It  is 
clearly not in keeping with Singapore’s rising educational levels, the increasing complexity of 
products, and higher expectations from a more literate and sophisticated public. 
 
One out of two Singaporeans has above GCE “O” level qualifications, compared to 
one out of three, ten years ago. 
One out of four Singaporeans has a degree; this is double the proportion ten years 
ago. 
 Our current requirements do not stack up well against major jurisdictions. They have been 
raising the quality and professionalism of their financial advisers.  
 
In the UK, the minimum requirement for representatives serving retail customers will 
be raised by end 2012 to tertiary level qualification, defined as at least a Diploma. 
In Australia, the current educational entry level is a Diploma-equivalent. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let  us  not  short-change  the  consumers  of  life  insurance  and  investment  products  in 
Singapore.  I  am  heartened  to  note  that  some  insurers  are  already  consciously  recruiting 
better  qualified  individuals  who  can  provide  value-added  advice  to  their  customers.  These 
agents  are  better  able  to  explain  the  intricacies  of  financial  planning,  and  recommend 
solutions to meet the financial needs of busy professionals or less savvy customers. But we 
must level the playing field and make this the industry norm. 
Raising the quality of financial advisory firms 
Management expertise and financial resources of financial advisory firms 
The second thrust of our approach is to raise the quality of financial advisory firms. While 
banks and insurers are generally well resourced, financial advisory firms vary in size. Some 
firms are so small that shareholders or directors double up as representatives, CEO, CFO, 
and  compliance  personnel.  Under  FAIR,  we  will  review  the  management  expertise  and 
financial  resources  of  financial  advisory  firms,  to  ensure  they  are  well  managed  and 
financially  sound.  We  will  take  this  review  into  consideration  when  admitting  new  financial 
advisory firms. 
Making financial advice a dedicated service 
Besides raising the quality of FA representatives and financial advisory firms, we must make 
financial  advice  a  dedicated  and  professional  vocation.  Customers  looking  for  financial 
advice  deserve  to  be  served  by  representatives  whose  primary  focus  is  to  provide  quality 
advice on regulated financial products. 
Unregulated activities of FA representatives 
We want an industry where providing financial advisory services is the primary focus of FA 
representatives. 
But of late, we have noticed a worrying trend of FA representatives conducting or wanting to 
conduct other activities alongside providing financial advice. Let me give a few examples. 
 
We have received queries from insurance agents who also want to be real estate 
agents.  They  want  to  be  allowed  to  market  and  earn  commissions  from  property 
transactions, often to the same customers they provide financial advice to. 
Some FA representatives have even applied to the Casino Regulatory Authority for 
a junket promoter license! 
MAS has received complaints against FA representatives who used their regulatory 
status to market questionable schemes in gold bullion. Some of these activities are 
clearly  in  conflict  with  FA  activities.  They  risk  undermining  the  interests  of 
consumers. 
  We will review the activities that FA representatives can conduct outside their advisory role, 
to ensure that representatives continue to put their customers first. Specifically, we will work 
with the industry on a list of activities that FA representatives should not engage in. To my 
mind, the activities with clear conflicts include: 
 
 
 
 
money lending; 
promoting junkets for casinos; 
selling real estate; and 
marketing investment products which do not accord safeguards to customers under 
the Financial Advisers Act. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We will also review other activities that FA representatives engage in that are not in conflict 
but which may distract representatives from their professional focus. Several insurers and FA 
firms recognise the risks of associating with representatives who may be distracted by other 
commitments  and  remuneration  opportunities  outside  the  realm  of  financial  advisory 
services.  These  companies  accept  only  representatives  who  are  fully  dedicated  and 
committed to providing quality financial advice to their customers. This is how it should be. 
But  practices  vary  across  financial  institutions,  and  it  may  not  be  practical  to  ban 
representatives from undertaking other activities that earn an income. MAS will work with the 
industry to push for a consistent industry-wide approach to representatives who engage in 
multiple activities. 
Role of introducers 
FAIR will also review the current practice of FA firms and their representatives making use of 
“introducers”  to  reach  out  to  customers.  An  introducer  may  be  another  representative,  but 
may also be any man-on-the-street. Introducers are typically paid a fee to refer customers to 
financial  advisers,  or  they  get  a  cut  of  the  commissions  generated  from  sales  to  the 
customers.  The  use  of  introducers  means  customers  risk  dealing  with  individuals  whose 
credentials  have  not  been  vouched  for  by  any  financial  institution.  It  also  means  that 
customers  may  not  receive  proper  advice  when  introducers  go  beyond  introducing  and 
pressure customers to buy products. 
Financial advisory activities in insurance broking firms 
Making sure that the financial advisory role is the primary focus of FA representatives is only 
one side of the coin. The other aspect to ensure, is that firms whose primary activity is not 
financial advisory services, are fully capable of managing this part of their business. 
In this regard, FAIR will review the scope of financial advisory activities currently carried out 
in  insurance  brokers.  Some  insurance  brokers  advise  on  group  term  life  insurance  to 
complement  the  suite  of  general  insurance  products  offered  to  their  corporate  customers. 
However, over the years, we have noticed that for some insurance brokers, FA activities and 
revenue  from  the  advisory  business  have  eclipsed  that  of  their  core  insurance  broking 
business.  MAS  is  concerned  that  insurance  brokers  may  not  have  sufficient  management 
expertise and compliance capability to oversee and manage the FA portion of their business. 
Lowering distribution costs 
Our fourth key thrust is to lower the cost of distribution, so that we can keep the overall cost 
of life insurance products affordable for Singaporeans. 
Direct sales of simple products 
The  online  channel  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  we  can  lower  distribution  costs.  We  have 
seen the use of direct sales via the internet for the distribution of general insurance products 
such as travel insurance and motor insurance. Why not life insurance? The industry could 
explore the use of the internet as an alternative distribution channel to offer life insurance to 
consumers at competitive prices.  
Online  distribution  will  also  mean  that  products  will  have  to  be  simplified.  Simple  term  life 
insurance  via  the  internet  could  be  a  good  way  to  help  lower  cost  and  make  affordable 
insurance  protection  more  readily  available  to  a  wider  population.  And  simple  term  life 
insurance is sometimes all that a person needs to protect against risk. MAS would like to see 
the sale of simple term life insurance products through the internet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Commission-based remuneration and distribution structure 
But  customised  financial  advice  is  still  required  for  the  more  complicated  insurance  plans, 
tailored  to  suit  individual  and  family  needs  and  circumstances,  and  for  those  who  want  to 
supplement  their  term  life  insurance.  To  lower  costs  for  such  products,  we  must  address 
some of the underlying inefficiencies in our remuneration and distribution structure. FAIR will 
fundamentally review the commission-based remuneration and distribution structure. 
In  Singapore,  insurance  products  are  distributed  through  insurance  agencies,  banks,  and 
financial  advisory  firms.  The  premiums  for  these  insurance  products  include  charges  that 
cover mortality risk, as well as various expenses incurred by the insurer, such as distribution 
and  management  expenses.  A  substantial  proportion  of  the  premium  in  the  earlier  years 
goes to paying for distribution expenses. Over the life of a policy, this cost can account for as 
much as 8% of the total premiums paid. A key driver of this cost is the multi-tier distribution 
structure that is common in Singapore’s insurance companies and large FA firms. 
The commission-based, multi-tier distribution structure involves representatives in the upper 
tiers  having  a  share  of  the  commissions  earned  by  lower-tier  representatives  who  provide 
insurance and financial advice to the consumer. 
 
Take for example a whole life insurance policy. An FA representative could earn a 
basic  commission  of  50%  of  the  policy’s  annual  premium  in  the  first  year,  and 
another 40% of the annual premium during the following five years. 
His  supervisor  would  in  turn  earn  overriding  commissions  throughout  the  first  six 
years. There is typically a third tier comprising the agency managers who also get 
overrides. 
Total overrides during the first six years can amount to 70% of the policy’s annual 
premium.  
Together, the total commissions and overrides earned by the representative and his 
supervisors would be equivalent to about 160% of the policy’s annual premium. 
   FAIR  will  examine  whether  this  commission  structure  aligns  the  interest  of  representatives 
with the long term interest of consumers, whether these representatives have the adverse 
incentive to sell products that pay them higher commissions, and whether the tier structure 
provides value for the customer or merely adds cost. 
Most  major  jurisdictions  have  long  moved  away  from  the  tiered  structure.  The  United 
Kingdom and Australia are moving towards a fee-based model. They have, in fact, banned 
commission payments from product manufacturers to financial institutions except in the case 
of pure-protection products. 
Enhance transparency of distribution and other costs 
A  third  way  in  which  we  can  lower  distribution  and  related  costs  is  to  enhance  the 
transparency of these costs. Presently, benefit illustrations show the total distribution costs 
but hide the direct payout to a representative. Customers should know what they are paying 
for. With greater transparency, a customer can decide if he is getting his money’s worth for 
the service and advice provided by his FA representative. 
Benefit  illustrations  also  do  not  include  a  detailed  breakdown  of  the  split  between  the 
protection  and 
insurance  product. 
Customers often assume that the insurance policy they bought covers only insurance to their 
dependants, when in fact the product may contain a substantial savings element. Insurers 
should strive to provide greater disclosure on how the premium is split between protection 
and  investment  on  bundled  insurance  products  to  enable  customers  to  better  understand 
what they are buying. 
investment  components 
investment-linked 
in  an 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Promoting a culture of fair dealing 
The  fifth  thrust  in  our  approach  to  instilling  customer  trust  in  life  insurance  and  financial 
advisory services is through promoting a culture of fair dealing by financial institutions. 
Dealing fairly with customers goes beyond mere compliance with regulatory requirements. It 
is an attitude that springs from the ethos and values of the institution. It is about a culture that 
places the consumer first, that is focused on doing what is right for the consumer, and that 
places a premium on integrity.  
It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Board  and  Senior  Management  to  forge  this  culture  of  fair 
dealing  throughout  the  organisation.  The  Board  and  Senior  Management  must  set  a  clear 
strategy to achieve the fair dealing outcomes, monitor its implementation, and train their staff 
and  representatives  to  treat  customers  fairly.  Most  of  all,  they  must  –  by  word  and  
deed – make clear to their staff that meeting revenue targets must never be at the expense 
of treating their customers with fairness and honesty. 
Enhance transparency of products 
A key aspect of fair dealing is to make insurance and investment products more transparent. 
MAS has enhanced safeguards for consumers who buy investment and insurance products 
that  are  complex.  For  example,  for  consumers  investing  into  unit  trusts  via  their 
investment-linked  life  insurance  policies,  we  now  require  insurers  to  provide  a  Product 
Highlights  Sheet  or  “PHS”  on  the  underlying  funds.  The  PHS  should  be  written  in  plain 
language, in a “Question & Answer” format prescribed by the MAS. It describes the profile of 
customers the fund is suitable for, what the fund invests in, and what the risk areas are that 
could cause a customer to incur a loss. 
We  also  require  FA  representatives  to  conduct  a  Customer  Knowledge  Assessment  to 
assess  whether  a  customer  has  the  relevant  knowledge  or  experience  to  understand  the 
risks of products which are more complex or have innovative features which customers might 
not understand. 
from 
industry  associations, 
FAIR – the next steps 
MAS recognises that FAIR will have a significant impact on the industry and on the public. 
We  will  take  a  consultative  approach  and  engage  all  stakeholders.  A  review  panel  will  be 
formed,  with  representation 
investment  community, 
academia, media and consumer bodies, to review and propose recommendations on the five 
areas I have outlined. MAS will shortly announce the members of the panel. We will solicit 
feedback from the public before the panel begins its deliberations and after it has made its 
recommendations.  
I appreciate that some of the proposals will impact businesses and representatives. I urge 
the industry to take a long term view from the customer’s perspective. The aim of FAIR is to 
bring about a higher quality of financial advisory services and better outcomes for customers, 
and  by  enhancing  customer  trust,  promote  sustained  growth  of  the  financial  advisory 
industry. MAS will work to ease the transition for those most affected by the changes. 
the 
Conclusion 
Since its inception in 1962, LIA’s key objectives have always been to promote high standards 
and best practices in the life insurance industry, ensuring quality financial advisory services 
and  raising  public  awareness  and  understanding  of  life  insurance.  We  see  LIA  as  a  key 
partner in facilitating the FAIR process and developing the insurance industry. 
I congratulate LIA on your golden anniversary and wish you many more fruitful years ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
