Deepak Mohanty: Price stability and financial stability – an emerging market 
perspective 
Address  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  in  the 
2012 Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) Board Retreat, Cape Town, South Africa, 27 June 2012. 
 The assistance provided by J.K. Khundrakpam and Rajeev Jain is acknowledged. 
 “A system of credit which has slowly grown up as years went on, which has suited itself to 
the  course  of  business,  which  has  forced  itself  on  the  habits  of  men,  will  not  be  altered 
because theorists disapprove of it, or because books are written against it.” Walter Bagehot, 
Lombard Street,1873. 
It is indeed an honour for me to be addressing the distinguished members of the Board of 
Directors and Senior Management of the Central Bank of Nigeria. I thank Governor Sanusi 
Lamido  Sanusi  for  this  opportunity.  The  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  generated  an 
intense debate on the role and responsibility of central banks in maintaining financial stability. 
Over the centuries, the world has experienced periodic financial crises, prompting changes in 
the way we think about monetary and financial stability. Yet, we are not immune from crisis. 
In  the  present  context, several  questions  arise.  What  ought  to  be  the objectives  of  central 
banks or more specifically that of monetary policy? Is there a trade-off between price stability 
and financial stability? Were central banks blindsided by the success of price stability to the 
neglect of financial stability? Do central banks have the necessary mandate and instruments 
to  handle  multiple  objectives  and  at  the  same  time  maintain  credibility?  How  does  one 
ensure accountability with multiple objectives? Is there a need to revisit the best practice in 
monetary policy? While we currently grapple with these issues, they are by no means new. 
Against  this  background,  I  sequence  my  presentation  as  follows.  First,  I  briefly  trace  the 
evolution  of  central  bank  objectives  over  the  centuries.  Second,  I  review  central  bank 
objectives  and  practices  in  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs).  Third,  I  highlight  our 
experience  in  India  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  how  we  have  combined  it  with 
financial stability. Finally, I conclude by drawing three practical lessons in central banking in 
terms  of  monetary  policy  framework,  institutional  design  and  communication  in  pursuit  of 
both monetary and financial stability. 
Evolution of central bank objectives 
Let  me  first  turn  to  central  banking  history  for  some  insights.  What  was  the  motivation  for 
setting up central banks in the 17th century? While the early central banks were set up for 
issuance  of  currency  and  financing  governments,  financial  stability  considerations  got 
embedded  as  trade  expanded  and  the  banking  and  financial  sectors  developed.  For 
instance, the Swedish Riksbank, the first central bank, was set up in 1668 as a joint-stock 
bank  to  lend  funds  to  the  government  and  to  act  as  a  clearing  house  for  commerce.  The 
Bank  of  England  (BoE)  was  set  up  in  1694  to  act  as  the  government’s  banker  and 
debt-manager. 
How  did  central  bank  objectives  change  in  the  19th  century?  Most  central  banks  began 
assuming financial stability function though it was not articulated the way we understand it 
now. Drawing from the criticism on its functioning during the panics in 1825, 1837, 1847, and 
1857,  the  BoE  adopted  the  “responsibility  doctrine”  proposed  by  Walter  Bagehot.  The 
doctrine  required  the  BoE  to  subsume  its  private  interest  to  that  of  public  interest  of  the 
banking system as a whole. As per the Bagehot’s rule, the BoE was to lend freely on the 
basis of any sound collateral offered, but at a penal rate to prevent moral hazard. Thus, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
role of the central bank as the lender of last resort (LOLR) as espoused by Bagehot remains 
the cornerstone of financial stability function even today.1  
How did central banks change in the 20th Century? The functions of central banks came to 
be further aligned with public policy objectives. Frequent bank panics in the US led to the 
creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913 with LOLR as one of its main functions. However, 
the Fed could not prevent the Great Depression as monetary policy followed the “Principle of 
Real Bills Doctrine”.2 After the Great Depression, central banks transformed themselves as 
growth and employment facilitators and put in place deposit insurance. This kept the world 
economy  insulated  from  any  major  banking  crisis  from  the  late  1930s  until  the mid-1970s. 
But fiscal activism and the belief that employment can be permanently increased at the cost 
of  inflation,  supported  by  the  early  version  of  the  Phillips  Curve,3  led  to  accommodative 
monetary policy. This manifested in high inflation in the 1970s. 
In  order  to  address  the  inflation  surge  and  the  accompanying  economic  stagnation, 
intellectual opinion swung in favour of price stability supported by the work of economists like 
Milton Friedman, which advocated a dominant role for monetary policy.4 Thus, price stability 
emerged as a primary objective of most central banks during the 1980s. How did financial 
stability fit into this framework? The understanding around that time was that monetary policy 
directed  at  maintaining  price  stability  would  lessen  both  the  incidence  and  the  severity  of 
financial instability. The argument was that price stability obviates the information problems 
for both borrowers and lenders and ensures financial stability through efficient allocation of 
resources. Studies based on the experience of advanced countries such as the US, the UK, 
Canada and Japan also concurred with the view that price instability contributed to financial 
instability (Bordo and Wheelock, 1998).5 
Did the financial crisis of the 21st century with its epicenter in the advanced countries change 
the  world  view  of  central  bank  objectives?  The  dominant  view,  particularly  among  the 
advanced  economies,  was  that  monetary  policy  should  ideally  have  a  single  objective,  a 
corresponding single tool, and an operationally independent and accountable central bank. In 
fact,  following  this  wisdom,  many  countries,  both  advanced  and  emerging  markets,  set 
explicit  inflation  targets  and  mandated  inflation  control  as  the  paramount  objective  of 
monetary policy since the 1990s. Explicit emphasis on price stability often came with certain 
legislative  changes  in  central  banks  and  emphasis  on  fiscal  rules  in  many  countries. 
Although central banks were cognisant of the importance of financial stability for conduct of 
monetary  policy,  a  distinction  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy  was 
generally maintained. 
The  current  global  crisis  seems  to  have  undermined  the  view  that  monetary  policy  should 
only have a single objective of price stability. The pre-crisis view, also called the “Jackson 
Hole  Consensus”,  was  that  central  banks  should  respond  to  asset  prices  and  financial 
imbalances only  to  the  extent  that  they  affect  the  shorter  term  inflation  forecast. However, 
                                                 
1  The term was first used by Francis Baring (1797) but systematically explained by Thornton (1802) who first 
identified it as a function of Bank of England. Thornton, H. (1802), An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the 
Paper Credit  of Great Britain, edited  with an Introduction  by F.A. von Hayek. New  York: Rinehart and Co., 
1939. 
If only real bills are discounted by banks, the expansion of bank money will be in proportion to the needs of 
trade. It was assumed that monetary system will be self regulating. 
2 
3  Phillips, A. W. (1958). "The Relationship Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wages in 
the United Kingdom 1861–1957", Economica, 25 (100): 283–299. 
4  Milton  Friedman  (1968),  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy”,  AEA  Presidential  Speech,  Amercian  Economic 
Review, Vol LVIII, No.1. 
5  Bordo,  Michael  D.  and  David  C.  Wheelock  (1998),  “Price  Stability  and  Financial  Stability:  The  Historical 
Record”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
such perception was belied by the recent crisis (Gali, 2011).6 It became clear that financial 
stability  can  be  jeopardised  even  if  there  is  price  stability  and  macroeconomic  stability 
(Subbarao,  2009).7  Consequently,  post-crisis  assessment  increasingly  veered  towards 
explicit recognition of the financial stability objective. But there are unsettled issues and the 
jury is still out. 
First, should financial stability be considered as an explicit objective of the central bank or, 
more  specifically,  as  an  additional  objective  of  monetary  policy?  It  has  been  argued  that 
central banks are not only the lenders of last resort, but also better equipped to look at both 
financial  system  and  economic  cycles.  In  this  context,  Eichengreen,  Prasad  and  Rajan 
(2011)  suggest  a  dual  mandate  of  price  stability  and  financial  stability  so  that  “monetary 
policy  is  recognised  as  a  legitimate  element  of  the  macroprudential  supervisor’s  toolkit.”8 
Similarly, Woodford (2012) argued that monetary policy might indeed lessen the severity of 
risks to financial stability.9 Gokarn (2010) was of the view that broader mandates for central 
banks will need to be made explicit and conditional on the priority of the core mandates.10 In 
contrast, Svensson (2010) argued that it was important to distinguish financial stability policy 
from monetary policy to avoid conceptual and practical confusion between the two policies. 
Using monetary policy for the financial stability objective can lead to poor outcomes.11  
Second,  how  compatible  is  inflation  targeting  framework  with  financial  stability  as  an 
additional  objective?  The  views  are  quite  diverse.  While  some  recommend  eschewing  of 
inflation  targeting  altogether,  Woodford  (2012)  suggested  modifying  inflation-targeting 
practice  for  making  interest  rate  policy  a  more  effective  tool  for  financial  stability.12  In 
contrast,  Svensson  (2010)  opined  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  remains  the  best-practice 
monetary policy before, during, and after the financial crisis.13 
Third, should financial stability be the sole or shared responsibility of the central bank? A BIS 
survey shows that in practice an overwhelming majority of central banks have either full or 
shared  responsibility  for  financial  stability,  but  the  mandates  are  rarely  explicit.14  Similarly, 
Čihák (2010) found that the remit for central bank’s role in financial stability was weaker than 
in  the  case  of  price  stability.15  The  dominant  view,  however,  seems  to  be  that  financial 
stability should be a shared responsibility, as monetary policy instruments of central banks 
can only have a partial impact on the ultimate objective of financial stability. 
Fourth,  do  central  banks  have  the  instruments  to  ensure  both  price  stability  and  financial 
stability?  Central  banks  functioning  with  a  single  instrument  of  short-term  interest  rate, 
                                                 
6  Gali,  Jordi  (2011),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Rational  Asset  Price  Bubbles”,  Barcelona  GSE  Working  Papers 
Series No.592. 
7  Subbarao, D. (2009), “Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, RBI Bulletin, October. 
8  Eichengreen, Barry, Eswar Prasad and Raghuram Rajan (2011), “Central Banks Need a Bigger and Bolder 
Mandate”, Opinion, Brookings Institution, October. 
9  Woodford, Michael (2012), “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability’, NBER Working Paper 17967, National 
Bureau of Economic Research. 
10  Gokarn,  Subir  (2011),  “Monetary  Policy  Considerations  After  the  Crisis:  Practitioners’  Perspectives”,  RBI 
Bulletin, January. 
11  Svensson, Lars E O (2010), “Monetary Policy After the Financial Crisis”, Speech at the Second International 
Journal of Central Banking (IJCB) Fall Conference, Tokyo, September. 
12  As in footnote 9. 
13  As in footnote 11. 
14  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2009),  Issues  in  the  Governance  of  Central  Banks,  A  Report  from  the 
Central Bank Governance Group, www.bis.org/publ/othp04.htm. 
15  Čihák,  Martin  (2010),  “Price  Stability,  Financial  Stability,  and  Central  Bank  Independence”  38th  Economics 
Conference at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
particularly those with inflation targeting framework may not be equipped to achieve multiple 
objectives  following  Tinbergen’s  assignment  rule.16  In  this  context,  many  have  argued  that 
interest rate is too blunt an instrument for dealing with overall financial stability issues (for 
example, Bernanke, 2011).17 Goodhart (2008) opined that many central banks with only one 
instrument  of  monetary  policy  may  find  these  two  objectives  often  conflicting  with  each 
other.18 In contrast, it is argued that though identifying the bubble is difficult, and therefore a 
risky  strategy,  the  cleaning  up  cost  after  the  bubble  burst  may  be  costlier  than  leaning 
against the bubble (Stark, 2010).19  
Finally, there are additional complexities in the context of EMEs as asset price bubbles are 
often  accompanied  by  exchange  rate  appreciation  emanating  from  large  capital  inflows  or 
trade  surplus.  Therefore,  raising  interest  rate  in  an  attempt  to  burst  asset  bubble  may 
engender further capital inflows aggravating the bubble itself. Thus, it has been emphasised 
that even if monetary policy is used to lean against the wind, it needs to be supplemented by 
counter-cyclical instruments. Some economists believe that combining financial supervision 
with monetary policy tasks, as indeed the case in many EMEs, can lead to synergies and a 
more effective conduct of monetary policy (Borio, 2009),20 and it can be usefully connected to 
the central banks’ lender-of-last-resort function (Blinder, 2010).21 Danthine (2012) suggested 
that central banks should be endowed with macroprudential instruments that directly target 
the root causes of the problems generated by excessive risk taking in times of low interest 
rates.22 
In this regard, Mohanty (2011) argued that while interest rate continues to be the dominant 
instrument  for  implementing  monetary  policy,  supplementing  it  by  other  quantity  or 
macroprudential  instruments  even  in  normal  times  will  enhance  the  flexibility  of  monetary 
policy to attain multiple objectives.23 Therefore, post-crisis, there has been greater emphasis 
on  introducing  additional  instruments  for  central  banks  to  deal  with  aspects  of  financial 
stability. In short, the role of central banks in ensuring overall stability of the financial sector 
has now got a fresh impetus. Against this background, I turn to the experience of EMEs. 
Central bank objectives in emerging markets 
How have the central bank objectives in EMEs been different? Historically, price stability has 
been  a  key  objective  for  central  banks  in  EMEs  as  in  the  case  of  advanced  economies. 
However, given the level of financial market development and institutional structure, financial 
                                                 
16  Tinbergen, J. (1952), On the Theory of Economic Policy, 2nd Edition, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
17  Bernanke, B. (2011), “The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and Practice,” Speech at 
the Federal Reserve of Boston 56th Economic Conference. 
18  Goodhart,  Charles  A.E.  (2008),  “Central  Banks’  Function  to  Maintain  Financial  Stability:  An  Uncompleted 
Task”, http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/1263. 
19  Stark,  Jürgen  (2010),  “In  Search  of  a  Robust  Monetary  Policy  Framework”,  Keynote  Speech  at  the 
6th ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches to Monetary Policy Revisited – Lessons from the Crisis”, 
Frankfurt am Main, November 19. 
20  Borio,  C.  (2009),  “Implementing  the  Macroprudential  Approach  to  Financial  Regulation  and  Supervision”, 
Banque de France Financial Stability Review No. 13, 31–41. 
21  Blinder,  A.  (2010),  “How  Central  Should  the  Central  Bank  Be?”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  48(1), 
123–133. 
22  Danthine Jean-Pierre (2012), “Reconciling Price and Financial Stability”, Speech at the University of Zurich, 
Zurich, January 24. 
23  Mohanty  Deepak  (2011),  “Lessons  for  Monetary  Policy  from  Global  Financial  Crisis:  An  Emerging  Market 
Perspective”, Paper Presented in the Central Banks Conference of the Bank of Israel, Jerusalem, RBI Bulletin, 
April. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
stability  has  been  important  to  policymaking,  considering  the  greater  incidence  of  financial 
crises  in  EMEs  in  the  20th  century.  Moreover,  many  of  them  were  also  responsible  for 
macroprudential regulation even though only a few of them directly derive it from the explicit 
mandate (Table 1). 
Indeed,  the  resilience  of  the  financial  systems  in  the  emerging  markets  during  the  recent 
global financial crisis owes to financial stability already being an important monetary policy 
objective  (De  Gregorio,  2011).24  Even  as  many  EMEs  formally  adopted  inflation  targeting 
(e.g., Chile, Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, Thailand and Mexico), in practice they followed a 
“flexible inflation targeting” framework, as discretion was used to respond to shocks and also 
to  pursue  other  objectives.25  EMEs  which  did  not  formally  adopt  inflation  targeting  (e.g. 
China,  Nigeria,  Malaysia  and  India)  have  price  stability  as  one  of  the  key  objectives  of 
monetary policy (Table 2). 
Multiple instruments, including quantitative tools such as the cash reserve ratio, were used to 
moderate  the  pace  of  domestic  credit  growth  as  well  as  monetary  impact  of  large  capital 
inflows  in  China,  India  and  Russia.  In  the  East  Asian  EMEs,  the  importance  of  financial 
stability and the need to prevent financial imbalances by active use of macroprudential policy 
measures  was  emphasised  after  the  Asian  crisis.  Accordingly,  central  banks  were  given 
either  the  sole  or  shared  responsibility  in  pursuing  financial  stability  in  addition  to  the 
traditional  mandate  of  monetary  stability  (Watanagase,  2012).26  In  South  Africa,  the 
prudential regulation and supervision of banks assisted and complemented the central bank 
in its pursuit of financial system stability. Similarly, the Central Bank of Brazil actively used 
macroprudential  measures  to  deal  with  emerging  financial  risks,  particularly  from  excess 
capital  flows  in  the  economy.  According  to  a  BIS  survey  (2010),  EMEs  significantly 
outnumbered advanced economies as users of some type of macroprudential instrument.27  
Global  financial  crisis  highlighted  the  importance  of  using  a  broader  set  of  instruments  for 
financial  stability.  In  this  regard,  most  central  banks  in  EMEs  where  monetary  policy  and 
prudential  supervision  were  within  their  purview  seem  to  have  been  better  equipped  to 
address  financial  stability  issues  as  compared  to  advanced  economies.  Now,  I  turn 
specifically to our experience in India. 
Financial stability: Indian framework 
The core functions of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are enshrined in the preamble to the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  as,  “to  regulate  the  issue  of  bank  notes  and  keeping  of 
reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to  operate  the 
currency  and  credit  system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage”.  In  addition,  the  RBI  is  also 
microprudential regulator as the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 entrusts it with the power to 
regulate and supervise commercial banks and co-operative banks. The RBI also regulates 
                                                 
24  De  Gregorio,  José  (2011),  “Price  and  Financial  Stability  in  Modern  Central  Banking”,  Keynote  Speech, 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  joint  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  Economic  Association 
(LACEA)-Latin  American  Chapter  of  the  Econometric  Society  (LAMES)  Conference  2011,  University  Adolfo 
Ibáñez, Santiago, November 11. 
25  Flexible inflation targeting (IT) framework which requires achievement of the desired inflation target over the 
medium-term  makes  it  easier  for  central  banks  to  look  not  only  for  price  stability,  but  also  consider  other 
variables, such as the output gap or the exchange rate. In a sense, flexible IT also implies a departure from 
the  corner  solutions  of  the  ‘Impossibility  Trinity’  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  independent  monetary  policy  and 
perfect capital mobility. 
26  Watanagase  Tarisa  (2012),  Remarks  at  Monetary  Policy  Workshop  on  Strengthening  Macroprudential 
Frameworks organised by IMF Regional Office for Asia and Pacific (OAP) March 22–23, Tokyo, Japan. 
27  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2010),  “Macroprudential  Instruments  and  Frameworks:  a  Stocktaking  of 
Issues and Experiences”, CGFS Papers, No. 38. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and supervises non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934. Similarly, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 empowers it to regulate 
the foreign exchange market and the oversight of the payment systems is derived from the 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. 
Drawing  from  a  wider  mandate,  monetary  policy  in  India  has  evolved  to  have  multiple 
objectives of price stability, financial stability and growth. These objectives are not inherently 
contradictory,  rather  mutually  reinforcing.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  recognises  that 
price  and  financial  stability  are  important  for  sustaining  high  levels  of  growth  which  is  the 
ultimate  objective  of  public  policy.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  financial  stability  has 
been proactive and preventive rather than reactive. Its role as monetary policy authority, well 
integrated with macroprudential regulation and microprudential supervision, with an implicit 
mandate  for  systemic  oversight  has  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  exploit  the  synergies 
across various dimensions (Subbarao, 2011).28  
Even  before  the  crisis,  the  institutional  arrangement  in  the  financial  sector  was  already  in 
place for inter-regulatory co-ordination to monitor financial stability in the economy. A High 
Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial Markets (HLCCFM) was set up in 1992 with the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank as Chairman, and the Chiefs of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), and the Finance Secretary 
to Government of India as members. However, post-crisis, the collegial approach to financial 
stability  has  been 
the  Financial  Stability  and 
Development Council (FSDC). 
The FSDC, headed by the Finance Minister, was set up in December 2010 in the wake of the 
global financial crisis with a specific mandate, inter alia, for systemic financial stability. The 
FSDC  is  expected  to  deal  with  issues  relating  to  financial  stability,  financial  sector 
development, inter-regulatory co-ordination and macroprudential supervision of the economy 
including  the  functioning  of  large  financial  conglomerates.  A  Sub-Committee  of  the  FSDC, 
headed  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  replaced  the  HLCCFM  and  is  the  primary 
operating  arm  of  the  FSDC.  This  Sub-Committee  has  also  set  up  a  dedicated  Crisis 
Management Framework. 
In  addition,  various  committees  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Central  Board  monitor  financial 
stability issues: the Board for Financial Supervision reviews the Reserve Bank’s supervisory 
and regulatory initiatives and the Board for Payment and Settlement Systems oversees the 
overall functioning of the payment system. 
Another development signifying the Reserve Bank’s role in the context of financial stability is 
the setting up of Financial Stability Unit in the Bank in July 2009 with a mandate to conduct 
effective  macroprudential  surveillance  of  the  financial  system  on  an  ongoing  basis  and 
enable early detection of any incipient signs of instability. The Reserve Bank also brings out 
biannual  Financial  Stability  Reports.  Incidentally,  the  IMF  has  just  concluded  a  Financial 
Sector Assessment Programme, which in fact comes close on the heels of a comprehensive 
self assessment of financial sector carried out by the Reserve Bank. Thus, the RBI is one of 
those central banks to recognise financial stability as one of the objectives of monetary policy 
even before the crisis. 
further  strengthened  by  constituting 
Lessons for central banks 
In my opinion, the global financial crisis has fundamentally altered the way we used to view 
monetary policy and financial stability and the interface between them. However, there are 
                                                 
28  Subbarao,  D.  (2011),  “Financial  Stability  Mandate  of  Central  Banks:  Issues  in  the  International  and  Indian 
context”, RBI Bulletin, July. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
issues  which  entail  further  work  in  three  key  areas.  First,  a  relook  at  monetary  policy 
framework  in  terms  of  both  objectives  and  instruments  towards  a  clear  recognition  of 
financial  stability.  Second,  to  put  in  place  an  appropriate  institutional  mechanism  drawing 
upon  countries’  own  experience  and  history  for  better  co-ordination  among  the  concerned 
regulatory  entities  to  deliver  on  financial  stability.  Third,  address  the  communication 
challenge  of  multiple  objectives  to  preserve  central  bank  credibility  to  ensure  price  and 
financial stability. Let me now elaborate on each of these three aspects. 
Monetary policy framework 
(i) 
The  view  that  monetary  policy  framework  should  allow  policymakers  to  lean  against  the 
build-up of financial imbalances, even if near-term inflation expectations remain anchored, is 
gaining  importance.  While  there  is  little  doubt  that  monetary  policy  framework  of  central 
banks  needs  to  change,  the  moot  point  is  what  should  be  the  ideal  monetary  policy 
framework  for  better  analysis  of  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  financial  imbalances?  One 
approach could be to formally broaden the set of information variables for monetary policy 
decision making: in a way, for example, the two pillar approach of the ECB or the multiple 
indicators approach of the Reserve Bank of India that factors in financial considerations into 
monetary  policy.29  The  multiple  indicators  approach  has  the  advantages  of  broad-basing 
monetary policy operations on a large set of information such as money, credit, asset prices, 
interest  rates  and  exchange  rate  and  providing  flexibility  in  the  conduct  of  monetary 
management. Such approach, however, may involve a greater element of judgment. 
At an operational level, the most widely accepted presentation of monetary policy reaction 
function that combines both inflation and growth objectives is the “Taylor Rule”. The Taylor 
rule  can  be  augmented  by  adding  financial  variables  to  the  standard  monetary  reaction 
function based on inflation and the output gap so as to enhance central banks’ ability to react 
to financial stability concerns. However, efficiency of such a formulation needs to be tested. 
Whichever framework is adopted, there should be flexibility for the central bank to respond to 
potential imbalances and the risks, apart from growth and inflation control. 
Institutional design for better coordination 
(ii) 
The  recent  crisis  and  the  subsequent  response  have  shed  new  light  on  the  critical  role  of 
central  banks  in  promoting  financial  stability.  However,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  this 
added responsibility should not come at the cost of their conventional role for price stability. 
This  is  more  relevant  particularly  for  central  banks  in  EMEs  which  admittedly,  are  yet  to 
achieve that level of credibility as their advanced economy  counterparts. For  many  EMEs, 
exchange rate stability is an important objective, and without price stability it is not possible 
to maintain exchange rate stability. Furthermore, the financial markets and institutions have 
grown in complexity, the oversight and regulation of which could be beyond a single entity 
such  as  the  central  bank.  Hence,  financial  stability  would  have  to  be  a  joint  responsibility, 
though the central bank could have a dominant role by virtue of it being the natural lender of 
last resort. However, there is a need to explicitly incorporate the financial stability role of the 
central bank into its statute to establish an accountability framework. 
The challenge for a central bank is to achieve multiple objectives without losing credibility as 
a  monetary  authority  solely  responsible  for  price  stability.  This  would  be  possible  only  if 
policies implemented by various stakeholders in financial stability are coherent. Accordingly, 
an appropriate design for co-ordination mechanism is required to derive synergies between 
monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  and  make  more  effective  use  of  policy  tools 
available with multiple bodies having the mandate of financial stability. 
                                                 
29  For discussion on multiple indicators approach, please see: Mohanty (2010), “Monetary Policy Framework in 
India – Experience with Multiple-indicators Approach”, RBI Bulletin, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The design of co-ordination mechanism may, however, vary across countries depending on 
the  nature  and  size  of  their  financial  systems  and  their  own  historical  experience.  In  fact, 
efforts towards greater institutionalisation of co-ordination mechanism have already begun. 
Most  prominent  examples  are  the  newly  created  bodies,  both  in  advanced  countries  and 
EMEs,  like  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  US,  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee (Interim) in the UK, the European Systemic Risk Board for the European Union, 
Financial  Regulation  and  Systemic  Risk  Council  in  France,  Financial  Stability  Council  in 
Chile, Council for the Stability of the Financial System in Mexico and Financial Stability and 
Development Council in India (Table 3). In some other countries, financial stability framework 
has  been  strengthened  by  setting  up  committees  in  central  banks  to  gauge  systemic  risk 
(e.g., Brazil in 2011). 
Under the new institutional design, as shown in Table 3, though financial stability has been 
recognised  as  a  shared  responsibility,  central  banks  have  been  assigned  the  lead  role  in 
most  of  the  countries.  Even  as  details  of  the  newly  created  bodies  differ,  the  thrust  is  the 
same, i.e., better co-ordination to gauge systemic risks and plan an appropriate response. 
Furthermore, with increasing sovereign risk concerns in a number of economies, particularly 
the advanced economies, better policy response is expected as fiscal authorities are also a 
part of the new institutional framework for financial stability. However, even under the more 
collegial  approach  to  financial  stability,  policy  co-ordination  is  not  going  to  be  so  easy, 
especially when there is a problem of time-inconsistency and the objective functions of the 
authorities may not always be the same (Praet, 2011).30 It is also important to guard against 
the risk that active involvement of governments should not bring back fiscal dominance and 
compromise the autonomy of each regulator and the central bank. 
(iii)  Central bank communication 
In  a  market-determined  system,  central  banks  have  placed  a  greater  reliance  on 
transparency  and  communication  to  enhance  monetary  policy  transmission  and  establish 
accountability  to  the  public  for  their  decision-making.  So  far  the  experience  shows  that 
communication on monetary policy issues has moved from complete secrecy, to constructive 
ambiguity  to  transparency.  For  instance,  the  Fed  and  the  ECB  have  in  recent  years 
frequently provided fairly direct indications about future interest-rate decisions in their official 
statements.  We,  in  the  RBI,  have  also  started  giving  forward  guidance  since  September 
2010. However, there are several challenges. 
It is not easy to communicate clearly on a single objective. Going forward, as central banks 
broaden  their  mandates  and  institutional  design  grows  in  complexity,  so  also  will  the 
communication challenges. For example, if a central bank were to ease monetary policy on 
financial  stability  concerns  even  when  inflation  is  high,  it  risks  unhinging  of  inflation 
expectations, which in turn could complicate financial stability. 
During the recent crisis, there were many instances of communication challenges faced by 
central  banks.  For  instance,  the  US  Fed  faced  communication  challenge  with  regard  to 
quantitative easing and the exit policy of its unconventional measures. We, in the RBI, had to 
face  communication  challenge  when  we  reduced  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  of  banks  in 
January and March 2012 on liquidity concerns even when inflation was above our tolerance 
level. While some interpreted it as premature reversal of tight monetary policy stance, others 
saw this as a pure liquidity action not inconsistent with our monetary stance. 
If the policy measures are not properly guided and not understood as intended, they may not 
transmit  the  right  signal  and  eventually  prove  to  be  a  noise  to  financial  market  entities. 
                                                 
30  Praet,  Peter  (2011),  “The  (Changing)  Role  of  Central  Banks  in  Financial  Stability  Policies”,  Speech  at  the 
14th Annual  Internal  Banking  Conference,  Organised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  and  the 
European Central Bank, Chicago, November 10. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Guidance by central banks, at best, could be conditional because of the provisional nature of 
immediate available information set, limitations of macro models, incomplete knowledge and 
uncertainties about the evolution of the economy and periodic unanticipated shocks. Thus, 
transparency  in  communication  is  a  double-edged  sword  which  at  times  could  produce 
unintended consequences. As central banks broaden their objectives so also they have to 
hone their communication skills. 
Conclusion 
To sum up: Financial stability as an objective of central banks has turned a full circle from 
being  the  predominant  objective,  to  a  virtual  neglect  to  being  reinstated  recently  as  an 
important  objective  drawing  on  the  lessons  of  global  financial  crisis.  However,  financial 
markets  and  institutions  have  grown  in  complexity  making  it  difficult  for  a  single  entity  to 
deliver  on  financial  stability.  Therefore,  financial  stability  has  to  be  a  shared  responsibility 
wherein central banks have a predominant role. This necessitates a fresh look at monetary 
policy  framework,  institutional  design  for  policy  co-ordination  and  effective  communication. 
Moreover, there is a need for explicit recognition of financial stability objective, particularly in 
the statute of the central bank, to establish an accountability framework. While it is not very 
apparent whether price stability can ensure financial stability, it is clear that price instability 
could  jeopardise  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  objective,  therefore,  cannot  or  should 
not  override  the  price  stability  objective,  which  should  continue  to  be  the  predominant 
objective of monetary policy. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Table 3 (cont) 
Financial Stability Framework after the Crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
