Bwalya K E Ng’andu: The National Strategy on Financial Education for 
Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of Zambia, 
at the launch of the National Strategy on Financial Education for Zambia, Lusaka, 12 July 
2012. 
 The Deputy Minister of Finance, Honourable Miles Sampa, M.P; 
The Minister of Education, Honourable Dr. John Phiri, M.P; 
The  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Securities  &  Exchange  Commission,  Dr.  Wala 
Chabala; 
The Registrar, Pensions and Insurance Authority, Mr. Martin Libinga; 
Your Excellencies, Heads and Representatives of Diplomatic Missions invited; 
Senior Government and financial sector industry officials; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Honourable  Ministers,  I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you,  on  behalf  of  the  three  financial 
sector regulators, i.e. the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Pensions and Insurance 
Authority  and  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  the  launching  of  the  National  Strategy  on  Financial 
Education for Zambia. 
The launch is being done under the auspices of the Financial Sector Development Plan and 
represents a culmination of a wide range of activities which have been carried out within the 
scope  of  the  Plan  since  2002  with  the  objective  of  addressing  challenges  in  the  financial 
sector and strengthening and broadening access to financial services in Zambia. 
The origins of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP), the vehicle through which the 
strategy being launched today has been delivered can be traced back to the IMF and World 
Bank sponsored Financial Sector Assessment Programme studies and the Bank of Zambia 
Review which were conducted in 2002/3. Following these studies, the Bank of Zambia held 
various consultations with other financial sector regulators and industrial players to gain buy 
in  and  ownership  of  the  proposals  that  had  been  recommended  for  implementation  from 
these institutions. 
Subsequently, the Government approved the establishment in 2004 of the Financial Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP) as the institution to deliver the required changes to the financial 
sector in the country. During the first phase of the programme between 2004 and 2009, the 
FSDP focused on updating financial laws and research and improving market knowledge of 
the  financial  sector  landscape.  In  phase  two  between  2010  and  2012  focus  has  been  on 
enhancing  financial  sector  infrastructure  which  includes  the  establishment  of  a  national 
switch, carrying out a law review exercise to modernise and harmonise financial sector laws 
and  developing  strategies  for  increasing  competition  among  service  providers  so  as  to 
favourably  influence  the  cost  and  quality  of  service  delivery  of  financial  services,  increase 
access  to  financial  services  by  developing  a  rural  finance  policy  and  strategy  and  lastly 
delivering effective financial education. 
Notwithstanding the work done through the FSDP, the financial sector in Zambia still faces a 
number of major challenges. Access to financial services among the adult population is at 
37.3%,  the  cost  of  accessing  financial  services  is  still  high,  the  quality  of  financial  service 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
delivery can do with some improvement and financial literacy remains low and presents an 
important factor in explaining the low level of financial inclusion that we see in the country 
today. The FSDP, Honourable Ministers, therefore, remains work in progress. 
I  would  like,  however,  to  mention  some  milestones  which  have  been  achieved  under  this 
programme  in  order  to  underscore  its  potential  as  a  tool  for  transforming  for  the  better, 
Zambia’s financial sector landscape.  
Under  the  FSDP,  we  have  witnessed  the  establishment  of  the  Credit  Reference  Bureau 
which is beginning to play an increasingly important role in helping financial institutions better 
manage credit risk, which in turn, should feed into less expensive credit. A draft rural finance 
policy and strategy aimed at improving finance to rural areas has also been completed and 
awaits  implementation.  Another  important  exercise  accomplished  has  been  the  law  review 
exercise  which  has  reviewed  all  existing  legislation  in  the  financial  sector  with  the  view  to 
modernise,  harmonise  them  and  ensure  that  the  different  legislations  speak  to  each  other 
rather conflict each other. Consequently, we will be submitting to Government amendments 
to various laws, including those in banking, insurance and the capital market. 
Another  significant  accomplishment  under  the  FSDP  has  been  work  done  so  far  in 
formulating  a  national  strategy  for  financial  education.  This  initiative  grew  out  of  the 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  financial  institutions  and  certain  NGOs  that  were  engaged  in 
promoting various financial education activities and programme were operating in isolation. 
What  was  clearly  missing  was  a  coherent  and  well-co-ordinated  strategy  among  these 
organisations for delivering an effective education to enhance financial literacy and inclusion. 
Consequently the FSDP identified the need to develop a coordinated approach to financial 
education as a meaningful way of bringing progress to this process. It therefore, started its 
intervention by commissioning a stock taking study of financial education efforts taking place 
in Zambia in order to establish its true status. DFID provided financial support in the form of 
technical assistance which enabled the FSDP to recruit FinMark Trust to carry out the study. 
Subsequently,  a  report was  produced  and  presented  to  various  stakeholders  in  November 
last year. The recommendations from the stakeholders meeting were then sent to the FSDP 
Steering  Committee  in  April  this  year.  This  Committee  endorsed  the  report  and  it  is  this 
report  which  is  being  launched  today  as  the  National  Strategy  on  Financial  Education  for 
Zambia. Once launched, it will be implemented in earnest. 
Honourable Ministers, the activities that have been carried out under this programme have 
been made possible by the very generous financial support extended throughout the different 
phases of the programme by the IMF, World Bank, DFID, SIDA and the Government of the 
Republic of Zambia. Of course the three regulators, BoZ, PIA, and SEC have also done their 
bit by seconding personnel to the FSDP Secretariat and taking responsibility for the financial 
obligations entailed. I want to thank all of them for their commitment and dedication. 
It  is  now  my  singular  honour  and  privilege  to  call  upon  the  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance, 
Honourable  Miles  Sampa,  MP  to  formally  launch  the  National  Strategy  on  Financial 
Education for Zambia. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
