Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Bank of Uganda highlights its Board’s 
achievements 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
farewell dinner for board members, Kampala, 1 June 2012. 
 Distinguished Board Members and your families,  
The Deputy Governor,  
Senior Management of the Bank,  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the management and staff of the Bank of Uganda, I wish to welcome you all to 
this occasion to bid farewell to our Board Members whose term of service comes to an end in 
June 2012. For the last five years, the Bank has been blessed with a formidable Board of 
Directors  who  has  carried  out  its  mandate  of  providing  oversight  of,  and  guidance  to,  the 
management of the Bank with integrity, intelligence, wisdom and an unwavering commitment 
to the public interest.  
The vision and stewardship provided by the Board has enabled the Bank to strengthen the 
implementation  of  its  core  mandate  of  macroeconomic  management  and  financial  sector 
regulation and to implement many projects which have enhanced the capacity of the Bank to 
serve  the  people  of  Uganda.  I  would  like  to  take  a  few  minutes  to  highlight  some  of  the 
Board’s achievements.  
Strategic planning and management  
The  Board  approved  the  Bank  of Uganda  Strategic  Plan for  2012–2017,  which  guides  the 
long term policies and direction of the bank. It is based on the Balanced Scorecard approach 
which is at the cutting edge of international best practice.  
Monetary policy  
Under  the  Board’s  leadership,  the  Bank  has  modernised  its  monetary  policy  operating 
framework.  This  has  entailed  the  introduction  of  an  inflation  targeting  lite  monetary  policy 
framework, the centrepiece of which is the policy rate – the Central Bank Rate – which I now 
announce at the start of every month. Over the past 11 months, we have successfully used 
our  new  monetary  policy  framework  to  bring  inflation  under  control.  Our  monetary  policy 
operations have also been made much more transparent, to enhance public understanding 
of our actions and objectives.  
Financial system regulation and supervision  
With  the  guidance  of  the  Board,  the  Bank  has  modernised  its  approach  to  the  prudential 
supervision  of  banks,  in  particular  through  the  introduction  of  risk  based  supervision.  The 
Bank  has  also  upgraded  many  aspects  of  the banking  laws,  including by  raising minimum 
capital  requirements  and  strengthening 
the  corporate 
governance of banks.  
the  regulations  pertaining 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Human resource policies and staff welfare  
The  Board  has  prompted  the  Bank  to  introduce  progressive  human  resource  and  staff 
welfare policies. In particular, the Bank has established a merit driven promotional regime. 
Other significant achievements in the area of human resources are the streamlining of the 
salary structure, measures to guarantee the sustainability of the Retirement Benefits Scheme 
and  the  succession  management  policy.  The  Bank  can  now  confidently  boast  that  the 
working conditions of its staff compare favourably with conditions in other institutions in the 
financial sector and the public service.  
Information technology 
The  Board  has  spearheaded  the  computerisation  of  the  functions  and  operations  of  the 
Bank. Computerisation is essential to promote efficiency, security, reliability and availability 
of services in real time. Included among the many examples of computerisation in the Bank 
are  the  BoU  Banking  System,  the  Human  Resources  Management  System  and  the 
upgrading of the Uganda National Interbank System.  
New family of banknotes  
The Bank introduced a new family of banknotes in 2010; the first time since the 1980s that 
new  bank  notes  had  been  introduced.  The  Board  played  a  major  role  in  overseeing  the 
design of the new banknotes, which incorporate many state of the art security features and 
have earned international recognition. Our new UGX50,000 bank note was given the award 
of the best bank note of the year in 2011 by the International Bank Society. The International 
Association of Currency Affairs conferred the award of best new bank currency series in the 
world on the new family of notes.  
Projects and infrastructure development  
The Board has also guided the Bank in the implementation of major capital projects which 
have  strengthened  its  capacity  to  deliver  services  up  country.  Examples  include  the 
construction of the Mbale Branch and the Kabale Currency Centre.  
On behalf of Management and Staff of the Bank, I want to thank all Board members for a job 
well done. Your contribution as Board members to our Bank and to public policy making in 
this country has been invaluable. It is a contribution for which you can justifiably take pride 
and I hope that your achievements in this regard will be widely recognised in our society. 
With these few remarks, I would like to wish you success for all of your endeavours in the 
future and for the good health of yourself and your families. 
Thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
