Darmin Nasution: Indonesia – sustaining growth during global volatility 
Keynote speech by Dr Darmin Nasution, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at a seminar, Jakarta, 
13 February 2012. 
 Fellow Speakers, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Assalamu alaikum Wr. Wb.  
Good morning and May God Bless Us All,  
To open my speech here today, I would like to invite you all to join me in expressing thanks 
and praise to God Almighty who has blessed us again with the opportunity to come together 
here for this seminar.  
This seminar is held to have a better understanding on the improvement of macroeconomic 
management  and  banking  regulation  that  Indonesia  has  achieved  following  Asian  crisis  in 
1997–98, as documented in the new IMF book titled “Indonesia: Sustaining Growth during 
Global Volatility”.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  has  come  to  our  common  understanding  that  changes  in  the  constellation  of  the  global 
economy since the global financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath had left a profound and 
widespread  consequence.  Against  the  backdrop  of  lingering  effects  from  the  global  crisis, 
significant  challenges  in  managing  an  increasingly  complex  macroeconomic  stability  has 
risen considerably. External shock and uncertainties seem becoming a constant dimension 
that  continually  shadows  us  in  the  process  of  policy  formulation  and  implementation.  The 
problem is we do not know when, how big and through which channel the shock will happen.  
As we might be aware, the unprecedented global financial turmoil from 2007 to 2009 was a 
big shock to the global economy, and represented the deepest deterioration since the 1930s. 
Thus  far,  Indonesia’s  economy  has  weathered  the  global  storm  well.  Indonesia  has 
continued  to  record  strong  macroeconomic  performance  with  sustained  high  economic 
growth. Provided that many economies had negative growth in 2009, Indonesian economy in 
that year still grew by 4%, which was one of the highest in the region.  
In  the  following  years  Indonesian  economy  continued  improving  with  well-maintained 
macroeconomic  and  financial  system  stability.  Economic  growth  in  2011  was  recorded  at 
6.5%,  increased  from  the  growth  in  2010  at  6.1%.  This  strong  growth  was  supported  by 
strong  private  consumption  and  investment  along  with  good  export  performance.  Looking 
forward  in  2012,  we  believe  Indonesian  economy  would  expand  in  the  range  of 
6.3%–6.7%. The main source of the growth is expected to come from domestic demand as 
investment  activity  gains  momentum,  owing  to  stronger  economic  fundamentals  and 
improved business climate.  
The recent upgrades of Indonesia’s rating by Fitch and Moody’s will help boost growth up to 
its  potential  level,  as long  as  it  is accompanied  by  efforts  to  utilize  our  large  potential  and 
address various structural issues. We believe that the upgrade may lead to a wider investor 
base not only to government bond market, but also to corporate bond and equity markets. 
This  will  eventually  lower  borrowing  cost  for  the  country  in  a  more  structural  manner, 
complementing the growing stream of FDI inflows to investment activities.  
Looking  at  inflation,  although  historically  Indonesian  inflation  rates  were  relatively  higher 
compared  to  other  emerging  countries  in  the  region,  in  recent  years  Indonesia  has 
successfully  reduced  inflation  to  single  digits.  Last  year  Indonesia’s  inflation  rate  was 
recorded  at  only  3.79%  (yoy).  And  the  declining  trend  in  inflation  still  continues,  in  which 
inflation in January 2012 was only 3.65% (yoy).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
intervention  strategy 
The  achievement  of  the  low  inflation  rate  was  supported  by  policies  to  bring  down  core 
inflation  as  well  as  inflation  of  volatile  food  prices  and  administered  prices.  For  2012,  we 
expect  that  inflation  pressure  will  still  be  manageable  within  the  range  of  inflation  target 
4.5%+1%,  even  taking  into  account  the  impact  of  limitation  on  fuel  subsidy  or  rise  in 
administered  prices.  The  coordination  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  government  in 
controlling inflation will certainly play an important role to bring down inflation. Thus far, this 
coordination is carried out, among others, through inflation control taskforce at national level 
(TPI) and regional level (TPID).  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen  
The  performance  of  Indonesia’s  external  sector  also  shows  resiliency.  Amidst  escalated 
global economic uncertainty, Indonesia’s balance of payments in 2011 continued recording a 
considerable surplus. The composition of capital account has further improved as reflected 
by FDI flows surpassing net portfolio flows beginning in the second half of 2011. This change 
in  the  nature  of  inflow  to  more  long-term  flows  will  definitely  enhance  the  resilience  of  the 
economy.  
In line with the development in balance of payment, the international reserves has increased 
significantly  in  recent  years.  International  reserves  at  the  end  of  January  2011  reached 
USD112 billion. Indeed, the reserves have been depleted compared to mid 2011, but remain 
adequate  to  cover  6.3  month  of  imports  and  short-term  government  debt  repayment.  This 
depletion merely reflects the process of recycling the international reserves in response to 
the  depreciating  pressure  on  rupiah  during  the  last  several  months  of  2011  triggered  by 
mounting European debt crisis.  
As  policy  response  to  preserve  macro  and  financial  system  stability,  Bank  Indonesia  also 
implemented  dual 
the  FX  and  government  bond  markets 
simultaneously.  This  strategy  had  stabilized  both  the  currency  and  government  bond  price 
from  further  drop,  while  also  increase  the  stock  of  government  bond  in  Bank  Indonesia 
portfolio for monetary operation purpose such as Reverse Repo. Currently, we hold around 
Rp 70 trillions of government bond.  
On  the  financial  sector,  our  financial  system  stability  has  been  well-preserved  during  the 
recent global turbulences. This goes back to more than a decade of repairs and improvement 
since the ASIAN crisis 
1997/1998 which has made our financial system, including the banking sector, more resilient 
and able to absorb instability risk as big as the 2008 and 2011 turmoil. The banking industry 
has been more resilient, as indicated by secure level of capital adequacy ratio (CAR) above 
the  minimum  level,  reaching  16.0%  at  the  end  of  2011  and  gross  non-performing  loans 
(NPLs) managed at comfortably safe level of 3.0%.  
Nevertheless, I believe the role of Indonesian banking sector and its efficiencies can still be 
further strengthen in supporting the economic development. Last year, bank lending grew by 
25% dominated by productive loan such as investment loan (36%) and working capital loan 
(24%). Despite this encouraging progress, the ratio of bank credits to GDP in Indonesia is 
still very low, only standing at 30%, well below other countries such as Malaysia, Thailand 
and  China,  which  ratio  has  reached  above  100%.  This  is  in  line  with  BI  survey  which 
indicated limited role of banking as companies still rely more on internal fund. At the end, this 
condition reflects the remaining large potential for business expansion.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen,  
The prevalent opinion points toward the improvement of macroeconomic management where 
Indonesia has implemented a program of wide-ranging policy reforms, particularly since the 
1997–98  Asian  financial  crisis.  As  pointed  out  above,  the  source  of  Indonesia’s  resilience 
includes  a  prudent  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  a  sound  banking  system,  a  large  stock  of 
international reserves, and a more flexible exchange rate. 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
These  underlying  strengths  allowed  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  government  to  respond  with 
standard “countercyclical” monetary and fiscal policies to mitigate the adverse impact of the 
global economic crisis. Yesterday, at the board meeting we decided to cut BI Rate further 
down by 25 bps to 5,75%. This kind of policy reaction contrasts sharply with past episodes 
such  as  the  1997–98  Asian  crisis,  2005  mini-crisis,  and  2008  global  financial  crisis  when 
Indonesia responded “procyclically” by raising interest rates and tightening fiscal policies.  
This edited volume prepared by IMF staff, entitled Indonesia: Sustaining Growth during 
Global Volatility, elaborates the substantial improvement in the quality of  macroeconomic 
management and banking regulation that Indonesia has achieved in the midst of a volatile 
global  environment.  In  addition,  this  book  also  highlights  the  most  binding  constraints  that 
need to be addressed to sustain and increase economic growth as well as to further lower 
vulnerability going forward.  
Overall,  this  book  provides  a  deep  and  balanced  perspective  on  the  Indonesian  economy 
that might help to further enrich the framework of macroeconomic management in Indonesia. 
We  appreciate  the  thorough  analysis  of  IMF  staff  on  various  issues  regarding  Indonesia’s 
economy. This in-depth and balanced analysis benefited from candid discussions between 
the Indonesian authorities and IMF staff during the Article IV consultations.  
Their  analysis  has  provided  insight  to  our  policy  discussions  which  should  contribute  to 
improving Indonesia’s economic performance. I sincerely hope that publication of this book 
will  help  to  better  understand  the  progress  made  by  Indonesia  in  macroeconomic 
management  and  policy  that  can  be  used  to  further  strengthening  not  only  Indonesian 
economy but also other economies.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen  
Needless  to  say,  we  cannot  and  may  not  assume  that  our  macro  stability  will  definitely 
continue in the future. This assumption can lead us to comfort zone that would reduce our 
ability to anticipate future challenges early on.  
I believe this seminar will be the right place to discuss both global and domestic challenges 
and  how  we  should  deal  with  them.  At  the  global  perspective,  the  immediate  policy 
challenges  is  certainly  how  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  global  economic  slowdown  and 
uncertainties.  Meanwhile,  at  the  domestic  front,  a  lot  of  domestic  unfinished  issues  to  be 
addressed which most of them are structural issues we never solve and thus have created 
inefficiencies both in the financial and real sectors.  
I  hope  this  seminar  will  give  us  various  perspectives  on  how  to  strengthen  Indonesian 
economy amidst those global and domestic challenges. May Allah Almighty always be with 
us, bless us and lighten our way towards a better future.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
