Karolina Ekholm: How can financial crises be avoided in Sweden? 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 27 September 2012. 
 The views expressed in this speech are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the 
Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank.  I  would  like  to  thank  Jill  Billborn,  Johanna  Fager  Wettergren  and 
Per Åsberg-Sommar for their great assistance in the writing of this speech. 
Four  years  after  the  financial  crisis  broke  out,  we  are  still  living  with  its  consequences:  a 
sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  sluggish  recovery  in  the  United  States  and  United 
Kingdom, with unemployment entrenched at high levels and a world beyond Europe and the 
United  States  that  is  finding  it  hard  to  adjust  to  the  fact  that  their  most  important  export 
markets are faltering. The realisation that the costs of financial crises are dreadfully high has 
led  to  a  general  understanding  that  economic  policy  must focus  much more  on  preventing 
such crises. 
Here in Sweden, we have coped relatively well through the recent turbulent years. But, even 
here, unemployment remains on a high level – and part of the high Swedish growth rate has 
merely been a recovery from the great fall in GDP in 2008 and 2009. It is well-known that I 
have  advocated  a  lower  repo  rate  to  push  down  unemployment  faster  and  to  push  up  an 
inflation rate that is currently below our target of two per cent. As there is a broad opinion that 
low interest rates form a risk to financial stability, it may seem as though I am taking the risk 
of a financial crisis breaking out in Sweden too lightly. But I am not. I share the opinion that 
economic policy needs to focus on counteracting financial crises. But I do not think that this is 
primarily a task for monetary policy. On the contrary, it is a task for macroprudential policy, 
and it is this topical policy area that I will be talking about today. I have previously spoken on 
how macroprudential supervision could be organised in Sweden, and on how responsibility 
for the tools in question could be allocated.1  The question of the allocation of responsibility 
and mandates is also being investigated just now by the Financial Crisis Commission. In my 
opinion, it is important that there are clear targets and mandates for macroprudential policy in 
the same way as there are for monetary policy. If this is the case, each policy area can take 
the other for granted. 
Macroprudential policy is aimed at counteracting risks in the financial system as a whole, and 
is a policy area for which many countries are now trying to set the framework.2 Exactly how 
these  frameworks  will  look  is  still  somewhat  unclear,  but  a  few  general  principles  have 
crystallised as regards both appropriate institutional structures and which instruments it may 
be appropriate to use.3 
Finansinspektionen already has instruments at its disposal that are focused on the health and 
behaviour of individual participants and companies. But one important lesson of the crisis is 
that this is not enough. Our toolkit needs to be complemented with tools that can focus on the 
system as a whole. Today, I will discuss what such a Swedish toolbox for macroprudential 
supervision could include. 
                                                
1  The speech “Macroprudential policy and clear communication contribute to financial stability” was held at the 
Swedish Bankers’ Association on 30 March 2012. See www.riksbank.se. 
2  For  more  detailed  analyses  of  macroprudential  policy  and  its  ability  to  counteract  systemic  risk,  see,  for 
example, Borio (2010), Galati and Moessner (2011) and Viñals (2010 and 2011). 
3  See, for example Lim, C., et al., (2011),”Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? 
Lessons from Country Experiences”, IMF Working Paper, 11/238. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Different types of risk… 
Before I go into the different types of tools that could be used to manage systemic risks, I will 
explain what is meant by systemic risk. 
The Riksbank usually defines systemic risk as the risk that a shock will occur in the financial 
system,  leading  to  substantial  costs for  society.4  Such  risks  can  arise  for  various  reasons. 
The  crisis  and  the  period  before  the  crisis  clearly  illustrate  the  tendencies  towards 
exaggerated  cyclical  behaviour  that  often  characterise  the  financial  markets.  In  periods  of 
strong growth, there is usually an increase in demand for loans for corporate investments and 
property purchases. It also seems to be common for awareness of risks to decrease during 
such an upturn. Lenders often relax requirements for  creditworthiness at the same time as 
they often take on too much debt themselves. When problems subsequently arise as a result 
of some borrowers finding it difficult to repay their loans, there can be an overreaction in the 
other direction, with severe credit tightening as a consequence. 
But systemic risk is not just a matter of a tendency towards exaggerated cyclical behaviour in 
credit  granting.  It  is  also  a  matter  of  how  the  concentration  of  risk  and  the  links  between 
different parts of the financial system at any given time affect the risk of a crisis hitting the 
system as whole. For example, several banks can take the same kind of risk or be dependent 
on the same funding sources. The high degree of interconnectedness in the financial system 
–  between  different  institutions  and  between  different  markets–  increases  the  risk  of 
contagion when financial problems arise.5 
Circumstances that need not constitute a risk on the micro level can thus become risks on the 
macro level. Not knowing which risks will trigger systemic crises is in the nature of things. Of 
course,  this is because the financial system  is  constantly  changing  – new  instruments and 
markets  arise  and  technology  develops.  And,  as  the  financial  system  changes,  the  risk 
outlook changes too. What at first seems to be uncomplicated and “risk-free” need not be so 
in  reality.  This  suggests  that  a  broad  set  of  macroprudential  supervision  instruments  is 
needed to tackle systemic risks. 
… suggest a broad toolkit for macroprudential supervision 
So  what  should  we  bear  in  mind  when  selecting  and  designing  tools  for  macroprudential 
supervision? Firstly, we need to be able to counteract different types of systemic risk and, for 
this,  we  clearly  need  different  types  of  tool.  The  principle  used  in  dealing  with  problems 
involving  a  tendency  towards  exaggerated  cyclical  behaviour  is  to  variously  make  it  more 
expensive and less attractive to allow risks to build up when times are good, at the same time 
as  buffers  are  created  that  can  be  used  when  times  are  bad.  Problems  caused  by  the 
financial system’s structure should instead be approached by managing individual institutions’ 
contributions  to total  systemic  risk, for  example by  way  of  specific  requirements  for  capital 
buffers, strengthened requirements for transparency, or limitations on certain types of activity. 
Secondly,  there  is  probably  a  need  both  for  tools  with  a  wide  area  of  effect  and  for  those 
aimed at a particular sub-market or activity. Countercyclical capital buffers are an example of 
a tool with a relatively wide area of effect. These are based on the total expansion in credit 
and cover all banks. I will return to this instrument shortly. However, such broadly-acting tools 
                                                
4  The  Riksbank  has  defined  financial  stability  as  meaning  that  the  financial  system  can  maintain  its  basic 
functions while also having resilience to disruptions that threaten these functions. The Riksbank and financial 
stability  (2010).  See  also  Nordh-Berntsson  and  Molin  (2012),  “A  Swedish  framework  for  macroprudential 
policy”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2012:1. 
5  Rajan (2005) argues that the element of distorted incentives for managers of financial assets to take serious 
risks has increased as a result of structural changes to the financial sector, in which the banks’ significance 
has decreased and the role of other players, such as securities funds, insurance companies, pension funds 
etc., has increased. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have the disadvantage that they risk having unforeseen effects in sectors that have not had 
problems. If the problems are clearly concentrated on a specific sector, tools with a narrower 
area  of  effect  are  thus  to  be  preferred.  If,  for  example,  the  problem  is  a  rapid  build-up  of 
housing  loans  in  combination  with  rapidly  rising  housing  prices,  it  may  be  better  to  focus 
specifically  on  the  housing  market.  A  more  narrowly-acting  tool  in  this  case  could  be  an 
increase of risk weights specifically on housing loans. However, it is not certain that there will 
always be narrowly-acting tools that are sufficiently effective. 
Thirdly, there may be a need for tools that can be focused on different types of participant. 
This  is  primarily  a matter of using tools  aimed at financial  companies,  as  it  is  within these 
companies that  problems  that  may  ultimately  lead  to  a  financial crisis  can  arise.  But  there 
may  also  be  reason  to  use  tools  aimed  at  households  and  non-financial companies.  Such 
tools can form important complements, for example by dampening demand for credit. 
Naturally, there are already policy areas that directly or indirectly influence financial stability. 
As regards the housing market, which is a sector that is creating a great deal of unease in 
Sweden  due  to  high  indebtedness  and  high  prices,  this  is  influenced  by  factors  such  as 
regulations for tax deductions for interest payments, changes to property tax, rent control and 
other regulations that affect incentives for housing construction. But decisions on measures in 
these areas are primarily taken on the basis of other goals than safeguarding the stability of 
the  financial  system.  In  micro  supervision,  which  is  the  kind  of  supervision  carried  out  by 
Finansinspektionen in Sweden, a series of different tools is also used to influence financial 
stability.  However,  at  present,  Finansinspektionen’s  remit  is  focused  on  dampening  risks 
among individual institutions, not in the system as a whole. 
What  we  need, quite  simply,  are  specific  tools for macroprudential  supervision  that can be 
used  with  the  direct  aim  of  promoting  stability  in  the  system.  This  will  make  it  possible  to 
counteract the systemic risks created by policies in other areas so that the system as a whole 
remains stable. The housing market is a good example of this. Politically, it may be difficult, if 
not  impossible,  to  carry  out  changes  to  the  taxation  system  making  mortgage  borrowing 
significantly  more  expensive,  even  if  this  would  be  the  most  effective  way  of  reducing  the 
risks associated with high indebtedness among households. This means we need tools that 
can counteract this kind of indebtedness and which can be used with the aim of promoting 
the stability of the financial system. 
There is a great need for such tools in Sweden 
The Swedish banking system is large and closely interwoven, which means that problems in 
one bank can easily spread to the other banks. The costs to society can thus be extensive in 
the event of a crisis. Increasing the safety margins in the financial system is therefore highly 
important. It can be enough for one bank to be impacted by problems for confidence in all 
banks to be dealt a blow. The important role of confidence in the financial markets became 
clear  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  when  the  lack  of  confidence  led  to  many  banks  rapidly 
encountering liquidity problems and being forced to rely on the Riksbank’s measures for their 
funding.  In  this  regard,  the  Swedish  banks  are  also  particularly  sensitive  to  shocks  on  the 
financial  markets  as  they  largely  obtain  funding  in  foreign  currency.  Funding  in  foreign 
currency is often for shorter durations than funding in Swedish currency and has been seen 
to disappear abruptly in times of stress. 
Important steps have already been taken… 
A  series  of  important  steps  have  already  been  taken  to  make  the  financial  system  more 
robust.  A 
the 
Basel III regulations.  Higher  demands  for  more  and  higher  quality  capital  will  contribute 
towards strengthening confidence in the individual banks and thereby also in the system as a 
whole. In addition, more capital will lead confidence in the banks on the financial markets to 
increase, which will make it easier for the banks to obtain access to market funding. 
taking  place  within 
large  part  of 
framework  of 
this  work 
the 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
form  of  countercyclical  buffers  and  special  capital  supplements 
The new regulations also bring with them a few “pure” macroprudential policy instruments in 
the 
for  global 
systemically-important financial institutions (SIFIs). I will  return  to this  shortly,  but allow  me 
first to say a few words on the new capital adequacy rules. 
At  the  moment,  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  and  the  European  Parliament  are 
negotiating procedures for the incorporation of the new capital adequacy rules into EU law. 
These discussions have broadly focused on whether individual member states should be able 
to place higher capital requirements than the minimum. I consider that we should be allowed 
to  do  this.  In  Sweden,  we  need  to  set  capital  requirements  on  the  basis  of  the  prevailing 
circumstances  on  the  Swedish  banking  market.  In  my  opinion,  this  must  be  the  guiding 
principle as long as it is Swedish taxpayers’ money that would ultimately be at stake in the 
event  that  Sweden  were  to  be  impacted  by  a  financial  crisis.  The  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank have signalled that the capital adequacy of the major 
Swedish banks needs to be increased considerably. According to the plan, capital adequacy 
is to increase to at least 10 per cent by 2013 and at least 12 per cent by 1 January 2015.6 
The  Swedish  banks  have  every  chance  of  meeting  these  requirements  due  to  their  high 
earning capacities and their low loan losses. The four major banks are systemically important 
on a national level and, additionally, Nordea is systemically important on a global level.7 The 
supplement for systemic importance is included in the capital levels that I have just cited. This 
is thus a measure linked to risks of a structural character. 
For the same reasons, there may be a need for Sweden to introduce tougher requirements 
for the Swedish banks’ liquidity reserves than are advocated by the Basel III regulations. The 
banks need to become better at themselves managing the liquidity problems to which their 
activities give rise, particularly as regards liquidity in foreign currency. If the banks match the 
maturities of  assets  and  liabilities  better  and maintain  sufficient  liquidity  reserves  in foreign 
currency, they will be less sensitive to shocks on the financial markets. 
The Basel III Accord intends that two quantitative liquidity requirements be introduced, one 
short-term  and  one  long-term.  The  short-term  measure  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  is 
intended to ensure that the banks have enough liquidity to cope for 30 days under stressed 
market  conditions.  The  long-term  measure  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR)  is  aimed  at 
reducing the maturity difference between assets and liabilities. 
The  Basel  Committee’s  plan  is  for  the  LCR  to  be  introduced  in  2015  but,  as  the  Swedish 
banks  largely  use  short-term  market  funding  in  foreign  currency,  the  Riksbank  and 
Finansinspektionen  consider  that  Sweden  should  go  in  advance  and  introduce  the  LCR  in 
January  2013.8  In  addition  to  this,  the  Swedish  banks  will  also  need  to  have  the  LCR  at 
100 per cent in the foreign currencies euro and US dollar. So, even here, we consider that 
higher requirements should be placed on the Swedish banks than the Basel III regulations do. 
Countercyclical capital requirements, a macroprudential policy instrument in focus 
One of the macroprudential policy instruments being discussed most in Europe at present is 
countercyclical  capital 
the  new 
Basel regulations. Consequently, this is an instrument that we know we will be able to use in 
Sweden in a number of years. The principle is simple: when the financial risks increase, the 
banks  will  successively  be  forced  to  increase  their  countercyclical  buffers;  when  the  risks 
recede, they will be permitted to decrease them. However, in practice, the instrument is not 
entirely so simple to design. The level of the countercyclical capital buffers will be determined 
requirements.  These  are 
included  as  a  part  of 
                                                
6  This refers to Core Tier 1 capital in relation to risk-weighted assets. 
7  FSB (2011), “Policy Measures to Address Systemically Important Financial Institutions”, 4 November 2011. 
8  See, for example, Financial Stability Report 2012:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
by the relevant authorities on the basis of quantitative and qualitative assessments. Among 
other data, the quantitative assessment will take into account the so-called credit gap, which 
is how far credit growth deviates from an estimated trend. But this is a fairly rough measure of 
the  degree of  risk  in  the  system,  and other  measures  and  assessments may also be fairly 
important. 
The  aim  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers  is  primarily  to  strengthen  the  banks  and  the 
resilience of the financial system. One effect of introducing the buffers will be to moderate the 
fluctuations  of  the  credit  cycle.  In  an  upturn,  substantial  credit  expansion  will  activate  the 
buffers, which means that the banks will gradually have to hold more capital. This will restrict 
lending and thus reduce the risk of exaggerated credit growth and rising asset prices. In a 
situation in which lending is being tightened, the banks’ capital will be freed up as the buffer 
requirement is reduced. The banks will therefore not need to reduce their lending to the same 
extent, which would otherwise reinforce the downturn. Here, it may be worth emphasising that 
the credit cycle does not typically coincide with the business cycle (the fluctuations of which 
we, at the Riksbank, attempt to dampen with the use of monetary policy), but has a longer 
course.  But  once  again,  the  primary  purpose  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers  is  to 
increase the resilience of the financial system by ensuring that the banks have enough capital 
in periods when risks are accumulating. 
Negotiations  are  underway  on  the  EU  level  regarding  the  implementation  of  Basel  III,  and 
thus also the countercyclical buffer. Who will be responsible for the instrument – an existing 
authority, several authorities together or a newly- formed authority – is an open question in 
Sweden and many other countries. The Swedish government has appointed a commission to 
investigate the implementation of countercyclical capital buffers in Sweden.9 
…but the Basel regulations do not capture all risks in Sweden 
The Basel III Accord will also place requirements on the banks’ leverage ratio, which is the 
minimum  amount  of  capital  that  the  banks  must  retain  regardless  of  the  risk  class  of  the 
assets.10  The fact that a requirement for the leverage ratio sets a ceiling for indebtedness in 
the banking system is very attractive. It guarantees a kind of minimum level for resilience. At 
the same time, the banks will no longer have to rely upon the risk weights correctly reflecting 
the actual risk in lending. 
My assessment is that leverage ratios and countercyclical buffers are good instruments for 
the management of systemic risks which will  help us strengthen the financial system when 
the need arises. But they have their limitations. Both of these instruments are indiscriminate 
and  it  will  be  difficult  to  determine  when  it  will  be  appropriate  to  increase  or  decrease  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffers.  If  we  are  to  be  able  to  combat  risks  efficiently,  we  will  also 
need instruments that can be directed towards the areas in which the problems exist. 
Variable risk weighting – a usable instrument 
One  instrument  that  a  growing  group  of  countries  is  choosing  to  introduce  is  variable  risk 
weighting for lending.11 These can be seen as a complement to countercyclical capital buffers 
and are aimed at counteracting the build-up of risks in lending to specific sectors. Varying risk 
weighting is thus a more focused instrument than countercyclical capital buffers. 
                                                
9  This work is being conducted within the framework of the government’s inquiry Fi 2012:05 “Inquiry on capital 
adequacy regulations”, to be concluded in the spring of 2013. 
10  This capital conservation buffer is to be held in the form of core Tier 1 capital and is to consist of 2.5 per cent 
of the risk-weighted assets. 
11  In the United Kingdom, the Financial Policy Committee has been given a mandate to introduce risk weighting, 
so-called  sectoral  capital  requirements,  see  Financial  Policy  Committee  statement,  March  2012.  See  also 
Bank of England Instruments of macroprudential policy, a discussion paper, December 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The banks’ capital ratios are determined by their capital and assets and by the risk weights 
used  for  calculating  the  risk-weighted  assets.  If  the  risk  weightings  on  lending  to  sectors 
considered as higher risk are increased, the banks must allocate more capital per loan. This 
could dampen lending to higher risk sectors. Our domestic banking crisis at the start of the 
1990s provides one example of how systemic risks can build up and become concentrated 
upon a single sector – in this case, commercial properties. An increase of the risk weighting 
on loans to commercial properties might have been able to alleviate the crisis that we went 
through then. 
In Sweden, recent discussions have, above all, dealt with risk weightings on mortgage loans, 
which are among the lowest in Europe due to the historically- low loan losses. But there is 
reason  to  question  these  low  risk  weightings,  as  they  do  not  account  for  recent  years’ 
increases  in  household  indebtedness.  Consequently,  Finansinspektionen  has  also  started 
work on reviewing the risk weights with the aim of increasing them. 
I consider that variable risk weighting is a macroprudential policy instrument that it would be 
advantageous  to  include  in  a  toolbox  for  Sweden.  It  could  both  strengthen  the  banks’ 
resilience  against  systemic  risks  in  a  broad  sense,  and  reduce  the  risks  associated  with 
lending to a specific sector. Such a tool would reduce the pressure on monetary policy as an 
instrument for  managing  risks  on  the Swedish housing market,  something that I  personally 
would  very  much  welcome.  This  would  allow  influence  to  be  exerted  on  the  expansion  of 
credit in the household sector and on housing prices, without simultaneously impeding credit 
granting in other sectors and possibly influencing the krona exchange rate in a direction that 
would impede exports. 
A ceiling on household borrowing 
Another  way  of  counteracting  systemic  risks  is  to  use  loan  ceilings  as  a  macroprudential 
policy  instrument.  These  can  certainly  be  focused  on  all  categories  of  borrower  in  society, 
but,  in  the  countries  in  which  they  have  so  far  been  applied,  they  have  been  directed  at 
households and their indebtedness.12 
These  instruments  have  usually  been  formulated  as  a  limit  on  the  amount  of  the  loan  in 
relation  to  the  household’s  income  or  the  value  of  the  household’s  assets  that  form  the 
collateral for the loan. There is no internationally harmonised definition of these instruments, 
allowing  them  to  be  defined  differently  as  regards  loan  amount,  income  and  value  of 
underlying collateral. 
In Sweden, Finansinspektionen issued a recommendation almost two years ago regarding a 
limit on how much borrowers may borrow, the so-called mortgage ceiling. According to this, 
household loans should not exceed 85 per cent of the property’s market value when the loan 
is  granted.  Lending  above  this  threshold  is  still  possible,  but  should  be  granted  without 
residential  collateral  and  therefore  at  higher  interest  rates.  Even  if  Finansinspektionen’s 
justification  for  the  mortgage  ceiling  was  to  protect  consumers,  the  measure  can  also  be 
used  for  macroprudential  supervision.  From  a  stability  perspective,  the  credit  risks  in  the 
banks’  credit  portfolios  could  be  reduced  if  the  rule  contributes  towards  reducing  the 
economic  vulnerability  of  households.  The  loan  ceiling  may  also  contribute  towards  more 
stable  price  formation  on  the  housing  market,  as  the  rules  influence  how  much  money 
households  are  willing  to  put  into  purchasing  housing.  If  this  counteracts  excessive  price 
variations  on  the  housing  market  and  the  unsustainable  accumulation  of  debt  among 
households,  it  will  also  likewise  contribute  towards  reducing  the  risk  of  loan  losses  in  the 
banking system. 
                                                
12  See, for example Lim, C., et al., (2011), “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? 
Lessons from Country Experiences”, IMF Working Paper, 11/238. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A loan ceiling based on income would have largely the same characteristics as one based on 
the  value  of  housing,  but  may  have  certain  advantages.  If  debts  are  not  linked  to  price 
movements  on  the  housing  markets,  this  avoids  the  problem  of  price  increases  and 
indebtedness reciprocally being pushed upwards in a rising spiral. 
Effectively combating future financial crises will require flexibility 
An efficient financial system is a prerequisite for a modern economy. A shock leading to the 
breakdown of any of the financial system’s functions can have major economic costs in the 
form  of  sharp  falls  in  GDP  and  high  unemployment.  Central  government  finances  can  be 
weakened so much that the country enters a debt crisis. From this point of view, it may be 
considered justifiable to make every effort to increase the resilience of the financial system. 
At the same time, it is important to always compare the cost of various types of measure with 
their benefit, so that we can design the most efficient system possible. 
I  have  presented  a  long  list  of  possible  instruments  that  could  be  used  to  conduct 
macroprudential supervision. By necessity, this list will include most tools, as different tools 
are  needed to  counteract different  systemic risks.  But  we are discussing  something  that  is 
relatively  new.  At  present,  we  only  have  limited  experience  of  conducting  macroprudential 
supervision  in  practice.  This  means  that  the  process  of  introducing  macroprudential 
supervision will entail a certain degree of trial and error. Quite simply, we will have to test our 
way forward, while constantly doing our best to assess the efficiency of the instruments being 
employed.13  The financial system is complex and dynamic, and the risk outlook is changing 
all the time. This means that it can never be determined with certainty where a financial crisis 
may arise. Bearing this in mind, it is important that we, in Sweden, construct a framework for 
macroprudential supervision that is flexible and that we do not limit our possibilities in terms 
of the instruments that can be used. It is also important to establish a process to evaluate and 
later develop and modify the toolbox. 
I  consider  that  a  clear  but,  at  the  same  time,  flexible  framework  for  macroprudential 
supervision will create the best conditions to counteract future financial crises. But this is not 
to  say  that  this would  be  enough  to  ensure  that  no  financial  crisis  ever  occurs  again.  The 
crises of tomorrow will probably have completely different causes to the crises of yesterday, 
making  them  difficult  to  protect  ourselves  against.  However,  the  scale  of  the  costs  of  a 
financial crisis justify making every effort to protect ourselves. 
As regards the question of where responsibility for macroprudential policy ought to lie, it is 
clear  that  this  area  is  closely  linked  to  both  the  Riksbank’s  and  Finansinspektionen’s 
activities.  The  Riksbank  has  been  analysing  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  for  fifteen 
years  and  also  currently  provides  recommendations  for  safeguarding  it  in  its  Financial 
Stability Reports. Finansinspektionen also works for the stability of the financial system but 
with a focus on individual institutions. The competence and experience of both authorities will 
have to be utilised if macroprudential policy is to be effective in Sweden. 
While  awaiting  a  more  long-term  solution  for  Swedish  macroprudential  supervision,  the 
Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  have  set  up  a  temporary  council  for  cooperation.  In 
addition  to  consulting  and  exchanging  information  on  assessments  of  risks  and  possible 
countermeasures, one task of the council is to discuss the development of instruments and 
methods within macroprudential supervision. The joint communication of our assessments in 
connection with this council for cooperation is a benefit in itself. However, over the long term, 
                                                
13  In the absence of empirical experience of conducting macroprudential supervision, theoretical analyses can 
provide guidance to the consequences that can be expected. However, academic research into this area is 
still in its infancy and it is therefore difficult to draw any unequivocal conclusions from it at present. Goodhart et 
al.  (2012)  is  one  example  of  a  study  investigating  the  interplay  of  a  number  of  macroprudential  policy 
instruments, which is to say whether these complement or substitute each other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
something more than a qualified discussion forum will be needed. To become really effective, 
macroprudential policy needs to acquire the distinct status of an independent policy area with 
its own tools for promoting stability in the financial system as a whole and a clear allocation of 
responsibility.  Assessing  and  demanding  responsibility  demands  a  clear  allocation  of 
responsibility. 
Another benefit of establishing a clear and effective framework for macroprudential policy is 
that this will allow monetary policy to be relieved of taking account of financial stability. In my 
opinion,  this  consideration  is  creating  a  risk  that  monetary  policy  will  become  unclear  and 
unpredictable.  A  functioning  macroprudential  policy  will  thus  let  us  both  reduce  the  risk  of 
financial  crises  and  give  us  a  monetary  policy  that  can  more  efficiently  stabilise  inflation 
around the inflation target and resource utilisation around a sustainable level. Thank you! 
References 
Borio,  C.,  2010,  “Implementing  a  Macroprudential  Framework:  Blending  Boldness  and 
realism”, Bank of International Settlements.  
Bank of England, Financial Policy Committee statement, March 2012. 
Bank of England, Instruments of macroprudential policy, a discussion paper, December 2011. 
Ekholm  K,  2012,  “Macroprudential  policy  and  clear  communication  contribute  to  financial 
stability”, www.riksbank.se. 
Galati,  G.,  and  Moessner,  R,  2011,  “Macroprudential  Policy  –  A  literature  Review”,  BIS 
Working Papers No. 337. 
Goodhart, C., Kashyap, A., Tsomocos, D. and Vardoulakis, A., 2012, “Financial regulation in 
general equilibrium”, Working paper 17909, NBER. 
FSB,  2011,  “Policy  Measures  to  Address  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions”,  4 
November 2011. 
Lim,  C.,  Columba,  F.,  Costa,  A.,  Kongsamut,  P.,  Otani,  A.,  Saiyid,  M.,  Wezel,  T., Wu,  X., 
2011,  “Macroprudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?  Lessons  from 
Country Experiences, IMF Working Paper, 11/238. 
Nordh-Berntsson,  C.,  Molin,  J.  (2012)  “A  Swedish  framework  for  macroprudential  policy”, 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2012:1. 
Sveriges Riksbank, Financial Stability Report 2012:1. 
Raghuram G. Rajan, 2005, “Has financial development made the world riskier?” Proceedings, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, issue Aug, pages 313–369. 
Viñals, J., (2010), “Towards a Safer Global Financial System”, presented at London School of 
Economics. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
