Paul Tucker: Resolution – a progress report 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the Institute for Law and Finance Conference, Frankfurt, 3 May 2012. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to join this important conference. The EU have made a 
massive  contribution  to  global  planning  for  resolution  regimes  to  address  the  fundamental 
problem of Too Big To Fail, inputting very significantly to the G20 Financial Stability Board’s 
Key  Attributes  for  Resolution  Regimes.  It  comes  as  no  surprise,  therefore,  that  the  EU  is 
committed to implementing that International Standard, via a Directive. 
As Chair of the FSB’s Resolution Steering Group, I thought the most useful thing I could do 
this morning is to give a brief progress report, and also to air some emerging thoughts on 
how to operationalise the FSB’s high policy.  
Preliminaries: what this is about 
For  those  who  hesitate  to  grasp  the  nettle  of  implementing  resolution  regimes,  I  want  to 
stress that the genie is out of the bottle. While myopia gripped the financial markets in the 
years leading up to the crisis, they are now seized of the risks on bank balance sheets. That 
will be reflected in the prices of the debt of those who bear that risk. If the risk in banking is 
not incorporated into the yields of bonds issued by banks themselves, then it will be reflected 
in higher sovereign borrowing costs. There is nowhere to hide. Quietly maintaining a policy of 
bailing out banks is not a free option for governments and their taxpayers. Anyone tempted 
to  argue  against  pursuing  the  resolution  policy  agenda  would  effectively  be  wanting  to 
increase  the  (contingent)  burden  on  the  taxpayer.  That  would  be  liable  to  increase  the 
pressure for fiscal austerity. 
As well as avoiding bailout by taxpayers, we must avoid liquidation – putting a failed bank 
through a standard bankruptcy procedure. That brings chaos. Resolution regimes are a way 
for  the  authorities  to  avoid  the  direct  hit  to  the  public  finances  while  at  the  same  time 
containing disorder in the financial system. That can lead to a much better financial system, 
with stronger market discipline and so less stability-threatening imprudence. 
Contemplating  this,  some  commentators  are  concerned  that  one  particular  resolution  tool  
–  commonly  known  as  bail-in  –  entails  losses  for  bond  holders.  That  is  a  misthink.  All 
resolution tools put losses on to debt holders and creditors. Because that is the only place 
they can go. Bail-in is just one technique for delivering that. Its distinguishing characteristic is 
that it applies losses up front based upon a valuation rather than at the end of a liquidation of 
assets. As such, it prospectively avoids an unnecessary destruction of value. 
But  there  is  no  silver  bullet.  We  need  resolution  tools  that  work  in  different  contexts  for 
different  types  of  bank/dealer.  That  means  having  a  rich  set  of  tools  but  with  a  common 
trigger for going into resolution. I will say something first about the trigger, and then about 
different resolution tools and strategies. 
The trigger for resolution 
Not a few people worry about the trigger for putting a firm into resolution – not too early, not 
too late. It is obviously important to get that trigger right.  
To my mind, the best way of thinking about it is that a firm should go into resolution when its 
time is up – when Recovery strategies are exhausted, and the firm just will not be able to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reverse  its  decline  into  insolvency  or  lack  of  viability.  How  to  frame  that  thought  more 
precisely? Every country has criteria for authorising/licensing a bank. A sensible trigger for 
resolution  would  be  when  a  bank  no  longer  meets  the  criteria  for  being  authorised  and, 
crucially, when there is no reasonable prospect of its doing so again. That does not give a 
damaging degree of flexibility to the authorities; it is a demanding test. 
Some resolution strategies 
In the banking field, many resolution tools entail separating out a distressed firm into different 
parts.  Separating  bad  from  good  assets;  and  separating  essential  from  non-essential 
functions.  The  good  and  critical  functions  are  sold  and  transferred  to  another  bank  (often 
known as “Purchase & Assumption”); or to a bridge bank pending such a transfer. The rump 
goes into administration, run down and disposal. 
That is achievable for relatively simple commercial banks operating in a single jurisdiction, 
and  all  of  whose  contracts  are  under  the  law  of  that  jurisdiction.  It  is  harder  for  so-called 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs),  spanning  many  markets,  jurisdictions, 
and currencies, with complex counterparty relationships. As one international colleague put 
it, the standard toolkit would face an “exponentially greater challenge”. 
Top-down capital restructuring: bail-in 
That  is  why  resolution  authorities  in  a  number  of  countries  are  exploring  how  to  execute 
“top-down”  resolutions  of  complex  groups,  employing  bail-in  of  debt  issued  by  the  holding 
company or top-level operating company. The US and UK have been working together very 
constructively  in  planning  how  to  operationalise  that  strategy;  and  if  we  continue  to  make 
progress I hope that we will be able to say more about it over the next few months.  
Imagine  that  a  large,  complex,  global  firm  –  just  one  legal  entity  for  the  moment  –  has 
20 lines of business, each the same size, which is to say using the same amount of balance 
sheet  and  capital.  Imagine  it  is  50  times  levered.  Now  imagine  that  one  of  those  lines  of 
business  is  completely  toxic,  worthless.  The  firm  is  insolvent,  bankrupt.  Unless  it  can  be 
resolved, it must cease trading and go into insolvent liquidation. 
But, in this stylized example, only a single line of business is toxic; the other 19 are fine. In 
other  words,  the  franchise  has  value.  In  the  non-financial  corporate  sector,  there  are 
established  tools  for  this.  The  remedy  would  be  a  negotiated  reconstruction  of  the  firm’s 
capital structure, writing off the equity and partially converting debt claims into new equity. In 
the US, that goes by the name of Chapter XI. In banking, which is subject to depositor and 
counterparty runs, there is not time for a process involving negotiations between the different 
classes  of  creditors  and  shareholders  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts.  And  the  public 
policy priority is the stability of the system, not only the welfare of creditors. An administrative 
agency needs to make and execute some rapid judgments. That is precisely what so-called 
bail-in  via  resolution  is  about.  The  essential  difference  from  other  resolution  tools  is,  as  I 
have said, that losses are applied ex ante, up front rather than at the end of a process of 
running down the assets associated with “non-critical” functions. 
I have been making a simplifying assumption: one legal entity. Now imagine a cross-border 
group  with  subsidiaries  in  many  jurisdictions  and  with  a  holding  company.  Under  the 
provisions  of  the  FSB  Resolution  Standard,  recapitalisation  through  reconstruction  of 
liabilities can also prospectively cut through a number of the long-standing impediments to 
resolution stemming from conflicts between home and host country insolvency laws; in other 
words, the cross-border problem. If the bail-in I have described were executed at the level of 
such  a  banking  group’s  holding  company,  there  should  in  principle  be  no  need  to  trigger 
default  clauses  in  subsidiaries  around  the  world  that  are  not  themselves  affected  by  the 
problem causing the group’s losses. The bail-in changes the ownership of the group but it 
does not affect the balance sheets of the subsidiaries. Contrast Lehmann. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
That doesn’t mean there is nothing to do. Far from it. For example, firms (legal entities) issue 
bonds not only in their home county but in a host of other jurisdictions. We shall need the 
documentation  of  bond  issues  by  banks  and  by  their  holding  companies  to  make  clear  in 
terms that they may be bailed in or subjected to another type of resolution operation by the 
firm’s home authorities; at the consequent change of ownership does not trigger “default” or 
‘control” clauses. That should not be a high hurdle. It is equivalent to incorporating Collective 
Action Clauses (CACs) in sovereign bond documentation.  
There  is  also  a  debate  about  which  particular  kinds  of  creditor  claim  should  be  subject  to 
bail-in  via  resolution.  Indeed,  this  is  one  of  the  key  questions  in  the  Commission’s 
consultation. One thought on this. It seems to me that the approach to putting losses on to 
different  types  of  creditor  should  probably  be  the  same  whatever  the  resolution  tool  used 
and, indeed, the same as in a standard insolvent liquidation. That would suggest that one 
way of addressing proposals to “exempt” some types of claim from bail in, and to establish a 
hierarchy  amongst  other  types  of  claim  subject  to  bail-in,  would  be  to  alter  the  creditor 
hierarchy in insolvency law. While that could be useful in the longer run, I don’t think that is 
essential to make this resolution tool work. Moreover, operating on the capital structure of a 
holding  company  can  cut  through  some  of  the  complexity,  since  topco  debt  is  structurally 
subordinated to the debt and other obligations of the bank operating companies it owns. 
A final thought before moving on to a possible resolution strategy for a different type of SIFI. 
What I have been describing is not a matter of designing new instruments with terms that 
automatically  trigger  a  pre-determined  write  down  or  conversion  into  equity,  which  would 
essentially  be  a  putative  form  of  “Tier  3”  capital.  Today’s  topic  is  rather  the  toolkit  the 
authorities need, in a statutory resolution regime, to maintain order when all such instruments 
have  converted,  all  other  options  are  exhausted  and  liquidation  beckons.  But  whether  via 
contractual terms or under resolution, debt can add to a bank’s loss absorbing capacity.  
The resolution of deposit-funded international commercial banking groups 
We should not assume a monolithic approach to resolution. It is not a case of one size fits all. 
What I have described could work for banking groups that issue plenty of debt. It would not 
work  so  easily  for  groups  operating  commercial  banks  around  the  world  that  are  funded 
pretty well entirely from insured deposits. If they haven’t issued bonds, then there would be 
no bond holders to bail in.  
It has become fairly common to say that such groups should be resolved on a regional basis, 
ie  broken  up.  Maybe.  But,  even  if  that  is  correct,  it  is  obvious  that  “break  it  up”  is  an 
incomplete  resolution  plan.  What  happens  to  the  broken-up  parts?  Under  a  “breakup” 
strategy, one needs a plan for each of the parts, both the distressed and the undistressed 
parts of the group. Under the FSB Standard (KA 11.8), it is clearly the responsibility of the 
home authorities of the group to ensure that a group wide resolution plan exists. There is no 
ducking  that.  It  removes  an  ambiguity  that  has  quietly  haunted  banking  authorities  for 
decades. 
Imagine  that  some  of  such  a  group’s  regional/local  commercial  banks  are  smallish  and 
simple, but that others are very large and complex. (Contrary to what is sometimes imagined, 
commercial banking can be complex!) 
To the extent that the group’s problems are in a bank(s) that is relatively small and simple, 
standard “Purchase & Assumption” techniques can be employed. Ie break up that bank into a 
good and bad bit; and effect a sale of the good and economically critical parts, aided by an 
injection  of  resources,  in  the  usual  way,  by  the  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme,  up  to  but  not 
beyond what it would have had to pay out to insured depositors in a liquidation. The critical 
services are thereby maintained, and the DIS becomes a creditor in the administration and 
realisation of the rump. At the end of that process of realising the assets in the rump, the 
Deposit Insurer learns how much it has lost. I want to stress that the DI typically incurs losses 
but discovers how much ex post. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Now  imagine  that  the  commercial  bank  subsidiary  in  question  is  big  and  complex.  The 
realisation of the assets via a standard rump-administration is liable to destroy a lot of value, 
increasing the Deposit Insurer’s losses. And in any case that strategy may not be consistent 
with maintaining stability (or containing disorder). A way of cutting through that would be to 
bail  in  the  Deposit  Insurer.  Rather  than  the  Deposit  Insurer  waiting  until  the  end  of  the 
process of a potentially destructive realisation of the assets, it would hear up front how much 
it  had  lost.  In  the  scenarios  I  have  described,  its  losses  should  be  smaller  that  way.  That 
approach  could,  if  necessary,  be  applied  in  different  regions  to  different  distressed 
subsidiaries of the group. 
In the world of real banks, the firms have uninsured as well as insured deposit liabilities, and 
they typically combine deposit taking with some bond issuance. That means that, after equity 
and  subordinated  debt  holders  were  extinguished,  losses  would  be  shared  amongst  the 
DIS and those bonds etc that could be bailed-in. Whether they got bailed-in together or in 
sequence (bonds first) would depend on whether a jurisdiction operated depositor preference 
in its insolvency regime.  
But  I  must  stress  that  in  no  way  does  any  of  this  dilute  the  protection  assured  to  insured 
deposits. 
It  does  transfer  losses  to  the  surviving  parts  of  the  local  banking  system.  But  so  do  other 
resolution techniques, and liquidation would entail much bigger losses for the Deposit Insurer 
and thus for other banks. 
There  is  much  work  to  be  done  on  planning  how  to  operationalise  that  kind  of  resolution 
strategy, but it is worth doing. 
The FSB work programme  
This brings me, briefly, to the FSB work programme for 2012 and into 2013. There will be a 
preliminary peer review of the extent to which jurisdictions’ resolution regimes comply with 
the FSB Standard. That will be followed by more exacting examinations, led by the IMF and 
World  Bank,  once  an  Assessment  Methodology  for  the  Resolution  Key  Attributes  is 
complete.  
Meanwhile, authorities are enjoined to produce assessments of resolvability of Global SIFIs 
and the obstacles in their way; firm-specific agreements for co-operation amongst home and 
host resolution agencies and supervisors; and resolution plans by the end of this year. Each 
of those requires a conception of a high-level resolution strategy for individual firms agreed 
amongst  top  officials  of  home  and  key  host  authorities.  And  the  development  of  those 
strategies will inform the information that the authorities need from firms. 
I  have  sketched  in  very  general  terms  two  broad  kinds  of  resolution  strategy,  potentially 
appropriate  for  different  types  of  global  SIFI.  In  other  cases,  where  a  business  is  rotten 
through and through, a more “traditional” break-up of a group may be needed, perhaps using 
a  “bad  bank”  in  some  cases.  Planning  for  that  will  not  be  easy,  and  so  for  those  extreme 
cases  there  is  a  special  need  somehow  to  ensure  continuity  in  the  provision  of  absolutely 
critical  services  to  the  economy.  In  the  UK,  that  is  one  way  that  ring-fencing  fits  into 
resolution planning.  
Implications for supervision 
All this has important implications for prudential supervisors.  
In the first place, supervisors get some allies: debtholders. The prospect of taking losses will 
incentivise bondholders (and fellow banks) to monitor the risks taken by banks – pricing or 
rationing accordingly. This is market discipline: an extra line of defence. Risk being priced 
into bank bonds will not, as some suggest or threaten, kill the market. It would be uncertainty 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
about the regime governing what happens in the event of distress that would kill the market 
because that kind of uncertainty could not be priced. 
Supervisors  won’t  be  idle  though.  Resolution  needs  preparation.  Hence  the  international 
agreement that firms should prepare Recovery Plans and contribute to Resolution Plans. To 
be clear, while the firms will own the Recovery Plans, the authorities will design and own the 
Resolution Plans. It has to be that way.  
To a much greater extent than ever before, supervisors will need to work backwards from the 
end game,  working with resolution authorities. That work is commencing around the world 
through dedicated Crisis Management Groups. In this context, Living Wills are effectively, in 
US parlance, a “pre-pack”. What I mean by that is that firms and regulators can do a lot of 
detailed planning for how they would, for example, execute a bail in of their debtholders. That 
will  focus  minds.  Including  on  who  holds  bank  paper.  This  is,  therefore,  relevant  to 
supervisors  of  insurance  companies  –  a  function  that  the  Bank  of  England  Prudential 
Regulation Authority will combine with bank supervision. 
But I must stress that none of what I have said entails supervisors diluting efforts to reduce 
the probability of failure, and to ensure plans are in place to enable recovery. 
Conclusion: the FSB’s planned Peer Reviews 
The nations of the G20 have signed up to the FSB’s Standard on resolution regimes. But, of 
course,  we  need  to  keep  each  other  honest.  That  is  why  the  FSB  has  proposed  a  Peer 
Review process, involving top officials, to ensure that this is working. The Bank of England is 
100%  behind  this.  Not  only  would  we  like  an  opportunity  to  vet  the  existence  of  viable 
resolution  plans  for  the  current  SIFIs  from  the  US,  Germany,  France,  Switzerland  and,  no 
doubt,  other  countries  down  the  road.  We  also  really  want  other  countries  to  be  able  to 
confront  us  with  harsh  reality  if  we  don’t  deliver  on  having  viable  resolution  plans  for 
UK SIFIs over the next few years.  
To all of this, the EU Directive will be crucial in giving us all the tools we need. I really do 
believe that, with Dodd Frank already in place, it will help set the tone for the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
