K C Chakrabarty: Empowering the growth of emerging enterprises 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Economic Times Thought Leadership Conclave, Mumbai, 12 April 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Anand Prakash in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri  Bodhisatva  Ganguli,  Deputy  Executive  Editor,  The  Economic  Times, 
Shri Pramit Jhaveri, CEO, Citibank India, Ms. Paromita Chatterjee, Senior Editor, ET Now, 
Mr.  Venu  Srinivasan,  Chairman,  TVS  Motor  Company  Ltd.,  Dr.  Swati  Piramal,  Director  – 
Strategic  Alliances  and  Communications,  Piramal  Healthcare  Ltd.,  distinguished  panelists, 
other distinguished guests, members of the print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. 
2.  
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Citibank for completing 200 years since its 
formation in 1812. It is indeed a matter of great privilege for me to be present here today at 
the Thought Leadership Conclave on “Empowering the Growth of Emerging Enterprises” and 
share some of my thoughts on ways for enhancing the efficiency of emerging enterprises in 
the country, which is indispensable for sustaining and even accelerating the high growth rate 
witnessed by the Indian economy in the past decade. I firmly believe that the next level of 
growth  in  the  economy  will  have  to  come  from  the  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
(MSMEs),  which  can  propel  India’s  growth  rate  from  around  7–8  per  cent  at  present  to  a 
sustainable 9–10 plus per cent in the medium-to long-term, which is considered as India’s 
desirable growth rate. We need to nurture and strengthen the MSME sector in the country as 
today’s  MSMEs  will  converge  into  large  industrial  houses  tomorrow  or  even  MNCs  in  the 
times to come. In order to take the country on to a higher and sustainable growth trajectory, it 
is  necessary  to  significantly  enhance  our  manufacturing  capabilities.  The  manufacturing 
SMEs are largely complemented by services sector SMEs that offer various services to the 
manufacturing sector. Strengthening of the manufacturing sector in the country a la China is 
imperative  as  manufacturing  sector  is  essential  for  enhancing  exports  and  creating  trade 
surplus,  which  will  go  a  long  way  towards  strengthening  the  country’s  situation  on  the 
external (BoP) front. The need of the hour is to empower SMEs so that they can take their 
rightful place as the growth engine of the economy. 
3. 
It is against this backdrop that this Conclave on empowering the growth of emerging 
enterprises assumes significance. The MSME sector is facing new challenges in the wake of 
increasing  globalization  and  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  the  sector  to  reinvent  itself  by 
enhancing its efficiency and productivity in order to remain competitive, both domestically as 
well  as  internationally  and  take  advantage  of  the  new  opportunities  cropping  up  in  an 
increasingly globalized world. I congratulate the Economic Times, which has hitherto been at 
the forefront of spreading financial literacy and awareness in the country, for organizing this 
Conclave  on  such  an  important  issue.  The  informed  discussions  at  these  kinds  of  forums 
help in garnering and shaping public opinion, building consensus, crystallizing policy inputs 
and giving us feedback on the required policy initiatives. 
A. 
Importance of SME sector 
4. 
SMEs  are  universally  acknowledged  as  major  contributors  to  Gross  Domestic 
Product (GDP) and even larger contributors to exports and employment. SMEs play a critical 
role  in  the  economic  and  social  development  of  emerging  markets  by  creating  jobs  and 
generating income for low-income groups. This fosters economic growth and social stability, 
and also contributes to the development of a dynamic private sector. Even in countries with 
large corporations such as the United States, SMEs contribute a very substantial percentage 
to the employment generated. Studies indicate that formal SMEs contribute up to 45 percent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of  employment  and  up  to  33  percent  of  GDP  in  developing  economies.  These  numbers 
would be significantly higher when taking into account the contributions of SMEs operating in 
the informal sector. 
5.  
According  to  a  recent  study  by  the  IFC  and  McKinsey  and  Company  (McKinsey), 
there are almost 365 to 445 million MSMEs in emerging markets, of which 25 to 30 million 
are formally classified as SMEs. In OECD economies, SMEs and micro enterprises account 
for over 95 per cent of firms, 60–70 per cent of employment, 55 per cent of GDP and a lion’s 
share  of  new  jobs.  In  the  APEC  region,  SMEs  account  for  around  90  percent  of  all 
businesses and employ as much as 60 percent of the work force. At present, however, they 
generate only around 30 percent of exports. In developing countries, more than 90 per cent 
of  all  firms  outside  the  agricultural  sector  are  SMEs  and  micro  enterprises,  generating  a 
significant portion of GDP. 
6. 
In the Indian context, the critical role and place of the MSME sector in the Indian 
economy  cannot  be  over-emphasized  in  employment  generation,  exports  and  economic 
empowerment  of  a  vast  section  of  the  population.  As  per  data  released  by  the  Ministry  of 
MSME, there are about 26.1 million enterprises in this sector. The sector accounts for 45 per 
cent of manufactured output and 8 per cent of the GDP. MSMEs contributed close to 40 per 
cent of all exports from the country and employed nearly 59.7 million people, which is next 
only to the agricultural sector. The performance of SMEs in India, though impressive, comes 
next  to  China  where  this  sector  provides  around  75  per  cent  of  the  total  employment, 
accounts for around 99 per cent of total enterprises and contributes around 60 per cent to 
GDP.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  there  are  4.69  million  SMEs,  constituting  99.7  per  cent  of  all 
enterprises, accounting for 70 per cent of all employment. The SME’s share in Japan’s GDP 
is 56.8 per cent. In Korea, SMEs account for around 79 per cent of employment and 46 per 
cent of GDP. 
7. 
Part of the contribution of the SME sector, both to the overall total factor productivity 
(TFP)1  (efficiency,  as  usually  defined)  of  an  economy  and  to  employment  generation  and 
distributional equality, comes by virtue of its pattern of technology choice. SME technology 
tends to be intermediate between the highly labour intensive technologies of micro enterprise 
which  achieve  only  low  average  labour  productivity,  and  the  highly  capital  intensive 
technologies of large firms which achieve high labour productivity, but use more capital per 
worker  than  is  available  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Its  intermediate  technology 
characteristic is what gives the SME sector a special role in the generation of adequate or 
decent  employment.  In  terms  of  efficiency,  the  price-lowering  and  quality-improving 
competition is more likely to come from SMEs rather than large firms. The SME sector also 
plays a key role in generating growth, especially pro-poor growth, i.e., more equitable and 
inclusive growth. SMEs tend to dominate a country’s new and fast growing industries. In this 
respect, and in others, SMEs are associated with dynamism. 
8.  
Globalization also increases the importance of keeping the SME sector strong since 
its role in providing subcontractors for large exporters may be quite important in cases where 
transportation costs are not low. Being able to rely on efficient low-cost subcontractors can 
substantially increase the competitiveness of the large exporters and has been an important 
factor underpinning the successes of Japan, Taiwan and Korea. 
Challenges faced by SMEs 
B. 
9. 
There are various challenges facing SMEs which, inter alia, include non-availability 
of timely and adequate finance, availability of raw material, technological obsolescence, lack 
                                                 
1  TFP has been defined as the portion of output not explained by the amount of inputs used in the production 
process and essentially captures how efficiently and intensely the inputs are utilized in production process). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  infrastructure  facilities,  marketing  bottlenecks,  deficient  managerial  and  technical  skills, 
sub-optimal  quality  standards,  sickness,  competition  from  large  enterprises,  globalization, 
non-competitive  real  exchange  rate,  etc.  The  opening  up  of  the  world  economy  in  the 
process  of  globalization  and  the  rapid  and  extensive  use  of  information  technology  have 
thrown  up  challenges  for  the  small  producers  and  manufacturers  who  have  to  not  only 
survive competition but also keep pace with the rapidly changing technological scenario in 
the  world.  Among  several 
to  aid  SMEs, 
IT & automation technologies are believed to be at the forefront in terms of increasing both 
productivity and profitability for SMEs in manufacturing. To meet the challenges emanating 
from increasing globalization, SMEs need to increase their efficiency as measured by total 
factor productivity (TFP). 
that  have  been  developed 
technologies 
further  add 
for  products, 
labor  and  capital  are.  They 
Strengthening SME competitiveness in developing countries 
(a) 
10. 
Metcalf, Ramlogan and Uyarra (2003) state that competitive advantage, which must 
be measured in relation to rivals in markets, is determined by how efficient and effective the 
prevailing  markets 
that 
entrepreneurship;  the  introduction  of  new  productive  combinations  and  innovation  is  the 
driving force that continually creates new competitive advantages and opportunities for profit 
and growth. 
11. 
Meyer-Stamer (1995) concurs with the view that competitiveness is created at the 
firm  level,  but  that  it  is  partly  derived  from  a  systemic  context  and  emerges  from  complex 
patterns of interactions between government, enterprises and other actors, and will therefore 
exhibit different forms in each society. 
12. 
 SME development strategies will necessarily be country and context specific. Each 
country  will  have  its  own  challenges,  opportunities  and  priorities  for  change.  Resources 
available  will  vary  by  country  and  therefore,  results  achieved  will  also  be  different. 
Notwithstanding  such  specificity,  some  of  the  SME  development  lessons  which  are 
applicable to most of the countries include: 
 
Peace  and  stability  is  a  key  requirement  for  the  development  of  SMEs  and  for 
attracting foreign investment. Studies show that war and crime are main deterrents 
of private investment, in particular, for foreign investors.  
SME development requires a crosscutting strategy, i.e. its success depends on the 
ability of governments to implement sound macroeconomic policies, the capability of 
stakeholders to develop conducive microeconomic business environments and the 
ability  of  SMEs  to  implement  competitive  operating  practices  and  business 
strategies. 
Dialogue  and  partnerships  between  the  stakeholders  is  essential  (public  sector, 
private sector and civil society).  
Investments in physical infrastructure and business services and the implementation 
capacity of policy makers, administrators and support structures determine success.  
Enhancing women’s ability to participate in SME development should be taken into 
account at every stage, as women account for an important share of private sector 
activity and contribute most to poverty reduction.  
    Modernization and diversification: risk mitigation 
(b) 
13. 
Modernizing  and  diversifying  SMEs  includes  both  the  creation  of  new  ventures  in 
order to revise the structure of the economy and transformation of existing businesses. In the 
wake of increasing globalization leading to new opportunities and reduction in trade barriers, 
there  is  a  pressing  need  for  SMEs  to  diversify  into  various  geographies  and  markets.  A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
diversifying  SME  needs  to  gear  up  to  the  challenge  of  operating  in  a  vastly  different 
environment  and  facing  increased  competition.  They  also  need  to  mitigate  various  risks 
which result from diversification into new markets and geographies. One of the major risks of 
diversification  is  currency  fluctuation  risk.  As  currency  fluctuations  can  adversely  impact 
SMEs,  it  is  very  important  for  them  to  protect  their  exposure  in  an  efficient  and  effective 
manner. The SME needs to determine whether it needs to hedge its exposure and what tools 
it needs for hedging (swaps, options, forward contracts, currency diversification, etc.). 
14. 
Despite the availability of new hedging  avenues, a very small proportion of SMEs 
enter  into  exchange  traded  currency  futures  transactions  to  hedge  their  risk.  Besides,  the 
quotes  offered  to  SMEs  in  OTC  markets  are  often  at  a  higher  premium.  Also,  various 
misconceptions and the lack of awareness amongst SME exporters about currency hedging 
hold back SME exporters from the currency derivatives market. It is essential for small units 
to  evaluate  their  cash  flow  positions  and  assess  the  degree  of  influence  exchange  rate 
fluctuations  can  have  on  their  profitability.  Also,  before  sealing  an  export  deal  with  an 
overseas  client,  SMEs  should  keep  the  option  of  entering  into  a  price  variance  with  their 
customer,  based  on  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Additionally,  in  order  to  minimize  export 
risks,  the  SME  needs  to  procure  credit  rating  report  of  the  buyer,  get  credit  insurance  for 
exports and consider professional assistance from debt collecting agencies. 
Challenges from globalization 
(c) 
15. 
Globalization and trade liberalization have ushered in new opportunities as well as 
challenges  for  SMEs.  Presently,  a  majority  of  SMEs  in  developing  and  emerging  market 
economies have been less able or unable to exploit the benefits of globalization and, to add 
to the situation, frequently face pressures in the domestic markets from cheaper imports and 
foreign competition. 
16. 
Increasingly,  SMEs  are  seeing  participation  in  international  markets  as  critical  to 
their  survival,  job  creation  and  growth.  But  the  development  of  a  fast-changing  and 
increasingly complex global marketplace has also placed considerable pressures on firms, 
particularly SMEs. 
Operating  successfully  in  international  markets  requires,  inter  alia,  learning  to 
17. 
remote-  manage  using  a  variety  of  informal  and  formal  business  relationships,  gaining 
familiarity  with  different  business  regulations,  customs,  cultures  and  languages,  and 
developing appropriate solutions for all the markets in which the firm operates. This poses 
challenges for business managers and requires them to use, or develop a much larger range 
of  managerial  competencies  than  if  they  operated  solely  in  their  domestic  market.  It  also 
poses challenges for governments (and business associations and others who assist SMEs) 
in providing the right, targeted support programmes and other incentives to encourage SMEs 
to internationalize and to help them overcome the internal and external barriers they face in 
doing that. 
Barriers to SME trade 
(d) 
18. 
According to an OECD – APEC study, “the numerous benefits to SMEs engaged in 
international  trade  are  well  documented,  with  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  that 
international  trading  activity  stimulates  increased  productivity  growth  by  strengthening 
competition and innovation and increasing access to new ideas and technology. International 
trading  activity  enables  businesses  to  achieve  growth  and  economies  of  scale  which 
domestic  markets  alone  would  not  provide.  Exporters  are consistently  found  to  outperform 
non-exporters  using  a  variety  of  measures  of  success  including  profitability,  production, 
wages and sales volumes”. At the same time, the study finds that “… trade barriers can be 
particularly damaging for SMEs since these barriers are generally outside of their control and 
are difficult to overcome. And while trade barriers do not only affect SMEs ... it is SMEs who 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  especially  vulnerable  and  need  an  open  and  transparent  environment  in  which  to 
operate.” The major barriers to SME trade include: 
a. 
b. 
Lack of access to finance  
Lack  of  capacity  to  internationalize  and  difficulty  in  identifying  foreign  business 
opportunities (SMEWG) 
Need for open and transparent business  
High transportation and related costs (SMEWG) 
Customs clearance delays due to difficulties in navigating overly complex customs 
requirements and documentation across jurisdictions  
Difficulty with intellectual property acquisition, protection, and enforcement  
Inadequate  policy/  regulatory 
commerce  
Difficulty  in  taking  advantage  of  preferential  tariffs  and  other  aspects  of  trade 
agreements 
to  support  cross-border  electronic 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
frameworks 
to 
issues  are 
fundamental 
Development of human and natural resources 
Human  resource  development 
(e) 
19. 
improving  SME 
competitiveness.  Empirical  studies  show  that  human  capital  is  a  significant  determinant  of 
growth.  The  ability  of  SMEs  to  adjust  to  the  competitive  pressures  that  come  with  trade 
liberalization  and  globalization  will  depend  on  the  level  of  skills  available  domestically. 
Developing countries are investing significantly in their education (mainly basic) and training 
systems. However, linkages between education and training strategies and SME/enterprise 
development strategies are still weak, resulting in weak market signals for policymakers and 
administrators. 
20. 
The  education  and  training  systems  can  influence  the  level  of  entrepreneurial 
activity in developing economies by developing an awareness and appreciation of the same 
in the wider society. A major area of concern in the Indian context is the low productivity and 
managerial  ability  of  SMEs  and  the  lower  skill  levels  of  the  SME  workers.  The  human 
resource constraints have been affecting both the efficiency and productivity of SME sector 
in India. A massive programme of skill and entrepreneurship development should form the 
backbone  of  SME  development.  There  should  be  training  programmes  by  the  industry 
associations  to  upgrade  the  skills  of  the  workers  and  to  acquaint  them  with  the  skills 
compatible with the new technology. Similarly, the labour laws should be simplified. There is 
a  need  to  incorporate  entrepreneurship  training  in  school  curricula.  Several  studies  have 
cited lack of entrepreneurship skills as a major shortcoming for women entrepreneurs, which 
can  be  addressed  by  incorporation  of  entrepreneurship  training  in  secondary  school 
curricula.  Investment  needs  to  be  made  in  a  big  way  on  skill  and  entrepreneurship 
development if the goal of sustainable employment is to be achieved. 
Corporate governance 
(f) 
21. 
Weak corporate governance of small firms, burdened further with poor availability of 
crucial  inputs,  has  made  these  firms  extremely  vulnerable.  Good  governance  practices  in 
SMEs will help them grow or attract additional investors. Raising capital has, for a long time, 
been seen as the major challenge facing SMEs. The absence of good corporate governance 
practices makes it difficult for them to access finance from banks or investors. 
22. 
Adoption of corporate governance framework by SMEs in India is indispensable for 
taking this sector to a higher growth trajectory. The lack of corporate governance is mainly 
due to lack of awareness about corporate governance practices and its impact on corporate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
performance. Thus, there is a need to educate SMEs about the benefits of adopting sound 
corporate  governance  practices.  There  also  is  a  need  to  implement  SME’s  corporate 
governance code. 
Local partnerships and clusters 
(g) 
23. 
The  need  to  adjust  to  global  competition  and  instances  of  prosperous  economies 
being  built  upon  localised  groups  of  firms,  have  caused  governments  to  turn  to  policies 
based  on  enterprise  clusters  (a  cluster  is  an  agglomeration  of  firms  in  a  related  line  of 
business  with  clusters,  in  some  cases,  being  comprised  principally  of  SMEs,  such  as  in 
Italy’s industrial districts). Cluster development policies have proliferated in both developed 
and  developing  economies.  Membership  of  clusters  and  networks  can  enhance  the 
productivity, rate of innovation and competitive performance of firms. Clusters and networks 
can  allow  small  firms  to  combine  advantages  of  small  scale  with  various  benefits  of  large 
scale. Schemes and programmes encouraging clusters need to be promoted further. Instead 
of  distributing  limited  resources  to  all  parts,  it  is  better  to  apply  them  to  areas  which  can 
optimize the returns and maximize the growth. 
SMEs’ access to finance 
(h) 
SMEs  identify  financing,  especially  medium  to  long-term  finance,  as  their  topmost 
24. 
obstacle  to  growth  and  investment.  According  to  the  IFC-McKinsey  study,  close  to  45  to 
55 percent of the formal SMEs (11–17 million) in the emerging markets do not have access 
to formal institutional loans or overdrafts despite a need for one. The finance gap is far bigger 
when  considering  the  micro  and  informal  enterprises  –  65–72  percent  of  all  MSMEs  
(240–315  million)  in  emerging  markets  lack  access  to  credit.  The  proportional  size  of  the 
finance  gap  varies  widely  across  regions  and  is  particularly  daunting  in  Asia  and  Africa. 
Closing the credit gap for formal SMEs will be less challenging than for informal SMEs. Close 
to  70–76  percent  of  the  formal  SMEs  (18–22  million)  in  emerging  markets  already  have  a 
banking relationship via deposit/checking accounts, while only about 30–35 percent of SMEs 
(8–10  million)  have  access  to  credit.  Hence,  the  key  challenge  is  to  support  banks  in 
extending credit facilities to SMEs who have a deposit/checking account, but do not yet have 
access to credit. Risk-sharing facilities, coupled with the introduction of best practice SME 
lending approaches are key interventions that can help banks provide credit to SMEs. These 
interventions  need  to  accompany  enhancements  to  the  enabling  environment  for  SME 
lending such as credit bureaus, collaterals and insolvency regimes. 
25. 
In  addition  to  loan  financing,  SMEs  have  the  option  of  collaborating  with  venture 
capital investors. Other significant forms of SME financing include leasing, trade credit and 
fiscal incentives in the form of tax breaks. Access to finance is essential for improving SME 
competitiveness, as SMEs have to invest in new technologies, skills and innovation. Issues 
pertaining  to  access  to  finance  cannot  be  resolved  by  implementing  financing  schemes  or 
programs in a vacuum. It is also noteworthy that efforts to resolve access to finance issues 
are  not  solely  the  responsibility  of  governments.  SMEs  also  need  to  take  initiative  in  this 
direction  by  implementing  sound  business  practices  and  continuously  investing  in  good 
internal  management  systems:  in  accounting,  planning,  financial,  operations  and  human 
resource management. In the Indian context, in spite of various measures taken by the RBI 
and the Government, availability of credit to SMEs continues to remain a major issue in the 
development of the SME sector in the country. 
Impact of the global financial crisis on SMEs 
(i) 
The problem of access to finance faced by SMEs has been strongly exacerbated by 
26. 
the  global  financial  crisis  as  SMEs  and  entrepreneurs  have  suffered  a  double  shock:  a 
drastic drop in demand for goods and services and a tightening in credit terms, which have 
severely affected their cash flows. Governments have responded generally by three types of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
measures aimed at: i) supporting sales and preventing depletion of SMEs’ working capital; 
ii) enhancing SME’s access to liquidity; iii) helping SMEs maintain their investment level. The 
Euro zone debt crisis has also impacted SMEs adversely. However, in the Indian context, the 
sharp  depreciation  of  the  rupee  against  the  US  dollar  in  recent  months  has  made  SME 
exports more attractive, which should, to some extent, help in nullifying the adverse impact of 
the sharp fall in external demand. In these difficult times on the export front, it is imperative 
for SMEs to tap the huge demand in the local markets. MSMEs are the best vehicle to create 
local  demand  and  consumption  and  also  to  fight  the  global  meltdown.  At  the  international 
level, the G20 is spearheading the work on SME Finance through SME Finance subgroup 
under its Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) (Dec 2010). 
Indian context 
C. 
27. 
Keeping  in  view  the  importance  of  SME  sector  in  fostering  growth  and  promoting 
employment,  the  Government  of  India  enacted  the  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
Development  Act,  2006.  Public  Policy  in  India  has  accorded  high  priority  to  this  sector  in 
order to achieve balanced, sustainable, more equitable and inclusive growth in the country. 
Some of the major constraints faced by the MSME sector and the important measures taken 
by  Government  of  India  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  address  them  have  been  set  out 
below. 
As with the SMEs operating elsewhere, access to timely and adequate credit is 
28. 
critical for MSME growth and development in India as well. To ensure enhanced credit flow 
to the sector, and more so to the micro units, based on the recommendations of the Prime 
Minister’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs  (Chairman:  Shri  T.K.A.Nair,  Principal  Secretary, 
Government  of  India),  banks  have  been  advised  to  achieve  a  20  per  cent  year-on-year 
growth in credit to micro and small enterprises. Advances extended to the MSE sector are 
treated as priority sector advances and as per the extant Reserve Bank guidelines, banks 
are  required  to  extend  at  least  60  per  cent  of  their  advances  to  the  MSE  sector  to  Micro 
Enterprises  by  2012–13  and  achieve  a  10  per  cent  annual  growth  in  number  of  micro 
enterprise accounts. The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by 
banks on a quarterly basis and banks have been advised to device strategies to step up their 
lending to micro units. However, the MSME sector needs to be competitive and should not 
expect subsidized interest rates as this may not help them much as the cost of credit forms a 
relatively small proportion of their overall cost. Table 1 provides outstanding credit to MSME 
sector by scheduled commercial banks. 
29. 
The problem of access to finance for the MSME sector is intrinsically linked to the 
problem  of  financial  exclusion  in  the  country.  The  ability  of  banks  to  rapidly  increase  their 
coverage  of  MSMEs  through  credit  facilities  would  depend  on  their  ability  to  expand  their 
reach to the hitherto unbanked segments of the country. The problem of financial exclusion is 
particularly  severe  in  the  MSME  sector,  which  is  revealed  by  the  data  provided  by  the 
4th Census of the MSME Sector which indicated that only 5.18% of units had availed finance 
through  institutional  sources  with  a  further  2.05%  relying  on  non-institutional  sources  for 
finance. However, the remaining 92.77% of units had no access to finance or depended on 
self  finance.  In  this  regard,  the  various  initiatives  taken  by  the  Government  of  India  and 
Reserve  Bank  such  as  adoption  of  the  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  model,  relaxation  of 
KYC  norms,  simplified  branch  authorization,  preparation  of  board  approved  financial 
inclusion  plans,  mandatory  opening  of  25%  of  new  branches  in  unbanked  rural  centres, 
preparation of financial inclusion plans by banks, etc. are expected to accelerate the process 
of  financial  inclusion  in  the  country  and  the  MSME  sector  is  expected  to  be  among  the 
beneficiaries of the same through better access to bank credit. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Table 1 
Outstanding credit to the MSE sector by SCBs 
(No. of A/Cs – in million) (Amount – Rs. in billion) 
 * change in definition of the sector as per the MSMED Act 2006 advised to banks in 2007. 
# Retail trade included in service sector. 
Source: Scheduled Commercial Banks. 
Note: Figs. In parentheses indicates Y-o-Y % growth/decline. 
Apart from bank credit, there is a growing need for venture/risk capital for financing 
30. 
high-growth-potential  and  start-up  SMEs.  The  Government  of  India,  in  the  Union  Budget 
2012–13  has  proposed  to  set  up  a  Rs.5000  crore  India  Opportunities  Venture  Fund  with 
SIDBI in order to enhance availability of equity to the SME sector. Access to Equity capital 
is another genuine problem. At present, there is almost negligible flow of equity capital into 
this  sector.  SEBI  has  permitted  BSE  and  NSE  to  set  up  an  Exchange  for  MSMEs,  which 
would help Indian SMEs to raise funds from capital markets. 
The SME sector often feels the constraint of non-availability of skilled labour. It is 
31. 
indeed  ironic  that  in  a  nation  of  more  than  a  billion  individuals,  skilled  labour  is  cited  as 
scarce. India needs to capitalize on its unique demographic dividend (it has a very large and 
young  workforce).  The  Government  of  India  and  various  State  governments  have  been 
implementing  a  number  of  schemes  and  programs  over  the  years.  The  Rural  Self 
Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) are also working in this direction. In line with the 
overall target set by the Prime Minister’s National Council on Skill Development, the Ministry 
of MSME and the agencies under it have targeted conducting skill development programmes 
for 4.78 lakh persons during 2011–12. Further, the Ministry aims to train 5.72 lakh persons in 
the  year  2012–13  through  its  various  programmes  for  development  of  self-employment 
opportunities  as  well  as  wage  employment  opportunities  in  the  country.  In  addition  to  the 
initiatives  taken  by  Government  agencies,  the  industry,  through  a  process  of  training  and 
handholding, has to contribute to building up a large base of appropriately skilled workforce 
available for employment in MSMEs. 
Apart  from  the  above  mentioned  factors,  efforts  are  on  to  promote  factoring 
32. 
services to tackle delayed realization of receivables, which adversely affects the recycling of 
funds and business operations of MSME units. To facilitate factoring services, the Parliament 
has recently passed the Factoring Regulation Bill that would address delays in payment and 
liquidity  problems  of  micro  and  small  enterprises.  The  Factoring  Bill  creates  the  legislative 
environment for factoring and makes the process easier. 
Growing incidence of sickness of SSIs is yet another area of concern. When the 
33. 
sickness prolongs it leads to the closure of units and unemployment. The mortality of the SSI 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
units is high. This has wider implications including locking of funds of the lending institutions, 
loss of scarce material resources and loss of employment. The data showing the position of 
sick small and micro enterprises as at the end of March 2010 & 11 is given below: 
(Amount in Rs. crore) 
 34. 
Timely  detection  of  sickness  is  critical  as  any  delays  in  this  regard  make  the 
possibility of revival of potentially viable sick units recede. In order to hasten the process of 
identification of a unit as sick, a proposal for modifying the extant definition of sickness, in 
line with the recommendations of the Working Group on Rehabilitation of sick SMEs, is under 
consideration of the Government of India and Reserve Bank of India. As it is observed that 
rehabilitation  of  sick  MSMEs  could  not  be  taken  up  due  to  non-availability  of  promoters’ 
contribution in a large number of cases, RBI has recommended to the Government of India 
to set up a Rehabilitation Fund for rehabilitation of sick MSMEs. All Scheduled Commercial 
Banks have also been advised to review and put in place MSE Loan policy, Restructuring / 
rehabilitation policy and Non-discretionary One Time settlement scheme for recovery of non-
performing loans, duly approved by their Board of Directors. 
An  exit  route  for  non-viable  units  is  necessary  to  manage  sickness.  The  present 
35. 
mechanism available in India for MSMEs is archaic. Business failure in India is viewed as a 
stigma,  which  adversely  impacts  individual  creativity  and  development  in  the  country.  The 
existing legislations may have to be toned up so as to provide for efficient liquidation of non-
viable businesses. 
To  ensure  competitiveness  of  the  MSEs,  it  is  essential  that  the  availability  of 
36. 
infrastructure,  technology  and  skilled  manpower  are  in  tune  with  the  global  trends.  The 
state of infrastructure, including power, water, roads, etc. in areas where SMEs are located is 
inadequate  and  unreliable.  Further,  the  MSE  sector  in  India,  with  some  exceptions,  is 
characterized  by  low  technology  levels,  which  acts  as  a  handicap  in  the  emerging  global 
market. Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs recommended several measures having a 
labour,  exit  policy, 
bearing  on 
infrastructure/technology/skill  development  and 
the 
recommendations, in a time bound manner, is being monitored by Government of India at the 
highest level. 
The government has adopted the cluster approach as a key strategy for enhancing 
37. 
the  productivity  and  competitiveness  as  well  as  capacity  building  of  MSEs  in  the  country. 
During  the  year  2011–12  (up  to  31  January  2012),  8  new  clusters  were  taken  up  for 
diagnostic  study,  5  for  soft  interventions,  and  4  for  setting  up  of  common  facility  centres 
(CFCs).  With  this,  a  total  of  477  clusters  have  been  taken  up  for  diagnostic  study,  soft 
interventions,  and  hard 
infrastructure 
development projects have also been undertaken. 
functioning  of  MSMEs,  viz.,  credit,  marketing, 
these  clusters,  134 
interventions.  Apart 
implementation  of 
taxation.  The 
from 
the 
Concluding observations 
D. 
38. 
SMEs  play  a  critical  role  in  the  economic  and  social  development  of  emerging 
markets and their role needs to be strengthened further in view of their contribution towards 
fostering  equitable  growth  and  employment  generation.  It  is  imperative  to  enhance  SME 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
competitiveness, which requires the creation of enabling legal, regulatory and administrative 
environment,  access  to  finance  and  capable  institutional  structures  and  most  importantly, 
human capital. 
39. 
The next level of growth in the Indian economy will have to necessarily come from 
the MSME sector, which can propel India’s growth rate from the present level of around 7-8 
per  cent  to  a  desirable  level  of  9-10  per  cent  and  beyond  in  the  medium-to  long-term.  In 
order to transform India into a major manufacturing hub like China, the Indian SMEs must 
embrace  change  so  that  they  can  survive  and  find  a  place  for  themselves  in  the  global 
competitive environment. The most important change needed is in the attitude of the stake 
holders and the mindset of the institutions which are engaged in the task of small enterprise 
development. Efforts should be made to take full advantage of opportunities made available 
by globalization. This is possible only through enhancing efficiency and competitiveness of 
the  enterprises  through  continuous  technological  innovations,  quality  improvement,  better 
access to finance, diversification into new geographies and markets, modernization, adoption 
of  better  risk  management  and  corporate  governance  practices,  better  human  resource 
management,  better  infrastructure,  investment  climate  reform,  etc.  All  stakeholders  in  the 
development  of  SMEs,  viz.,  government,  RBI,  banks  and  other  agencies  like  MSME 
associations/  chambers  and  large  industry  associations  should  gear  up  to  provide  an 
enabling  environment  to  the  SMEs  for  taking  them  to  a  higher  and  sustained  growth 
trajectory.  SMEs,  on  their  part,  should  strive  hard  to  take  advantage  of  the  available 
opportunities  while  staying  clear  of  the  potential  pitfalls  that  confront  them  in  their  natural 
progression into large corporations or even into multi-national corporations of the future. 
I wish the Conclave all success. Thank you. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Annual Report, 2010–11, Ministry of Micro, Medium and Small Enterprises, Government of 
India. 
Banerjee Parthasarathi (2005), Corporate Governance and Competence in SME’s in India, 
CACCI Journal, Vol. 1. 
Berry  Albert  (2007)  The  Importance  of  SMEs  in  the  Economy,  ITD  Global  Conference  on 
Taxation of Small and Medium Enterprises. 
Blakely, E. J. and Bradshaw, T. K. (2002), Planning Local Economic Development: Theory 
and Practice, Sage Publications. 
Chakrabarty Dr. K C (2012), “Empowering MSMEs for Financial Inclusion and Growth- Role 
of Banks and Industry Associations”, address at the SME Banking Conclave 2012. 
Economic Survey, Government of India, 2011–12. 
G20  Seoul  Summit  (October  2010),  Scaling-Up  SME  Access  to  Financial  Services  in  the 
Developing World. 
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) website, Sub-Group on SME Finance, G20. 
Malecki,  E.  J.  (1997),  Technology  and  Economic  Development:  the  Dynamics  of  Local, 
Regional and National Competitiveness, Longman, London. 
Markku Virtanen, “Modernising and Diversifying Existing SMEs”, OECD Paper. 
Metcalfe,  J.  S.,  R.  Ramlogan  and  E.  Uyarra  (2003),  “Economic  Development  and  the 
Competitive  Process”,  paper  delivered  at  CONFERÊNCIA  INTERNACIONAL  SOBRE 
SISTEMAS  DE 
INOVAÇÃO  E  ESTRATÉGIAS  DE  DESENVOLVIMENTO  PARA  O 
TERCEIRO MILÊNIO, November, p. 1–31. 
Meyer-Stamer,  J., 
‘Micro-Level 
Development, Vol. 23, p. 143–148. 
Promoting  Entrepreneurship  and  Innovative  SMEs  in  a  Global  Economy:  Towards  a  More 
Responsible  and  Inclusive  Globalisation,  Istanbul,  Turkey  3–5  June  2004,  2nd  OECD 
Conference of Ministers Responsible for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). 
Report of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs, January 2010 (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair). 
Report  of 
Dr.K.C.Chakrabarty). 
Zimmerman,  Barsky,  and  Brouthers,  “Networks,  SMEs,  and  International  Diversification”, 
THE MULTINATIONAL BUSINESS REVIEW, VOLUME 17 • NUMBER 4. 
the  Working  Group  on  Rehabilitation  of  sick  SMEs 
Innovations  and  Competitiveness’,  World 
(Chairman: 
(1995), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
