K C Chakrabarty: Indian economy – imperatives for second generation 
reforms 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inaugural session of the State level seminar, organized by the Department of Economics of 
the  Vivekananda  Education  Society’s  College  of  Arts,  Science  and  Commerce,  Mumbai, 
14 September 2012. 
 The assistance provided by Smt. Rekha Misra and Shri S.M. Lokare in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Dr.  Suresh  Kotak,  Chairman,  Kotak  and  Co.  Ltd.;  Dr.  J.  Phadnis,  Principal  of  the  VES 
College  of  Arts,  Science  and  Commerce;  Shri  B.L.  Boolani,  Trustee  In-charge;  Dr.  Suniti 
Nagpurkar,  Head  of  the  Economics  Department  and  Convener  of  the  Seminar,  Mrs.  Dipta 
Dasgupta, my old friend from the Banaras Hindu University; faculty members and students 
participating in the Seminar, Ladies and Gentlemen. It is, indeed, a matter of great pleasure 
and privilege for me that I have been called upon to address today’s Seminar, which indeed 
is  topical,  given  the  changing  contours  of  the  financial  regulatory  architecture  amidst 
uncertain  global  financial  market  environment.  The  global  banking  and  financial  system  is 
currently undergoing structural transformation with standard setting institutions and national 
authorities  framing  new  regulatory  paradigms  to  address  the  weaknesses  of  the  global 
financial system that surfaced during the crisis. Against this backdrop, I am delighted that the 
Vivekananda Education Society is conducting this State level Seminar on this subject. 
The Vivekananda Education Society, which started its educational activities in 1962, today 
imparts  education  to  more  than  18000  students  ranging  from  primary  school  to  advanced 
learning  in  diverse  areas  such  as  management,  law,  engineering,  science,  etc.  With  a 
mission  of  “Pursuit  of  Excellence  in  Higher  Education”,  the  society  has  sought  to  impart 
quality education and help in character building in students. I am told that the society and this 
college  in  particular,  were  set  up  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  socially  and  economically 
weaker  sections  of  the  population,  in  line  with  the  recognition  that  education  provides 
opportunities for improvement in quality of life of these deprived sections. I congratulate the 
Society for completion of 50 glorious years and commend its achievements over this period. I 
hope that it continues its good work in the times to come. 
I must admit that interacting with a gathering of teachers and students provides us with an 
opportunity  to  get  a  different  perspective  on  issues  from  what  we  normally  get  while 
interacting  with  fellow  finance  professionals.  Besides,  interacting  with  teachers  provides  a 
platform to  convey  our  ideas,  through  you, to  a  much  larger  audience consisting  of  young 
minds who will define the path that the country and the financial sector will take in the years 
to come. It is, hence, a great pleasure for me to be here today. 
Swami Vivekananda – a great reformer himself 
On the eve of the Golden Jubilee celebrations of the Vivekananda Education Society, it is apt 
to  recall  Swami  Vivekananda,  from  whom  the  College  derives  its  name  and  inspiration. 
Swami  Vivekananda  was  a  great  thinker  and  reformer  of  India  who  envisioned  a  new 
educational model for the society. His valuable thoughts on education are relevant and viable 
even  today.  According  to  him,  “education  is  the  manifestation  of  the  perfection  already  in 
man”. He said “mere book-learning won’t do. We want that education by which character is 
formed, strength of mind is increased, the intellect is expanded, and by which one can stand 
on one’s own feet”. He taught that it is only through education that the upliftment of masses 
is possible. However, Swami Vivekananda’s scheme of education, through which he wanted 
to build a strong nation that will lead the world towards peace and harmony, is still a far cry. It 
is high time that we give serious thought to his philosophy of education and remember his 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
call to every-body – “Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached.” I hope the society 
pursues this vision of Swami Vivekananda. 
Swamiji’s  most  unique  contribution  to  the  creation  of  new  India  was  to  open  the  minds  of 
Indians to their duty to the downtrodden masses. He was the first religious leader in India to 
understand and openly declare that the real cause of India’s deep rooted problems was the 
neglect  of  the  masses.  Long  before  the  ideas  of  Karl  Marx  were  known  in  India,  Swamiji 
spoke about the role of the labouring classes in the production of the country’s wealth. 
Having said this, let me come back to the realm of financial sector reforms in India. As many 
of you are aware, the Indian financial sector has seen wide ranging reforms during the last 
two  decades.  However,  these  reforms  were  broader  and  focused  at  the  macro  level  with 
internal reforms at the institutional level yet to take place. Thus, the need of the hour is to go 
for second generation reforms. Nonetheless, the reforms in the financial sector alone will not 
bring perpetual prosperity. It is the real sector which needs reforms. The financial sector has 
to grow and keep pace with the developments in the real sector. 
Why financial sector regulation? 
On an intuitive basis, the business of finance and banking is different from other businesses. 
This is on account of the fact that while other businesses operate with their own funds, banks 
are  highly  leveraged  institutions  that  operate  with  public  money  and  hence,  require  to  be 
closely regulated and supervised. Besides, unlike other businesses where, due to absence of 
entry  barriers,  free  market  competition  can  be  expected  to  ensure  efficiency  and  fair 
treatment  of  customers,  in  the  banking  business,  high  entry  barriers  imply  that  banking 
operations cannot be carried out without a license. This restricts the free play of competitive 
forces and hence, makes it all the more imperative to have a sound regulatory framework, 
particularly for protection of customers. In the business of banking and finance, there is an 
inherent  inequity  between  the  provider  of  the  service  and  the  consumer  and  this,  again, 
presents the need for a framework of rules and procedures, which we call as regulation. 
The  health  of  the financial  sector  is  a  matter  of public  policy  concern  in  view  of  its  critical 
contribution  to  economic  performance.  Financial  regulation  and  supervision  assumes 
importance  in  ensuring  that  the  financial  system  operates  along  sound  lines.  The  primary 
justification for financial regulation by authorities is to prevent systemic risk, avoid financial 
crises, protect depositors’ interest and reduce asymmetry of information between depositors 
and  banks.  As  the  costs  of  financial  crises  are  perceived  to  be  very  high,  the  authorities 
realised that they should be avoided at all costs. As a result, banks came to be regulated 
everywhere. Besides, financial regulation attempts to enhance the efficiency of the financial 
system and to achieve a broad range of social objectives. Going by the experience in several 
countries, effective regulation is in the interests of all concerned, though it cannot be based 
on a “one-size-fits-all” approach. However, it is important to bear in mind that while financial 
institutions do benefit from an appropriate regulatory regime, there is not much evidence that 
the  existence  of  a  regulatory  jurisdiction  makes  institutions  stronger  and  less  prone  to 
shocks. There is neither a unique theoretical model, nor just one practical approach to the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  a  financial  system.  The  existence  of  different  types  of 
regulatory models of the financial system makes the ideal choice a difficult exercise. 
The  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  system  in  India  is  carried  out  by  different 
regulatory  authorities.  The  Reserve  Bank  regulates  and  supervises  the  major  part  of  the 
financial system. In the past five decades, the Indian banking system has traversed through 
a difficult path endeavoring to balance several competing and conflicting demands on it from 
large, medium, small and tiny borrowers in both the organised and unorganised sectors. The 
banking system’s activities were initially tightly regulated and their freedom was restricted. It 
also  confronted  several  domestic  stresses  and  external  shocks.  However,  the  regulations 
have  changed  over  time  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  steps  out  of  the  restrictive 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
operational  environment  and  functions  in  an  atmosphere  that  provides  the  freedom  to 
innovate. 
In recent years, innovations in instruments and processes, advances in technology and the 
increasing  volumes  of  capital  intermediated  by  the  financial  system  have  necessitated  a 
proactive strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework. Emergence of several 
players with diversified and significant presence in the financial sector makes it imperative for 
supervision and regulation to be spread across various segments of the financial system. In 
recent  years,  there  has  been  a  shift  in  emphasis  from  microregulation  to  macro-
management,  supported  by  a  tightening  of  prudential  norms  and  improvements  in  the 
functioning of the financial system. 
Since the global crisis, there has been a decisive shift in trend towards assigning increased 
responsibility  to  the  central  banks  for  both  “systemic  oversight”  and  “macro-prudential 
regulation”. This greater responsibility is driven by the capability of the central banks among 
regulators  and  public  institutions  to  perform  the  intended  task.  Central  banks  have  robust 
frameworks  for  macroeconomic  analysis,  and  in  India,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  the 
responsibility for micro-prudential supervision of banks and non-banking financial companies. 
As a result, while macroeconomic analysis has helped in strengthening the microprudential 
supervision, supervisory information aggregated for the financial system as a whole has also 
helped in conducting more appropriate macroeconomic policies. 
The Reserve Bank has been deeply involved in the development of markets, and it monitors 
and analyses the impact of market trends on the economy and financial institutions. Another 
important reason why central banks have to be the systemic risk regulator is because of their 
mandate of Lender of Last Resort (LOLR). Going forward, given the complex nature of the 
challenge, significant strengthening of the capacity for systemic risk assessment and macro-
prudential regulation would be critical for the Reserve Bank. 
Macroeconomic and financial sector reforms 
In  response  to  the  macroeconomic  crisis,  a  programme  of  stabilisation  and  structural 
adjustment was initiated in July 1991, with wide ranging reform measures encompassing the 
areas of trade, exchange rate management, industry, public finance and the financial sector. 
Fiscal  correction,  exchange  rate  adjustment,  monetary  targets  and  inflation  controls 
constituted  the  immediate  measures  for  macroeconomic  stability.  These  measures  were 
supported by structural reforms in the form of industrial deregulation, liberalisation of foreign 
direct investment, trade liberalisation, overhauling of public enterprises and financial sector 
reforms. Apart from aiming at restoring the economic stability on both domestic and external 
fronts, the economic reform programme strived towards achieving a higher growth trajectory 
through  increased  levels  of  investment  and  improvements  in  productivity,  efficiency  and 
competitiveness. Structural reforms aimed at reorientation of the economy from a centrally 
directed command and control economy to a market oriented one to foster greater efficiency 
and  growth.  This  was  done  by  introducing  greater  competition  in  the  economy  through 
progressive internal deregulation accompanied by external competition promoted by foreign 
direct investment and trade liberalisation. 
The reform measures had sectoral dimensions as well. Beginning with the industrial policy of 
1991, reforms in the industrial sector were undertaken with a view to remove distortions in 
the  resource  allocation  and  improve  competitiveness  of  Indian  industry.  The  reform 
measures  included  removal  of  industrial  licensing,  reduction  in  the  number  of  industries 
reserved for the public sector, abolition of restrictions on investment and expansion under the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP)Act, 1969, automatic approval of foreign 
investment, elimination of quantitative import restrictions on intermediate and capital goods 
and  steady  reduction  in  protective  customs  tariffs.  These  measures  created  a  favourable 
environment for industry to upgrade its technology and build-up capacity in order to cater to 
growing  domestic  and  external  demand.  A  series  of  policy  initiatives  were  undertaken  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
agricultural sector as well. These included, inter alia, replacement of quantitative controls by 
tariffs,  partial  decontrol  of fertilizer  prices,  removal  of  bottlenecks  in  agricultural  marketing, 
relaxation  of  restrictions  of  the  Essential  Commodities  Act,  1955,  replacement  of  the 
Revamped  Public  Distribution  System  (RPDS)  with  Targeted  Public  Distribution  System 
(TPDS),  and  establishment  of  Rural  Infrastructure  Development  Fund  (RIDF).  Moreover, 
price reforms improved terms of trade for agriculture. Also, exchange rate and international 
trade reforms improved the incentive structure facing agriculture. 
Several  initiatives  were  undertaken  for  the  development  and  reform  of  financial  markets, 
particularly since the 1990s. The reforms in various segments of financial markets such as 
money, the government securities and the foreign exchange markets were introduced in a 
calibrated,  sequenced  and  careful  manner,  in  step  with  those  in  other  markets  in  the  real 
economy.  The  sequencing  has  also  been  informed  by  the  need  to  develop  market 
infrastructure, technology and capabilities of market participants and financial institutions in a 
consistent  manner.  In  India,  the  initiation  of  the  structural  reforms  in  the  early  1990s 
encompassed  a  process  of  phased  and  coordinated  deregulation  and  liberalisation  of 
financial  markets.  Financial  markets  in  India,  in  the  period  before  the  early  1990s,  were 
marked by administered interest rates, quantitative ceilings, statutory pre-emptions, captive 
market  for  government  securities,  excessive  reliance  on  central  bank  financing,  pegged 
exchange rate, and current and capital account restrictions. As a result of various reforms, 
the financial markets have transited to a regime characterised by market-determined interest 
and  exchange  rates,  price-based 
instruments  of  monetary  policy,  current  account 
convertibility,  phased  capital  account  liberalisation  and  an  auction-based  system  in  the 
government  securities  market.  Enhancing  efficiency,  while  at  the  same  time  avoiding 
instability in the system, has been the challenge for the regulators in India. This approach to 
development  and  regulation  of  financial  markets  has  imparted  it  greater  resilience.  India’s 
reform  programme  has  had  a  definite  positive  and  significant  impact  on  the  economy  as 
compared with the past. 
Who are the stakeholders? 
In the whole process of reforms, the key stakeholders are the customers themselves. The 
regulators have a critical role in ensuring fair treatment to customers and it cannot be left to 
the  market  forces  alone.  The  key  to  a  prompt,  effective  and  courteous  customer  service 
emanates from having the right attitude. A radical transformation of attitude right from Top 
Management to ground level employees is the first step towards improving customer service. 
Communication is at the root of effective customer care in a service industry, especially like 
banking,  where  the  documents,  terms  and  conditions,  practices  and  precedents  are  all 
heavily  loaded  against  the  customer.  In  many  fields  and  in  different  countries,  regulators 
determine  the  price.  But,  the  financial  sector  regulator  in  India  does  not  do  so.  Therefore, 
whatever charges are levied, it is expected that they are reasonable and that the pricing is 
fair, transparent and non-discriminatory. Globally, regulators are expected to usher in much 
stricter  regulations  in  the  area  of  fair  treatment  to  customers.  Banks  need  to  price  their 
products  and  services  fairly  and  competitively  and  ensure  higher  transparency  in  their 
products and pricing. Lack of transparency in designing and pricing of products and services 
and selling them to inappropriate customers could expose banks to litigation and reputational 
risks, besides making them liable for supervisory action. There should be no unreasonable 
post sale barriers if the customers wish to change product or bank. Customer education is 
also critical in providing appropriate and need based products and services and the Indian 
Banks’  Association  may  have  a  critical  role  to  play  in  this  regard.  The  banking  business 
would, thus, have to turn customer centric in all its true dimensions. 
Financial sector reforms – what next? 
The Indian approach to financial sector reforms, so far, has been driven by the predominant 
objective of enhancing the role of finance in promoting growth and economic development, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
while preserving financial stability, which is equally critical for sustained economic progress. 
While balancing the goals of efficiency and stability in introducing reforms, the Reserve Bank 
has  moved  towards  deregulation  of  interest  rates,  promoted  development  of  markets,  and 
strengthened  the  legal  infrastructure  to  facilitate  better  enforcement  of  financial  contracts. 
Going forward, three areas will continue to be important in policy debates, i.e., development 
of  long-term  corporate  bond  markets,  derivative  markets  to facilitate  better  price  discovery 
and risk transfers, and more competition by allowing greater foreign participation. 
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of  the  financial  system  across  the  world  is 
undergoing a paradigm shift following the problems experienced during the global financial 
crisis. In this regard, multilateral and standard setting bodies like the G-20, IMF, BIS and FSB 
have  been  in  the  forefront  to  design  an  advanced  regulatory  framework  to  prevent  the 
recurrence  of  such  crisis.  Addressing  the  regulatory  gaps  based  on  the  lessons  from  the 
global  financial  crisis  in  advanced  economies  will  be  a  major  challenge  for  regulators  all 
around the world. Much of the challenges in the domain of financial stability regulation would 
arise  from  complexities  surrounding  the  assessment  of  systemic  risk,  interconnectedness, 
common exposures, risk concentrations in complex innovative products and use of models to 
manage and price risks which, at times, mask information. 
While  India’s  financial  sector  remained  resilient  in  the  face  of  global  shocks,  there  are  a 
number  of  areas  where  the  reforms  would  be  needed  to  promote  stability  and  generate 
growth impulses for the real economy. In the wake of turbulent global financial environment, 
banks and financial entities have to grapple with growing complexities and risks associated 
with their businesses. Against this backdrop, the policy initiatives such as adoption of tighter 
capital  and 
risk  management  practices  and  sound 
compensation practices are required to place the Indian banking system on a strong footing 
and  enhance  the  banking  sector’s  ability  to  absorb  shocks  arising  from  any  financial  and 
economic stress and encourage prudent risk taking. 
Moreover, in India, while broader institutional reforms have taken place at the macro level, 
the internal reforms among banks and financial institutions are yet to take place. Thus, there 
is  a  need  to  go  for  second  generation  reforms,  particularly  focusing  on  bringing  down  the 
cost of banking services, strengthening the credit delivery mechanism, improving customer 
service, reforming the human resources management systems and enhancing the financial 
outreach to hitherto unbanked areas. 
liquidity  standards, 
improved 
Second generation reforms 
Let me talk about some of the elements of these second generation reforms. 
Adopting improved risk management practices 
(i)  
One fundamental principal of finance that I would like to emphasize is the direct relationship 
between risk and return. Any investment that offers greater returns, invariably involves more 
risk. Similarly, if you avoid taking risk, then the returns could even be negative. Banks, for 
instance, are in the business of taking risks and hence, cannot be expected to shun risk in its 
entirety. Four basic requirements that banks and professionals in the field need to develop is 
to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
My advice to all students entering the finance field would be that never take a risk where you 
cannot meet the above four requirements. 
Understand Risk  
Define Risk  
Measure Risk  
Manage Risk  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Globally,  there  is  an  increasing  move  towards  more  advanced  approaches  to  risk 
management.  Banks  in  India  have  made  progress  in  moving  towards  the  advanced  risk 
management approaches. Banks, however, need to traverse a long distance in this regard. 
As capital always comes at a cost, banks need to have in place a fair and differentiated risk 
pricing of products and services. This involves costing, quantitative assessment of revenue 
streams from each product and service and an efficient Transfer Pricing Mechanism, which 
would determine capital allocation. Each business unit in the enterprise would have to aim at 
being  a  profit  centre  within  the  overall  risk–return  framework.  In  essence,  it  would  mean 
accountability for profit, tempered by the discipline of risk–return within a deeply embedded 
culture of good governance. Our past experience has been of poor savers subsidising the 
rich borrowers. Also, there are incidences of rampant mis-pricing of risks. From a business 
perspective, pricing of assets should be non-discriminatory and in line with risk rating of the 
customer. A lower rated customer should not get a better price than a higher rated customer. 
Once  these  basic  issues  are  addressed,  other  issues  such  as  migration  to  advanced 
approaches, etc. would gain importance. 
While  all  Indian  banks  have  adopted  the  standardised  approaches  under  the  Basel  II 
framework in 2009, the pace of migration to the advanced approaches has, naturally, been 
very slow. Though the Reserve Bank has set an indicative time schedule for implementation 
of  the  Advanced  Approaches,  banks’  response  has  been  less  than  encouraging  so  far. 
Migration to the Advanced Approaches is important for larger banks as it involves adoption of 
more sophisticated risk management systems. Moreover, there are reputational issues also 
in  large  banks  continuing  with  standardised  approaches.  Apart  from  these  fundamental 
issues,  much  of  this  sluggishness  could  be  attributed  to  issues  relating  to  development  of 
human  resource  skills,  technology  upgradation,  branch  interconnectivity,  availability  and 
management  of  historical  data,  robustness  of  risk  management  systems,  etc.  within  the 
banks. Even within the Reserve Bank, the supervisors would have to make rapid strides to 
be able to appreciate the nuances associated with the quantitative techniques and models. 
The  objective  of  the  Basle  III  reform  package  is  to  improve  the  banking  sector’s  ability  to 
absorb  shocks  arising  from  financial  and  economic  stress,  whatever  the  source,  thus 
reducing the risk of spillover from the financial sector to the real economy. An assessment of 
Indian banks’ capital requirements under Basel III has revealed that, notwithstanding some 
issues with a few individual banks, the system as a whole, is very well capitalised and the 
transition to the revised capital norms of overall capital adequacy, Tier I component or equity 
component  would  be  smooth. The  implementation  period  of  Basel  III  capital  requirements, 
including  capital  conservation  buffer  and  regulatory  deductions,  will  begin  from  January  1, 
2013 and will be fully implemented by March 31, 2018, before the timeline (January 1, 2019) 
indicated in Basel III rules. 
Reforming human resources management 
(ii)  
There is an imperative need to improve the productivity and efficiency of human resources. 
An  organisation  can  only  be  as  good  as  its  people.  They  are  the force behind  innovation, 
business process re-engineering and making the difference between success and failure. A 
committed and highly motivated work force can make the difference in winning and retaining 
customers  as  banking  is  a  people  oriented  business.  Banks  have  to  be  knowledge 
organisations, able to attract and retain talent. HR policies should look at right size, right fit 
and  career  growth  with  market  related  compensation.  Increasingly,  there  is  going  to  be 
intense competition for the right kind of talent as they are likely to be in short supply. The 
demand  for  efficient  manpower  will  not  only  stem  from  domestic  institutions  but  also  from 
foreign  institutions/  countries;  and  not  just  from  the  banking  industry  but  from  other 
financial/non-financial sectors. The challenge before Indian banks is, therefore, to revitalise 
themselves  by  hiring  the  right  talent,  investing  in  training  and  bringing  about  a  vibrant 
transformation in their DNA. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Technology to be more customer focused 
(iii)  
Most banks are already on Core Banking Systems (CBS) which covers banking operations 
pertaining to deposits, withdrawals, credit delivery, back-office operations, etc. Banks need to 
look beyond Core Banking to harness the benefits of technology. CBS could provide inputs 
for developing customised products based on customer database. It would help in planning 
product  delivery  and  service  at  selected/  multiple  delivery  points,  better  Customer 
Relationship  Management  and  building  lasting  customer  relationships  which  will  translate 
into  higher  revenues.  Technology  needs  to  be  more  customer  focused  than  employee  or 
vendor  focused.  In  case  of  glitches,  the  rectification  must  be  swift  to  instill  faith  and 
confidence in the system. It is only the more agile and innovative players who will stay ahead 
in the game. Along with IT solutions arise allied issues such as IT security, governance and 
audits. Gaps in IT security could make banks vulnerable to data piracy, fraud and operational 
risk leading to reputation risk and erosion of customer confidence. 
Focusing on MIS and information literacy 
(iv)  
MIS is an inseparable part of bank’s decision making process. The integrity and timeliness of 
data  is  critical  in  formulating  the  bank’s  capital  planning,  business  strategies,  reviewing 
achievements  vis-a-vis  targets,  formulating  course  correction  exercises  where  required, 
feeding data into stress tests and importantly, taking action on the outcomes. This brings us 
to  technology  support  for  decision  making.  Banks  have  made  huge  investments  in 
technology, which should be translated into better MIS through decision support systems and 
yield  returns  on  investment  by  providing  economical,  affordable  and  customised  customer 
centric banking solutions. The use of technology should not be seen as an end in itself but as 
a means to an end. 
Business strategy and vision 
(v)  
The role of banks’ Boards would become increasingly crucial in the next decade in view of 
the  looming  competition.  The  Board  would  need  to  have  a  clear  vision  for  the  bank,  a 
strategy to achieve its objectives, both medium and long-term, and a well laid out long-term 
plan. Banks would need to look beyond their existing customer base and large corporates 
and reach out to rope in the vast number of small, retail and SME clients which are presently 
deprived of bank credit. Alongside extending the reach of their banking services, there would 
be  a  need  to  improve  the  products  offered to  customers  and the quality  of  services. They 
need to have proper business model and delivery model. 
long 
term  equitable  development,  since  a 
Reaching to the unbanked / under-banked areas 
(vi)  
In  India,  growth  with  equity  has  been  the  central  objective  right  from  the  inception  of  the 
planning  process.  The  objective  of  financial  inclusion  is  to  provide  financial  services  at 
affordable cost to those who are excluded from the formal financial system. This is vital for 
sustaining 
the 
households/areas  do  not  have  access  to  basic  banking  facilities,  notwithstanding  the 
existence  of  vast  institutional  framework  in  the  country.  An  important  challenge  is  to 
channelise  more  savings  to  the  financial  system,  particularly  in  rural  areas  and  from  the 
urban  informal  sector.  This  would  need  further  penetration  of  the  banking  system.  The 
Reserve Bank’s emphasis on financial inclusion is important in attaining this objective over 
time. There is also enormous potential for extending finance in semi-urban and rural areas 
for  productive  activities,  which  may  require  strengthening  the  banking  correspondent 
relationship, simultaneously enhancing the risk assessment and risk management capacities 
in  order  to  maintain  credit  quality  and  sustain  the  credit  growth  in  these  sectors.  Besides 
benefiting  the  unbanked  masses,  this  will  also  ensure  viability  and  scalability  of  banks’ 
financial inclusion initiatives. 
large  proportion  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Bringing down the cost of banking services 
(vii)  
Further  reduction  in  the  cost  of  banking  services  may  require  greater  competition  among 
product lines, improved delivery mechanisms and increasing use of information technology. 
The costs of banking transactions need to be dramatically reduced as has happened in many 
other fields such as telecom, after the advent of technology. However, it is observed that, in 
banking,  the  transaction  costs  continue  to  be  high,  particularly  in  agriculture  sector,  which 
include  costs 
in  appraisal  of  borrowers,  processing,  documentation  and 
disbursement  charges,  loan  monitoring/supervision  and  collection.  It  is  essential  to  bring 
down such transaction costs to make available credit at affordable price to the farmers. 
incurred 
Balancing the real and financial sector reforms 
Financial  sector  reforms  alone  will  not  bring  continued  prosperity.  In  the  recent  years,  we 
see, growing evidence on growth deceleration in the Indian economy. For sustaining the high 
growth  path,  improving  the  investment  climate  and  enhancing  the  absorptive  capacity  by 
bringing in the real sector reforms would be critical. The fact that a well-developed financial 
sector is necessary to act as the intermediary between entrepreneurs/ investors and savers 
can hardly be overstated. An efficient financial sector reduces the cost and risk of producing 
and  trading  goods  and  services  and,  thus,  makes  an  important  contribution  to  raising 
standards  of  living.  The  recent  crisis,  however,  showed  that  the  financial  sector  had 
apparently taken a quasi-autonomous existence without close connection with the financing 
requirements  of  the  real  economy.  The  financial  industry,  indeed,  grew  oversized  in  the 
preceding  years,  reflected  in  rapid  credit  creation,  asset  price  bubbles  and  high  levels  of 
indebtedness, particularly in advanced financial systems. The disproportionate growth in the 
global financial sector was largely due to the aggressive search for yield, engendered by the 
easy  liquidity  in  the  global  system  that  triggered  a  wave  of  financial  innovation.  Complex 
financial  products  were  created  by  structuring  and  hedging,  originating  and  distributing,  all 
under the belief that real value could be created by sheer financial engineering. There were 
hardly any signs of growing capital formation due to the growing and increasingly complex 
financial sector. 
The financial sector grew more rapidly than other goods and services. In a way, that made 
growth of finance an end in itself and not a means to meet human needs such as food, fuel, 
health  and  education.  Given  that  the  busting  of  the  oversized  financial  sector  has  a 
devastating impact on the real sector, it becomes important to (i) examine the optimal size of 
the financial sector relative to growth and development needs and (ii) make financial sector 
innovations more meaningful to cater to the needs of the real sector. 
For  sustaining  the  high  growth  path,  it  is  imperative  that  we  bring  in  reforms  in  the 
agriculture, industry, infrastructure and services sectors. I would like touch upon some of the 
elements of these reforms. 
Improving agricultural governance and productivity 
In order to step up agriculture growth, a judicious use of technology is required along with 
institutional  reforms,  including  those  relating  to  land,  incentives  for  supply  response  and 
better  input  use.  Given  the  dependence  of  a  vast  majority  of  workforce  on  agriculture, 
enhancing the agricultural output, driven by higher yield and diversification of crops, assumes 
importance. Higher investment, backed by sustained research and extension activities, could 
be critical for augmenting yield. The policy focus, so far, has been on using higher MSP to 
generate  supply  response  and  public  investment  on  expanding  the  irrigation  potential. 
However,  there  is  a  need  for  improving  the  market  structure  for  agricultural  commodities, 
ensuring  competitive  pricing,  enhancing  warehouse  facilities  and  improving  rural  roads  for 
enhancing  better  connectivity  with  urban  markets.  Better  water  management,  with  an 
emphasis on water harvesting, would be important for enhancing the farm productivity and 
output. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Improving the performance of manufacturing sector 
The  manufacturing  sector’s  performance  in  a  competitive  environment  and  in  the  face  of 
risks of rising protectionism could encounter several challenges. Despite the advantages of a 
large domestic market, abundant availability of skilled labour force, and the proximity to the 
fast growing Asian markets, productivity growth needs to catch up with the Asian economies, 
including  China.  This  requires  greater  emphasis  on  quality,  better  adoption  of  technology, 
more  flexible  labour  laws,  significantly  improved  infrastructure  and  a  policy  environment 
supportive  of  the  SMEs  sector.  The  industry-education  linkages  must  be  strengthened 
vigorously. Persistent problems like frequent disruptions in the availability of power and lack 
of stable demand also affect the performance of the manufacturing sector. 
Harnessing the potential of services sector 
Notwithstanding the high growth and resilience of the services sector in the recent past, the 
sector faces multiple challenges for sustained growth over the years. A number of services, 
where  India  enjoys  comparative  advantage,  experience  lack  of  clear  policy  thrust.  For 
instance, despite the high quality of healthcare services, it attracts a number of regulations. 
Similarly, in education, multiple regulation points and lack of credible accreditation systems 
hamper the growth potential. Given the medium to long-term contribution of investments on 
education and health to growth and productivity, availability of these services at affordable 
cost,  while  enhancing  their  global  competitiveness, must form  part  of  the  priority  in  India’s 
development process. A number of services in India are either predominantly associated with 
the  Government  or  not  liberalised  enough  to  ensure  growth  through  organised  private 
initiatives. Services like professional, legal, postal, accountancy and insurance need further 
liberalisation to harness their potential. 
Facilitating infrastructure finance 
As per the assessment of the Planning Commission, during the Twelfth Plan (2012–17) India 
may need infrastructure investments of over US$ 1trillion. This poses a mammoth financing 
task.  The  infrastructure  gap  in  India,  both  in  relation  to  other  major  countries  and  its  own 
growing demand, has been a key factor affecting the overall productivity of investments. The 
requirement of high initial capital outlay, that took over longer terms, necessitates measures 
to  address  the  financing  constraint  to  capacity  expansion  in  infrastructure.  The  financing 
issue  relates  not  only  to  possible  resource  gap,  but  also  to  ensure  commercially  viable 
funding  that  remains  so  over  business  cycles.  Infrastructure  investment  during  the Twelfth 
Plan  will  need  to  be  funded  by  both,  public  and  private  sectors.  Despite  increasing 
participation of the private sector in bridging the infrastructure gap, public investment still has 
to play a significant role. Fiscal consolidation and reorientation of expenditure towards capital 
expenditure  is  required  to  meet  the  target.  The  banking  system,  despite  the  risk  of  asset-
liability mismatch while lending for long-term infrastructure projects, has seen high growth in 
credit to this sector in recent years. 
To sum up 
The first round of financial sector reforms resulted in strengthening of the financial system 
and making it more vibrant and resilient. However, over time, the pace of reforms and growth 
has  slowed  down  and  the  need  for  second  generation  of  reforms  is  strongly  felt.  These 
reforms would have to focus on individuals and corporates and work towards improvement in 
productivity and efficiency of the economy as a whole. 
Financial  sector  reforms,  in  isolation,  will  not  have  a  significant  impact  unless  there  is 
improvement in the absorption capacity of the economy. Real sector reforms should precede 
financial sector reforms for bringing in inclusive and sustainable development of the country. 
Even  in  the  financial  sector,  there  is  an  imperative  need  for  internal  institutional  reforms, 
particularly  focusing  on  improving  the  risk  management  practices,  reducing  the  cost  of 
transactions, both borrowing and lending, and improving the overall customer service. I hope 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
all  concerned  stakeholders  work  towards  implementation  of  these  second  generation 
reforms, which is essential for moving the economy back to the high growth trajectory. 
I would, once again, like to congratulate the Vivekananda Education Society for completion 
of 50 glorious years and hope that the Society continues its efforts to produce students who 
are fully equipped to shoulder the responsibility of taking the nation forward in the coming 
years.  I  would  also  urge  the  management,  faculty  and  students  to  rededicate  themselves 
towards  further  broadening  the  activities  and  reach  of  the  Society  so  that  it  provides  an 
avenue  for  the  deprived  segments  to  attain  social  and  economic  prosperity  through 
education.  This  would  be  in  line  with  the  message  that  Swami  Vivekananda  sought  to 
spread, all through his life, through his work and writings. 
I wish the deliberations of the Seminar all success. Thank you. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
