K C Chakrabarty: Exploring the challenge of financial education across 
emerging economies 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Visa-FT Financial Literacy Forum Series, Mumbai, 5 June 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Smt.  Sushma  Vij  and  Ms  Geeta  Nair  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged 
Mr.  James  Crabtree,  Chief  Mumbai  Correspondent,  Financial  Times,  Mr.  Uttam  Nayak, 
Group Country Manager, South Asia, Visa Inc, Mr. Thomas Davenport, Director, South Asia, 
IFC, Ms. Nirupama Soundararajan, Additional Director, FICCI, Ms. Jayshree Vyas, Managing 
Director, SEWA Bank, distinguished guests, members of the press, ladies and gentlemen. It 
is my pleasure to be present here today to address this august gathering to deliberate on the 
challenge  of  financial  education  across  emerging  economies.  Financial  Literacy,  together 
with Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection form a triad which has a vital bearing on 
the stability of the financial system. Financial literacy is one of the major challenges facing 
countries across the globe, irrespective of their level of economic development and has been 
receiving  significant  attention  from  policy  makers  worldwide.  I  would,  therefore,  like  to 
congratulate Financial Times and Visa for taking initiative by organizing this financial literacy 
forum and bringing together thinkers, policy makers and market practitioners to deliberate on 
how to enhance the effectiveness of our financial literacy efforts.  
When  we  talk  about  financial  literacy,  we  are  usually  referring  to  a  set  of  skills  that  allow 
people to manage their money wisely along with some understanding of essential financial 
concepts,  not  least  an  appreciation  of  the  trade-off  between  risk  and  return.  Financial 
Literacy  is  not  just  about  markets  and  investing,  but  also  savings,  budgeting,  financial 
planning,  basics  of  banking  and  most  importantly,  about  being  “Financially  Smart”.  To 
understand  financial  planning,  a  person  should  be  financially  literate  and  be  able  to 
understand  the  importance  of  preparing  household  budgets,  cash-flow  management  and 
asset allocation to meet financial goals. Hence, the foundation of financial literacy needs to 
be laid by inculcating financial prudence through education at the school level.  
Is financial literacy required only in emerging and developing economies? 
I  would  say  that  financial  literacy  is  essential  for  both  developed  nations  and  emerging 
economies. However, we need to bear in mind that the focus of financial literacy initiatives 
would  vary  depending  on  the  economic  profile  of  the  target  population.  For  developed 
countries,  the  access  to  financial  products/  services  is  fairly  widespread  and  hence, 
consumers/ market participants are required to be educated more about the characteristics 
of  the  financial  products/services,  including  their  risks  and  returns.  However,  for  emerging 
market  economies,  ensuring  adequate  access  to  financial  products  and  services  is  more 
important  with  the  financial  literacy  initiatives  focusing  on  creating  demand  for  these 
products/services.  In  India,  the  access  to  products  itself  is  lacking.  Therefore,  ensuring 
widespread  access  to  financial  products/  services  and  greater  knowledge  about  the  basic 
financial products/ services, including their risk/ return profiles, is essential for expanding the 
outreach  and  inclusiveness  of  the  financial  system.  Thus,  our  financial  literacy  efforts  are 
closely interlinked with our financial inclusion strategy.  
Why is financial literacy necessary? 
Financial  Literacy  is  considered  an  important  adjunct  for  promoting  financial  inclusion, 
consumer  protection  and  ultimately,  financial  stability.  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial 
Literacy need to go hand in hand to enable the common man to understand the needs and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
benefits  of  the  products  and  services  offered  by  the  formal  financial  institutions.  We  have 
defined financial inclusion as ensuring access to appropriate financial products and services 
needed  by  all  sections  of  the  society  in  general  and  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  weaker 
sections and low income groups in particular, at an affordable cost, in a fair and transparent 
manner  by  regulated  mainstream  institutional  players.  So,  from  the  financial  literacy 
perspective, it essentially involves two elements, one of access and the other of literacy. 
Who are the target groups and what messages to deliver? 
I shall argue here that everyone in the economy needs to be financially  literate viz., users 
and providers of financial products/ services. In the Indian context, the users can be broadly 
categorized as the financially excluded resource-poor, the lower and middle income groups 
and high net worth individuals. 
For the resource-poor population, financial literacy would invariably involve addressing deep 
entrenched behavioural and psychological factors that are major barriers to participating in 
the  financial  system.  For  the  purpose,  our  financial  literacy  efforts  are  primarily  directed 
towards  dissemination  of  simple  messages  of  financial  prudence  (vernacular  language) 
through large awareness campaigns across the country combined with vigorous roll out of 
financial inclusion plans by banks, insurance and pension funds, and others. However, it is 
important  to  note  that  being  literate  is  not  a  necessary  prerequisite  for  attaining  financial 
literacy as the basic financial messages can be conveyed through various alternate means 
without relying on written inputs. Some of the basic messages we seek to deliver are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Why save?  
Why save regularly and consistently?  
Why save with banks?  
Why borrow within limits?  
Why borrow from banks?  
Why borrow for income generating purposes?  
Why repay loans  
Why repay loans in time?  
Why do you need insurance?  
Why you will need regular stream of income post working life –pension?  
Why you should keep money aside regularly and consistently during your earning 
life for pension in old age?  
What is interest? How moneylenders charge very high interest rates?  
What is the difference between money and credit.  
• 
• 
One of the primary challenges for improving the effectiveness of financial literacy efforts is to 
ensure the standardization of the basic messages being conveyed to people. This will help in 
ensuring  consistency  in  the  messages  reaching  the  target  audience  from  various  sources 
and making it more focused and purposeful. I hope that this forum deliberates on this issue 
and comes up with some useful ideas on the same. 
For the lower and middle income groups that are participating in financial markets as either 
savers or borrowers or both, i.e. the financially included, financial literacy is about enhancing 
their  knowledge  about  the  market  and  about  the  range  of  products/  services  available  for 
meeting various financial goals. For instance, how many people invest in equities? They lack 
knowledge about how the equity market functions, which gives relatively high returns over a 
longer  time  horizon  as  compared  with  other  kinds  of  investments.  For  high  net  worth 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
individuals,  the  education  is  useful  to  fetch  greater  returns  from  their  investments  in  the 
market  and  to  avail  credit  at  relatively  cheaper  rates.  But  whether  saving  or  investing,  the 
basic lesson that a higher return implies higher risks cannot be lost sight of. People need to 
be educated to balance their investments in terms of liquidity and risks and that they should 
not put all eggs in the same basket.  
While  financial  literacy  for  the  users  of  financial  services/products  is  of  paramount 
importance, literacy is also a must for financial service providers. Banks, financial institutions 
and other market players too need to be literate about their risk and return framework. Every 
bank,  in  order  to  expand  its  customer  base,  needs  to  understand  the  requirements  of  its 
customers,  the  market,  credit  and  operational  risks  involved  and  returns  to  be  achieved. 
They need to understand that for their business to survive, their customers must survive and 
for that, they need to understand the appropriateness of the products themselves to be able 
to explain it to their customers.  
Besides, the providers of financial services have a vested interest in the spread of financial 
inclusion and financial literacy, as it will help them in expanding their business operations to 
newer  segments  of  the  population.  Globally,  it  is  observed  that  commerce  for  the  poor  is 
more  viable  than  commerce  for  the  rich.  Financial  Inclusion  needs  to  be  pursued  in  a 
commercially viable manner, which is possible only if the entire suite of products including 
credit  products,  remittance  services  and  deposit  products  are  offered  to  customers.  The 
commercial  viability  of  financial  inclusion  efforts  is  essential  for  ensuring  long  term 
sustainability and scaling up of this business. The failure of financial intermediaries to ensure 
effective  implementation  of  financial  inclusion  efforts  as  a  viable  business  model  indicates 
the lack of basic financial literacy on the part of these financial intermediaries. 
Institutional framework in India 
One critical advantage that India has in its Financial Literacy and Financial Inclusion efforts is 
the  strong  institutional  framework  in  place  for  guiding  its  implementation.  We  have  the 
Financial  Stability  &  Development  Council  (FSDC)  headed  by  the  Union  Finance  Minister 
which,  inter  alia,  has  been  mandated  to  look  after  Financial  Inclusion  and  Literacy  efforts. 
With heads of all financial sector regulatory authorities being part of the FSDC, it seeks to 
ensure inter-regulatory co-operation for attaining the stated goals. FSDC has constituted a 
Sub-Committee  to  focus  solely  on  Financial  Inclusion  and  Literacy.  In  our  multi  agency 
approach, Reserve Bank has taken a lead role in spreading financial inclusion and financial 
literacy, both in terms of creating an enabling policy environment and providing institutional 
support.  
One of the important tasks that the FSDC Sub-committee has taken up is to formulate the 
National Financial Literacy Strategy document with the following objectives. 
(i)  
Create  awareness  and  educate  consumers  on  access  to  financial  services, 
availability of various types of products and their features.  
Change attitudes to translate knowledge into behaviour. 
Make consumers understand their rights and responsibilities as clients of financial 
services.  
(ii)  
(iii)  
Financial literacy – Ideally start early in schools 
It is well recognized that to be effective, financial literacy initiatives should ideally commence 
at  school  level  although,  even  at  a  later  stage  adult  education  would  provide  substantial 
benefits. Financial education at the school level would involve teaching the basics concepts 
for laying a strong foundation. The groundwork for this sort of conceptual understanding is 
best  laid  in  a  formal  educational  setting.  The  reason  why  it  is  important  to  teach  financial 
education in schools is also due to its multiplier effect on the society as they would be in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
best position to act as ambassadors for the spread of financial education in their surrounding 
environment.  In  India,  therefore,  we  are  engaging  with  the  curriculum  setting  bodies  like 
National  Council  of  Educational  Research  and  Training  (NCERT),  Education  Boards  like 
Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), Central and State Governments to try and 
embed such concepts in the school curriculum. 
Channels of financial literacy 
Taking into consideration different cultures and market development needs, we are adopting 
a  multi-channel  approach  to  cover  different  financial  and  education  levels  in  various  age 
groups. We  have  a  link  on  Financial  Education  on  the  RBI  website  for  the  common  man, 
containing  material  in  13  Indian  languages,  which  includes  comic  books  on  money  and 
banking  for  children,  puzzles,  competitions,  etc.  Top  Executives  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
undertake outreach visits to remote villages on a continuous basis to spread the message of 
financial  awareness  and  literacy.  A  Young  Scholars  Scheme  has  been  instituted  wherein, 
around  150  graduate  students  are  selected  each  year  from  across  the  country,  who  are 
provided  summer  internship  in  various  offices  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  are  expected  to 
submit  small  project  reports  relevant  to  the  Bank’s  functioning.  Moreover,  these  young 
scholars are required to visit some schools in their region and explain their project to school 
students,  so  as  to  create  greater  awareness  among  the  school  students  regarding  the 
functioning of the Reserve Bank. Besides, town hall meetings, participation in information / 
literacy programmes organized by Press, enacting plays and skits, arranging stalls in local 
fairs/ exhibitions, etc. are some other initiatives towards this objective. 
Who all are partnering in this initiative? 
Everybody  has  to  be  involved  in  the  financial  literacy  efforts.  In  India,  a  large  number  of 
stakeholders including the central and state governments, financial regulators and players, 
civil society, educationists and others are involved in spreading financial literacy. As we have 
adopted  a  bank  led  model  for  financial  inclusion,  banks  are  actively  contributing  to  our 
financial  literacy  initiatives  by  setting  up  Financial  Literacy  and  Credit  Counselling  Centres 
with  focus  on  educating  people  on  availability  of  various  deposit,  credit  and  remittance 
products offered by banks, so as to create demand for the same, with the aim of attaining 
Financial Inclusion. As on March 31, 2012, there are 429 FLCCs functioning throughout the 
country. Use of mobile Financial Literacy vans by banks in the North Eastern States, Weekly 
Radio programmes on financial literacy in some States by banks and similar programmes in 
Tribal districts by NABARD, awareness programmes on various Government Sponsored self 
employment  schemes  involving  bank  loans  and  subsidy  by  Government  agencies  like 
KVIC,DICs, SC/ST corporations, Mass media campaigns, tie ups with educational institutes, 
financial  awareness  workshops/  help  lines,  books,  pamphlets  and  publications  on financial 
literacy  by  NGOs,  financial  market  players,  etc.  National  and  State  level  rural  livelihood 
missions have large number of field functionaries for proper handholding support to a large 
number  of  Self  Help  Groups.  A  number  of  other  websites/portals  of  banks/  /State  Level 
Bankers  Committees  are  disseminating  information  on  banking  services.  Conduct  of 
Financial  Literacy  programmes  by  Rural  Self  Employment  Training  Institutes,  conduct  of 
training programmes for Farmers Clubs, NGOs & SHG members by NABARD are also useful 
initiatives  in  this  regard.  State  Governments  and  local  level  administrations  have  an 
important role to play in financial literacy campaigns as they are closer to the ground and will 
be in a position to better implement the initiatives taken. 
Consumer protection through literacy 
For  all  users  of  financial  services,  an  important  component  of  financial  literacy  is  the 
provision of a grievance redressal mechanism, which they can access in cases of complaints 
and  frauds  by/against  financial  service  providers.  The  availability  of  an  effective  grievance 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
redressal  mechanism  is  essential  as  its  absence  could  lead  to  loss  of  confidence  in  the 
financial system, prompting people to move away from it. This would be a serious setback to 
our  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  For  cost-effective,  quick  grievance  redressal  related  to 
banking  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  instituted  Banking  Ombudsmen  in  each  of  our 
Regional  Offices.  Other  regulators  have  also  setup  ombudsman  in  their  areas.  However, 
banks/financial  institutions  should  realize  that  improved  customer  awareness/  service  and 
effective  grievance  redressal  at  their  level  alone  can  substantially  reduce  the  number  of 
complaints going to Ombudsmen.  
In  addition  to  the  obvious  benefits  of  financial  literacy  at  the  individual  level,  it  has  major 
macro-economic benefits as well. If we can bring the excluded population into the purview of 
banking services, we could raise household and overall domestic savings further, and can, 
thus, fulfill one of the necessary conditions for achieving double-digit growth. 
Conclusion 
While  a  number  of measures  have  and  are  being taken, given  the  enormity  of the task of 
financial literacy, a lot of ground still needs to be covered. Here, I would like to emphasize 
the need for a partnership of all the stakeholders in a collaborative manner. The preparation 
of  National  Strategy  on  Financial  Education  is  a  step  in  this  direction.  However,  like  the 
proverbial  “horse  and  carriage”,  efforts  to  improve  financial  capacity  and  to  raise  financial 
literacy best go together; it makes for an easier and more successful journey. 
I wish the deliberations all success. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
