Agathe Côté: Modelling risks to the financial system 
Remarks  by  Ms  Agathe  Côté,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 21 August 2012. 
 Introduction 
It  has  become  a  summer  tradition  for  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  address  the  Canadian 
Association for Business Economics. This year it is my pleasure and I thank you for the kind 
invitation. 
An audience of colleagues and fellow economists offers me an opportunity to delve into a 
complex subject, and one that is particularly timely: financial system risk. 
We continue to see today the enormous costs to the global economy of the financial crisis 
that started five years ago. Of the many lessons we have learned from the crisis, a key one is 
this: we need to pay more attention to the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
This means understanding better how risks get transmitted across financial institutions and 
markets, and understanding better the feedback loop between the financial system and the 
real  economy.  From  a  policy  perspective,  this  means  taking  a  system-wide  approach  to 
financial regulation and supervision. Major reforms of the global financial system now under 
way address this need. 
System-wide risk has been a focus of attention at the Bank of Canada, and at other central 
banks,  for  some  time.  Ten  years  ago,  the  Bank  issued  the  first  edition  of  its  semi-annual 
Financial System Review in which it identifies key sources of risks to the Canadian financial 
system  and  highlights  the  policies  needed  to  address  them.  A  year  later,  in  2003,  we 
organized our annual conference on the theme of financial stability.1  
In the wake of the global financial crisis, the Bank has intensified its research efforts in this 
area.  In  particular,  a  priority  is  to  improve  the  theoretical  and  empirical  models  we  use  to 
analyze  elements  of  the  financial  system  that  can  lead  to  the  emergence  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities. With more finely tuned quantitative models and tools, the Bank will be better 
able to identify risks on a timely basis so that the private sector and policy-makers can take 
corrective action to support financial stability. 
Let me acknowledge upfront that this task is complex. While macroeconomic models have 
long  been  used  to  guide  monetary  policy  decisions  by  central  banks,  models  of  financial 
stability and systemic risk are much less advanced. 
In my remarks today, I want to talk about the progress that we have made at the Bank in 
modelling risks to the financial system. I will start by briefly describing the notion of systemic 
risk  and  various  approaches  used  to  identify  and  measure  it.  I  will  then  discuss  two 
state-of-the-art  quantitative  models  that  we  have  developed  to  improve  our  assessment of 
risks to the Canadian financial system. 
The multiple dimensions of systemic risk 
Systemic, or system-wide, risk goes beyond individual institutions and markets. It is the risk 
that the financial system as a whole becomes impaired and that the provision of key financial 
services breaks down, with potentially serious consequences for the real economy. 
                                                
1  Bank of Canada annual conference on “The Evolving Financial System and Public Policy” held in December 
2003 in Ottawa. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Systemic risk manifests itself in different ways. There is a time dimension, which refers to the 
accumulation of imbalances over time, and a cross-sectional dimension, which refers to how 
risk is distributed throughout the financial system at a given point in time. 
Procyclicality  is  the  key  issue  in  the  time  dimension.  It  reflects  the  tendency  to  take  on 
excessive  risk  during  economic  upswings  –  too  much  punch  from  the  punchbowl,  if  you 
will  –  and  to  become  overly  risk  averse  during  the  downturns.  Procyclicality  makes  the 
financial system and the economy more vulnerable to shocks, and increases the likelihood of 
financial distress. 
Risk  concentrations  and  interconnections  are  the  key  issues  in  the  cross-sectional 
dimension. Financial institutions can have similar exposures to shocks or be linked through 
balance  sheets.  As  a  result,  losses  in  one  institution  can  lead  to  fears  of  contagion  that 
amplify the adverse effects of the initial shock. For instance, uncertainty about the viability of 
counterparties can lead to hoarding of liquidity, which may seem like an appropriate action 
for the individual institution but can have disastrous consequences for the financial system as 
a whole. 
System-wide surveillance requires that we regularly assess the importance of various types 
of systemic risk. How  we judge a particular risk will be based on the probability that it  will 
lead  to  financial  system  distress,  and  on  the  extent  of  its  impact  should  that  distress 
materialize. 
Early-warning indicators 
A fundamental challenge is to detect the risks arising from both global and domestic sources 
in  an  environment  with  a  vast  number  of  potential  indicators.  Therefore,  one  direction  of 
research at the Bank has been to isolate the key signals from this broad information set by 
identifying  a  smaller  group  of  variables  that  can  serve  as  early-warning  indicators  of 
emerging imbalances. 
Since financial crises in Canada have been rare, international data are used to help establish 
numerical  thresholds  for  each  domestic  indicator.  For  example,  if  international  evidence 
suggests that credit growth above a certain rate tends to be associated with increased risk, 
then a period with credit growth above the threshold would suggest an elevated probability of 
financial stress. Selecting the level of thresholds involves a difficult trade-off between false 
alarms  and  failure  to  signal  an  event,  so  in  practice  the  early-warning  indicators  are  used 
mainly to identify areas where more detailed investigation may be warranted. They provide 
an  objective,  practical  starting  point  to  detect  the  buildup  of  imbalances  in  the  financial 
system. 
One early-warning indicator that we regularly track is the deviation of the aggregate private 
sector credit-to-GDP  ratio from  its trend  (the  credit-to-GDP gap),  which  serves  as  a  rough 
measure  of  excessive  leverage  across  the  financial  system  (Chart  1).  This  indicator  has 
been shown to provide some leading information as a predictor of banking crises, and has 
been proposed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) as a useful guide 
for  decisions  about  when  to  activate  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  –  an  important 
macroprudential policy instrument in the Basel III agreement.2  
Given the complexity of systemic risk, it is unrealistic to expect a single measure or indicator 
to  serve  all  purposes.  Combining  indicators  can  produce  better  signals  with  fewer  false 
alarms  and  undetected  crises.  For  example,  research  shows 
the 
that  combining 
                                                
2  See D. X. Chen and I. Christensen, “The Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffer: Insights for Canada.” Bank of 
Canada Financial System Review (December 2010): 29–34. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
credit-to-GDP gap with a measure of real estate prices produces an indicator that performs 
better than either variable on its own.3  
Our own work at the Bank reinforces findings elsewhere that aggregate private sector credit 
and real estate prices are among the most reliable indicators of financial stress. 
Identifying sources of risk is essential, but so is determining the likelihood that these risks will 
materialize. Therefore, another important aspect of ongoing research is the development of 
statistical models to help us forecast the probability that a crisis will occur based on a group 
of indicators.4  
Macro stress tests 
Early-warning indicators are useful to gauge the probability of financial stress, but a thorough 
assessment also requires an analysis of what could happen if the risk materializes. This is 
the goal of macro stress testing. 
A good part of the Bank’s efforts in recent years has been devoted to developing and refining 
stress-testing models. This class of models takes a large but plausible macroeconomic shock 
as a starting point and analyzes its impact on the balance sheets of banks or other sectors of 
the economy. 
The  Bank  now  has  two  main  stress-testing  models  to  help  monitor  risks  to  the  financial 
system.  These  models  can  also  be  used  to  assess  the  potential  impact  of  policy  tools  or 
regulatory actions in mitigating financial system risks. 
Assessing risks from elevated household debt 
The first, the Household Risk Assessment Model, or HRAM, is a microsimulation model that 
assesses how the debt burden of Canadian households can affect financial stability. Using 
microdata  from  household  balance  sheets,  the  model  allows  us  to  estimate  how  various 
shocks would affect the distribution of debt within the household sector. The simulations take 
into  account  changes  over  time  in  individual  debt  levels,  as  well  as  changes  in  household 
wealth from savings and fluctuations in the value of financial assets. Tracking the asset side 
of  household  balance  sheets  gives  us  a  more  accurate  picture  of  systemic  risk  since 
changes in wealth affect households’ ability to pay their debt. 
Household vulnerabilities depend not only on the average level of debt, but also on how debt 
is distributed across individuals. One strength of the model is precisely its ability to account 
for  this  distribution.  For  instance,  while  record-low  interest  rates  in  recent  years  have 
contributed to a relatively low aggregate household debt-service ratio, the share of Canadian 
households that are considered most vulnerable – those with a debt-service ratio equal to or 
higher than 40 per cent – has climbed to above-average levels, as has the proportion of debt 
held by these vulnerable households (Chart 2). 
Using HRAM, we estimate that if interest rates were to rise to 4.25 per cent by mid-2015, the 
share  of  highly  indebted  households  would  rise  from  slightly  above  6  per  cent  in  2011  to 
roughly 10 per cent by 2016, while the proportion of debt held by these households would 
rise from 11.5 per cent to about 20 per cent over the same period. 
So while the aggregate household debt-service ratio paints a somewhat rosy picture, taking 
into account distributions gives us a clearer and more cautionary indication of how vulnerable 
our financial system actually is to household debt. 
                                                
3  See C. Borio and M. Drehmann, “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises – Revisited,” BIS Quarterly Review 
(March 2009): 29–46. The Bank of Canada is also conducting research on approaches to combine indicators. 
4  For example, logit and probit models are used widely to calculate the probability of a crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Another strength of the model is that it provides a flexible tool for simulating the impact on 
household  solvency  of  a  wide  range  of  potential  shocks,  such  as  an  increase  in 
unemployment.  HRAM  indicates  that  household  loans  in  arrears  would  more  than  double 
under  a  severe  labour  market  shock  similar  to  that  observed  in  the  recession  of  the  early 
1990s. 
Despite  the  model’s  strengths,  we  continue  to  enhance  our  analysis  by  improving  HRAM. 
Expanding  the  behavioural  aspects  of  the  model  is  one  way  to  do  this.  For  instance,  the 
model currently allows distressed households to pay their debts by selling their liquid assets, 
but not their homes. Work is also under way to improve the design of the shock scenarios. 
Results  of  stress  tests  using  HRAM  are  regularly  reported  in  the  Bank’s  Financial  System 
Review  and  constitute  an  important  element  of  our  overall  assessment  of  the  risks 
associated with household finances. 
Assessing contagion effects in the banking system 
HRAM  provides  invaluable  information  on  vulnerabilities  in  the  household  sector,  but  the 
Bank is also interested in assessing risks more broadly within the Canadian financial system. 
To this end, we have been working for several years on developing a MacroFinancial Risk 
Assessment Framework (or MFRAF).5  
Drawing  on  detailed  data  from  bank  balance  sheets,  MFRAF  is  a  quantitative  model  that 
tracks the contribution of individual banks to systemic risk. Traditional stress-testing models 
focus exclusively on solvency risk, and estimate the overall risk to the financial system by 
simply aggregating credit (or other asset) losses that would materialize at individual banks in 
the  event  of  a  severe  shock.  MFRAF  goes  beyond  this  traditional  approach  by  taking  into 
account  linkages  among  banks  arising from  counterparty  exposures  –  or  network  spillover 
effects – as well as funding liquidity risk, that is, the risk of market-based runs on banks. 
The financial crisis illustrated the significant risks associated with a deterioration of funding 
liquidity. The collective reactions of market participants led to mutually reinforcing solvency 
and  liquidity  problems  at  banks  around  the  world.  As  funding  liquidity  evaporated,  many 
well-capitalized institutions had to take writedowns on illiquid assets, or sell them at a loss, 
creating uncertainty in the market about their solvency and adding to the downward pressure 
on asset prices. 
MFRAF has been built to integrate funding liquidity risk as an endogenous outcome of the 
interactions  between  solvency  concerns  and  the  liquidity  profiles  of  banks.  This  strong 
microeconomic  foundation  constitutes  a  major  innovation  in  macro  stress-testing  models. 
MFRAF also incorporates network externalities caused by the defaults of counterparties, with 
the size of a counterparty’s interbank exposures increasing the likelihood of spillover effects. 
A  key  lesson  from  the  model  is  that  failure  to  account  for  either  funding  liquidity  risk  or 
interbank  exposures  could  lead  to  significant  underestimation  of  the  risks  to  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole  if  the  banking  system  is  undercapitalized  and  relies  extensively  on  the 
short-term funding market.6 Importantly, the loss distributions generated by the model exhibit 
fat tails, a key feature of the actual distribution of financial system risks (Chart 3).7  
                                                
5  Work  on  MFRAF  started  in  2006,  ahead  of  the  2007  IMF-FSAP  exercise  for  Canada  which  involved  the 
assessment  of  the  Canadian  banking  sector  using  a  credit-risk  model  only.  The  analytical  foundation  of 
MFRAF is based on the work by S. Morris and H. S. Shin, “Illiquidity Component of Credit Risk,” Princeton 
University,  2009,  which  provides  a  theoretical  framework  for  roll-over  risk,  and  by  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale, 
“Financial  Contagion,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  108,  1  (2000):1–33,  which  explores  the  spread  of 
contagion in a banking network. 
6  This hypothetical banking system consists of six major banks whose main balance-sheet parameters (capital 
ratio level, reliance on short-term funding and holdings of liquid assets) are in line with those observed in 2007 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The fact that the model is able to replicate this important stylized fact demonstrates that it 
has significant potential as a tool for assessing systemic risk. Nevertheless, while MFRAF is 
already somewhat complex, the layers of interaction will need to be further augmented. For 
instance,  the  model  misses  any  negative  feedback  that  could  occur  between  heightened 
risks to the banking system and the real economy. The model could also be expanded over 
time to include other types of financial institutions and markets. 
Compared  with  other  approaches  that  use  market-based  data,  such  as  the  asset-pricing 
approach, the transmission channel in models like MFRAF is transparent, and this improves 
our interpretation of results. Because of this “story-telling” ability, many central banks have 
begun to use this type of framework in their financial stability analysis.8  
In  addition  to  assessing  risks,  MFRAF  can  be  used  to  examine  the  merits  of  policy  or 
regulatory initiatives such as capital and liquidity rules. As the model becomes more refined, 
the objective is to use it more to complement other existing macro stress-testing exercises 
and  to  sharpen  our  analysis  and  communication  of  risks  in  the  Bank’s  Financial  System 
Review. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The Bank of Canada is conducting extensive research into finding methodologies and tools 
to identify and measure systemic risk. 
While  work  in  this  area  is  extremely  complex,  the  Bank  has  made  substantial  progress  in 
recent  years.  We  now  have  two  state-of-the  art  models.  And  with  HRAM,  the  Bank  of 
Canada is one of the few central banks at the leading edge of using microsimulation models 
to assess vulnerabilities in the household sector. 
Our efforts to build these models have provided us with important lessons. 
First, distributions matter – we cannot rely solely on aggregate data: distributional features 
and  complex  interactions  are  very  important  for  assessing  risks.  This  means  developing 
models  that  capture  these  effects.  Our  household  simulation  model  is  aimed  directly  at 
understanding  how  the  distribution  of  debts,  assets  and  income  affects  financial  stability. 
MFRAF  uses  information  about  the  interconnections  of  individual  financial  institutions 
because these can lead to non-linear network effects that are also important for assessing 
systemic risks. 
Second, predicting behaviour under stress conditions is very difficult. Models need to be able 
to  handle  a  variety  of  “what-if”  scenarios  corresponding  to  different  assumptions  about 
behaviours under stress. 
Finally,  we  need  to  consider  the  many  different  sources  of  risk  to  the  financial  sector  and 
take into account their cumulative effects and interactions; otherwise we may underestimate 
risks. 
                                                                                                                                                   
for international banks that were bailed out during the crisis. See C. Gauthier and M. Souissi, “Understanding 
Systemic  Risk  in  the  Banking  Sector:  A  MacroFinancial  Risk  Assessment  Framework,”  Bank  of  Canada 
Review (Spring 2012): 29–38. 
7  See  A.  Haldane,  “Tails  of  the  Unexpected,”  speech  to  the  University  of  Edinburgh  Business  School, 
8 June 2012). 
8  See C. Borio and M. Drehmann, “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises - Revisited,” BIS Quarterly Review 
(March 2009): 29–46. Also see A. Foglia, “Stress Testing Credit Risk: A Survey of Authorities’ Approaches,” 
International Journal of Central Banking 5, no. 3 (2009): 9–45. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Obviously,  quantitative  measures  alone  will  never  be  enough  to  get  a  complete  picture, 
especially since the financial system evolves rapidly. Intelligence gathered from discussions 
with  the  financial  sector,  as  well  as  information  shared  with  other  policy-makers  and 
supervisors here in Canada and in the international community, will always be critical to the 
overall assessment of the risks. 
While we are making progress, it is important to remember that financial system modelling is 
still 
infancy.  The  goal  –  understanding,  preventing,  and  reducing  systemic 
|risk – deserves our attention, diligent research and hard work. 
It has been my pleasure to share some of the Bank’s efforts with you today. 
Thank you very much. 
its 
in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
