Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Asian markets at the crossroads 
Keynote address by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
OECD-ADBI 12th Roundtable on “Capital market reform in Asia”, Tokyo, 8 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
0. 
Good morning, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. I am delighted and honored to 
have the opportunity to deliver this keynote address at the OECD-ADBI 12th Roundtable in 
Tokyo. 
This Roundtable was established in 1999 immediately after the Asian Financial Crisis. It aims 
at  providing  an  opportunity  for  experts  who  have  a  wide  range  of  backgrounds,  including 
policymakers, and those working in financial industries and academia, to exchange frank and 
candid views on the development of Asian financial markets. Although it was unfortunately 
canceled last year owing to the Great East Japan Earthquake, it is my distinct pleasure to be 
invited this year once again. In this regard, I would like to convey my sincere appreciation to 
the  relevant  institutions,  including  the  OECD  and  the  ADBI,  for  their  enthusiastic efforts  to 
organize  this  valuable  event.  Moreover,  I  hope  our  most  welcome  guests,  taking  the 
opportunity to attend international conferences hosted in Japan, including this Roundtable, 
can experience firsthand the great progress Japan has made in recovering from the disaster. 
Financial markets in Asia: resiliencies and vulnerabilities 
1. 
How should we evaluate the development of Asian financial markets over the recent past? 
To answer this question, let me begin by summarizing the resiliencies and vulnerabilities of 
Asian economies and financial markets at this moment. 
Resiliencies 
As for the resiliencies, we can first point out the fact that Asian economies have achieved 
higher  growth  in  the  past  several  years  than  other  regions  of  the  world.  Current  accounts 
have  in  general  recorded  stable  surpluses  during  this  period  (Chart  1).  We  should  also 
commend  the  region’s  authorities  for  their  efforts  in  maintaining  the  relative  soundness  of 
their fiscal positions. Given these favorable economic conditions, some Asian jurisdictions, 
such as China, introduced prompt and large-scale fiscal stimulus measures, and contributed 
successfully to the recovery not only of the regional economy but also of the global economy 
as a whole. 
Asian economies have also enhanced their resilience to various financial shocks through the 
flexible introduction and implementation of a number of macroprudential measures, including 
changes in the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio and the debt-to-income (DTI) ratio. These measures 
have  contributed  favorably  to  the  stability  of  domestic  financial  systems,  as  well  as  the 
stability of prices of goods and services and financial assets. Moreover, they have introduced 
a number of regulatory measures, such as those relating to the foreign exchange positions 
held by financial institutions, the so-called financial levy, and the minimum holding period of 
bonds for nonresident investors. These measures have steadily taken effect since they were 
announced and introduced. 
Vulnerabilities 
On the other hand, there are also vulnerabilities in the region. First, there still remains the 
double-mismatch of currency and maturity in the banking sector (Chart 2). This problem was 
identified in the wake of the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997. When banks finance short-term 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
money  in  foreign  currencies,  swap  it  to  local  currency,  and  invest  in  long-term  domestic 
assets, they incur risks both in terms of currency and maturity. For some external reasons, if 
short-term  foreign  currency  funding  becomes  difficult  in  the  market,  banks  tend  to  face 
funding problems. Moreover, if their local currency depreciates significantly at the same time, 
they  also  encounter  an  increase  in  unhedged  foreign  currency  liabilities  in  terms  of  local 
currency, and eventually have to deal with the deterioration of their balance sheets. In fact, 
when Lehman Brothers collapsed, such vulnerability emerged in some Asian economies. 
Second,  in  the  Asian  region  including  Japan  to  some  extent,  the  financial  intermediation 
function has traditionally been served by indirect financing, mostly through banks (Chart 3). 
Although it has gradually declined in some jurisdictions in recent years, the reliance of firms 
on  indirect  financing  is  still  structurally  high.  Given  this  financing  structure,  when  a  large 
negative shock hits financial institutions, nonfinancial corporations are likely to find it hard to 
get  smooth  debt  financing  from  these  financial  institutions,  almost  regardless  of  these 
nonfinancial corporations’ financial soundness. 
Third, from a wider perspective, there is still the issue of scant investment opportunities in 
Asian local currencies. Abundant savings in Asia have not been invested sufficiently within 
the region, and have thus eventually been invested outside the region, such as in bonds in 
the United States and developed Europe. 
To  put  it  in  a  different  perspective,  the  Asian  financial  sector  remains  insufficient  both  in 
terms  of  its  variety  and  its  depth,  in  contrast  with  the  strength  of  its  non-financial  sectors, 
especially  manufacturing.  High  reliance  on  bank  finance  implies  the  underdevelopment  of 
regional bond markets. It is also often mentioned that the immature local derivatives market 
makes appropriate risk-taking transactions difficult, as risk-hedging instruments are limited. 
Moreover, owing to less-developed securitization markets in the region, Asian economies do 
not  sufficiently  enjoy  the  merits  of  the  securitization  schemes  that  attract  a  variety  of 
investors depending on their risk-taking capacities (Charts 4 and 5). 
Fourth,  meanwhile,  there  are  some  jurisdictions  in  Asia  that  rely  significantly  on  so-called 
micro-finance.  Micro-finance  is  indispensable  particularly  for  the  sustainable  growth  of 
emerging markets and developing economies, and as such has been a main agenda item of 
the  G-20.  However,  there  is  one  caveat.  The  main  agents  of  micro-finance  are  nonbank 
financial  institutions  that,  unlike  banks,  are  not  tightly  supervised  by  the  authorities,  but 
which,  like banks,  take  deposits  and  provide credit  to  customers.  This  means  that  it could 
become  a  risk  factor  in  the  financial  system,  if  the  market  share  of  loans  and  deposits  by 
micro-finance agents becomes non-negligible. 
2. 
Policy responses by the Asian authorities 
Current regional initiatives 
How have the Asian authorities responded to these vulnerabilities? Among many, I would like 
to  introduce  the  following  two  projects  that  have  been  particularly  effective  in  the  past  ten 
years.  
The  first  is  a  project  aimed  at  developing  liquid  bond  markets  to  bridge  abundant  local 
savings  and  local  investments.  The  Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central 
Banks, EMEAP, consisting of eleven central banks and monetary authorities in the region, 
established the Asian Bond Fund investment trust, and became the initial buyers by investing 
in sovereign and quasi-sovereign bonds in the eight member jurisdictions.1 Also, as part of 
                                                 
1  When  it  was  launched  in  2003,  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  was  limited  to  investment  only  in  U.S.  dollar-
denominated  bonds.  However,  since  2005,  the  Fund  has  begun  to  include  those  denominated  in  the  local 
currencies of the eight members, with the aim of raising awareness among private investors. Each listed fund 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  process  of  ASEAN+3,  the  authorities  have  launched  the  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative 
(ABMI).  Under  the  current  initiative,  there  are  four  main  issues  that  were  raised  and  have 
been  implemented  since  2008,  namely  i)  the  facilitation  of  demand  for  local  currency-
denominated bonds, ii) the promotion of their issuance, iii) the improvement of the regulatory 
framework,  and  iv)  the  improvement  of  the  relevant  infrastructure  for  the  bond  market.2 
Owing in part to these projects initiated by the regional authorities, the Asian bond market 
has developed steadily, although still not deep enough and varying across jurisdictions. 
The second is a project aimed at building a mutual framework of foreign currency liquidity 
provision in times of crisis, called the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI). The CMI started building a 
bilateral currency swap network in the region, which involves a contingent claim on foreign 
currency  reserves  held  by  each  ASEAN+3  authority.  The  CMI  has  since  enhanced  its 
effectiveness  by  increasing  its  size  and  the  number  of  participants.3  The  authorities  are 
discussing  expansion  of  the  scope  to  cover  crisis  prevention,  as  well  as  to  assess  the 
sufficiency of the size. 
To ensure the effective implementation of crisis prevention and liquidity support in times of 
crisis, it is essential for the authorities to monitor closely the regional economy and financial 
markets,  and  exchange  their  views  on  respective  macroeconomic  policies.  The  ASEAN+3 
authorities thus established their own but independent surveillance unit, called the ASEAN+3 
Macroeconomic  Research  Office  (AMRO),  in  Singapore  in  April  2011.  In  addition,  the  top-
level Finance Ministers’ Meeting will be expanded from 2012 to include the region’s central 
bank governors in the Finance Ministers’ and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting. 
Remaining challenges 
However, challenges remain. Although there have been improvements in some areas, as I 
have mentioned, I would like to raise the following five points. 
(1) To Solve Double-Mismatch of Currency and Maturity 
The first is about the double-mismatch of currency and maturity. This structural issue has not 
changed fundamentally in the past ten years. According to BIS statistics, cross-border credit 
denominated in local currencies from foreign banks to local residents has grown rapidly in 
the 2000s (Chart 2). However, their reliance on foreign currencies is still large. Fundamental 
vulnerability  continues  to  be  found  also  with  respect  to  maturity  mismatch,  although  the 
mismatch has reportedly been improving to some extent.4 
(2) To Change Bank-Centered Financial Structure and High Reliance on Foreign Institutions 
Second,  the  bank-centered  structure  of  the  financial  intermediary  function  also  remains 
basically  unchanged.  Moreover,  Asian  region’s  funding  relies  heavily  on  foreign  financial 
                                                                                                                                                      
has steadily been recognized by investors, although the extent of this recognition varies across the markets. 
Moreover,  the  Fund  has  been  functioning  as  a  catalyst  for  improving  market  infrastructure,  such  as 
deregulation  and  exemption  of  withholding  taxes  for  nonresident  investors,  through  its  reviewing  process 
among the EMEAP members. 
3 
2  The most notable recent achievement of the ABMI is the establishment in November 2010 of a trust fund in 
the  ADB,  called  the  Credit  Guarantee  and  Investment  Facility  (CGIF).  The  CGIF  plans  to  start  its  credit 
guarantee operations for local currency-denominated corporate bonds issued in the ASEAN+3 jurisdictions in 
the first half of 2012. 
In  2010,  the  authorities  evolved  the  CMI  framework  from  its  original  bilateral  swap  arrangements  to  the 
multilateral Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM), which is a collective decision-making framework 
signed by all member jurisdictions in the single contract. 
In the BIS statistics on cross-border credit outstanding by maturity, it is not evident that borrowing of less than 
one-year maturity has been decreasing. However, the authorities report the considerable reduction in those of 
very short-term maturities. 
4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
institutions. For example, in the areas of project finance and trade finance, the Asian region 
has continued to depend considerably on foreign financial institutions, particularly European 
banks. In fact, in the wake of the European sovereign debt problem, net capital outflows were 
observed from August to December last year, except in October. Recent data suggests that 
capital  flows  returned  to  the  region  in  January.  As  such,  Asian  financial  markets  have 
suffered from high volatility caused by the development of global capital flows, which is more 
or less the same problem they experienced in the Asian Financial Crisis. The background to 
this is that the market infrastructures, such as those of bond markets, remain less developed. 
Although the Asian bond market has certainly been developing as I mentioned earlier, the 
corporate bond market, in particular, remains limited in its depth and liquidity.5 
(3) To Develop Collateralized Transactions Markets 
Third, let me emphasize the importance of collateralized transactions markets, including the 
repurchase agreement of securities, in order to develop deep and resilient financial markets. 
Short of a full blown crisis, but still relatively strained conditions such as found in the current 
European debt problem, market participants tend to prefer collateralized to uncollateralized 
transactions,  when  counterparty  risks  are  strongly  recognized  among  them.  This  indicates 
the  utmost  importance  of  having  a  solid  market  foundation  of  eligible  bond  transactions  in 
order  to  secure  stable  financial  transactions,  regardless  of  rain  or  shine  in  financial 
conditions. In this regard, the cross-border collateral arrangement (CBCA) made between the 
Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Bank  of  Thailand  in  November  last  year  has  the  potential  to  be 
expanded  throughout  Asia.  In  fact,  at  almost  the  same  time,  a  CBCA  was  announced 
between  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore.  Meanwhile, 
the EMEAP formed an action group, and has been discussing the promotion of CBCAs within 
the region. 
(4) To Foster Financial Innovation 
The  fourth  challenge  is  to  develop  innovative  financial  products,  appropriate  for  an  aging 
population in the region. In Asia, the population is aging at a steady but faster pace, not only 
in  Japan  but  also  in  other  economies  such  as  China,  Korea,  and  Thailand  (Chart  6). 
Financial  innovation  is  therefore  essential  to  offer  a  flexible  variety  of  enhanced  financial 
products appropriate to the particular stage in the life cycle of the population. In this regard, 
the  development  of  securitization  seems  a  key  factor.  I  recognize  that  securitization, 
especially in its complex forms, has suffered from a negative image since the Lehman shock. 
However, simple, plain-vanilla type securitization products may contribute to the realization of 
appropriate risk-adjusted returns on financial transactions including lending, leading to more 
active  operations  of  financial  institutions.  Moreover,  as  the  credit  intermediary  channel 
becomes multi-layered to complement conventional lending, the risk tolerance of the financial 
system  would  be  enhanced  through  risk  diversification.  Thus,  it  is  important  to  “reinstall” 
useful securitization technologies into the system. 
In  this  regard,  let  me  mention,  for  example,  Asset-Based  Lending  (ABL),  which  is 
collateralized lending based on business assets held by firms. By utilizing effectively a variety 
of their assets, firms do not have to rely on conventional real estate collaterals and personal 
credit  guarantees  when  borrowing.  ABL  is  particularly  useful  in  providing  opportunities  for 
firms at different stages in their life cycles, such as during start-up, business expansion, and 
business transformation, when it is difficult to obtain sufficient financing through conventional 
                                                 
5 
In Japan, although the amount outstanding of corporate bonds has been increasing, the market size continues 
to be limited compared to that of government bonds, and  we have to admit that the market liquidity is low. 
There are also a limited number of issuances of corporate bonds with non-investment grades, which has long 
been an issue in Japan. Against this background, market participants established the “Forum on the Activation 
of  Corporate  Bond  Market”,  and  have  been  discussing  a  number  of  ways  in  which  the  market  may  be 
improved. Moreover, as the issuance of securitized products has stagnated since its peak in fiscal year 2006, 
we need to revitalize the securitization market as well. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
bank borrowings. ABL may thus lead to the enhancement of the surveillance capacities of 
financial  institutions  through  the  necessity  of  continuous  monitoring  of  such  firms.  The 
promotion  of  this  kind  of  ABL  could  contribute  to  the  enhancement  of  economic  growth 
potential, and I believe it is a useful scheme also for Asia in the future. In this regard, the 
Bank  of  Japan  established  the  “Special  Rules  for  Equity  Investments  and  Asset-Based 
Lending to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure”, which has been in effect since summer 
2010.  The  special  rules  were  established  with  the  aim  of  further  enhancing  financial 
institutions’ efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth through the use of a 
wider range of financial techniques. 
(5) To Enhance Financial Inclusion 
The fifth challenge is financial inclusion. From the perspective of developing deep financial 
markets, it is also important to improve infrastructures so that more of the world’s population 
has access to financial services. There are reportedly more than 2.5 billion adults who are 
excluded from accessing financial services, and also tens of millions of small enterprises that 
are  facing  serious  financing  problems.  Financial  inclusion  is  a  project  with  the  aim  of 
resolving  the  problem  of  inaccessibility  to  fundamental  financial  services.  The  project  is 
expected to improve the lives of underprivileged people, and provide fundamental financial 
support  to  small  enterprises,  leading  to  the  realization  of  sustainable  economic  growth 
through the increase in personal consumption and the creation of job opportunities. As the 
European debt problem gets worse and uncertainties grow in the global economy, financial 
inclusion  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  improving  the  welfare  of  emerging  markets  and 
developing  economies  with  high  growth  potentials,  and  thus  in  ensuring  global  economic 
stability (Chart 7). 
Financial inclusion has been discussed in the framework of international forums such as the 
G-20  and  APEC.  Meanwhile,  in  the  area  of  financial  education,  closely  related  to  financial 
inclusion, the OECD has introduced valuable initiatives to enhance global cooperation by, for 
example,  publishing  the  report,  “Recommendation  on  Principles  and  Good  Practices  for 
Financial  Education  and  Awareness”  in  2005,  and  also  by  establishing  the  International 
Network  on  Financial  Education.  I  support  wholeheartedly  further  development  of  these 
initiatives,  as  financial  education,  like  financial  inclusion,  is essential  for  the  stability  of  the 
global financial system, and thus for sustainable growth of the global economy. 
Financial internationalization 
3. 
Next, I would also like to express my views on financial internationalization, especially, the 
recent  development  of  “renminbi  internationalization”,  one  of  the  agenda  items  of  this 
Roundtable. 
Generally  speaking,  the  internationalization  of  a  currency  indicates  that  its  settlement, 
calculation,  and  value-storage  functions  have  expanded  beyond  a  certain  jurisdiction.  To 
maintain  these  functions,  it  is  assumed  that  capital  movements  are  liberalized,  and 
international customs such as commercial contracts are adhered to. In other words, if these 
fundamental  conditions  are  breached,  or  altered  artificially  or  politically,  true  financial 
internationalization cannot be realized. 
New kid on the block – renminbi on the rise 
From this point of view, let me take a look at the recent development of so-called renminbi 
internationalization. In recent years, we have observed an increase in reminbi-denominated 
trade settlements, the establishment of an offshore renminbi market, and the expansion of 
renminbi-denominated financial products in Hong Kong. In addition, some central banks and 
monetary  authorities  in  emerging  markets  and  developing  economies  have  recently 
announced  the  inclusion  of  the  renminbi  in  their  foreign  currency  reserves.  As  such,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
renminbi has been used increasingly in cross-border financial transactions, attracting greater 
attention from all over the world. 
China  began  taking  steps  towards  currency  internationalization  in  order  to  improve  the 
renminbi’s  settlement  function.  The  Chinese  authorities  intended  to  reduce  Chinese  firms’ 
excessive reliance on the U.S. dollar in their trade settlements, and to mitigate the foreign 
exchange risks of huge U.S. dollar holdings in the corporate and government sectors, as the 
impact of the Lehman shock spread throughout the global financial system. 
Cross-border trade settlements in renminbi first started in July 2009 as a trial across a limited 
region,  namely  between  365  designated  firms  in  the  city  of  Shanghai  and  four  cities  of 
Canton Prefecture and ASEAN, Hong Kong, and Macau. The amount has since expanded to 
record just under RMB 600 billion (about JPY 7 trillion) in the third quarter of 2011 (Chart 8). 
However,  the  development  intended  by  China  means  simply  that  we  can  use  renminbi  for 
cross-border financial transactions that used to be settled only in foreign currencies. It should 
be  kept  in  mind  that  the  development  has  not  contributed  significantly  to  the  mitigation  of 
capital regulations. While the volume of renminbi has increased in offshore markets as it is 
employed  in  cross-border  trade  settlements,  there  remains  very  limited  room  for  offshore 
renminbi to flow back to the mainland under the current strict capital regulations imposed by 
the  Chinese  authorities.  For  this  reason,  there  has  been  a  growing  need  for  developing 
offshore  renminbi  markets  to  meet  the  demand  of  agents  who  hold  renminbi  outside  the 
mainland and wish to invest them in the market. In fact, the Hong Kong offshore market has 
been playing a major role in absorbing such offshore renminbi liquidity. 
It  would  be  implausible  to  assume  that  renminbi  “internationalization”  will  be  further 
developed without significant capital-flow deregulation. In fact, the current strict regulations 
on  capital  inflows  to  the  mainland  have  gradually  become  an  obstacle  to  the  further 
development of offshore renminbi markets themselves. The need for issuance of renminbi-
denominated bonds, so-called dim-sum bonds, is after all limited. In the Hong Kong renminbi 
offshore market, the amount outstanding of issuance of dim-sum bonds is currently around 
RMB 70  billion,  which  is  much  smaller  than  renminbi-denominated  deposits  of  about 
RMB 600 billion. If China wishes to promote further the internationalization of the renminbi, it 
may be necessary to address the issue of capital account liberalization. 
Future synergy between renminbi and yen 
Nevertheless, the renminbi has steadily and increasingly been used in settlements outside 
the  mainland.  Depending  on  developments  in  the  liberalization  of  capital  transactions,  the 
presence  of  the  renminbi  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  Asian  region.  Against  this 
background,  what  do  we  think  about  the  status  of  the  Japanese  yen?  The  yen  is  used 
internationally  as  a  currency  that  is  always  tradable  and  has  a  well-established  settlement 
infrastructure, in line with the U.S. dollar, euro, and British pound. Meanwhile, the amount of 
trade  between  Japan  and  China,  the  two  economic  giants  in  Asia,  has  expanded  by 
2.5 times since 2001, reaching about JPY 26.5 trillion in 2010. During the same period, the 
number of firms that have extended their operations from Japan to China has increased by 
1.5 times to about 22,000. However, the amount of trade settlements denominated in either 
yen or renminbi is very limited. Taking into consideration the long and profound ties between 
the  two  countries,  as  well  as  their  importance  to  Asian  regional  trade,  mitigating  foreign 
exchange risks incurred by exporters and importers, and reducing their transaction costs, by 
promoting  trade  settlements  denominated  in  both  currencies  would  have  considerable 
significance (Chart 9). 
Currently,  the  U.S.  dollar  is  generally  used  as  the  intermediary  currency  when  conducting 
currency transactions between yen and renminbi on foreign exchange markets. As a result, 
the price of the yen and renminbi is determined by the cross-currency rate of yen-U.S. dollar 
and  renminbi-U.S.  dollar,  thereby  requiring  U.S.  dollar  settlements.  If  a  direct  exchange 
market between the yen and renminbi is developed and has a certain degree of liquidity, one 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
benefit  will be  a  reduction  in  transaction  costs, as  the  price  will  be set directly  without  the 
U.S. dollar as intermediary. Moreover, without settlements in U.S. dollars, there is also the 
merit  of  a  reduction  in  currency  settlement  risks  for  financial  institutions.  As  such,  the 
development of financial and foreign exchange markets denominated in yen and renminbi is 
an important issue for financial stability, not only for Japan and China but also for the rest of 
Asia (Chart 10).6 
I  believe  the  yen  and  Japanese  government  bonds  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  the 
process of developing financial and foreign exchange markets in Japan and China, and thus 
in  the  whole  Asian  region.  For  example,  to  develop  highly-liquid  and  deep  bond  markets, 
price transparency in the market is indispensable, as is a stable risk-free yield curve as the 
basis for pricing. The improved market-based function of interest rates formation is also an 
essential  factor  for  the  development  of  risky  product  markets,  including  corporate  bond 
markets, as well as for determining appropriate foreign exchange rates that reflect economic 
fundamentals. In Europe, German government bonds function as a benchmark not only for 
financial products in Germany but also for fixed income products traded in the rest of Europe. 
Currently in Asia, I believe Japanese government bonds are a leading candidate to act as 
such  a  benchmark,  as  they  are  always  stably  priced,  and  promptly  traded  and  settled. 
Moreover, their issuance volume is large enough, and their credit rating is reasonably high. 
In Japan, we have strived to improve the financial infrastructure, including the payment and 
settlement system. As you know, the issuance of Japanese government bonds is the largest 
in the world, and there exists a well-developed local currency-denominated bond market. The 
Bank  of  Japan  operates  the  payment  and  settlement  system  for  Japanese  government 
bonds, and has worked continuously over the past more than ten years to improve market 
functions.  As  a  result,  the  Japanese  government  bond  market  has  maintained  its  high 
liquidity. In this regard, please allow me to repeat the importance of promoting cross-border 
collateral  arrangements  between  other  Asian  neighbors,  with  the  use  of  such  highly-liquid 
Japanese government bonds as an effective means. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
I have so far explained the current assessments on Asian economies and financial markets 
and the relevant developments in the region’s financial internationalization. Now, let me wrap 
up  by  summarizing  my  views  once  again  on  the  points  that  are  crucial  for  Asia’s  future 
development. 
A balance between domestic and external demands 
The growth  in Asian economies since the 1970s has been driven mainly by exports. As a 
dividend  of  successful  economic  growth,  the  increasing  numbers  of  people  in  the  middle 
income class have contributed significantly to the steady increase in domestic demand since 
the  mid-2000s,  thereby  leading  current  global  economic  growth.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
undeniable that the region remains vulnerable to external shocks through the trade channel, 
as  evidenced  by  the  Lehman  shock.  As  population  pyramids  change  and  the  region’s 
                                                 
6  To support the growing economic ties between Japan and China, the leaders of Japan and China agreed on 
December  25  last  year  to  enhance  financial  transactions  between  the  two  countries,  specifically  through 
promoting  the  use  of  the  yen  and  renminbi  in  cross-border  transactions  between  the  two  countries,  and  in 
support for the development of direct exchange markets between the two currencies. These agreed areas will 
be  mutually  promoted  by  establishing  the  “Joint  Working  Group  for  Development  of  Japan-China  Financial 
Markets”.  Meanwhile,  the  global  community  has  also  begun  to  pay  attention  to  developments  in  “renminbi 
internationalization”.  For  example,  on  January  16  this  year,  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  HM 
Treasury of the United Kingdom announced the establishment of a forum with the aim of mutually promoting 
offshore renminbi operations between Hong Kong and London. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
economies develop, Asia needs to be vigilant in isolating the potential contagious effects of 
external shocks, such as the deleveraging of assets by European banks, through a steady 
transition to an economy driven also by domestic demand. 
Further development in local bond markets 
To  increase  resilience  against  external  shocks  and  reduce  volatility  in  asset  prices,  it  is 
important to develop deep local capital markets and enhance their functions and resistance 
to  the  influences  of  capital  flows  in  the  region  as  a  whole.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  higher 
volatility in Asian stocks and bonds causes higher volatility in their currencies. Volatile asset 
price leads to an unstable financial system, and is thus an obstacle to sustainable economic 
growth. What is important in the region is to enhance the market capacity for receiving capital 
flows, or in other words, to dramatically improve the situation of being “a big fish in a small 
pond”. 
Regional financial cooperation and collaboration 
It is essential for each jurisdiction to harmonize its market regulations and practices with the 
global  standards  in  promoting  cross-border  transactions.  However,  unilateral  effort  by  a 
single jurisdiction has its limitations. Collective effort is also needed to build the investment 
foundations by actively utilizing regional forums, such as ASEAN+3 and EMEAP, to create a 
regional  investment  class.  While  respecting  diversity  across  jurisdictions,  we  should  not 
introduce arbitrary regulations or ignore global contractual practices. 
Needless to say, we cannot completely prevent financial crises. However, we can improve 
our  resiliency  in  times  of  crisis  by  preparing  multi-layered  safety  nets  as  backstops  in  the 
financial  system.  Such  safety  nets  include  the  development  of  deep  and  liquid  capital 
markets,  the  establishment  of  currency  swap  networks,  and  cross-border  collateral 
arrangements  that  provide  local  currency  liquidity  by  accepting  foreign  currency  assets  as 
eligible collateral. 
It is often said that Asia is the region with the widest variety of cultures, social structures, and 
developmental stages. As traditional financial theory tells us, the appropriate combination of 
these diversities offers welfare gains. In the process of deepening the mutual ties between 
Asian  economies,  improvements  in  market  function  through  regional  financial  cooperation 
will provide better investment opportunities for households, firms, and financial institutions, 
and  thus  contribute  to  more  effective  resource  allocation  in  the  region.  The  activities  of 
ASEAN+3  and  EMEAP,  particularly  their  resolute  efforts  since  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis, 
have  proven  that  financial  cooperation  based  on  mutual  understanding  and  respect  will 
always enable us to find effective measures in any circumstances. The Bank of Japan would 
like to continue contributing to the development of Asian financial markets, through its active 
participation in the initiatives of regional financial cooperation and collaboration. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 