Ewart S Williams: Victor E Bruce – a pioneer of Trinidad and Tobago's 
financial development 
Tribute by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the 
opening of the Victor E Bruce Financial Complex, Port-of-Spain, 18 June 2012. 
 I am honoured to be part of this very significant naming ceremony and I would like to thank 
the Tobago House of Assembly for inviting me to say a few words about my predecessor and 
the “father” of our Central Bank, Victor Edward Bruce, in whose honour this building is being 
dedicated.  
There is a certain irony to this ceremony taking place at this time and in this place – Tobago. 
You see, just before his retirement in 1984, Victor Bruce was the main driver of the Project to 
construct  the  financial  complex  in  Port  of  Spain.  As  it  turned  out,  the  complex  which  was 
completed in 1987, was named in honour of another national icon, Dr. Eric Eustace Williams, 
our  first  Prime  Minister.  Naming  the  financial  complex  in  Tobago  after  Victor  Bruce  is 
therefore a well-deserved, even if a belated recognition.  
I would like to congratulate the THA on its decision to name this beautiful complex in honour 
of  the  first  local  Governor  of  our  Central  Bank,  a  true  pioneer  of  our  country’s  financial 
development.  To  me  this  initiative,  coming  on  the  heels  of  the  renaming  of  the  ANR 
Robinson  International  Airport,  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  our  newfound  commitment  to 
recognise and to pay tribute, to those who have made exceptional contributions to our 
society.  
Naming  places  and  buildings  after  our  heroes  have  the  effect  of  reminding  us,  in  tangible 
terms, that we are part of something much larger than ourselves. It also serves to promote a 
sense  of  community  and  social  continuity  –  critical  elements  in  the  maturation  of  a 
people.  
Victor  Bruce  was  first  and  foremost,  a  Tobagonian  and  a  proud  and  distinguished 
Tobagonian.  But,  in  a  fundamental  sense,  he  was  much  more  than  that.  Sir  Courtenay 
Blackman,  former  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  and  one  of  Victor’s  close 
collaborators, in a tribute to Victor’s memory, opined that Victor Bruce did not belong only to 
Tobago or even to Trinidad and Tobago but was a citizen of the world.  
In  Governor  Blackman’s  view,  Bruce  had  talent  so  great,  networking  connections  so  vast, 
and a capacity for service so tremendous that he could not be contained within the confines 
of his native land. It was thus not surprising that his last days were spent in the service of 
Africa.  
Victor Bruce’s illustrious career was launched not from a platform of privilege and wealth but 
from humble beginnings in Tobago.  
Following his early education at Bishop’s High School, Victor Bruce joined the civil service 
and continued his education the hard way through evening classes, before going on study 
leave to the London School of Economics. On his return to Trinidad and Tobago, he worked 
at the Central Statistical Office before being appointed Director of Personnel Administration 
and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Tobago Affairs in 1963. It was soon after, Tobago had 
been  devastated  by  Hurricane  Flora  and  Bruce’s  assignment  was  to  oversee  the 
rehabilitation of the island’s damaged economy. 
Bruce’s success at this assignment earned him his next appointment as Deputy Governor 
of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, on January 01, 1966. This was a little more 
than a year after the Central Bank was established in 1964 and it was a time when the post 
of Governor was reserved for an expatriate, under technical assistance provided by the IMF.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In 1969, Victor Bruce broke this mould when he was appointed the first local Central Bank 
Governor.  
In his fifteen years at the helm, Victor Bruce proceeded to establish the Bank as arguably 
the  most  efficient  public  sector  institution  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  Under  Bruce,  the  Bank 
became  an  important  player  in  the  economic  life  of  our  nation  as  well  as  an  active  and 
respected participant in regional and international economic fora.  
Victor  Bruce  remains  the  longest  serving  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago.  He  was  the  Dean  of  the  Central  Bank  Governors  of  the  Caribbean  and  Latin 
America  and,  for  years,  was  the  region’s  spokesman  in  the  main  international  monetary 
organizations – the G-20 and G-77.  
As the first local Central Bank Governor, Victor Bruce played a critical role in:  
• 
steering  the  banking  system  through  localisation,  and  the  political  turmoil  of  the 
1970s;  
managing the break with the pound sterling and the shift of the country’s peg to the 
US dollar;  
widening  the  network  of  commercial  bank  branches  to  allow  easier  access  to 
banking services; and  
the creation of a number of capital market institutions, most notably, the Trinidad 
and Tobago Stock Exchange, the Unit Trust Corporation and the Home  Mortgage 
Bank.  
   The  key  to  Victor  Bruce’s  phenomenal  success  was  his  uncompromising  commitment  to 
excellence.  He  demanded  the  highest  standard  of  performance.  Shoddy  work  was 
unacceptable, as was shoddy conduct. Bruce believed that central banks were, by definition, 
elite organizations in which style and substance were inseparable. He believed strongly that 
the  Central  Bank  had  a  sacred  responsibility  to  the  people  and  should  be  free  of  political 
influence  
Victor Bruce, the person was un-rivalled. Blessed with dignified bearing, he seemed to be 
naturally  cut  out  for  leadership.  His  was  a  commanding  presence.  He  was  self  assured, 
positive  in  approach,  and  a  consummate  diplomat.  Renown  for  unquestioned  integrity  and 
exceptional  executive  skill,  Victor  Bruce  was  the  person  first  sought  after,  for  any  difficult 
assignment ...and he always delivered.  
Ever  mindful  of  his  humble  origins,  he  was  compassionate  and  most  attentive  to  the 
problems of the disadvantaged.  
For his contribution to public service, Victor Bruce was awarded the Humming Bird Medal in 
1969 and the Trinity Cross in 1980 then the nation’s highest honour.  
Victor Bruce also found time to involve himself in the community through sport, the Rotary 
and the Church.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dedicating this complex to the memory of Victor E Bruce is a fitting 
testimony to his pioneering presence and his considerable contribution to our financial sector 
and to public service.  
I  would  hope  that  this  Victor  E  Bruce  Financial  Complex  serve  as  an  inspiration  to  young 
Tobagonians,  reminding  them  that  they  too  are  capable  of  achieving  the  kind  of  personal 
growth that Victor Bruce achieved by using the same keys of success – personal discipline; a 
commitment to excellence; and a willingness to work hard to achieve one’s goals.  
Honorable Chief Secretary, I thank you sincerely for giving me the honour to participate in 
this most deserving tribute to a great Tobagonian, a true national icon and one who paved 
the way for many to follow. All the central bank governors that succeeded Victor owe him a 
tremendous debt of gratitude for the respect and the dignity with which he imbued the Office.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I hope that the naming of your main financial complex after Victor Bruce will spur all those 
who  work  within  to  the  highest  standards  of  performance,  public  service  and  integrity  for 
these were the things that Victor stood for. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
