DeLisle Worrell: Changes impacting Barbados’ competitive market 
position 
Remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the opening of 
the International Business and Financial Sector Conference, Bridgetown, 15 March 2012. 
 This conference takes place at an extremely challenging time for the international business 
and financial sector (IBFS). In addition to the adverse effects of ongoing global uncertainty, 
we have to cope with swiftly changing international regulatory guidance, and with changes in 
law and practices abroad that may affect Barbados’ competitive position in the market. We 
have had to confront major changes in the IBFS sector before, and we will overcome them 
on this occasion, just as we have done in the past. To achieve this, we must be proactive, 
both in the public and private sectors. 
We are already embarked on the process of strengthening our framework of regulation of the 
financial  sector,  to  ensure  that  it  stays  abreast  of  the  most  current  guidance  and  best 
practices. The Central Bank is coordinating an exercise which will lead to a comprehensive 
review,  via  an  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP),  to  be 
conducted next year. We, the regulators, will work together with you to ensure that the FSAP 
certifies us as being on par with the foremost international financial centres worldwide. This 
year is devoted to perfecting our systems and legislation, so that we can do our own self-
assessment. As always, any changes will be fully ventilated and discussed with you. Some of 
you  will  have  participated  in  previous  FSAPs,  and  you  know  that  when  the  assessment 
teams come to visit, they will interview a sample of financial institutions, to have your views. 
Please communicate with us now on things that we need to address, so that next year you 
will be able to affirm that we are up to best international standards in every way. 
It is vital that we track all aspects of international developments affecting the IBFS sector. To 
this end, the Central Bank last month launched a quarterly electronic newsletter, available on 
our website. I urge you to take a look, if you have not done so already, and to look out for 
forthcoming  issues  in  May,  August  and  November.  The  newsletter  aims  to  facilitate 
networking, and we welcome your contributions and reactions to the material. The February 
issue  deals  with  Caribbean  involvement  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  body 
overseeing  international  financial  reform;  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  Anti  money 
laundering  (AML),  a  proposal  for  a  new  international  IFC  forum,  tax  information  exchange 
agreements  (TIEAs)  and  Double  Taxation  Agreements  (DTAs)  and  legislation.  The  briefs 
which  appear  in  the  newsletter  are,  as  you  will  see,  contributed  by  your  colleagues  in  the 
industry, as well as by officials. We urge you to submit your own views and information, in 
reaction to what you read in the newsletter, as well as original material. 
The  dialogue  which  this  conference  permits  is  very  important  in  helping  to  craft  fruitful 
responses  to  the  changing  international  environment.  We  the  regulators  need  to  be 
continuously updated on the opportunities and interests that you the active agents see for 
yourselves, and the mechanisms that will facilitate your activities. You all need to understand 
the  requirements  for  maintaining  a  first  class  financial  centre,  so  that  you  can  plan  your 
strategies  accordingly.  In  the  end,  both  sides  have  the  same  objective,  to  cement  the 
international  reputation  of  Barbados’  financial  centre  by  attracting  only  the  best  run 
companies to our shores. 
We  welcome  you  all  to  this  second  annual  IBFS  conference.  We  have  an  agenda  that  is 
focussed on the issues that are most current, and we have an opportunity here to continue 
our public-private sector dialogue on the way forward. We have the collective will, and today 
we expect to further dialogue and investigate the ways by which we can further expand the 
IBFS sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
