Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Developments in Spain 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Senate  Budget  Committee  in  relation  to  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2012,  Madrid, 
30 May 2012. 
 last  year,  spreading 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee at a vitally important juncture for our country. A severe crisis 
continues to assail the Spanish economy, making it a centre of attention not only for the euro 
area  countries,  but  probably  for  the  world  economy.  Against  this  background,  the  2012 
Budget  is  a  key  instrument  for  shoring  up  the  credibility  of  our  public  finances  and  our 
economic policy in general, and for restoring confidence in our economy.  
The seriousness of the current situation is inextricably linked to the European sovereign debt 
crisis,  which  worsened 
to  countries  with  sounder  economic 
fundamentals  than  those  initially  affected.  The  depth  of  the  crisis  and  the  difficulties  in 
overcoming  it  can  be  attributed  to  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  built  up  by  various 
economies,  imbalances  that  reached  an  excessive  scale  owing,  perhaps,  to  the  apparent 
protection  afforded  by  the  Monetary  Union.  But  the  current  critical  situation  may  not  be 
understood  without  considering  a  European  element  relating  to  the  absence  of  suitable 
mechanisms  within  the  Union  to  tackle  problems  on  this  scale  and  to  the  difficulties  of 
shaping a strategy enabling them to be corrected in an orderly manner.  
The depth of Spain’s problems, along with the lack of a suitable European response, has led 
moreover  to  the  crisis  becoming  systemic,  acutely  affecting  countries  with  problems  of  a 
different nature and magnitude.  
True,  there  has  been  some  progress  in  European  governance  in  recent  years,  with  the 
strengthening of procedures already in place, the design of new macroeconomic surveillance 
procedures and the implementation of new Treaties. These treaties include that establishing 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  and 
the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and 
Governance in the euro area, which makes provision for the so-called Fiscal Compact. But 
this progress has not been sufficient to stabilise the situation, partly due to the lack of broad 
consensus that is apparent in the stance and statements of different European authorities.  
In  these  circumstances,  action  by  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  key  to  easing  the 
moments  of  greatest  tension  and  extending  the  time  available  to  adopt  the  necessary 
measures  in  other  economic  policy  areas.  Evidently,  the  ECB  cannot  resolve  the  serious 
underlying problems of this crisis, be they national or related to the European architecture. It 
can only address some of the manifestations of these problems, in particular those reflected 
in  financial  markets,  with  a  view  to  smoothing  the  way  so  that  governments  can  take  the 
corresponding measures.  
Spain is a clear example of an economy in which Eurosystem action has overcome critical 
situations  and  has  provided  the  time  needed  to  set  in  train  ambitious  reforms  in  various 
areas.  Significantly,  this  reforming  drive  has  in  no  way  been  slowed  by  the  fact  that  the 
Eurosystem  has  taken  specific  measures,  such  as  the  three-year  long-term  refinancing 
operations. In the specific case of the ongoing clean-up, restructuring and recapitalisation of 
the Spanish credit system, this process has intensified, to adapt to a new set of increasingly 
worse  economic  and  financing  conditions,  by  imposing  stricter  capital  and  real  estate 
provisioning requirements on banks.  
Of  the  recently  adopted  structural  reforms,  I  would  underline  the  importance  of  the  labour 
market reform. This is an area where Spain had built up evident inefficiencies that have now 
been tackled to some extent by the new legislation. The essential role of employment in any 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
scenario for exiting the crisis should also be highlighted, since only with a recovery in jobs 
can  a  stable  path  of  public  finances,  a  reduction  in  private  debt  and  bank  restructuring 
become entrenched.  
The labour market reform is intended to provide companies with various means to achieve 
greater  internal  flexibility,  so  that  they  may  adapt  working  conditions  more  rapidly  and 
effectively  to  their  position  in  the  cycle.  In  this  respect,  it  allows  the  decentralisation  of 
collective  bargaining  and  shapes  an  environment  more  conducive  to  job  creation  and  job 
stability,  once  the  current  difficult  circumstances  have  been  overcome.  Overall,  these 
changes should in time bring about a recovery in the competitiveness of Spanish companies.  
It  is  very  important  that  the  reform  should  be  accompanied  by  measures  that  improve  the 
competitive environment in which companies take decisions, promoting the liberalisation of 
activities where there are still obstacles to competition.  
But let me move on to the main part of my testimony: the examination of Spanish budgetary 
policy. I said at the outset that Spain is the centre of attention for the international economic 
community.  This  is  because  we  face  a  particularly  complex  situation,  where  there  is  an 
overlap between various adjustment processes and imbalances, generated following a long 
upturn.  Possibly,  Spanish  fiscal  policy  was  not  the  source  of  the  current  difficulties.  But 
clearly, overcoming these problems will require us to swiftly move public finances towards a 
path of stability, as this is crucial for restoring agents’ confidence and reducing uncertainty 
about the economic outlook.  
As you know, following the recent revision, the budget deficit ended 2011 at 8.9% of GDP, a 
long  way  off  the  6%  target  set  in  the  previous  Stability  Programme.  The  public  debt/GDP 
ratio stood at end-2011 at 68.5%, more than 30 pp above the 2007 figure. The deficit targets 
have been set at 5.3% of GDP for 2012 and at 3% for 2013. If these targets are met, the 
public debt/GDP ratio would stabilise in 2014, albeit at a level somewhat higher than 80%.  
The  consolidation  involved  in  meeting  these  fiscal  targets  will  be  tremendously  hard  to 
achieve.  Events  in  2011  show  the  difficulties  of  reducing  the  budget  deficit  at  times  of 
economic  weakness.  And  they  highlight  the  need  to  improve  budgetary  monitoring,  early 
warning  and  control  procedures,  especially  in  a  country  such  as  Spain  with  highly 
decentralised public finances.  
A  realistic  macroeconomic  scenario  is  the  starting  point  for  achieving  budgetary  targets. 
Here, as you know, the Spanish economy has double-dipped, with GDP declining by 0.3% in 
both the final quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of 2012. And the outlook for the coming 
months is not favourable either. 
In terms of composition, the pattern of economic activity observed in recent quarters does 
not  differ  from  that  seen  at  the  start  of  the  crisis  in  2008,  when  national  demand  was 
considerably  weak  and  its  impact  on  output  was  softened  by  the  positive  contribution  of 
external demand to growth. In any event, Spain has not been immune to the slowdown  in 
world  trade  and,  in  particular,  to  the  greater  sluggishness  of  some  of  our  main  trading 
partners,  such  as Italy  and  Portugal,  meaning that  exports  have  recently  been  seen  to  be 
less buoyant.  
Foreseeably,  then,  in  2012  we  will  once  again  see  a  substantial  decline  in  GDP.  In  this 
respect,  the  Government’s  macroeconomic  forecast  of  a  1.7%  fall  seems  realistic  and 
prudent.  But 
the  current 
macroeconomic  climate  is  very  high.  In  terms  of  the  composition  of  the  macroeconomic 
figures, the view of the Banco de España does not differ greatly from that of the Government; 
the  adjustment  of  national  demand  is  projected  to  continue  further,  while  net  demand  will 
remain the linchpin of the Spanish economy, although its considerable contribution to growth 
will not suffice to prevent a contraction in activity and employment.  
As earlier stated, it is vital here that companies should harness the flexibility afforded by the 
new labour legislation to respond to the changes in demand without having to shed staff. If 
the  uncertainty  permeating 
it  should  be  stressed 
that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
used appropriately, not only will this prevent the demise of certain companies, but production 
will also be much more competitive and Spanish products more attractive, both domestically 
and  abroad.  Evidently,  in  a  situation  like  the  present,  the  recovery  in  Spain  should  be 
export-led. Accordingly, all measures and reforms that enhance competitiveness should be 
considered a priority.  
In this connection, the State Budget for 2012 is part of a broader, medium-term consolidation 
strategy that requires the participation of the different levels of government. The Stability and 
Growth Programme unveiled in late April to the European authorities details these objectives 
up to 2015, with a breakdown of the efforts required by each level of government.  
From  my  standpoint,  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  is  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the 
recovery  of  the  Spanish  economy,  although  the  adjustments  needed  to  meet  the  fiscal 
targets  may  in  the  short  term  exert  adverse  effects  on  demand  and  activity.  As  for  the 
financial tensions that have shaken the Spanish economy in recent weeks, holding resolutely 
on a course towards fiscal consolidation is a pre-requisite for dispelling the mistrust stifling 
the economy. Therefore, the potential short-term costs will be amply offset once it becomes 
apparent that the efforts made are yielding results.  
The State and Social Security budgets for 2012 are pivotal to this strategy. Fortunately, while 
they have not yet been approved, many of the measures they envisage have already been 
implemented,  thereby  preventing  precious  time  from  being  lost  in  adjusting  the  fiscal 
imbalance. In this respect, it should be stressed that cutting the budget deficit requires an 
unprecedented structural effort. The measures that have to be adopted must reduce debt in 
an  environment  in  which  the  interest  burden  will  be  growing  and  where  the  double-dip  in 
economic  activity  will  affect  tax  revenue  and  some  cyclical  expenditure.  In  light  of  these 
conditioning  factors,  the  consolidation  strategy  must  obviously  use  all  the  instruments 
available, on both the expenditure and revenue sides.  
As  regards  revenue,  various  measures  have  been  adopted  affecting,  above  all,  the  direct 
taxes  households  and  firms  pay.  A  reduced  rate  has  also  been  introduced  to  bring 
undeclared assets out into the open. Here, although the macroeconomic forecast for 2012 
may  be  realistic,  there  are  risks  of  slippage  in  projected  revenue.  This  is  in  light  of  the 
composition  activity  is  likely  to  evidence,  given  the  sizeable  weight  of  exports  and  the 
weakness  of  private  consumption  and  the  real  estate  market,  which  may  lead  to  lower 
revenue than the course of output might suggest, as was the case in 2011. The foreseeable 
decline  in  employment  also  appears  to  suggest  Social  Security  contributions  will  be  more 
modest  than  budgeted.  Finally,  there  is  substantial  uncertainty  surrounding  projected 
revenue takings in respect of the special treatment accorded to undisclosed income.  
Turning to expenditure, the draft Budget outlines highly significant cuts in public investment, 
current transfers and goods and services purchases. These projections are not without risk, 
given the substantial inertia some of these items show, which hinders any permanent change 
in  their  trajectory.  Precisely  to  reinforce  this  trajectory,  the  government  added  further 
education  and  health-care  measures  following  the  presentation  of  the  draft  Budget,  which 
should  contribute  to  attaining  the  targets  set.  That  said,  overspending  on  items  such  as 
unemployment  benefits  or  pensions  cannot  be  ruled  out,  since  they  depend  on  factors 
beyond  the  control  of  the  authorities,  such  as  the  unemployment  rate,  demographics  and 
inflation.  
Given these risks, the Budget must be rigorously implemented and mechanisms activated to 
enable  any  emerging  deviations  to  be  detected  sufficiently  in  advance,  so  that  additional 
countervailing measures may be taken. If this were necessary, measures to contain current 
expenditure or to increase indirect taxes could be adopted, as already contemplated in the 
Stability Programme ahead of 2013. Nor can it be ruled out that the temporary tax increases 
approved this year may have to remain in place for longer or be replaced in time by other 
permanent measures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I believe that in a country as decentralised as Spain, and in light of the deviations that arose 
in  2011,  what  was  needed  was  to  accompany  budgetary  consolidation  with  a  significant 
strengthening of the institutional framework, so that all tiers of government might be called on 
to  meet  their  commitments.  Fortunately,  the  recently  approved  Organic  Law  on  Budgetary 
Stability  is  a  substantial  improvement  here.  Moreover,  it  is  fully  attuned  to  the  recent  EU 
reforms on governance. Also, the agreement reached a few days back between the central 
and regional governments under the aegis of the Fiscal and Financial Policy Council on the 
deficit  targets  for  2012  and  on  the  consolidation  plans  to  attain  these  targets  is  excellent 
news. This lays the foundations for avoiding overruns such as those witnessed last year.  
What is crucial now is the swift and effective implementation of the instruments envisaged in 
this Organic Law, in particular the monitoring and control mechanisms for public finances at 
all levels of government, and those intended to enforce compliance with the targets set by all 
of them.  
The law proposes substantially improving general government transparency at the different 
stages  of  the  budgetary  process.  In  particular,  timely  detection  of  budgetary  deviations  is 
considered essential so as to adopt measures. Consequently, it would be advisable to begin 
publication of the regional government monthly revenue and expenditure outturns as soon as 
possible, as envisaged in the Organic Law (Article 27.3). The law further includes coercive 
instruments to ensure compliance with budgetary targets by all levels of government. Such 
instruments can be effective in ensuring discipline if rigorously applied and if the appropriate 
procedures for overseeing the budget outturn throughout the year are set in place.  
But the pressure of everyday events should not make us lose sight of the medium and long 
term. Allow me to refer here to the major reform of the pensions system approved in July last 
year. This checked a pension spending dynamic that was endangering the sustainability of 
public  finances  over the  medium  and  long-term horizon.  But  it  should  be  recalled  that  this 
reform  did  not  cancel  out  all  the  risks  arising  from  population  ageing.  It  would  thus  be 
desirable to properly define the so-called sustainability factor, so that the parameters of the 
system may adapt automatically to future demographic developments.  
Admittedly,  the  economic  difficulties  such  as  high  unemployment  and  low  growth  that  we 
face are most serious. But the main problem currently confronting the Spanish economy is 
the  fall  in  all  confidence  indicators  in  recent  months,  exacerbated  in  recent  weeks  by  the 
management of the latest banking crisis. Restoring confidence is the imperative at present, 
since  without  it,  none  of  our  problems  will  be  resolved.  All  government  measures  and  all 
actions  taken  by  economic  policymakers  and  agents  should  be  aimed  at  restoring  the 
confidence  we  have  lost.  And  one  of  the  pre-requisites  for  doing  so  and  for  dispelling  all 
uncertainty is that Spain should bring its public finances back on to a path of stability in line 
with its European commitments.  
I believe there is a sizeable consensus that Spain needs to redress its fiscal imbalance and 
move  towards  a  path  of  stability,  in  line  with  its  European  undertakings,  and  that  this  is  a 
pre-requisite  for  restoring  confidence  and  dispelling  uncertainty.  Consolidation  measures 
have  been  tabled  that  are  capable  of  bringing  about  this  change  of  direction  in  budgetary 
dynamics.  And,  above  all,  the  national  budgetary  framework  has  been  substantially 
reinforced in order to allow the coordination, monitoring, surveillance and, where appropriate, 
correction  of  deviations  by  the  different  tiers  of  government,  which  we  were  previously 
lacking and which is vital to achieve the fiscal targets set.  
The authorities at all levels of government have taken a significant first step in ratifying these 
targets and agreeing on their contribution to the consolidation drive that must be undertaken 
in the coming months. Now it is of the essence to restore credibility with a rigorous budgetary 
outturn, transparent management and, when necessary, corrective measures that shore up 
the  fiscal  targets  set.  That  will  attest  to  the  strength  of  the  commitment  to  the  budgetary 
stability enshrined in the new Organic Law. The State Budget for 2013, which will begin to be 
drafted in the coming weeks, must uphold this commitment and give expression in specific 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
measures  to  some  of  the  announcements  made  in  the  context  of  the  latest  Stability 
Programme. It is no overstatement to say that much of Spain’s future is at stake in complying 
with  these  fiscal  targets,  and  that  failure  in  this  process  of  consolidation  would  set  back 
considerably the possibility of an economic recovery in our country.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
