Patrick Honohan: The return of the surprise in central banking 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Golden Series on World Money, London, 
8 May 2012. 
 In the old days, central banking used to be about surprises. When I studied monetary policy 
first,  the  distinctions  were  all  between  anticipated  and  unanticipated  events,  only  the 
unanticipated  mattered  if  policy  was  to  improve  on  a  supposed  unemployment-inflation 
trade-off, so surprises were key.  
Then  along  came  Friedman  and  Phelps  and  gradually  their  insight  that  “You  can’t  fool 
enough  of  the  people  enough  of  the  time”  led  to  an  approach  to  monetary  policy  that 
emphasised limited ambitions, predictability and – by and large – no surprises. I’ll come back 
to that. 
But  some  of  the  great  pivotal  moments  in  the  history  of  central  banking  are  about  shock 
tactics,  the  timing,  their  potential  impact  and  the  communications  around  them.  These,  I 
submit, are the three key lessons we need to keep in mind. 
Timing is everything 
When  it  comes  to  such  surprises,  timing  can be  everything  –  better  not  be  late. Take  this 
from an issue of the New York Times during the 1907 crisis: “Knickerbocker will be aided; 
President Barney quits and financiers promise to support the Trust Company; JP Morgan & 
Co.  help”.  But  JP  Morgan  didn’t  help  enough  and  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company 
suspended payment for 5 months. Next day the Trust Company of America was duly saved, 
but it was too late: “The fallout from permitting the crisis to surface spawned an avalanche of 
bank  suspensions  and  a  sharp  contraction  in  the  economy”  (William  Silber,  2007,  When 
Washington Shut Down Wall Street). Notice the publication date 2007. I guess Silber was not 
all  that  surprised  at  the  September  2008  sequence  of  events  –  Lehmans  are  let  go,  and, 
although AIG is rescued almost immediately thereafter, there is an ensuing panic- and credit 
crunch-induced deep global recession.  
We  may  take  this  as  the  first  lesson  of  central  banking  announcements:  there  may  be  no 
second chances: missing the moment for the decisive surprise intervention may place you in 
a very bad position. 
Long-lasting effects 
Another great epoch-changing statement was that of Richard Nixon some 40 years ago, on 
August 15, 1971, ending the Bretton Woods regime of fixed but adjustable exchange rates. 
In that statement he remarked: “Let me lay to rest the bugaboo of what is called devaluation”. 
A bugaboo, according to Merriam-Webster is “an imaginary object of fear” or “something that 
causes fear or distress out of proportion to its importance”. Well imaginary or not, the ending 
of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  did  have  consequences.  (Though  the  consequences  did  not 
include the one feared by my future father-in-law who had just heard a few days earlier of the 
engagement  of  his  daughter  to  a  boy  with  a  job  offer  from  the  IMF:  would  it  survive?). 
Consequences  there  were:  the  closing  of  the  gold  window  (announced  by  Nixon  as 
temporary)  became  permanent  and  was  followed  by  a  decade  in  which  prices  in  the  US 
doubled. And they almost doubled again in the following decade!  
So here is my lesson no. 2: surprise announcements can have long-run effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Credibility and truthfulness 
Of course statements around devaluations and the run-up to them have had a tendency to 
weaken the credibility of central bankers (and other public officials). Take this quote from the 
Irish  Finance  Minister  reported  in  the  Irish  Times,  Thursday  January  28,  1993:  “I  want  to 
assure  the  people  in  London  who  are  putting  around  the  rumours  that  we  are  going  to 
devalue today or tomorrow that they are wrong”. True enough, no devaluation occurred on 
the Thursday or Friday … but it did on the Saturday. 
Although widely cited, former Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman Alan Blinder famously 
did not say “the last duty of the central banker is to tell the public the truth”. What he did do, it 
seems,  was  conduct  a survey  of  central  banker  attitudes,  “in  which  officials  had ranked  ‘a 
duty  to  be  open  and  truthful  with  the  public’  last  among  criteria  on  why  credibility  was 
important”. Well, that’s even worse, though it’s not Blinder’s view; it was the view of many 
central bankers he surveyed in 1999. Devaluation denials may have been an obvious reason 
for  this,  and  it  is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  regimes  such  as  the  disastrous  ERM,  which 
create such pressures for disinformation, can be among the most ineffective. Lesson no. 3: 
central-banking-by-surprise  makes  candid  communication  extremely  difficult.  Yet  we  all 
agree that credible communication is essential for lasting policy success: so this is a problem 
with fixed but adjustable exchange-rate regimes, for example. 
Floating  exchange-rate  regimes  with  inflation  targeting  (or  some  variant  of  it)  are  quite 
different in this respect – and I think that this is one important reason why their adoption has 
become relatively widespread. With inflation targeting (any variant, soft or hard), the sudden 
surprise  announcement  is  not  a  prominent  part  of  the  policy  arsenal.  Instead  the  market’s 
expectation of official action (on policy interest rates, for example) is gently nudged towards 
the  policymakers’  intentions  by  small  steps,  speeches,  hints  and  graduated  open  market 
operations. A very different policy environment where, instead of dissembling before major 
actions,  the  whole  aim  of  policy  communication  is  towards  having  no  surprises  at  all. 
Perhaps  the  most  extreme  example  of  this  is  the  Federal  Reserve  pre-commitments  of 
recent months. 
Let’s  think  of  the  two  major  recent  ECB  policy  surprises:  the  SMP  in  May  2010  and  the 
3-year LTROs in December 2011. How do we rate them considering the lessons that have 
been proposed above. The SMP announcement occurred at a time of great market tension. 
Sovereign  risk  contagion  from  Greece  had  just  begun,  and  there  was  the  additional 
background  of  the  unnerving  flash  crash.  The  danger  that  sovereign  spreads  would  spiral 
away,  undermining  monetary  transmission  as  well  as  a  lot  of  other  things,  seemed  real, 
especially as the funding firewall that was quickly agreed at political level would take several 
months  to  become  a  reality.  ECB  intervention  in  secondary  debt  markets  looked  like  a 
sensible  and  urgent  action  needed  to  nip  things  in  the  bud.  A  moment  analogous  to  that 
seized by JP Morgan in 1907, if you will. For some, the SMP may have looked like something 
close to the dreaded monetary financing, but the Treaty is pretty clear on these matters, and 
buying plainly in the secondary market is not monetary financing. (Any student of the history 
of central banking knows how often central banks have been loaded up with unremunerated 
paper by spendthrift governments.  
If  central  bank  dealings  with  government  paper  might  be  portrayed  as  lying  along  a 
spectrum,  the  SMP  lies  well  over  to  one  end.)  The  action  was  prompt  –  the  JP  Morgan 
moment  was  not  missed  –  and  the  spike  of  yields  was  removed.  (cf.  lesson  1)  And  what 
about the longer run? Well there have been consequences, but not those imagined at the 
outset.  Sovereign  spreads  widened  again  and,  though  the  program  was  used  again  with 
varying  degrees  of  vigour,  it  cannot  be  said  by  any  means  to  have  eliminated  the 
cross-country variations which are indeed impeding the smooth functioning of the monetary 
transmission. And it has not avoided the large debt exchange at steep haircuts for Greece, 
the original biggest target of the programme. Lesson 3 is I think confirmed. Communication 
around the SMP introduction, and the well-known differences of opinion which surrounded it, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
tended  somewhat  to  undermine  the  coherence  of  communication  by  central  bankers 
generally and was, I would say, problematic. The jury is still out on whether the policy has 
been a lasting success, and there are of course different views on what it could have been 
expected to achieve long-term. 
Let’s  hope  that  the  3-year  LTRO,  brought  in  once  again  in  response  to  financial  market 
pressures,  not  only  on  sovereign  bonds,  but  especially  on  bank  funding,  does  have  the 
lasting effects that are no widely hoped for it. Certainly it was well-timed (lesson 1), though 
some  observers  will  have  hoped  for  this  or  more  at  an  earlier  stage,  and  can  note  that, 
despite its scale and duration, it has not brought, for example, Irish sovereign spreads below 
the levels that triggered the bail-out in November 2010. Let’s hope that lesson 2 applies, and 
that it will be of lasting value. As for lesson 3, this time the measure seems to have been 
relatively trouble-free on the communications front. But perhaps again it is too early to say, 
and the voices of the critics of large TARGET  balances may eventually start to drown out 
more welcoming voices and ask awkward and destabilising questions about intra-zone credit 
risk. Instead, I prefer to think that the reason the LTRO was trouble-free was that it went with 
the grain: this action corrected the market’s misapprehension that the ECB was indifferent or 
“didn’t get” the existential worries that were prevalent in the market. As much as the technical 
aspects  themselves,  this  favourable  signalling  function  of  the  LTRO  announcement 
reassured and stabilised markets. 
I have ranged too widely for these remarks to warrant any general conclusions. The crisis 
has brought back centre stage the role of dramatic announcements with far-reaching effects. 
It is important to get the timing right: too late and a lot of damage can be done; too soon and 
the  side-effects  may  be  worse  than  the  hoped-for  effect  (if  the  source  of  the  problem  has 
been exaggerated or misdiagnosed). And the communications issues are more challenging 
than the finely-honed practice of monthly announcements by inflation targeting central banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
