Stefan Ingves: Financial stability is important for us all 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag Committee 
on Finance, Stockholm, 15 March 2012. 
 Today, I would like to give you a few examples from Sweden and abroad to illustrate why 
financial stability affects us all, not least in our role as consumers. It can easily happen that 
discussions  of  bank  regulations,  not  least  at  the  EU  level,  can  be  considered  difficult  to 
understand. This is partly because the discussions are often technical, and partly because 
they can seem abstract. I would like to demonstrate how the political framework for financial 
stability  very  strongly  affects  Swedish  banking  customers  –  in  other  words,  almost  all 
households. 
Crises cost society enormous amounts 
As financial crises are very costly for the citizens of a society, we should try to avoid them at 
almost any price.  
The  financial  system  forms  the  cornerstone  of  a  modern  economy.  Its  basic  functions  are 
converting savings to investments, managing risks and mediating payments, functions that 
we  all  constantly  come  into  contact  with  every  day,  in  one  way  or  another.  A  functioning 
financial system is also necessary for the repo rate, which is to say monetary policy, to have 
an impact. A modern society cannot do without the functions of the financial system. Without 
the financial sector, Sweden would grind to a halt. But the system also entails risks. Banks 
are dependent on confidence, are highly leveraged and are thus vulnerable. Problems in the 
financial sector are contagious.  
Precisely because we need the financial system so much, reducing the risk of financial crises 
must be an important priority. Financial crises cause great damage to society. In addition, we 
know that financial crises have permanent effects on growth. It takes a long time to recover 
from  the  major  fall  in  GDP  following  on  from  a  deep  financial  crisis.  Normally,  we  see  a 
downwards shift in GDP level even if good times may then mean a return to the same rate of 
growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
The modern Swedish example of a financial crisis was a frightening experience for many of 
us. The social costs of the crisis at the start of the 1990s can be illustrated in several ways. 
One way would be to compare actual growth with the trend development. The difference in 
Sweden’s GDP towards the end of the 1990s corresponds to 20 per cent of GDP each year, 
or SEK 50 000 per person in 1998 prices. The financial crisis of a few years ago, which was 
milder for Sweden, has cost the people of Sweden thousands of kronor more per year. 
The real effects have a high social and economic price 
One  of  the  more  tangible  effects  of  the  crisis  of  the  1990s  was  its  impact  on  the  labour 
market.  Having  gotten  used  to  a  level  of  unemployment  of  a  few  per  cent,  we  then  saw 
unemployment  increase  to  double  figures  over  only  a  couple  of  years.  Overheating  at  the 
end of the 1980s and the resulting financial crisis almost doubled long-term unemployment.  
And, of course, shocks to the national economy of this kind do not spare us citizens in our 
role as taxpayers either.  
Problems in the banking sector impact the country’s citizens in several ways 
A banking crisis thus impacts individual citizens in several ways. 
Lower  or  even  negative  growth  leads  us,  as  employees,  to  run  an  increased  risk  of 
unemployment and to earn lower wages than would otherwise have been the case. When 
the growth path falls over the longer term, we also have to count on lower pensions. 
Bank crises also risk being costly to us in our role as taxpayers. If the government is forced 
to compensate those who have put money into a bank, or even take over and capitalise a 
bank on the ropes, there will be less funding left for other purposes. Taxes will be higher or 
public welfare lower – or both. 
As almost all citizens are also bank customers, they are also impacted more directly. A crisis 
in the Swedish banking system would lead  to higher funding costs for the banks and thus 
higher  lending  rates.  Customers  in  a  bank  needing  to  be  restructured  may  also  need  to 
change  bank  and  negotiate  conditions  under  circumstances  that  would  probably  not  be 
particularly favourable. 
All of this risks leading to major difficulties for households. And this is something that we saw 
all too many examples of at the start of the 1990s. 
Financial crises ultimately threaten fundamentally important social functions 
An  even  more  serious  financial  crisis  could  even  threaten  fundamentally  more  important 
social  functions.  Households  are  dependent  on  the  banks’  ability  to  manage  payments  so 
that they can receive wages, purchase food and so on. In turn, our banks are dependent on 
the financial market as a whole. 
If  a  serious  crisis  should  break  out  –  if  the  payment  systems  should  stop  working,  if  the 
banks should stop trusting each other or if the banks should cancel payments – there would 
be problems for a great many of us. As a conjectural experiment, we could ask ourselves 
how many Swedish households would be able to cope with a week or two in which neither 
charge cards nor ATMs functioned. Thankfully, we haven’t had to worry about such problems 
in Sweden.  
The financial crisis of 2007–2009 impacted borrowers in other countries hard 
A meltdown in the global financial economy was averted in 2008 and 2009 at a price we are 
still unable to calculate. Even if the total cost has yet to be calculated, we can still note that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the consequences of the financial crisis are clear if we take one of its fundamental causes, 
the US housing crisis, as an example. In the autumn of 2011, 22 per cent of all US mortgage 
holders  still  owed  more  than  the  value  of  their  property.  This  is  almost  11  million 
homeowners.1 
One  of  the  factors  behind  the  development  of  the  US  housing  market  was  irresponsible 
lending to households with weak debt-servicing ability. We have also seen examples of this 
in Europe. 
Problems in the housing sector could have severe consequences for households 
We don’t want to have to go through a similar development in Sweden. Our experiences of 
the  crisis  of  the  1990s  are  more  than  enough.  And  we  didn’t  emerge  unscathed  from  the 
crisis of 2008 either. Nobody wants a new financial crisis. 
At the moment, the greatest risks to financial stability in Sweden are the financial unease in 
the euro area and the resulting unease on the financial markets. However, our assessment is 
that  the  Swedish  banks  are  also  well-prepared  for  weaker  development  than  in  our  main 
scenario.  
I  would  also  like  to  touch  on  a  domestic  risk  that  is  frequently  mentioned  –  Swedish 
households’  high  levels  of  indebtedness  and  the  risk  of  a  fall  in  housing  prices.  Firstly,  I 
would like to say that we don’t see any acute threat in this regard. We are not facing any 
dramatic falling housing prices. In addition, our assessment is that the Swedish banks can 
also cope with fairly large falls in the market value of housing. 
Nonetheless, we at the Riksbank have long warned that the high level of indebtedness may 
make  the  Swedish  economy  vulnerable.  If  the  economy  should  develop  adversely, 
households may be forced to cut back on their consumption. When a home falls greatly in 
price,  the  household  becomes  unable  to  move  without  realising  major  losses.  Individual 
households can then find themselves in particularly dire straits. 
A couple of days ago, Finansinspektionen presented a report on housing loans in Sweden.2 
Encouragingly,  this  report  showed  that  the  mortgage  ceiling  introduced  in  2010  may  have 
dampened indebtedness and risk. At the same time, it can be noted, for example, that over 
half of new loans approved have no amortisation requirements whatsoever. Of the remaining 
loans, almost half must be amortised over a period of 50 years or longer. A large percentage 
of the loans being issued at present will remain for a long time. To a certain extent, these 
entail risks that the banks will also have to manage in several decades’ time.  
The higher capital adequacy demanded by the Ministry of Finance, Finansinspektionen and 
the Riksbank for the major Swedish banks should be seen in light of this. The banks need to 
lend a little more of their own money and slightly less of other people’s. This would mean that 
they would be able to bear losses more easily and would reduce the risk of future costs for all 
of us, as citizens. 
The European Commission is concerned about developments in Sweden 
The  European  Commission  is  also  concerned  about  the  high  debts  accumulating  among 
Swedish households. In a recent report, the Commission identified a number of risks to the 
financial stability of various EU countries, including Sweden.3 
                                                 
1  Modestino & Dennett (2012) 
2  Finansinspektionen (2012). 
3  European Commission (2012) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In this sense, the European Commission’s analysis does not depart radically from our own. 
As  I  have  already  said,  there  are  good  reasons  to  try  to  prevent  problems  and  to  curb 
excessive risk-taking as regards housing loans. This is why we in Sweden have argued that 
Sweden  must  have  the  possibility  of  placing  higher  requirements  on  the  Swedish  banks  – 
particularly the major banks.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  EU  countries  are  currently  negotiating  new  capital  adequacy 
regulations  for  the  EU.  The  Riksbank’s  opinion  is  that  the  EU  should  establish  minimum 
requirements, but that individual countries, such as Sweden, for example, should be able to 
go  further  –  just  to  reduce  the  risk  of  financial  crises  at  a  national  level.  I  know  that  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Finansinspektionen  agree,  as  do  several  other  countries  and,  for 
example, the European Systemic Risk Board.  
The Riksbank has an important role to play in the prevention of financial crises 
The  Riksbank’s  task  of  preventing  new  crises  is  connected  to  our  responsibility  for  the 
country’s  means  of  payment.  Only  the  Riksbank  can  provide  unlimited  liquidity  to  the 
Swedish banks in a crisis situation. During the crisis of 2008 and 2009, the banks could also 
borrow as much as they needed from the Riksbank.  
The Riksbank monitors the financial sector with a systemic perspective. If we hadn’t realised 
it  before,  one  clear  lesson  from  the  crisis  of  2008–2009  was  that  monitoring  individual 
institutions is not enough. We and other authorities around the world learnt that we have to 
keep our eyes on the connections between the banks and how they are affected, as a whole, 
by  developments  on  the  markets.  Among  other  means,  the  Riksbank  influences  financial 
market participants through the analyses we make and the recommendations we issue in the 
Financial Stability Reports. 
Another  important  role  for  the  Riksbank  is  being  the  country’s  representative  in  several 
forums  that  set  the  standards  for  the  financial  sector,  primarily  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  Committee  on 
Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS). 
At the same time, it is worth pointing out that, at present, the Riksbank does not have any 
sharper  tools  than  words  in  the  preventive  work  or  macro-prudential  supervision.  We  can 
warn and recommend, but when it comes to real measures, other authorities currently hold 
responsibility.  It  is  a  difficult  task.  Always  raising  a  warning  when  everything  seems  to  be 
going well seldom makes you popular. 
Financial stability policy is of great importance for Swedish households 
Preventing future crises is an important task – as is being able to manage them if they break 
out anyway. 
I  hope  that  this  speech  has  clarified  why  Swedish  households  are  dependent  on  financial 
stability. Firstly, households and the economy as a whole need functioning financial services. 
Secondly, all experience shows that the consequences of a financial crisis are very costly for 
households, employees, taxpayers and bank customers. 
As citizens of a modern society, we thus have a right to expect that the authorities will do 
their best to prevent and manage financial crises. In turn, the authorities need tools and a 
clear  responsibility  structure  to  prevent  crises,  as  far  as is  possible.  It  is  equally important 
that there be efficient tools to manage crises if they break out anyway. 
Sweden  cannot  afford  to  go  through  another  crisis  like  that  in  the  1990s.  Neither  can  the 
world afford a new 2008. This is why it is so important that we constantly strive to ensure that 
new financial crises do not break out. This is in the interests of every citizen. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The regulation of the financial sector 
affects the country’s citizens
Policy discussions
in Sweden, in the EU, globally
Could be perceived as abstract
Often technical
Behaviour of the 
financial sector
Effects on the real economy
Swedish citizens 
and consumers
 Crises cost society enormous amounts
GDP growth in Sweden, 1960-2010, SEK billion
 Source: The Riksbank
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The real effects have a high social and  
economic price
Unemployment in Sweden, 1985-2000, percentage of labour force
Source: The Riksbank
  Problems in the banking sector impact the 
country’s citizens in many ways
Via the real
economy
Weaker economic 
development
Higher unemployment
Lower wages
Lower pensions
Problems in the 
banking sector        
Via the public sector
Directly against 
bank customers
Deposit guarantee
Need for capital 
injections
Higher taxes
Deterioration of 
public welfare
Increased 
uncertainty
New banking 
relationships
Higher 
interest  
rates
New terms
Poorer economy
Poorer economy
for households
for households
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A financial crisis will ultimately threaten 
basic social functions
The financial system  
is central in the society
Household
Household’s
bank
Who can pay whom 
in a serious crisis?
Grocery 
shop
Grocery shop’s 
bank
 Employer’s 
bank
Employer
Other financial market 
participants 
– in and outside 
Sweden
  The financial crisis of 2007-2009 impacted 
borrowers in other countries hard
Source: Federal Reserve Boston
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Problems in the housing sector could have 
severe consequences for households
Distribution of new mortgage loans by amortisation period, 
per cent
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 - 10
10 - 30
30 - 40
40 - 50
Amortisation period, years
> 50
None
Source: Finansinspektionen
  The European Commission is concerned 
about developments in Sweden
From Alert Mechanism Report 2011/2012
”Despite overall good macroeconomic performance some countries 
display developments in assets markets, including in particular housing, 
and a continuous build-up of indebtedness in the private sector, 
which also warrant further analysis”
 The European Commission would like a closer examination of 
Swedish households’ indebtedness
 Sweden’s mandate to handle the situation depends on how the 
Basel III regulations are implemented in the EU
Source: European Commission
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Riksbank has an important role to play 
in the prevention of financial crises
The Riksbank is responsible for means of 
payment and can provide liquidity
But the
Riksbank 
lacks sharp 
preventive 
tools
The Riksbank monitors the financial 
sector with a systemic perspective
The Riksbank represents Sweden in 
International regulatory cooperation
 Preventing financial crises is of great 
importance for Swedish households
Swedish households need functioning financial services and protection 
from financial crises and their effects
Citizens have the right to expect that authorities will prevent and 
manage financial crises to the best of their ability
Authorities need the right tools to prevent and manage crises
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
European Commission (2012): Alert Mechanism Report 
Finansinspektionen (2012): Den svenska bolånemarknaden (the Swedish mortgage market) 
Modestino,  A.  S.,  &  Dennett,  J.  (2012):  “Are  American  Homeowners  Locked  into  Their 
Houses?  The  Impact  of  Housing  Market  Conditions  on  State-to-State  Migration”,  Working 
Paper No. 12-1, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
