K C Chakrabarty: Revised guidelines on priority sector lending – 
rationale and logic 
Special address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the FIBAC 2012, organized by the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI) and the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Mumbai, 4 September 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri T V Rao and Shri P Manoj in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri Alok K. Misra, Chairman, IBA and CMD, Bank of India; Shri Pratip Chaudhuri, 
Chairman, State Bank of India; CMDs/ CEOs of other banks; other senior members of the 
banking fraternity, delegates to the conference, members of the print and electronic media, 
other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is, indeed, a matter of great pleasure for 
me to deliver this special address at the annual FICCI – IBA Global Banking Conference – 
FIBAC 2012. FIBAC has become one of the important events in the banking calendar and 
has emerged as a forum for serious deliberations on issues facing the banking industry and 
generation  of  several  new  thoughts  and  ideas.  The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference 
emphasizes  on  attaining  sustainable  excellence  through  customers,  employees  and 
technology.  Drawing  from  the  theme,  my  talk  today  would  focus  on  bank  finance  to 
vulnerable  sections  of  the  population,  which  have,  hitherto,  been  largely  neglected  and 
hence, require special emphasis in order to attain the goal of sustainable banking excellence. 
The interplay of the three elements of customers, employees and technology would be key to 
this. 
2.  
I  see  that  the  BCG  has  released  a  knowledge  paper  on  Productivity  in  Indian 
Banking in the inaugural session of the Conference. Banks, as is widely accepted, perform 
the important function of financial intermediation in the economic system. High productivity in 
performing  this  function  requires  banks  to  have  operational  and  allocational  efficiency. 
Operational  efficiency  entails  performing  the  intermediation  function  at  the  lowest  cost. 
Allocational  efficiency  requires  that  resources  are  allotted  to  the  most  deserving  and 
productive segments of the population. The entire scheme of priority sector lending in India is 
aimed  at  attaining  greater  allocational  efficiency,  thereby  facilitating  effective  financial 
intermediation by banks. I feel that an effective and transparent framework for priority sector 
lending,  which  is  the  objective  of  our  revised  priority  sector  guidelines,  would  help  attain 
improved  productivity/  efficiency  and  ultimately,  the  goal  of  sustainable  excellence  in 
banking. The guidelines have generated considerable debate and I thought it proper to use 
this  forum  to  clarify  our  thought  process  behind  the  guidelines  and  allay  some  of  the 
apprehensions expressed by banks. 
The evolution 
3. 
Before  deliberating  on  the  mainstay  of  today’s  topic  let  me  briefly  touch  upon  the 
evolution  of  priority  sector  lending  in  India.  Indian  banking  is  a  unique  example  of 
harmonious blend of commercial banking with social banking. Bank credit has an immense 
role  in  the  development  of  the  economy.  Besides  economic  growth,  it  should  also  lead  to 
removal  of  poverty  and  equitable  distribution  of  income.  Several  Committees  have  looked 
into the aspect of rural credit and priority sector credit in India. The Indian Central Banking 
Enquiry  Committee  (1931)  was  one  such  committee  constituted  in  pre  independent  India. 
During  1960s,  came  the  concept  of  Social  Control,  which  was  to  ensure  an  equitable 
distribution of credit keeping in view the relative priorities of our developmental needs. The 
description of the priority sectors was formalised in 1972 on the basis of the report submitted 
by  the  Informal  Study  Group  on  Statistics  relating  to  advances  to  the  Priority  Sectors 
constituted by the Reserve Bank in  May 1971. In November 1974, banks were advised to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
raise the share of priority sector in their aggregate advances to the level of 33 1/3 per cent by 
March 1979. 
4. 
Subsequently, on the basis of the recommendations of the Working Group on the 
Modalities  of  Implementation  of  Priority  Sector  Lending  and  the  Twenty  Point  Economic 
Programme  by  Banks  (Chairman:  Dr.  K. S. Krishnaswamy),  all  commercial  banks  were 
advised  to  achieve  the  target  of  priority  sector  lending  at  40  per  cent  of  aggregate  bank 
advances by 1985. Sub-targets were also specified for lending to agriculture and the weaker 
sections  within  the  priority  sector.  The  eligible  activities  and  entities  qualifying  for  priority 
sector have undergone many changes since then. The guidelines on priority sector were last 
revised  in  the  year  2007  based  on  the  recommendations  of  an  internal  group.  In  addition, 
several  Committees  including  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Reforms  (Narasimham 
Committee) has looked into the aspect of priority sector. 
5.  
The need for improving credit flow to certain sectors, prevalent at the time of bank 
nationalization, remains important today also, as large segments of the population continue 
to be deprived of access to credit from the formal financial system. We are well aware that 
this  segment  of  the  population  mainly  consisted  of  farmers;  especially  small  and  marginal 
farmers, artisans, weavers, and weaker sections. Over a period of time, the role played by 
commercial  banks  increased  financing  of  priority  sectors,  viz.,  agriculture  and  small  scale 
industries. 
6.  
There has been an argument that the share of agriculture in GDP is very low and 
also that there is not enough credit absorption capacity for agriculture credit and hence, the 
target for direct agriculture is on the higher side. 
Table 1 
Sectoral composition of GDP (at factor cost) 
(percent) 
Source: CSO ; Base Year:2004–05; Data at Constant Prices 
Notes : Data for 2008–09 are Provisional Estimates, 2009–10 are Quick Estimates and 2010–11 are 
Revised Estimates. 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Table 2  
Outstanding credit of scheduled commercial banks 
according to occupation 
(percent) 
 
Source: BSR Returns, RBI; Others include transport operators, professional and other services, personal 
loans, trade finance and all others 
The  declining  share  of  agriculture  in  GDP  cannot  be  accepted  as  a  valid  reason  for 
prescribing  lower  targets,  as  agriculture  is  an  important  sector  considering the  livelihood  it 
generates  for  almost  two-third  of  India’s  population.  It  is  also  critical  for  ensuring  food 
security and poverty alleviation. Besides, it needs to be borne in mind that this sector does 
not have recourse to other sources of finance such as equity, Commercial Papers, etc. The 
inherent weakness in the co-operative structure restricts its ability to cater to credit needs of 
the agricultural sector. 
7.  
The  All  India  Rural  Credit  Survey  carried  out  in  1954  indicated  that  formal  credit 
institutions provided less than 9% of rural credit needs in India. Moneylenders, traders and 
rich landlords accounted for more than 75% of rural credit. As per the “Situation Assessment 
Survey  of  Farmers”  conducted  as  a  part  of  the  59th  round  of  National  Sample  Survey 
(January–December 2003), at an all-India level, estimated number of rural households was 
147.90 million,  of  whom  60.4%  were  farmer  households.  Out  of  this,  74.97 million 
households  were  small  and  marginal  farmer  households  (SFMF).  Out  of  the  74.97 million 
SFMF  in  the  country,  only  about  46.3  per  cent,  i.e.,  34.70 million  farmer  households  had 
access to credit, either from formal or informal sources. The most important source of credit 
for farmers, in terms of percentage of outstanding loan amount, was banks (36%), followed 
by  moneylenders  (26%).  This  indicates  that  a  vast majority  of farmers are  still  deprived  of 
credit from formal financial institutions. Dependence on usurious moneylenders continues to 
afflict the rural poor. 
Background for the revised guidelines 
8. 
The  changing  economic  conditions  and  our  learnings  from  the  operation  of  the 
priority sector lending scheme over the years led to a felt need for revisiting the priority sector 
guidelines and updating it in line with our current national priorities. It was also felt that more 
clarity needs to be given to the entire gamut of priority sector and to ensure that the target 
sectors get credit in time and in right quantities. The need for revising the guidelines was also 
raised at various fora, both within and outside RBI. In this background, an expert committee 
was appointed by RBI under the Chairmanship of Shri M.V.Nair (the then CMD, Union Bank 
of India and former Chairman, IBA) with members drawn from across banking, agriculture, 
MSE and other sectors. The Committee submitted its Report to the RBI in the last week of 
February, 2012. The same was placed on the RBI website and comments / suggestions were 
called  for  from  all  stakeholders  and  the  general  public.  After  taking  into  account  the 
comments /suggestions received and after due deliberations, RBI came out with the revised 
guidelines on July 20, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Basic philosophy of the new priority sector guidelines 
9. 
Before going into the nuances of the new priority sector guidelines, I would like to 
highlight the four basic pillars/philosophy upon which these guidelines are based. These are: 
• 
Priority  sector  refers  to  those  sectors  of  the  economy  which,  though  viable  and 
creditworthy, may not get timely and adequate credit in the absence of this special 
dispensation. Typically,  these  are  small  value  loans  to farmers for  agriculture  and 
allied activities, micro and small enterprises, poor people for housing, students for 
education and other low income groups and weaker sections. Those sectors which 
are able to get timely and adequate credit would not qualify for priority sector status.  
Priority  sector  activities  have  to  be  carried  out  by  banks  as  a  part  of their  normal 
business operations. It should not be viewed as Corporate Social Responsibility. On 
the part of the Reserve Bank, one important facilitation in this regard has been that 
pricing  of  all  credit  has  been  made  free,  though  with  the  expectation  that  pricing 
should not be exploitative. 
Banks  should  lend  directly  to  beneficiaries  instead  of  routing  these  loans  through 
intermediaries.  This  will  ensure  better  management  of  risks  and  also  reduction  in 
transaction costs for such loans. 
Our  Priority  Sector  efforts  would  not  be  successful  unless  we  create  innovative 
structures,  products  and  processes.  Market  players  should  be  willing  to take risks 
and innovate. 
  I  would  also  like  to  dispel  two  wrong  notions  commonly  cited  regarding  priority 
Wrong notions about priority sector classification 
10. 
sector lending: 
• 
 Priority  Sector  guidelines  are  aimed  at  helping  banks  attain  the  targets:  The 
objective of these guidelines is not to facilitate banks to achieve the priority sector 
targets but to ensure easier access to credit to those deserving beneficiaries who 
are otherwise not getting it, or finding it difficult. 
If  a  sector  is  not  classified  as  priority  sector,  it  will  not  get  bank  credit:  Non-
classification  of  a  sector  as  priority  sector  does  not  imply  that  banks  should  not 
extend credit to the sector. It only implies that the sector would receive credit even 
without  priority  status  and  hence  violates  the  principle  stated  above.  In  fact,  the 
available  data  suggests  that  while  flow  of  credit  is  more  for  non-Priority  Sector 
advances, it is less costlier than Priority Sector credit. 
Let  me  re-emphasize  that  unless  the  basic  philosophy  behind  these  guidelines  are 
understood  and  the  wrong  notions  are  clarified,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  engage  in 
meaningful deliberations on the subject of priority sector lending. 
PSL targets and descriptions 
11. 
The revised guidelines aim at implementing the essence of the recommendations of 
the  Nair  Committee  without  dismantling  the  established  and  accepted  structure  of  priority 
sector lending. The overall target under priority sector is retained at 40 percent as suggested 
by the Nair Committee. The targets under both direct and indirect agriculture are retained at 
13.5 percent and 4.5 percent, respectively. The focus of the guidelines is on direct agricultural 
lending to individuals, Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Joint Liability Groups (JLGs). 
12. 
However, one significant innovation that we have introduced is that bank financing 
of  agriculture  through  non-financial  intermediaries  such  as  Primary  Agricultural  Credit 
Societies (PACS), Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS) and Large-sized Adivasi Multi Purpose 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Societies (LAMPS) ceded to or managed or controlled by such banks, has also been treated 
as  direct  agriculture.  This  dispensation  would  facilitate  direct  agricultural  finance  by  banks 
which  do  not  have  wide  presence  in  rural  areas  and  would,  otherwise,  have  struggled  to 
meet the targets. 
13. 
We have kept the definition of agriculture sector unchanged with the exception that 
credit  to  institutions  has  been  treated  as  indirect  finance  and  credit  to  food  and  agro 
processing industries has been shifted from agriculture to micro and small enterprises. The 
existing  definition  of  the  industries  sector  including  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  has  also 
been retained. 
14. 
In the services sector, however, we have made some changes and expanded the 
definition of services sector to include services which were not specifically listed earlier, with 
the  rider  that  credit  limit  is  fixed  at  Rs.1  crore.  While  the  services  sector  is  contributing 
around 67 per cent of our economy, data from major 47 banks at end Mar 2012 indicates that 
services  sector  received  only  23.6  percent  (Rs.10.17  trillion)  of  bank  credit,  18.4  percent 
(Rs 7.87  trillion)  was  accounted  for  by  personal  loans  whereas  agriculture  sector  received 
12.2 percent  (Rs.5.23  trillion)  and  industries received  45.8  percent  (Rs.19.67 trillion)1. This 
highlights the inadequate flow of credit to services sector. There is a need for banks to go to 
the interiors, to mofussil towns and cities and expand credit linkage in those areas. There is a 
mass of people residing in these places that are willing to provide security to obtain credit, 
but are, currently, not getting the credit. Providing loans to these segments, particularly for 
productive purposes, will also help in tackling the problem of retail inflation. 
No new targets/ sub-targets 
15. 
One important area where we have diverged from the views of the Nair Committee 
is that we have not imposed any new targets under the priority sector framework. The Nair 
Committee had recommended certain additional sub-targets for credit to micro enterprises, 
small and marginal farmers and realignment of certain existing targets. We have consciously 
decided against this as we believe that fresh targets would distort the allocation of credit. 
16.  
Besides,  though  we  have  not  prescribed  fresh  targets,  the  interests  of  small  and 
marginal  farmers  and  other  individuals  will  be  taken  care  by  shifting  the  direct  part  of 
agricultural loans to corporates, partnership firms and other institutions to indirect agriculture. 
Target for foreign banks 
17. 
As all of you are aware, foreign banks operating in India had been given a special 
dispensation on priority sector lending. The sole argument for this preferential treatment was 
their  limited  branch  network.  Now,  the  stage  has  come  where  there  is  a  need  to  have  a 
relook into this preferential treatment; again based on the same logic of branch network. 
18. 
Nair  Committee  has  recommended  that  foreign  banks  may  also  be  mandated  to 
achieve overall priority sector target of 40 per cent of ANBC and focused priority sector target 
of 7 per cent of ANBC for lending to micro enterprises, at par with domestic banks. We have 
adopted a graded approach while fixing priority sector targets for foreign banks with smaller 
banks with less than 20 branches having a target of 32 percent and foreign banks with 20 or 
more branches being mandated to attain a target of 40 percent. Several foreign banks have 
expressed  their  firm  belief  in  the  India  growth  story  and  have  shown  keen  interest  in 
contributing  to  and  actively  participating  in  the  same.  If that  be  so, for  such  banks,  with  a 
larger  presence  in  India,  we  would  like  to  eliminate  the regulatory  arbitrage  by  prescribing 
targets similar to Indian banks. 
                                                
1  MPD Data of major 47 banks as on Mar 23, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Is this necessary? 
19.  
Definitely Yes. After nationalization, the task of financial inclusion was considered, 
primarily, to be the responsibility of public sector banks alone. However, over the years, it 
has become evident that public sector banks alone cannot deliver on this mandate. This is 
not due to a lack of willingness on their part, but due to structural inadequacies and lack of 
autonomy  in  areas  such  as  recruitment  of  staff  from  particular  locations,  compensation 
practices,  etc.  In  fact,  I  have  always  believed  that  financial  inclusion  in  India  would  be 
brought  in  by  foreign  /  private  sector  banks  and  considerable  progress  is  being  made  by 
some of them in this regard. 
20.  
One  basic  question  that  often  arises  is  that  what  is  the  need  for  foreign  banks’ 
presence in India and what is the value added by their presence? It is felt that their presence 
is required not just for innovations in corporate finance and derivatives business, but also in 
areas such as agriculture and MSE finance. They can draw upon their global experience to 
develop innovative solutions and delivery models that would deliver credit in a cost effective 
manner to agricultural and rural areas. This will spur the domestic banks also. As an analogy, 
an  example  of  innovation  that  comes  to  my  mind  is  computerization,  which  was  first 
introduced by foreign banks in India and was, subsequently, taken up by private sector and 
public sector banks. The impact that this innovation has had on banking in India needs no 
mention. Some other such areas include ATMs, technology banking, etc. 
21.  
Foreign banks are encouraged to open branches in the rural areas as well and to 
play an equal role, along with domestic banks, in lending to the priority sector. India being a 
growing economy, there exist enough opportunities and avenues for foreign banks having 20 
or more branches to invest in “priority sector” areas (especially in agriculture and MSEs) and 
meet the target set, which is to be achieved over a period of five years. The time has come 
for foreign banks having large and long presence in India to play an active role in the priority 
sector,  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Indian  banks  and  it  is  felt  that  there  cannot  be  any 
distinction here. 
Why 20 branches and above? 
The number is not just an abstract one. We have done considerable research before 
22.  
the guidelines were finalised. These banks have had presence in India for nearly 100 years, 
i.e., even before some of the public sector banks were born. These banks know the Indian 
economy and are well versed with the Indian culture. We welcome these banks to join and 
help the growth story of India. 
23.  
We  would  like  these  banks  to  come  back  to  us  with  detailed  plans  on  how  they 
would be meeting this target. We are willing to discuss any difficulty faced by foreign banks in 
this regard. We have an open mind on this. 
Loans to non-bank financial intermediaries for on-lending 
24. 
In  terms  of  the  pre-revised  guidelines  on  lending  to  priority  sector,  bank  loans  to 
other  NBFCs  (other  than  MFIs  including  NBFC-MFIs)  for  on-lending  were  not  classified 
under  priority  sector.  We  have  retained  these  guidelines.  Loans  through  MFIs  (including 
NBFC-MFIs), which adhere to criteria prescribed by RBI, have been given PSL status as the 
credit is expected to be going to the most vulnerable sections of the society and low income 
groups of the population. 
Housing 
25.  
In the pre-revised guidelines, housing loans up to Rs.25 lakh were categorised as 
PSL irrespective of the location. The revised guidelines prescribe that loans up to Rs.25 lakh 
for housing in metropolitan centres with population above ten lakh and Rs.15 lakh at other 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
centres would be treated as PSL. This is expected to fine tune the disbursal of need based 
housing  loans  in  all  centres.  One  of  the  additions  in  the  revised  guidelines  aimed  at 
augmenting credit flow in the housing sector is that loans for housing projects exclusively for 
economically  weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups,  provided  the  cost  does  not  exceed 
Rs.5 lakh per dwelling unit, have been recognised as priority sector for the first time to boost 
the provision of houses to weaker sections and low income groups. 
26.  
As  a  stated  policy,  bank  loans  for  on-lending  by  NBFCs,  except  MFIs,  are  not 
permitted  as  priority  sector  in the  pre-revised  and  revised  Priority  Sector  guidelines.  Since 
HFCs are essentially NBFCs, it is not logical to treat bank loans to HFCs for on-lending, as 
priority sector. Further, banks being financial intermediaries, need to lend directly instead of 
relying on NBFCs/ HFCs for providing credit. 
Investments by banks in securitized assets and outright purchases 
27.  
Purchases/ investments in securitized assets are an important avenue for meeting 
priority sector requirements for banks without significant branch presence. This is also critical 
for banks which do not have the expertise to originate small value loans. Such banks can rely 
on  the  expertise  of  other  intermediaries,  who  can  originate  the  loans,  which  can  then  be 
taken over into the bank’s books through securitization. I would only like to advise that such 
transactions should not be done merely to tide over the regulatory requirement at year-ends. 
28.  
Banks are allowed to continue to classify their investments in securitised assets and 
outright  purchases,  where  the  underlying  assets  qualify  for  PSL  status,  under  respective 
categories  of  PSL,  provided  they  follow  the  RBI  guidelines  on  securitisation  and  outright 
purchases. Pricing for the ultimate beneficiary has been capped at Base Rate plus 8%. Here 
we have slightly differed from the Nair Committee recommendations, which had linked it to 
bank’s  Lending  Rate  plus  6%.  We  felt  that  linking  it  to  Base  Rate  would  ensure  greater 
transparency  in  pricing  and  ease  of  monitoring.  The  ceiling  on  pricing,  in  contrast  to  the 
general freedom given to banks in pricing loans, is because free market still does not exist 
for 
to  distortions.  The  Nair  Committee’s 
recommendation  to  restrict  the  bank  loans  for  on-lending,  buy-outs  and  securitization  to  a 
maximum of 5% of ANBC is not accepted. This is to allow banks to build up PSL portfolio 
through the route of outright purchase/ investments in securitised assets. 
the  poor  and  hence,  pricing 
is  prone 
Investments/Purchase/ Assignment transactions undertaken by banks with NBFCs, 
where the underlying assets are loans against gold jewellery 
29. 
In terms of the pre-revised guidelines on priority sector, investments made by banks 
in securitized assets originated by NBFCs, where the underlying assets were loans against 
gold jewellery, and purchase/ assignment of gold loan portfolio from NBFCs were not eligible 
for  classification  under  agriculture.  Such  pool  of  loan  assets  against  gold  jewellery  is 
generally extended by these NBFCs without proper credit appraisal and without verification 
of end use of funds. Some of our special scrutinies have confirmed this aspect. In the revised 
guidelines, such investments and outright purchases do not qualify for PSL status. 
Other highlights 
30.  
(i) 
A few other highlights of the revised guidelines are: 
Loans to individuals for educational purposes, including for vocational courses upto 
Rs.10 lakh in India and Rs.20 lakh abroad: The limits are not changed. However, the 
vocational courses were added recently under this. 
Loans to individuals for setting up off-grid solar and other off-grid renewable energy 
solutions for households: This was not allowed in the pre-revised guidelines. 
(ii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Management information system (MIS) 
31. 
Let me now turn to an area which is absolutely critical. There are several gaps in 
data on priority sector coverage and the existing data is not fully reliable. In the light of this, it 
was decided against prescribing fresh targets under priority sector. We, however, emphasize 
that there is an urgent need for data cleansing so that we are able to generate fast, reliable 
and  consistent  MIS  on  the  coverage  of  priority  sector  lending  across  all  sections  of  the 
economy.  This  would  prove  to  be  a  valuable  input  for  refining  our  policy  framework  and 
strategies in this area. A separate circular would be issued on this subject. 
32. 
One of the objectives of the revised guidelines is to ensure greater transparency in 
priority sector lending. I would urge banks to work towards this goal by having the courage 
and conviction to highlight any shortfall in achieving the targets instead of including ineligible 
loans  under  priority  sector  category.  The  generation  of  reliable  MIS  would  be  crucial  to 
attaining this transparency. 
Conclusion 
33. 
The  priority  that  senior  management  of  banks  accord  to  priority  sector  would 
determine the success of our efforts in this area. Without this commitment, it would not be 
possible to accomplish this task. Let me assure you that the top management at the Reserve 
Bank is fully committed to this goal, as is evident from the amount of time we spend on this 
subject at our meetings and outreach visits and the number of enabling policy initiatives that 
we  have  taken  in  this  regard.  Financial  inclusion  and  priority  sector  credit  are  closely 
interconnected subjects as financial inclusion is the process and priority sector loans are the 
business effect/ end product of the same in the books of the banks. If we are doing financial 
inclusion, then these targets are achievable, if not, then these are not. The new guidelines, 
then,  is  the  new  mantra.  We  need  to  be  consistent  in  our  approach  towards  financial 
inclusion and priority sector lending. 
34.  
We  are  happy  to  share  with  all  stakeholders  our  logic  and  rationale  for  the  new 
guidelines  and  discuss  further  refinements,  if  any,  and  most  importantly,  how  can  we 
facilitate  the  achievement  of  these  guidelines  and  ensure  its  effective  implementation  and 
monitoring. In fact, just last week, we have had a round of discussion with the CMDs/CEOs 
of  banks. We  would,  however,  emphasize  that  the  basic  conceptual framework for  issuing 
these guidelines need to be appreciated by all players so that the goal of credit linking the 
deserving but deprived segments of the economy is successfully accomplished. Besides, as 
mentioned  earlier,  an  efficient  framework  for  extending  bank  finance  to  the  vulnerable 
sections needs to be viewed as an essential prerequisite to attaining allocational efficiency in 
the economy, thereby contributing to productivity and efficiency of the banks in particular and 
the economy in general, which is the core objective of this summit. 
35. 
I hope that this Conference devotes some time to deliberating this important subject 
and comes to a common appreciation of the logic and reasoning behind these guidelines and 
sees them as a vehicle to improve the productivity and efficiency of the Banking System. I 
wish the deliberations a great success. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
