Peter Pang: Pilot platform for cross-border investment and settlement of 
debt securities 
Remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary,  at  the 
Press  Conference  on  Pilot  Platform  for  Cross-border  Investment  and  Settlement  of  Debt 
Securities – Hong Kong, Malaysia and Euroclear Bank, Hong Kong, 13 March 2012. 
 Deputy Governor Muhammad Ibrahim, Mr Anso Thiré, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good afternoon. Let me welcome you all to this press conference to announce the launch of 
the strategic alliance of the cross-border bond investment and settlement platforms in Hong 
Kong, Malaysia and Euroclear Bank. 
The Pilot Platform to be launched on 30 March under this strategic alliance goes well beyond 
commercial cooperation amongst the partners. It will advance the important policy objectives 
of  fostering  bond  market  development  and  promoting  financial  stability  at  both  global  and 
regional levels. 
There  are  strong  demand  and  supply  side  factors  that  focus  global  investors’  attention  on 
bond  markets  in  Asia.  On  the  demand  side,  the  European  sovereign  debt  problems  and 
successive downgrades of sovereign credit ratings of the advanced economies underscore 
the need for geographical diversification by global investors. Asia is the obvious choice as it 
stands  out  as  the  bright  spot  and  engine  for  global  growth.  According  to  IMF’  s  forecast, 
emerging Asia, with China as the core, will contribute about 57% of the world’ s GDP growth 
by 2016. Augmenting this favourable demand factor is the improved credit ratings of Asian 
sovereign issuers. There are now 14 Asian economies at investment grades, of which, nine 
are at or above the single A rating. 
At  the  same  time,  the  supply  side  factors  are  also  highly  favourable.  The  huge  financing 
needs of Asia will support a continuous expansion in bond issuance. According to the Asian 
Development Bank, Asia’ s infrastructure financing needs alone amounted to USD 8 trillion 
from  2010  to  2020.  Equally  important  is  the  emergence  of  new  and  attractive  bond  asset 
classes. The two products that have caught most attention of global investors are the sukuks 
in Malaysia and the RMB dim sum bonds in Hong Kong. This is rightly so as these products 
connect the global market with the vast and increasingly prominent financial systems in the 
Islamic world and China. 
We have seen very encouraging development of the sukuk market in Malaysia, the symbol of 
Islamic financing. The amount of outstanding sukuks in Malaysia increased substantially from 
MYR  146  billion  (USD  41.3  billion  equivalent)  at  the  end  of  2006  to  MYR  361  billion 
(USD 113.9 billion equivalent) at the end of 2011. Meanwhile, the growth of the RMB debt 
securities market has been phenomenal. In a short space of 5 years, the annual issuance 
amount  lodged  with  the  Central  Moneymarkets  Unit  (CMU)  in  Hong  Kong  increased  by 
16 times  from  a  modest  amount  of  RMB  10  billion  (USD  1.4  billion  equivalent)  in  2007  to 
RMB 172 billion (USD 27.3 billion equivalent) in 2011. The growth momentum is expected to 
pick  up  further  after  China’  s  announcement  to  formalise  the  use  of  RMB  in  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) in 2011. The upside is very significant as China’ s total FDI amounted to 
USD 116 billion in 2011, or RMB 750 billion equivalent. 
Besides  facilitating  the  rapid  development  of  the  sukuk  and  dim  sum  bond  markets,  more 
importantly,  the  Pilot  Platform  will  contribute  significantly  to  financial  stability  in  the  Asian 
region.  With 
fiscal 
consolidation, the two-speed recovery will continue to entice portfolio flows into Asia. The key 
challenges  for  Asia  are  to  channel  such  flows  to  productive  use,  reduce  concentration  in 
short-term positions of the more volatile asset classes, and to avoid such flows spiking up a 
the  advanced  economies  undergoing  structural  adjustment  and 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
property price bubble. Channelling the inflows into the bond market will serve these useful 
purposes as the investors are typically institutional investors who take long-term positions in 
strategic economic sectors. 
The global financial crisis has reminded us of the destructive powers of a liquidity crunch and 
the  need  for  quick  access  to  local  currency  liquidity  in  times  of  stress.  In  particular,  the 
increased risk aversion arising from the recent financial crises and heightened alertness to 
the  counterparty  exposure  have  raised  the  demand  for  secured  lending.  As  an  illustration, 
the  average  tripartite  collateral  management  deals  outstanding  administered  by  Euroclear 
Bank  increased  substantially  from  EUR  76  billion  in  2001  to  EUR  325  billion  in  2011.  An 
important  function  of  the  Pilot  Platform  is  to  enable  financial  institutions  to  make  use  of 
securities held in one of the partner systems as collateral to conduct secured borrowing in 
the local currency of another partner economy. As an example, a European bank can make 
use  of  its  securities  held  with  Euroclear  Bank  as  collateral  to  borrow  Hong  Kong  dollar  to 
meet the liquidity needs of its Hong Kong subsidiary. The cross-border and cross-currency 
collateral  management  service  to  be  provided  by  the  Pilot  Platform  is  a  timely  solution  to 
meet this market need, and will be a powerful tool to enhance financial stability in the partner 
economies. 
Talking  about  the  alliance  we  have,  we  are  indeed  very  fortunate  to  have  three  strong 
institutions to be the founding partners of the Pilot Platform – the RENTAS in Malaysia, the 
CMU  in  Hong  Kong,  and  the  Euroclear  Bank.  Each  will  bring  unique  and  valuable 
contribution  to  the  partnership  and  the  potential  synergy  would  be  substantial.  Through 
RENTAS,  global  investors  will  have  convenient  access  to  Islamic  bonds.  In  the  other 
direction,  Euroclear  Bank’  s  clients  will  benefit  from  the  large  and  increasingly  wealthy 
investor  base  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  Islamic  world.  Likewise,  the  CMU  will  provide  an 
easy  access  to  RMB  bonds  and  highly  rated  bonds  in  other  currencies  for  the  global 
investors and enrich Euroclear’ s investor base with the fast expanding investor clusters in 
greater China. Euroclear Bank, with over 300,000 securities in 2011 and holds clients’ assets 
valued at EUR 10.8 trillion, provides a huge reservoir to support cross-border cross-currency 
collateralised lending. Its large investor base will also provide a powerful platform for global 
investors  to  access  the  markets  in  Hong  Kong  and  Malaysia.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to thank Bank Negara Malaysia and Euroclear for sharing our vision and working 
with us to bring it to fruition.  
The  platform  will  offer  a  wide  range  of  services  to  global  and  domestic  investors.  These 
services  include  a  global  securities  database  containing  information  of  international  and 
domestic  securities,  provision  of  a  single  point  of  entry  to  allow  investors  to  buy  and  hold 
international  and  domestic  bonds  through  their  accounts  of  the  local  system,  cross-border 
issuance and settlement of bonds in foreign currencies on a delivery-versus-payment basis, 
provision of an effective and efficient channel for cross-border cross-currency collateralised 
lending and borrowing between financial institutions, and automation and standardisation of 
the  corporate  action  processing  such  as  interest  payments  and  redemption,  distribution  of 
corporate  action  notices,  and  exercise  of  custody  instructions.  My  colleague  Esmond  will 
explain these arrangements in greater details shortly. 
Finally, I would like to stress that the Pilot Platform to be launched is meant to be inclusive, 
not exclusive, and we welcome the participation of more parties. The benefits in promoting 
bond  market  development  and  financial  stability  can  only  increase  with  more  bond 
investment and settlement systems in the region joining as partners. We will continue to work 
closely  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  Euroclear  Bank  to  promote  the  platform  to  other 
central  banks  and  securities  settlement  systems  in  the  region  and  to  implement  additional 
services to the platform to meet evolving market needs. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
