Bojan Marković: National Bank of Serbia’s outlook on inflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Bojan  Marković,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the 
presentation of the Inflation Report, Belgrade, 16 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press and fellow economists, 
Declining  steadily  over  the  last  year,  inflation  fell  in  April  to  2.7%  year-on-year,  its 
lowest  level  since  comparable  records  are  available  from  the  beginning  of  1980. 
Consistent  with  our  projections  from  the  previous  Inflation  Reports,  the  inflation  figure  is 
slightly below the lower bound of the target tolerance band for April. From May, however, we 
expect inflation to rise at a moderate pace and to move temporarily around the upper bound 
of  the  target  tolerance  band  in  late  2012  and  the  first  half  of  2013,  only  to  return  back 
towards the target thereafter. 
Gross domestic product declined in the first quarter due to extremely cold weather, but also 
due to the contraction in economic activity of our key foreign trade partners. Recessionary 
trends in the euro area will continue to have a negative impact on the Serbian economy in 
the  remainder  of  the  year,  but  modest  economic  growth  of  0.5%  is  still  expected  in  2012 
given the start of production in the automotive industry.  
The National Bank of Serbia last revised its key policy rate in January by cutting it down to 
9.5%.  In  April,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  amended  the  Decision  on  Required  Reserves, 
lowering the FX reserve requirement ratio and increasing the share of FX required reserves 
to be allocated in dinars. 
 The new Inflation Report comes out at a time of post-election uncertainties as to how fast the 
future  government  will  be  formed.  From  the  viewpoint  of  fostering  macroeconomic 
stability  and  lowering  the  country  risk  premium,  it  is  desirable  that  the  future 
government  is  formed  promptly  and  that  it  undertakes  efficient  fiscal  consolidation 
measures  to  cut  the  budget  deficit  and  contain  public  debt.  This  also  includes  the 
continuation  of  the  arrangement  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  which  will  help 
improve  the  perception  of  country  risk,  and  thus  contribute  to  the  stabilisation  of  financial 
markets. 
The euro area sovereign debt crisis showed some signs of abatement following successful 
implementation  of  the  debt  swap  agreement  between  Greece  and  private  investors  and 
expansionary measures by the European Central Bank, but in the last few days uncertainty 
appeared again over the formation of the new Greek government. Furthermore, as indicated 
by  the  contraction  of  economic  activity  in  the  past  two  quarters,  the  situation  in  the  euro 
area’s  real  sector  remains  challenging.  Growth  forecasts  for  the  euro  area  for  the  current 
year remain negative, while countries in the region face muted growth prospects. 
Nonetheless,  Serbia’s  country  risk  premium  has  declined,  as  a  result  of  the  easing  of  the 
euro area sovereign debt crisis and expansionary measures taken by the European Central 
Bank,  the  EU’s  positive  decision  on  Serbia’s  candidate  status,  and  affirmation  of  the 
country’s credit rating. In fact, looking at the region, the sharpest fall in EMBI this year was 
registered for Serbia. 
The dinar nonetheless weakened against the euro. Depreciation pressures were driven by 
several factors: increased energy imports due to cold weather, lower exports, departure of 
the private owner from the Smederevo steel plant, postponed review of the arrangement with 
the  International  Monetary  Fund,  increased  government  spending,  and  reduced  capital 
inflow. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Together with a spell of extremely cold weather in February, recessionary trends in the euro 
area  and  sluggish  growth  of  the  regional  economies  have  led  to  a  contraction  in  Serbia’s 
economic activity in early 2012. According to preliminary estimates for the first quarter, gross 
domestic product fell by 0.5% from the previous quarter and by 1.3% from the same period 
last year. 
Unfavourable weather conditions in February strained and even restricted electricity supply 
to  a  large  number  of  enterprises.  Together  with  the  suspension  of  operations  of  the 
Smederevo steel plant, this pushed manufacturing down by as much as 12%. However, as 
the  production  not  only  normalised  in  March,  but  also  compensated  in  part  for  what  was 
missed in February, manufacturing picked up by 19%. 
The same factors had a decisive impact on exports, which followed a pattern similar to that of 
manufacturing in the first three months of 2012, while recording a mild fall at quarterly level. 
The  steepest  drop  in  exports  was  registered  for  base  metals,  chemicals  and  chemical 
products, while exports of agricultural products and electrical equipment increased. 
Cold weather prompted an increase in imports of energy, and thereby, intermediate goods, 
pushing  overall  imports  higher.  On  the  other  hand,  imports  of  equipment  and  consumer 
goods recorded a decline. 
Economic  activity  contracted  in  the  first  quarter.  The  negative  contribution  came  from  net 
exports,  as  well  as  lower  private  sector  investment,  signalled  by  a  dip  in  imports  of 
equipment and reduced construction activity, and adverse weather conditions. 
Conversely,  an  upturn  in  retail  trade  points  to  a  positive,  though  modest,  contribution  of 
household consumption to economic activity. 
Economic  activity  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  upcoming  quarters  and  reach  roughly 
0.5% for the entire year 2012. Over the short run, increased government expenditure in the 
first half of the year exerts some positive contribution to domestic demand. But, euro area 
recession  and  dented  economic  growth  of  Serbia’s  other  foreign  trade  partners  will  reflect 
negatively on demand for Serbian products and the inflow of FDI in the course of this year. 
Despite  this,  past  and  current  investments  in  export  branches  of  industry,  primarily  in  the 
automotive industry, will lead to increased production and exports from the second half of the 
current year. Past weakening of the dinar will also give impetus to exports growth. In view of 
high unemployment and modest economic growth, final consumption is expected to contract 
this year as well. Coupled with a fall in investment demand and past weakening of the dinar, 
this will probably result in lower imports in 2012. 
With production picking up in the mostly export-oriented automotive industry, a more 
palpable  growth  of  the  Serbian  economy  of  3%  could  be  expected  in  2013.  This, 
however, will largely hinge on the speed of the global economic recovery. Growth may 
turn  out  slower  than  anticipated  in  case  stricter  fiscal  consolidation  measures  are 
applied.  In  our  view,  however,  application  of  stricter  consolidation  measures  is 
desirable as it would contribute to macroeconomic stability, public debt sustainability, 
lowering of the country risk and, consequently, of the cost of borrowing, all of which 
would have a positive long-term impact on the economic activity in Serbia. 
We wish to underline again that sustainability of economic growth in Serbia is more important 
than  its  pace,  which  assumes  further  shifting  of  the  sources  of  growth  from  domestic  final 
consumption towards net exports and investments, primarily into export-oriented industries.  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Inflation  has  been  on  a  steady  decline  throughout  the  last  year,  mostly  as  a  result  of 
weakening  cost-push  pressures  on  food  prices,  low  aggregate  demand  and  restrictive 
monetary policy measures applied at times of strongest inflationary pressures. 
The fall in year-on-year inflation was particularly pronounced in the first months of the year, 
as substantial price hikes from early 2011 dropped out from the calculation. Inflation thus fell 
from  7.0%  in  December  to  3.2%  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  and  to  2.7%  in  April  2012, 
which is the lowest year-on-year inflation rate since records are available beginning in 1980. 
This is also slightly below the lower bound of the target tolerance band for that month. Such 
inflation movements are consistent with our projections from the previous Inflation Reports.  
Consumer  prices  increased  by  2.0%  in  the  first  quarter,  under  the  influence  of  several 
diverging factors. 
The rise in import prices on the back of a weaker dinar has so far produced only a minor 
inflationary effect, as importers, faced with low demand, abstained as much as possible from 
raising  domestic  prices.  There  were,  however,  some  price  increases  in  this  respect,  most 
notably in the case of foreign currency indexed prices such as flat rentals and cars. This is 
also the key reason behind the rise in market-determined prices of non-food products and 
services. 
Excluding  a  substantial  increase  in  prices  of  eggs,  food  prices  continued  to  have  a 
disinflationary effect in the first quarter. 
By contrast, a more notable push to consumer price growth came from an increase in prices 
of petroleum products on the back of rising global oil prices early in the year, and prices of 
cigarettes following the regular adjustment of excises to consumer price growth in the prior 
year. In the year to date, there have been almost no increases in administered prices. 
After  reaching  minimum  level  in  April  2012,  year-on-year  inflation  is  expected  to  rise  at  a 
moderate pace from May and return towards the target. It will hover close to the upper bound 
of the target tolerance band in late 2012 and the first half of 2013 and thereafter fall back 
towards the target.  
In  the  second  quarter  of  2012,  with  the  coming  of  the  new  agricultural  season,  inflation 
growth will be driven primarily by rising prices of fruit and vegetables. Our expectations are 
based on the fact that these prices are currently low because of a drop in the prior season 
and that there will be some scope for their increase even if the new agricultural season turns 
out to be average. 
Moreover, we expect that the absence of administered price growth in the year to date will be 
compensated  after  the  formation  of  the  future  government,  which  will  impact  on  growth  in 
headline inflation in that period. Over the medium term, however, it is likely that growth in 
administered  prices  will  slow  down  from  earlier  years  as  they  come  close  to  their 
economically sustainable level. 
After  reaching  their  historical  high  in  euros  early  in  the  year,  global  oil  prices  have  been 
vigorously declining since the beginning of April, and are likely to generate a disinflationary 
effect over the coming months. 
In addition, given the high unemployment rate and a modest outlook for economic growth in 
both Serbia and its major foreign trade partners, we estimate that low aggregate demand will 
weigh  down  on  price  growth  in  the  coming  period.  The  expected  fiscal  consolidation 
measures of the future government will work in the same direction. 
Another reason for deceleration in price growth are lower inflation expectations which over 
the last eight months have fallen by around 2 percentage points. 
Growth  in  import  prices  driven  by  past  weakening  of  the  dinar  may  generate  inflationary 
pressures. It is, however, probable that importers will react rather by cutting their margins in 
an  environment  of  low  demand  than  by  raising  prices.  Furthermore,  if  the  expected  fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
consolidation measures of the future government turn out to be intensive enough, they may 
strengthen the dinar and push down import prices in autumn. 
However, overall, the coming of the new agricultural season, the past rise in import prices 
and  sharper  administered  price  growth  after  the  formation  of  the  future  government  will 
(despite  low  aggregate  demand)  lead  inflation  closer  (at  a  moderate  pace)  to  the  upper 
bound of the target tolerance band by the end of the current and in the first half of the next 
year. Thereafter, inflation is expected to gradually return towards the target. 
The  key  risks  to  this  projection  are  associated  with  the  future  government’s  fiscal  policy, 
developments  in  the  international  environment  and  movements  in  food  and  administered 
prices. 
At  a  time  when  financial  markets  are  highly  sensitive  to  indicators  of  public  debt 
sustainability, the absence of fast and vigorous fiscal consolidation measures of the future 
government  may  produce  inflationary  consequences  through  rising  risk  premium  and 
elevated depreciation pressures. 
If on the other hand, fiscal consolidation measures involve VAT hikes, this will bring about a 
one-off temporary rise in prices, but in the medium-run inflationary pressures would weaken 
owing to the strengthening of the dinar and falling risk premium. 
Movements  in  the  risk  premium  and  the  exchange  rate,  including  the  speed  of  Serbia’s 
economic growth, will also be affected by developments in the euro area, which still faces 
numerous challenges as financial markets react vehemently to every unfavourable piece of 
news. 
Risks acting in both directions, associated with coming of the new agricultural season, are 
present in this period of the year as well. Weather conditions and movements in world prices 
of agricultural products will have a significant impact on trends in these prices in the domestic 
market and therefore on cost-push pressures on food prices. 
Uncertainties also prevail in terms of administered price movements, i.e. the speed at which 
the  future  government  and  local  government  authorities  will  remove  the  disparities  in  the 
pricing of services under their remit. 
 Since January 2012, the Executive Board of the National Bank has not revised the key policy 
rate which currently stands at 9.5%. However, given the inflation projection, a decision was 
made in April to reduce the reserve requirement ratio from 30% to 29% on liabilities with the 
maturity  of  up  to  two  years,  and  from  25%  to  22%  for  the  maturity  over  two  years.  At  the 
same time, the dinar portion allocated against foreign exchange reserve requirements was 
raised by 5 percentage points for all maturities. The aim of this measure was to contribute to 
moderate  stabilisation  of  inflation  movements  and  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market,  to  slightly  reduce  the  costs  of  bank  funding  and  stimulate  banks  to  use  long-term 
sources of funding. All of the above is likely to have a positive impact on financial stability.  
The future path of the key policy rate will depend primarily on the pace and intensity of fiscal 
consolidation to be undertaken by the future government. Price and financial stability can 
be  delivered  at  a 
lower  degree  of  monetary  restrictiveness  provided  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reforms are more intensive and effective. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
