Michael Gondwe: Importance of the SME sector in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the launch of 
the Soweto branch of Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited, New Soweto market, Soweto, Lusaka, 
31 August 2012. 
  The  Standard  Bank  Chief  Executive  for  Personal  and  Business  Banking  in 
Africa, Mr Terry Moodley;  
The Managing Director of Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited, Mr Dennis Kennedy;  
Distinguished Customers of Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited;  
Management and Staff of Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I feel honoured and privileged to be amongst you this morning. I wish to thank the Stanbic 
Bank  Management  for  extending  an  invitation  to  me  to  deliver  a  keynote  address  on  this 
important occasion.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to begin by applauding Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited 
for opening the Soweto Trader Branch. I commend Stanbic Bank as I observe that the Trader 
Branch is specifically designed with the Small and Medium Sized Enterprise (SME) sector in 
mind. This branch opening fully complements the Bank of Zambia which has set Financial 
Inclusion as one of its key strategic objectives. It is our expectation that the opening of this 
branch will provide opportunities for the SMEs to access financial services which for a long 
time  have  been  lacking  in  this  sector.  The  fact  that  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  is  opening  its 
branch in a part of the city where most of the business players are unbanked is victory for the 
financial  inclusion  process  which  seeks  to  get  more  Zambians  banked  and  more  SMEs 
access financial products.  
Distinguished Guests, the role that SMEs play in an economy cannot be over-emphasised. 
SMEs  provide  sustainable  economic  growth 
job  creation,  development  of 
entrepreneurial skills and the potential to contribute significantly to export earnings. However, 
provision  of  finance  to  the  SME  sector  in  Zambia  still  remains  a  challenge.  A  survey 
conducted by the World Bank on Enterprise Development in Zambia (2007) identified poor 
access to finance as a major impediment to investment and growth in Zambia. Only 16% of 
firms surveyed reported having a loan or line of credit from a financial institution, compared 
with 23% for the region and 35% for all countries surveyed. Therefore, while Zambia’s cost of 
doing  business  index  has  progressively  improved  in  recent  years,  access  to  finance 
continues to feature among the three key constraints to investment and growth.  
It is, nevertheless, gratifying to note that commercial banks in Zambia are slowly realising the 
importance  of  the  SME  sector.  You  may  wish  to  note  that  at  the  end  of  December  2011, 
commercial banks’ lending to SMEs was at 21.0% of total loans, an improvement from 17.0% 
in  December,  2010.  This  also  represented  an  increase  in  lending  to  SMEs  by  68.9%  to 
K2,322.5 billion from K1,375.0 billion in 2010. Although this trend is impressive, much more 
needs  to  be  done  in  order  for  the  sector  to  meaningfully  contribute  to  the  growth  of  the 
country’s  economy.  Provision  of  finance  to  the  SMEs  can  be  a  leading  conduit  for 
transforming  our  economy  by  opening  up  business  opportunities  as  well  as  channelling 
resources more efficiently and effectively to the sectors that require it the most.  
through 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Distinguished  Guests,  To  see  a  commercial  bank  bring  its  services  to  the  heart  of  the 
informal  sector  is  an  encouraging  sign  not  only  to  the  Bank  of  Zambia  but  to  the 
entrepreneurs  of  Soweto  Market  as  it  demonstrates  the  confidence  that  the  Bank  has 
entrusted  in  the  SME  sector.  It  is  also  our  hope  that  the  perception  of  banks  being 
intimidating to the informal sector will be a thing of the past thus alleviating the challenges 
faced by SMEs in accessing finance.  
Furthermore,  by  partnering  with  the  local  entrepreneurs  in  Soweto  Market  which  is  the 
biggest market in Zambia, Stanbic Bank is encouraging a culture of banking for a myriad of 
Micro small and medium entrepreneurs. Because of the key role that SME sector plays in the 
economy, the Bank of Zambia will ensure that financial institutions are fully responsive to the 
unique characteristics of this sector.  
The  Bank  of  Zambia  attaches  great  importance  to  initiatives  that  seek  to  enhance  the 
provision  of financial  services  to  the  underserved  sectors  of the  economy.  The  opening of 
this  Branch  today  is  a  demonstration  of  this  important  objective.  In  recognition  of  the 
importance  of  the  financial  sector  towards  national  development,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has 
continued  to  address  various  weaknesses  in  the  Zambian  financial  system,  among  them 
being the low financial intermediation and limited access to finance.  
The Bank of Zambia is encouraged to see banks in the country exploring new ways in which 
they  can  take  banking  services  where  they  are  needed  the  most  and  this  is  mainly  to  the 
unbanked. On its part, the Bank of Zambia has continued to implement measures to reduce 
the cost of borrowing. In the recent past, the Bank introduced the Policy Rate which is aimed 
at fostering transparency in the determination of lending rates. Under the new framework, all 
financial  institutions  are  now  required  to  realign  the  pricing  of  loans  with  reference  to  the 
Policy Rate. 
Furthermore,  in  January  2012,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  introduced  the  new  minimum  capital 
requirements for commercial banks. The minimum primary capital was raised from K12 billion 
to  K104  billion  and  K520  billion  for  locally  and  foreign  owned  banks,  respectively.  This 
measure  is  intended  to  make  commercial  banks  more  resilient  to  financial  instability  and 
provide  banks  with  strong  balance  sheets  that  would  meaningfully  support  economic 
activities in the country.  
I am pleased to note that Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited was one of the first banks to reduce 
their  lending  rates  in  line  with  the  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  policy  rate.  I  am  also 
pleased that Stanbic fulfilled the new capital requirements well ahead of the time set for the 
exercise. Before the end of May 2012 Stanbic had fully met the capital increase requirement 
well ahead of the deadline of 31st December 2012. We are confident that the measures taken 
collectively by the Bank of Zambia and commercial banks will provide enhanced scope for 
more financing at lower cost thereby facilitating further growth of the economy and the SME 
sector in particular.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me take this opportunity to appeal to all SMEs and individuals 
that obtain financing from financial institutions to be responsible borrowers by ensuring that 
these loans are paid back as the failure to settle obligations destabilises the banking sector 
and leads to increased cost of borrowing. As you all are aware, banks play a crucial role in 
financial intermediation and this is enhanced by branch network expansion programs. Thus, 
there is need for all financial sector players including MSMEs to play their role in augmenting 
savings  mobilization  which  will  in-turn  provide  the  necessary  financing  to  the  productive 
sectors in the economy.  
In  concluding,  I  would  like  to  encourage  banks  to  seek  various  ways  of  supporting  the 
SMEs not only in Soweto Market but in other underserved places throughout the country. For 
instance  Buseko  Market  in  Lusaka  and  Chisokone  Market  in  Kitwe  would  offer  huge 
opportunities for banks and other financial players. Let me also congratulate Stanbic bank for 
introducing  the  SME  Tamanga  account  and  for  streamlining  processes  such  as  customer 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
evaluation  and  account  opening  procedures  to  cater  for  the  special  circumstances  of  this 
very important part of our economic sector.  
It  is  now  my  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  the  Soweto  Branch  of  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia 
Limited officially open.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
