Jens Weidmann: Rebalancing Europe 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at Chatham House, 
London, 28 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Thank  you,  Mr  Popham,  for  the  words  of  welcome.  This  is  a  very  special  event  for  me. 
Chatham House has been held in great respect for almost a hundred years – not only in the 
UK  but  also  in  Germany  and  across  the  globe.  The  privilege  I  feel  is  underscored  by  the 
distinguished audience that has gathered here today. I feel truly honoured to speak to you in 
such a famous venue. 
About  six  weeks  ago,  I  came  across  an  article  in  the  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  a 
leading  German  daily.  The  author  of  the  article,  an  economist  at  the  London  School  of 
Economics, had chosen the title: “The fanatic central bank – where there is a will, there is 
always just one way”. 
Well,  I  did  come  here  wearing  the  hat  –  or  rather  the  suit  –  of  a  central  banker,  and  of  a 
“Bundesbanker”  at  that.  The  ideas  that  I  am  going  to  present  might  therefore  be  seen  as 
fairly conservative and principled. But, as I hope to convince you, they are still well short of 
being fanatic. I did not come here to deliver a lecture. I am, in fact, deeply convinced that 
sharing and discussing ideas will lead to better solutions. During the next quarter of an hour, 
I will try merely to outline my line of reasoning in order to leave enough scope for discussion. 
But first, a brief look at where we currently stand in these challenging times. 
Europe off balance 
2. 
We  face  a  crisis  that  is  no  longer  confined  to  individual  countries.  Throughout  Europe,  it 
weighs heavily on people’s minds and challenges the viability of monetary union in its current 
form. It is obvious to all of us that the crisis has to be resolved and future crises must be 
prevented. 
The  first  step  must  be  to  contain  the  crisis,  to  prevent  it  from  spreading.  To  this  end, 
policymakers  have  surrounded  the  crisis  with  a  “Wall  of  Money”,  which  has  meanwhile 
reached a height of €500 billion. Ring-fencing is certainly a sensible approach, but just like 
the “Tower of Babel” the “Wall of Money” will never reach heaven. If we continue to make it 
higher  and  higher,  we  will,  in  fact,  run  into  more  worldly  constraints  –  both  financial  and 
political ones. 
And, whether we like it or not, we are also changing the rules of the game in monetary union 
and might set incentives that lead to new problems in the future. 
In any case, we must realise that all the money we put on the table will not buy us a lasting 
solution to the crisis. As Mervyn King frequently and rightly states: “all we can buy is time” – 
time that must be used to address the root causes of the crisis. 
I  think  we  all  agree  that  the  crisis  has  two  major  causes:  first,  the  macroeconomic 
imbalances that have built up in recent years and, second, public and private debt that has 
ballooned  in  some  member  states.  Both  problems  must  eventually  be  addressed.  Europe 
has to be rebalanced. 
But views on how to achieve this goal differ. Given the unprecedented character of the crisis 
and its complexity, this seems only natural to me. Still, I hope that the fault lines will converge 
at some point in the future and that a consistent approach will emerge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Now, what are the specific questions we have to address? 
Rebalancing Europe 
3. 
Frankly, there are about a million questions to be answered. But to simplify matters a bit and 
to keep my outline reasonably short, I will ignore some of them. Altogether, I will address just 
two questions today. 
The first one relates to the macroeconomic imbalances. Their most prominent symptom are 
diverging  current  accounts  –  countries  such  as  Greece  run  persistent  current  account 
deficits, while countries such as Germany run persistent surpluses. The question is: which 
countries have to adjust? Those with a current account deficit? Those with a surplus? Both? 
The second question looks at the additional problem of public debt. It is obvious that public 
deficits  have  to  be  brought  down  significantly.  But  is  it  sensible  to  consolidate  while 
simultaneously  correcting  macroeconomic  imbalances  by  deleveraging  and  by  rebalancing 
the current account? 
Rebalancing current accounts 
3.1 
Let  us  begin  by  looking  at  the  first  question.  Normally,  exchange  rate  movements  are  an 
important  channel  through  which  unsustainable  current  account  positions  are  corrected  – 
eventually,  deficit  countries  devalue,  while  surplus  countries  revalue  their  currencies.  The 
reaction this triggers in imports and exports then helps to bring the current account closer to 
balance. 
In a monetary union, however, this is obviously no longer an option. Spain no longer has a 
peseta to devalue; Germany no longer has a deutsche mark to revalue. Other things must 
therefore give instead: prices, wages, employment and output. 
Which brings me back to my original question: which countries have to adjust? 
The typical German position could be described as follows: the deficit countries must adjust. 
They  must  address  their  structural  problems.  They  must  reduce  domestic  demand.  They 
must become more competitive and they must increase their exports. 
But this position has not gone uncontested. Indeed, a number of renowned economists take 
a  different  view.  They  fear  that  it  would  be  too  much  of  a  burden  for  the  deficit  countries 
alone to adjust. They consequently suggest that surplus countries should shoulder at least 
part of the burden. 
To avoid confusion, it is important to make a distinction at this point. A distinction between 
the adjustment as such and the burden it entails. Only the burden can be shared. I think most 
people would agree that the adjustment itself has to take place in the deficit countries. It is 
true that surplus countries have benefited through higher exports. But ultimately, it was the 
deficit  countries  that  operated  an  unsustainable  model  defined  by  a  credit-fuelled  boom  in 
domestic demand, and this model has to be reformed. Not every deficit country needs the 
same reforms, of course, but all require some sort of adjustment. 
By contrast, it is sometimes suggested that rebalancing should be undertaken by “meeting in 
the  middle”,  that  is  by  making  surplus  countries  such  as  Germany  less  competitive.  This 
suggestion implies that the adjustment as such would be shared between deficit and surplus 
countries. But the question we have to ask ourselves is: “where would that take us?” 
The competitive edge some economies enjoy did not come for free. It is the result of often 
painful adjustments among workers and within firms. Giving part of it up to ease the pressure 
on deficit countries might make these countries better off in relative terms. But would it not 
make everyone poorer in absolute terms? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We have to acknowledge that Europe is not an island but part of a globalised world. And at 
the global level, we are competing with economies such as the United States or China. I ask 
you: how can we, how can Europe succeed in this world if we willingly give up our hard-won 
competitiveness?  To  succeed,  Europe  as  a  whole  has  to  become  more  dynamic,  more 
inventive and more productive. 
To  make  a  more  popular  comparison:  imagine  that  in  the  Champions  League  Barcelona 
were denied Lionel Messi just so that the other teams, including Bayern Munich, had a better 
chance  of  winning.  Would  that  be  a  sensible  way  to  rebalance  the  competitiveness  of 
Europe’s top teams? 
In  my  view,  we  will  gain  nothing  if  we  try  to  rebalance  by  actively  shifting  weights  at  both 
ends of the scale. 
A second point is this: a large proportion of the current account deficits and surpluses result 
from  trade  with  countries  outside  the  euro  area.  Even  if  surplus  countries  expanded  their 
imports,  this  would  help  their  fellow  euro-area  countries  to  increase  their  exports  only 
marginally. The latter must first offer something other euro-area countries would want to buy 
from them rather than from someone else. 
To  achieve  this,  the  deficit  countries  must  take  measures  that  unlock  their  potential  to 
increase productivity and improve competitiveness. This would considerably reduce the cost 
of adjustment and the time it takes. 
The  OECD  and  other  organisations  have  for  years  been  promoting  a  long  list  of  reforms. 
These aim at making labour markets more flexible, opening up product markets and making 
the public sector more efficient. A number of reforms have already been announced and, in 
some  instances,  implemented  in  countries  such  as  Portugal,  Spain  and  Italy.  And  we  are 
already  seeing  some  promising  results,  especially  in  Ireland.  But  despite  these  first  steps, 
there is still a long way to go. 
Such an adjustment will initially place a huge burden on the people in deficit countries, even 
taking into account the extraordinary boom in the years prior to the crisis. But will the burden 
be too heavy to bear? A central fear is that of deflation. Unless productivity growth increases 
miraculously, it is certainly true that prices and wages will have to fall in many cases. But we 
must not confuse such a one-time adjustment with full-fledged deflation. 
And we must acknowledge that surplus countries are already helping to ease the burden of 
adjustment. What are the rescue packages other than publicly guaranteed interim loans to 
facilitate the adjustment? 
Another  thing  we  should  not  forget  is  this:  of  course,  surplus  countries  will  eventually  be 
affected  as  deficit  countries  adjust.  Not  every  country  on  earth  can  run  a  current  account 
surplus – unless we trade with “space aliens” as Paul Krugman recently suggested. 
As  the  deficit  countries  import  less  and  become  more  competitive  exporters,  surplus 
countries  will  run  lower  surpluses.  The  key  issue  is  whether  this  happens  as  a  result  of 
market processes or as a result of efforts to fine-tune aggregate demand in the euro area. I 
would welcome the former, but I object to the latter. 
Consolidating public budgets 
3.2 
Reforms aimed at promoting growth are an important part of the adjustment process – I think 
everybody agrees on that. But what about consolidation? A frequently cited argument is that 
it  would  be too  much  of  a  burden for  countries  to  correct macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
consolidate public debt at the same time. The result, it is said, would be a vicious cycle of 
falling demand and slowing economic growth. 
It  is  true  that  consolidation  might,  under  normal  circumstances,  dampen  economic  growth. 
But  structural  reforms  and  consolidation  are  often  hard  to  disentangle.  For  example,  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
bloated  public  sector  or  very  generous  pension  system  are  both  a  drag  on  growth  and  a 
burden on the budget. And another question is: are these normal times? It is quite obvious 
that  everybody  views  public  debt  as  a  major  threat.  The  markets  do,  politicians  do  and 
people on the street do. 
A wide-spread lack of trust in public finances weighs heavily on growth: there is uncertainty 
regarding  potential  future  tax  increases,  while  funding  costs  rise  for  private  and  public 
creditors alike. In such a situation, consolidation might inspire confidence and actually help 
the economy to grow. 
In my view, the risks of consolidation are consequently being exaggerated. In any case, there 
is  little  alternative.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  George  Osborne  recently  said:  “You 
can’t borrow your way out of debt”. In my opinion, he is absolutely right; the only promising 
approach is to “cut” your way out.  
A bigger role for the Eurosystem? 
3.3 
“Stop”,  some  might  say  at  this  point,  “it  is  true  that  member  states  will  eventually  have  to 
reform,  and  governments  will  have  to  tighten  their  belts.  But  that  still  leaves  the  ECB. 
Shouldn’t the ECB temporarily ease the pressure even more?” 
Usually, the boundary between monetary and fiscal policy is clear-cut for good reason. Once 
a central bank becomes involved in fiscal policy, it eventually loses its independence and its 
credibility as an inflation-fighter. This is the story told not only by economic theory but also by 
historical experience. 
Just  think  about  the  unholy  “marriage”  between  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  Italian  treasury  in 
1975. Banca d’Italia promise of marriage was to act as buyer of last resort for government 
bonds. Until the “divorce” in 1981, Italian government debt more than tripled, while average 
inflation stood at 17%. After Banca d’Italia was granted greater independence, inflation rates 
began  to  fall  significantly.  Or  think  of  the  UK:  after  the  new  monetary  framework  was 
established  in  1993  and  the  Bank  of  England  was  granted  greater  independence,  inflation 
rates also came down. 
However,  during  a  crisis  the  boundary  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  can  become 
blurred. To contain the crisis, central banks have to act more flexibly and accept more risks 
on  their  balance  sheets.  I  think  this  is  unavoidable,  and  the  Eurosystem  has  already 
undertaken tremendous efforts in this direction. 
But  although  there  are  times  when  things  are  not  black  and  white,  I  do  not  think  clear 
distinctions are completely irrelevant. This is particularly pertinent in a monetary union where 
member  states  retain  their  autonomy  in  fiscal  and  economic  policy.  In  such  a  setting, 
governments  have  an  incentive  to  accumulate  debt;  this  is  known  as  a  deficit  bias.  To 
counter that incentive, the EU Treaty explicitly prohibits monetising public debt. 
If  central  banks  went  down  this  route,  they  would  be  redistributing  fiscal  risks  and  costs 
among  the  taxpayers  of  the  euro  area.  However,  this  is  the  prerogative  of  national 
parliaments. If central banks’ balance sheets are used to bring about redistribution and if the 
implied costs become apparent, this could have a highly corrosive effect on the credibility of 
central  banks  and  on  their  independence.  Credibility  and  independence  are,  however, 
indispensable to maintain price stability and to ensure the acceptance of monetary union as 
a whole. This would be too high a price to pay, and again we would merely be buying time. 
Conclusion 
4. 
This brings me back to the beginning of my speech: we must not just contain the crisis, we 
must  resolve  it.  To  achieve  this  goal,  we  must  address  two  central  issues:  the  problem  of 
excessive public debt and the problem of macroeconomic imbalances. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Countries  with  current  account  deficits  and  excessive  public  debt  must  act.  They  must 
implement  structural  reforms  and  they  must  consolidate  their  budgets  to  get  back  onto  a 
stable  growth  path.  Of  course,  adjustment  is  a  huge  challenge  for  the  people  in  these 
countries  but  the  status  quo  is  clearly  unsustainable,  and  doing  nothing  will  lead  to  even 
sharper corrections. By contrast, taking up the challenge will open the doors to a more stable 
and more prosperous future. 
In my speech, I have focused on the member states. This is not to deny that an overhaul of 
the institutional framework of monetary union is equally pressing. Member states have made 
it  clear  that  they  want  to  retain  their  autonomy  in  fiscal  policy.  But  in  that  case  we  need 
stricter  rules  to  counter  the  deficit  bias  that  I  mentioned  before.  Some  progress  has  been 
made on this issue. Now, it is decisive that the rules are applied rigorously. 
In  addition,  placing  monetary  union  on  a  sounder  footing  is  closely  linked  to  regulatory 
reforms  in  the  financial  system.  But  I  will  leave  these  important  issues  for  the  discussion, 
rather than going into them right now. 
Admittedly,  the  crisis  has  opened  our  eyes  to  structural  flaws  at  many  levels.  But  this 
sobering experience has also provided the impetus to correct these shortcomings. The time 
has come to move from containing the crisis to resolving it. If we have the will to make the 
right choices, we will be able to rebalance Europe and lay the foundation for a stronger, more 
stable  monetary  union.  As  Winston  Churchill  said:  “Difficulties  mastered  are  opportunities 
won”. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  presented  my  ideas  to  you  and  I  now  look  forward  to 
discussing them with you. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
