Gill Marcus: The changing mandates of central banks – the challenges 
for domestic policy 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Gordon 
Institute of Business Science (GIBS), Johannesburg, 30 May 2012. 
 Good evening, and thank you for the opportunity to be with you. It is always a pleasure to 
return to GIBS as I was personally associated with this school after my term of office as a 
Deputy Governor expired in 2004, and have a great deal of respect for the forums you create 
for open dialogue.  
One would have thought that a return to the South African Reserve Bank would be relatively 
straightforward because of my previous experience in central banking. However, I found a 
very different world. Not only had the environment in which central banks operate changed 
dramatically, the expectations of central banks as reflected in their extended mandates had 
also changed.  
In  the  early  to  mid-2000s  leading  up  to  the  global  financial  crisis  there  was  an  emerging 
macroeconomic  theory  and  policy  consensus.  The  period  was  known  as  the  Great 
Moderation, following an apparent trend towards macroeconomic convergence, particularly in 
the  advanced  economies.  Business  cycles  appeared  to  be  more  synchronised  with  lower 
amplitudes,  and  low  inflation  prevailed  in  most  countries.  Some  went  as  far  as  to  suggest 
that both business cycles and inflation were dead. Inflation targeting had become a broadly 
accepted  monetary  policy  framework,  making  price  stability  the  overriding  objective.  The 
framework  was  widely  credited  for  contributing  to  this  benign  environment.  Mervyn  King, 
Governor of the Bank of England, once remarked that a sign of a successful monetary policy 
was  when  it  became  boring,  and  indeed  it  seemed  that  the  world  was  on  its  way  in  that 
direction.  Well,  all  I  can  say  is  “bring  back  boring”.  At  the  same  time,  while  many  central 
banks  had  implicit  financial  stability  mandates,  the  evolving  trend  at  that  time  was  for  the 
regulation and supervision of the banking and financial sectors to move out of central banks. 
Notable examples were in the UK and Australia, and serious consideration was also given to 
moving  bank  supervision  out  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  the  early  2000s.  The 
focus of central banks appeared to be narrowing.  
Today  things  have  changed  quite  dramatically.  Monetary  policy  and  central  banking  in 
general has become anything but boring, and rather than taking a back seat in the economy, 
central banks are now at the forefront of attempts to stabilise and repair the damaged global 
economy.  The  mandates  of  central  banks  have  been  extended  in  numerous  countries, 
including in our own, bringing with it new and difficult challenges. In my remarks this evening 
I will focus on the growth and financial stability aspects of broadened mandates in the South 
African context. 
The modern mandate of central banks had focused primarily on price stability, reinforced by 
the increased adoption of inflation targeting. The simplistic view of inflation targeting is that 
all a central bank has to do is to conduct policy in such a way as to keep inflation in line with 
the target. Other possible objectives of monetary policy are seen to be secondary or not the 
concern of monetary policy. This relates in particular to economic growth, and by extension 
to  employment.  Although  the  Bank  has  often  been  criticised  for  not  being  sufficiently 
concerned  about  growth,  we  are  also  criticised  by  those  who  believe  that  we  have  gone 
beyond our mandate by focusing on growth. 
In  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  is  clear  that  growth  and  employment  became 
foremost concerns of most central banks, particularly in those economies where the recovery 
was  slow  and  protracted,  and  where  inflation  was  not  perceived  to  be  a  threat.  The 
persistence of the extraordinarily low interest rate environment in the advanced economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
attests  to  that.  So  is  this  focus  on  growth  a  new  mandate  for  central  banks  and  an 
undermining of the primary inflation objective? 
In  this  respect,  inflation  targeting  has  often  been  misunderstood,  or  oversimplified.  It  is 
important to distinguish between strict and flexible inflation targeting. A strict inflation targeter 
is one that only focuses on inflation to the exclusion of all other possible objectives. As such, 
it is a theoretical construct as in reality no central bank acts in this way. A flexible inflation 
targeter, by contrast, puts some weight on the deviation of output from potential (the output 
gap), and this weight can change depending on circumstances. In effect this implies that the 
objective of monetary policy is to achieve the inflation target with output in line with potential. 
The  focus  however  is  on  deviations  from  potential  output,  as  it  is  generally  believed  that 
monetary policy has limited, if any, long run impact on the growth potential of the economy. 
This is the domain of other policies. The flexibility is manifested when concern for the state of 
the economy can result in deciding on a longer time horizon for achieving the inflation target, 
in order to minimise the negative impacts on output growth. It also follows that if inflation is in 
line with its target and if inflation expectations are well anchored, more weight can be given 
to  stabilising  or  increasing  growth  that  is  below  potential,  without  sacrificing  much  price 
stability. This does not imply a change in mandate, and is consistent with a flexible inflation 
targeting framework, such as we have in South Africa. 
What does appear to have changed is that the burden of stabilisation and growth stimulus is 
falling increasingly on central banks, particularly in those countries that no longer have any 
fiscal space. In many countries, the response to the crisis was initially through both monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  easing.  However,  the  measures  taken  did  not  resolve  the  crisis  and  an 
unanticipated  consequence  was  that,  in  a  many  instances,  this  led  to  excessive  and 
unsustainable deficits and debt ratios.  For example, in 2007, government debt to GDP ratios 
in the US and the UK were 62 per cent and 44 per cent. By 2012 they have almost doubled 
and expected to reach 103 per cent and 87 per cent respectively. In the euro area, the debt 
ratios of Greece and Ireland increased from 105 per cent and 25 per cent, to 157 per cent 
and  122  per  cent  over  the  same  period.  Of  these  four  countries,  only  the  US  is  currently 
experiencing  positive  growth.  The  costs  of  servicing  this  debt  has  also  increased 
significantly,  particularly  in  the  peripheral  Eurozone  countries,  as  doubts  about  their 
sustainability persist. 
This rapid expansion has resulted in fiscal consolidation or retrenchment becoming the order 
of the day in many, mainly advanced, countries, even where growth has not fully recovered. 
In short the global crisis has continued to mutate, and we now face the challenge of systemic 
banking weakness in a number of countries, for instance Spain, sovereign debt and possible 
default in parts of the Eurozone, and high and rising unemployment. The unemployment rate 
in  the  Eurozone  has  risen  to  10,9  per  cent,  with  Spanish  unemployment  at  24,1  per  cent. 
Fiscal austerity has reinforced the slow growth, and consequently increased the burden on 
monetary  policy.  Although  the  mandate  may  be  the  same,  the  shared  responsibility  is  no 
longer there, and more is expected from central banks. At times these expectations may be 
beyond what monetary policy can reasonably be expected to deliver.  
In this context we can consider whether the conduct of monetary policy in South Africa been 
much different in the post crisis period. Some have argued that the current accommodative 
stance of monetary policy is part of a new mandate, and a deviation from inflation targeting. 
We  would  argue  that  the  Bank’s  actions  have  been  consistent  with  the  flexible  inflation 
targeting  framework.  Since  the  crisis,  the  economy  has  been  growing  at  below  what  we 
estimate potential output to be (around 3,5 per cent), and the absolute output gap, that is the 
difference between the level of output and the potential level of output, coincidentally also at 
around 3,5 per cent, has been persistently negative. It will require a period of above-potential 
growth to close this gap, unless there has been a destruction of capacity which would reduce 
the size of the gap. A negative ouput gap also implies less pressure on inflation. Although 
inflation  had  moved  outside  the  target,  the  considered  view  of  the  MPC  was  that  inflation 
would return to within the target, and, given the subdued state of the economy, it was felt 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inappropriate to speed up this process through a tighter monetary policy stance. This view 
was  also  reinforced  by  the  absence  of  excess  demand-side  pressures  and  relatively 
well-anchored inflation expectations.  
In the 2006–08 period, by contrast, when inflation exceeded the target, growth was in excess 
of the Bank’s estimates of potential, with measured growth at between 5 and 6 per cent per 
annum,  with  very  high  rates  of  growth  in  credit  extension  and  household  consumption 
expenditure. Under such circumstances, a tighter monetary policy stance was justifiable or 
appropriate. 
It is also important to note that recent central bank interventions have not always been about 
stimulating growth directly through low interest rates. In the context of the crisis, and again 
more  recently  when  fiscal  policy  has  been  constrained,  the  focus  has  at  times  been  on 
helping dysfunctional parts of the financial markets to work better. This is recognition of the 
central place that financial markets have in the efficient workings of the real economy. These 
policies have aimed at preventing a negative feedback loop from financial sector stress to the 
real  economy,  and  have  resulted  in  a  number  of  significant  forms  of  unconventional 
monetary policy actions, particularly in countries where interest rates had reached their zero 
bound. 
There  are  a  number  of  illustrations  of  this.  Quantitative  easing  (or  credit  easing  as  it  was 
referred to in the US) was initially aimed primarily at providing liquidity to specific segments 
of the financial markets that were no longer functioning efficiently. During the crisis the loss 
of confidence in banks and some financial instruments, and the lack of trust between banks, 
disrupted  some  segments  of  the  markets  and  the  interbank  markets.  Central  banks 
responded  by  becoming  the  counterparties  and  bought  unconventional  assets  on  a 
significant  scale.  Between  2007  and  2011,  central  bank  balance  sheets  in  the  advanced 
economies increased from around 10 per cent of GDP to in excess of 20 per cent of GDP, a 
total  of  almost  US$8  trillion.  More  recently  the  US  Fed  initiated  its  Maturity  Extension 
Programme (more popularly referred to as Operation Twist), whereby the Fed sold short term 
Treasury securities and bought longer term securities, in an effort to bring down long term 
interest  rates.  The  aim  was  to  give  a  boost  to  the  ailing  domestic  housing  market,  as 
mortgages are often priced off long-term rates in the US, as well as to the corporate bond 
market.  The  Long  Term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTRO)  of  the  ECB,  through  which 
Euro1,3 trillion of liquidity was injected into the European banking system that was in danger 
of seizing up, is another example of such measures. The objective was to keep the banking 
and  interbank  system  operating,  and  to  cushion  the  real  economy  from  banking  sector 
stress.  Some  of  these  activities  were  intended  to  provide  additional  stimulus  to  economic 
growth, but some also had a strong financial stability element. This leads us to the area in 
which  central  bank  mandates  have  changed  most  significantly:  that  is,  responsibility  for 
maintaining financial stability. 
Prior to the crisis, financial stability was generally an implied mandate for central banks. The 
fall-out from the crisis has led to an increasing number of central banks being given explicit 
financial stability macroprudential mandates. This is distinct from microprudential supervision 
and regulation of the banking system where the focus of the regulator is limited to individual 
banking institutions and the banking system. A broader macroprudential focus would look at 
the build-up of financial imbalances and the risks posed by the positions taken by leveraged 
financial  institutions  to  the  broader  financial  sector  and  to  the  economy  in  general.  For 
example, in a low interest rate environment and high rates of growth of credit extension by 
banks, these funds can be used to finance purchases of assets and result in the build-up of 
bubbles in the housing or equity markets.  
The issue of how central banks should react to asset prices was the subject of much debate 
prior to the crisis. The dominant view at the time was that financial imbalances and crises 
should not occur in a low inflation environment, and where they did, central banks were not in 
a position to recognise or predict them. Nor did they have appropriate tools to prick incipient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
bubbles. Interest rates would had to have been raised to unacceptably high levels in a low 
inflation  environment  in  order  to  deal  with  the  bubbles  that  had  emerged.  The  consensus 
view was that asset prices should be taken into consideration by monetary policy only to the 
extent  they  impact  on  inflation,  and  that  the  role  of  central  banks  should  be  confined  to 
cleaning  up  after  the  bubble  had  burst.  Unfortunately,  as  we  are  all  now  well  aware,  five 
years after some of these bubbles burst central banks are still cleaning up. 
But  there  were  some  influential  voices,  notably  coming  out  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, that argued that the low inflation/low interest rate environment of the 2000s was 
the  cause  of  the  asset  price  bubbles  in  the  first  place.  In  other  words,  ironically,  the 
successful attainment of low inflation was leading to longer term financial stability problems. 
This approach argued in favour of monetary policy leaning against these excesses. The view 
was that too narrow a focus, or too short a time horizon for policy, blinded policy makers to 
longer term systemic financial stability risks which could take a long time to evolve. 
Since the crisis, a widely accepted perspective has emerged which sees monetary policy and 
macroprudential policy having different objectives, and different instruments. This approach 
attempts to avoid a conflict of objectives or trade-offs in the application of the interest rate 
instrument.  Others  however  contend  that  it  is  not  feasible  to  completely  separate  the  two 
policies,  as  interest  rates  affect  financial  stability,  while  macroprudential  tools  affect  credit 
growth and therefore inflation. 
While  macroprudential  oversight  has  emerged  as  a  distinct  policy  focus,  there  is  still  no 
unanimity as to the best governance arrangements for such oversight. Some central banks, 
for  example  the  Bank  of  England,  have  established  financial  stability  committees,  and  this 
places the mandate for financial stability squarely in the court of central banks. A different 
approach is expressed by Lars Svensson at the Swedish Rijksbank who argues that as is the 
case with fiscal policy, financial stability policy is conceptually different from monetary policy, 
and should be conducted by a completely different institution and different individuals. 
More  significantly,  while  it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  interest  rate  should  be  the  main 
instrument of monetary policy, the choice and efficacy of financial stability instruments is still 
very much work in progress. Given the different institutional structures in different countries, 
the type of instruments will also likely differ from country to country. However there are some 
common themes in the evolving thinking on this topic. It is generally accepted that excessive 
credit extension is at the heart of most asset price bubbles, and therefore the instruments 
that are used should be directed at preventing excessive leverage in the relevant markets. 
Charles  Goodhart,  for  example,  has  argued  that  because  housing  markets  are  at  the 
epicentre  of  most  financial  crises,  it  is  sufficient  to  focus  on  instruments  that  prevent 
excessive  build-up  of  housing  related  credit.  These  include  setting  maximum  loan-to-value 
ratios on property transactions and borrowing restrictions in relation to disposable income.  
Other possible macroprudential instruments include reserve requirements for particular types 
of  loans,  contracyclical  capital  buffers  for  banks  and  capital  surcharges  for  systemically 
important banks. In general these are microprudential tools, some of which had previously 
been applied in many countries as anti-inflation measures and since jettisoned, but are now 
being reconsidered with a narrower focus. It is still premature to pronounce on the efficacy or 
success of such policies, and this remains work in progress. 
In  reality  financial  stability  is  generally  a  shared  responsibility  as  financial  crisis  resolution 
often requires fiscal intervention and the application of public money. This has the potential 
to  create  challenges  for  central  bank  independence.  Even  if  narrow  monetary  policy 
independence  remains  intact,  the  boundaries  between  monetary  and  macroprudential 
policies are often blurred. However, as Jaime Caruana of the BIS argued in his address at 
the Bank last year, because there will always be strong opposition to central banks resisting 
asset  price  accelerations,  or  taking  away  the  punchbowl  when  the  party  gets  going,  the 
arguments for independence apply with even greater force, and such independence will be 
needed not only from political cycles but also from the financial markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is  ongoing 
to  determine 
the  appropriate  policy 
In South Africa, the implicit financial stability mandate of the Bank was made explicit in the 
letter from the Minister of Finance to the Governor in February 2010. The Bank’s financial 
stability  committee  has  been  reconstituted  and  meets  in  alternate  months  to  the  MPC. 
Furthermore, and in recognition of the shared responsibility for financial stability, a Financial 
Stability Oversight Committee has been established, jointly chaired by the Governor and the 
Minister of Finance. The focus of the Bank FSC is on crisis prevention, and while the FSOC 
does review current conditions, the primary purpose of this committee is crisis management 
and resolution. Furthermore, government has decided that regulation and supervision of the 
financial  sector  should  move  to  a  “twin  peaks”  approach.  This  means  that  all  prudential 
regulation  will  become  the  responsibility  of  the  SARB,  while  market  conduct  will  be  the 
province of the Financial Services Board. This is a very significant reform and adds to the 
tasks and responsibilities of the Bank.  
Work 
instruments.  To  date,  while 
counter-cyclical measures have been introduced to address the fallout of the ongoing global 
economic crisis, South Africa’s banking system has emerged largely unscathed. While there 
is no room for complacency, no policy decisions have had to be taken in respect of financial 
stability. 
One  area  of  potential  concern  for  financial  stability  is  the  acceleration  in  the  growth  of 
unsecured lending by the banking sector, although unsecured lending is not restricted to the 
banking sector only. This form of lending has been growing at rates in excess of 30 per cent 
and, at face value, anything growing at such elevated rates must be a cause for concern. But 
this  also  needs  to  be  seen  in  context  as  total  loans  and  advances,  of  which  unsecured 
lending forms part, is still growing at relatively moderate levels. Both the FSC of the Bank 
and the Registrar of Banks are keeping a close eye on these developments, and are trying to 
understand this phenomenon more fully. 
Without coming to any definitive conclusion on the issue, a number of points can be raised. 
Firstly, should we be concerned about this from a financial stability, a microprudential, or a 
monetary  policy  perspective?  From  a  monetary  policy  point  of  view,  we  would  need  to 
understand  the  extent  to  which  this  lending  translates  into  excessive  expenditure  with 
potential inflationary consequences. At this stage, this does not seem to be the case. While it 
may well be that unsecured lending may have contributed to the growth rate of 5 per cent in 
household consumption expenditure, this growth was in line with real income growth and not 
considered unsustainable or excessive. In fact, there are signs of a moderation in the rate of 
growth  of  household  consumption  expenditure  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012,  particularly  with 
respect  to  durable  goods.  Furthermore  there  is  little  evidence  that  CPI  inflation  is  being 
driven in any meaningful way by excess demand pressures.  
A microprudential approach would focus on the risk profile and key ratios of the individual 
institutions. This is part of the function of the Registrar of Banks. At this stage, there are no 
signs of stress in any of the banks or in the banking system as a whole. To the contrary, the 
ratio of impaired advances to total loans and advances, which had remained stubbornly high 
for some time, has declined from 5,8 per cent in March 2011 to 4,6 per cent in March 2012.  
From a more systemic perspective, the risks to the banking sector at this stage appear to be 
limited, as unsecured lending (which includes traditional forms of unsecured lending such as 
overdrafts,  credit  cards  and  loans  to  SME’s),  at  around  8  per  cent,  is  a  relatively  small 
proportion of total lending although this ratio has been rising. If loans to SME’s, overdrafts 
and credit cards are excluded, the ratio is 4 per cent. From a financial stability perspective, 
we also need to consider whether it is likely to lead to asset price bubbles elsewhere in the 
system. The housing market remains very subdued, with some of the house price indices still 
reflecting falling prices. Although the equity market reached an all-time high in April before 
falling  back  in  recent  days  following  increased  global  risk  aversion,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
argue that this is a bubble. In any event the link between high rates of growth in unsecured 
lending and equity or bond price movements is extremely tenuous at best. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Growth in credit extension by banks to the private sector has been relatively muted. Growth 
over twelve months in private sector credit extension was 7,3 per cent in April, down from to 
9,2  per  cent  in  the  previous  month.  It  is  significant  that  total  loans  and  advances  to 
households, which includes unsecured lending, is still only growing at annual rates of around 
7 per cent. 
There is a potential concern about the possibility of an excessive burden of household debt. 
Although the ratio of household debt to disposable income is still high, it has been declining. 
Having peaked at 82,3 per cent in 2008, the ratio declined to 74,6 per cent in the final quarter 
of  2011.  Household  debt  is  nevertheless  still  rising,  but  at  a  slower  pace  than  that  of 
disposable incomes. So at a macro level, there does not appear to be a cause for concern. 
The concern, however, could be the distribution of these debts. There is the risk that some 
households are becoming over-leveraged, but this would suggest that the limits set by the 
National Credit Act are not being adhered to.  
A further concern that is often expressed is: what happens when the interest rate cycle turns 
and many of these new borrowers may find it difficult to service their loans. Some of these 
loans are on a fixed interest basis with monthly repayment commitments, thus the servicing 
of  the  loans  should  not  be  materially  affected  by  interest  rate  increases.  There  is  also 
evidence that some of the growth in unsecured loans is as a result of loans with a greater 
value and longer repayment term being extended to existing clients with a proven repayment 
record.  
It  is  also  possible  that we  are  observing  a  structural  change  with  respect  to  bank  lending. 
Mortgage credit extension is subdued and it is more difficult than in the past for households 
to access their mortgage bonds to finance consumption expenditure. So to some extent, this 
may be an adjustment away from mortgages and once the adjustment has taken place, more 
sustainable rates of increase should be observed. But because rates charged on unsecured 
lending  are  much  higher  than  on  mortgages,  consumers  are  getting  access  to  more 
expensive  credit,  although  this  is  not  evident  yet  in  the  data  on  the  cost  of  servicing 
household debt which has declined consistently since the end of 2008.  
These developments are being closely monitored for signs of unsustainable increases which 
could have systemic implications for the banking sector, for financial stability in general or for 
inflation. But as I have illustrated above, the answer is not simple.  
In conclusion, the context that central banks operate in has become increasingly complex. 
The global growth outlook has deteriorated in recent weeks, and coupled with increasingly 
volatile  and  risk  averse  financial  markets  in  response  to  uncertainties  in  the  Eurozone, 
central banks will again be expected to play a core role in helping to manage or resolve the 
crisis. The scope for fiscal policy to play a meaningful role is limited by the high sovereign 
debt  ratios  which  are  part  of  the  underlying  problem.  There  are  also  increasing  concerns 
about  the  sustainability  of  expanded  central  bank  balance  sheets  and  the  abnormally  low 
global interest rates, which are seen by some as already sowing the seeds of the next crisis. 
At the same time, the financial stability focus, the tightening of banking regulations and the 
move towards Basel III is having the effect of increasing deleveraging by banks, particularly 
in  Europe,  and  raising  the  cost  of  capital  for  banks.  These  developments  are  focused  on 
ensuring  a  more  stable  financial  system  in  the  future,  but  in  the  process  are  having  a 
contractionary  impact  on  growth.  The  potential  for  conflict  between  the  different  mandates 
are evident.  
In South Africa, we have not had to make any exceptional liquidity provision, and monetary 
policy  has  been  more  accommodative  than  it  would  have  been  in  the  absence  of 
below-potential growth rates and a persistently negative output gap. Inflation is expected to 
return to within the target range in the near term, and to remain contained over the forecast 
period. The banking system is stable despite challenges expected in implementing Basel III, 
especially over the longer term. However, we vigilantly monitor global developments and the 
possibility of contagion to our economy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  important  that,  in  extending  the  mandates  of  central  banks,  there  should  be  a  clear 
understanding of what central banks can and cannot do, and an appreciation of the possible 
conflicts  between  the  different  objectives.  Central  banks,  in  normal  times,  function  in  an 
uncertain environment. In the prevailing difficult global conditions uncertainty is at an even 
higher level, and many of the actions taken have no precedence. It is therefore incumbent 
upon central banks to share information and together learn from our collective experiences. 
As the lines between the various mandates become increasingly blurred, there is a danger 
that  the  burden  of  expectations  could  be  excessive,  and  ultimately  undermine  confidence 
and  credibility  in  central  banks  themselves.  These  challenges  are  being  considered  by 
central  banks  and  others,  and  require  that  all  of  us  better  understand  the  immediate 
challenges  of  the  mutating,  extremely  severe  global  financial  crisis.  At  the  same  time  we 
need to appreciate that measures required to deal with the crisis may well have unintended 
consequences for central banks, their mandates, independence, capacity and role in society. 
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak to you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
