Mugur Isărescu: Monetary policy during transition. How to manage 
paradigm shifts 
Presentation  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the 
Annual  Conference  of  the  European  Association  for  Banking  and  Financial  History, 
organised by the European Association for Banking and Financial History and the National 
Bank of Romania, Bucharest, 7–9 June 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  started  my  career  back  in  August  ’71,  the  day  after  President  Nixon  announced  the 
suspension  of  gold-convertibility  of  the  US  dollar  and  the  introduction  of  a  10  percent 
surcharge on American imports, thus marking the dismantling of the Bretton Woods System. 
We  all  know  what  happened  next:  in  an  attempt  to  preserve  a  system  of  fixed  exchange 
rates, the Smithsonian arrangement – which set a fluctuation band of +/–2.25 percent – was 
introduced  in  December  1971.  It  only  lasted  for  six  months,  so  that  during  1972–73  fixed 
exchange  rates  were  replaced  by  floating  regimes  in  most  economies  around  the  world. 
Exception  made  the  countries  of  the  European  Economic  Community,  which  decided  to 
implement  a  joint  floating  arrangement  and  introduced  rather  funny  concepts  such  as  the 
“snake in the tunnel”. 
Those  were  also  years  of  intellectual  controversy  –  I  remember  reading  alternatively  the 
Newsweek  articles  of  Samuelson  and  Friedman,  one  preaching  the  virtues  of  Keynesian 
policies, while the other praised free markets and non-intervention. I witnessed the end of an 
era and the dawn of another. 
I also remember a conference in Salzburg in 1975, when Richard Cooper and Robert Aliber 
invited Friedrich Hayek – recently awarded the Nobel Prize in economics – to give a lecture 
on  stagflation.  I  cannot  forget  the  striking  answer  he  gave:  stagflation  was  the  result  of 
Keynesian policies. 
In the decades that followed I witnessed many other policy and paradigm shifts, but I have to 
confess that some of them – such as quantitative easing and close to zero policy rates – I 
could hardly have imagined a few years ago. However, in this paper I will deal neither with 
quantitative easing nor with close to zero policy rates. 
I will focus on those paradigm shifts that challenged the monetary policy conduct in Romania 
during the transition years, while also approaching the theoretical controversies in the field. 
Starting with the search for a better nominal anchor and the emergence of inflation targeting 
as one of the mainstream monetary policy strategies, I will then tackle the issue of exchange 
rate regimes and how the focus changed from intermediate arrangements to corner solutions 
and back again. As this issue cannot be separated from the one of capital flows, I will then 
turn to the debate “capital controls versus free movement of capital”. The last three topics are 
especially  relevant  in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis,  referring  to  the  consequences  of 
having  a  majority  foreign-owned  banking  system,  the  rethinking  of  central  bank  objectives 
with special attention paid to financial stability and, finally, the choice of the optimal inflation 
target. 
From monetary anchors to inflation targeting 
1. 
During  the  nineties,  giving  up  the  intermediate  objective  as  an  anti-inflationary  anchor  in 
favor of direct inflation targeting marked a major change in the way of thinking the monetary 
policy framework around the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to 
the 
the  mid-nineties, 
literature  on  monetary  policy  strategies  came 
Monetary  strategies  based  on  a  nominal  anchor,  be  it  the  exchange  rate  or  a  monetary 
aggregate, still prevailed in the early nineties. While exchange rate pegs are currently still in 
place  in  some  countries  (and  I  will  come  back  to  this  later),  monetary  targeting  slid  into 
oblivion. 
But, at the time when the National Bank of Romania had to choose a strategy for conducting 
its  monetary  policy,  monetary  targeting  was  not  yet  out  of fashion.  Moreover,  this strategy 
was  adopted  and  implemented  in  the  context  of the  stand-by  arrangements  signed  by  the 
Romanian authorities with the IMF, which stipulated the monitoring of monetary aggregates 
developments. The same as with fiscal and income policies and with structural reforms, the 
programs  agreed  upon  with  the  IMF  were  a  strong  anchor  for  coherent  policies  in  the 
nineties. 
Another  reason  for  choosing  monetary  targeting  was  that  the  alternative  strategy,  i.e. 
exchange rate targeting, was not really an option, given the particularities of the Romanian 
economy.  The  explicit  use  of the  exchange  rate  as  an  anti-inflationary  anchor  would  have 
been extremely risky considering the threat of an excessive current account deficit widening, 
as well as the low foreign exchange reserves in the first decade of the transition period. The 
latter would have left the central bank little room for maneuver to protect the exchange rate in 
the event of a speculative attack. 
include 
By 
recommendations  varying  from  exclusive  focus  on  monetary  anchors  to  ignoring  them 
altogether. In 1996, Mishkin and Estrella wondered “Is there a role for monetary aggregates 
in the conduct of monetary policy?” in an article that stirred heated debates. “Not really”, was 
the conclusion. 
Even  the  classical  example  of  successful  monetary  targeting  –  the  Bundesbank  –  did  not 
apply  the  strategy  “by  the  book”.  They  managed  to  keep  inflation  at  low  levels,  but  the 
monetary targets were missed in several years. The success of the Bundesbank’s strategy 
lay to a greater extent in the credibility of its clearly anti-inflationary stance – also reflected in 
announcing annual inflation targets – than in strict compliance with monetary targeting rules. 
Although central bankers tend to think of themselves as upholders of timeless values – as 
Mervyn King put it – a new fashion started to attract followers. The era of inflation targeting 
was dawning. 
However, for Romania it was still too early, as it was rather unclear whether the new strategy 
was appropriate for developed economies only or for emerging economies as well. Anyway, 
at  that  time,  i.e.  mid  to  late  nineties,  Romania  fulfilled  none  of  the  inflation  targeting 
prerequisites: the annual inflation rate was still far from single-digit levels, fiscal dominance 
was strong, central bank credibility was not yet consolidated, while the possibility to forecast 
inflation two-years ahead was wishful thinking. 
In  the  end,  as  financial  innovation  and  the  unstable  money  velocity  weakened  the 
money-inflation relation, monetary aggregates did abandon us. In the case of Romania – and 
probably in the case of other transition economies, as well – another reason for the monetary 
aggregates  unsuitability  as  intermediate  target  may  be  attributable  to  the  lack  of  financial 
discipline  which  led  to  the  build-up  of  arrears  in  the  inefficient  SOEs  (largely,  towards  the 
state  and  among  themselves).  As  the  arrears  acted  as  money  substitute,  the  role  of 
monetary aggregates in guiding monetary policy became increasingly irrelevant – restricting 
money supply often resulted into an accumulation of arrears. Although the arrears ceased to 
be an issue during the boom years, they emerged again as a problem during the crisis, the 
build-up being significant in socially-sensitive sectors such as public utilities and healthcare. 
Coming  back to  mid-2000s,  after  several  years  of  preparation,  the  NBR  joined  the  club  of 
inflation targeters in August 2005.  
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that, when Romania gave up monetary targeting, Estonia was 
its  only  peer  among  Central  and  East  European  countries  in  terms  of  longevity  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary  policy  regime,  with  its  currency  board  adopted  in  1992.  Shifts  from  one  end  to 
another of the spectrum of monetary and exchange rate arrangements were common in the 
region. Specifically, the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary had various forms of exchange 
rate  pegs  during  the  nineties,  before  shifting  to  inflation  targeting.  As  for  Romania,  the 
transition between the two regimes was smoother, since the monetary targeting framework 
included elements such as the disinflationary stance, exchange rate flexibility and, of course, 
the major role of monetary aggregates, which are also seen in the inflation targeting regime. 
Amid the never-ending, heated debates on rules versus discretion in monetary policy, which 
are so time- and energy-consuming in the academic world globally, inflation targeting may be 
viewed as an attempt to make both ends meet. This strategy has the merit of combining tight 
constraints  in  terms  of  the  final  objective  (the  inflation  target)  with  a  certain  degree  of 
discretion  as  regards  the  calibration  of  monetary  policy  instruments  so  as  to  provide  an 
adequate  response  to  shocks.  While  theoretical  orthodoxy  used  to  claim  that  inflation 
targeting needs a free floating currency, in practice, many inflation targeters opted for a light 
version of the strategy. So did many Marlboro smokers. As a rule, small open economies that 
joined the club over the nineties felt that a managed float regime would serve them better. 
This was also the line pursued by the NBR when introducing inflation targeting in 2005, with 
the extensive technical support generously offered by the IMF and the Czech National Bank. 
At that time, inflation targeting seemed poised to become the monetary policy framework in 
most countries that did not have fixed exchange rate regimes in place – and this was still the 
case only a few years ago. However, the global crisis broke out and changed the order of 
priorities on policymakers’ agenda. It remains to be seen how inflation targeting will adapt to 
the  post-crisis  economic  and  financial  environment,  which  also  challenges  the  overriding 
importance of the low inflation goal. While monetary targeting failed to survive for reasons of 
the break in the monetary aggregates-inflation relation (in other words, the nominal anchor 
was  unable  to  actually  “anchor”  inflation),  inflation  targeting  will  have  to  rely  more  on  its 
flexible  component,  be  it  constrained,  in  order  to  be  successful  in  an  environment  where 
financial stability needs particular attention. 
2. 
Exchange rate arrangements: from managed float to corner solutions and 
back again 
As I mentioned earlier, let me turn now to the developments in exchange rate arrangements. 
In the early nineties, when I became Governor, almost two thirds of the countries had some 
form of managed float. By the end of the same decade, their share had dropped to around 
one  third.  In  a  seminal  paper  (Fischer,  2001)  this  “move  towards  corner  solutions”  was 
viewed  as  a  response  to  the  impossible  trinity  under  free  capital  movements.  At  that  time 
Romania  still  had  capital  controls  in  place.  But  when  we  completed  the  capital  account 
liberalization,  in  September  2006,  the  issue  had  become  not  only  academic,  but  also  a 
practical one. By then Romania had adopted inflation targeting and the problem seemed to 
have been solved: such a regime seemed incompatible with any type of managed float of the 
exchange rate. 
In  reality,  things  proved  to  be  much  more  complicated.  Despite  NBR  interventions,  the 
exchange rate of the leu witnessed a significant nominal appreciation immediately before and 
after  EU  accession  (January  2007).  In  retrospect,  I  would  say  that  it  was  more  difficult  to 
conduct monetary policy when confronted with massive capital inflows than with the scarcity 
thereof.  When  flooded  by  capital  inflows  (especially  when  concentrated  in  non-tradable 
sectors),  a  conflict  between  price  stability  and  external  equilibrium  emerges.  Interest  rate 
hikes may be needed in order to manage aggregate demand and anchor expectations, but 
this  would  entail  further  capital  inflows  and  an  unsustainable  nominal  appreciation  of  the 
exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  was  the  dilemma  the  NBR  faced  between  2006  and  2008,  when  the  current  account 
deficit exceeded 10 percent of GDP, a level which was clearly unsustainable, despite being 
largely financed through foreign direct investments. Amid the ongoing international financial 
crisis, a significant adjustment of the current account deficit became unavoidable. Indeed, it 
narrowed from 11.6 percent of GDP in 2008 to 4.2 percent of GDP in 2009 (a level around 
which it remained thereafter). Had Romania been on a fixed exchange rate, the entire burden 
of the adjustment would have fallen onto the real sector of the economy, with the ensuing 
social and political costs. Conversely, had Romania allowed a completely free floating of its 
currency,  no  adjustment  in  the  real  sector  would  have  probably  occurred  (including  a 
25 percent wage cut in the public sector and the redundancy of more than 200,000 public 
employees).  At  the  same  time,  too  abrupt  a  depreciation  would  have  generated  a  much 
larger  share  of  non-performing  loans  (currently,  they  stand  at  nearly  16  percent  of  total 
loans),  with  the  result  of  worsening  banking  indicators.  The  flexibility  we  have  retained  in 
managing  the  exchange  rate  proved  a  valuable  tool  in  mitigating  the  consequences  of the 
crisis. 
At the same time, theory has evolved and the “managed floating plus” concept (introduced by 
Goldstein  in  2002)  gained  recognition.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Argentine  crisis  it  became 
obvious that hard pegs could not solve the problems of an overvalued real exchange rate, 
limited  flexibility  of  domestic  costs  and  prices,  and  too  much  public  debt  to  allow 
countercyclical fiscal policy. (Incidentally, outside of the EMU, all other 37 economies with no 
independent legal tender were small, with the exception of Argentina and Hong Kong SAR). 
Let  me  briefly  recall  the  benefits  of  the  “managed  floating  plus”  strategy,  as  described  by 
Goldstein:  the  more  currency  mismatch  is  brought  under  control,  the  less  should  there  be 
fear  of  floating;  if  the  exchange  rate  is  allowed  to  move,  the  greater  will  there  be  the 
awareness of currency risk and the incentive to hedge against it; the less necessary it is to 
see the exchange rate as a target, the more likely inflation targeting will be successful and, 
hence,  the  more  willing  will  foreign  investors  be  to  lend  in  local  currency;  the  greater  the 
availability  of  domestic-currency  denominated  instruments,  the  better  the  prospects  for 
reducing currency mismatch. 
Let  me  add  two  comments:  first,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  ensure  current  account 
sustainability  in  the  long  run.  It  also  takes  good  fiscal  and  structural  policies.  The  best 
monetary policy can achieve is “buying time” for these policies to be implemented, without 
jeopardizing its own objectives. 
Second,  managed  floating  faces  a  composition  problem  on  the  global  scale.  Attempts  by 
many countries to keep their currencies at an undervalued rate may end up in a race to the 
bottom  –  akin  to  the  “beggar-thy-neighbor”  policy  of  the  ’30s.  Multilateral  or  global 
arrangements  are  perceived  as  the  best  solution  to  such  problems  (Flassbeck,  2004).  As 
changes  in  the  exchange  rate,  deviating  from  purchasing  power  parity,  affect  international 
trade  the  same  way  as  changes  in  tariffs,  they  should  be  governed  by  multilateral 
regulations. 
As  we  can  see,  both  theory  and  practice  have  moved,  in  the  last  two  decades,  full-circle: 
from managed float to corner solutions and back again. Under these circumstances, the best 
a policymaker can do is to stay open-minded and assess the merits of each individual theory 
in the context of the country’s particularities. 
 Capital controls vs. free movement of capital flows 
3. 
Now let me briefly turn to capital flows and related issues. The crisis that broke out in 2007 
entailed  a  massive  reduction  in  private  capital  flows,  which  had  previously  generated 
developments that led to the accumulation of imbalances conducive to the crisis itself. These 
imbalances  were  manifest  in  the  overheating  of  emerging  market  economies,  the 
over-appreciation of currencies, the swelling private foreign debt, credit and asset prices, as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
well as in the wider current account deficits and the larger currency mismatches in the private 
sector. However, towards end-2009, the global economy looked poised to exit the financial 
crisis  and  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  in  Latin  America,  Asia  and  Central 
and Eastern Europe seemed to rebound. This trend looked set to strengthen and expand, in 
Romania as well, in the early months of 2011.  
Against  this  background,  the  idea  of  introducing  capital  controls  in  emerging  market 
economies  has  gained  increasing  support.  Even  the  IMF,  which  has  historically  opposed 
controls, has softened its hard-line approach. Thus, the Fund has recently published several 
papers  concluding  that,  under  particular  circumstances,  controls  are  justifiably  part  of  the 
policy toolkit of emerging market economies faced with massive capital inflows. There were 
some  economists  in  Romania  who  opposed  the  removal  of  controls,  as  it  acted  as  an 
obstacle  to  the  shift  from  monetary  targeting  to  inflation  targeting  back  in  2005.  Similar 
recommendations were formulated by the IMF mission under Romania’s first precautionary 
stand-by arrangement, which suggested that the liberalization of monetary flows, scheduled 
for 2005–2006, be postponed until the interest rate differential narrows  sufficiently and the 
banking  system  is  prepared  to  deal  with  large  inflows  of  volatile  capital.  Such  a 
postponement  was  not possible  as  Romania’s entry  into the  European  Union  in  2007  was 
conditional upon full capital account liberalization.  
In order to better understand the role of capital controls, we need to look first at the benefits 
of capital inflows. Supporters of free capital movement rightly point out that capital flows are 
actually a source of additional financing for emerging market economies, while also providing 
opportunities for risk diversification and helping avoid abrupt changes in consumption (Ostry 
et al., 2011).  
The  keyword  here  is  the  capital  volume.  Excess  capital  triggers  the  aforementioned 
imbalances.  Then  it  is  only  reasonable  to  admit  that  the  actions  we  need  to  take  should 
contain  capital  inflows  to  levels  that  (i)  allow  the  economy  to  operate  at  its  potential  rate, 
(ii) do not lead to the accumulation of foreign reserves above the adequate level, and (iii) do 
not determine currency overvaluation. 
Controls might very well ensure the fulfillment of these criteria, but there are two problems 
here. First, it might happen that such controls are not effective, meaning they can easily be 
circumvented.  Nearly  two  thirds  of  the  increase  in  the  liabilities  of  foreign-owned  banks  in 
Romania  during  2005–2008  occurred  after  the  reserve  ratio  was  raised  to  40  percent. 
Second, even assuming they cannot be evaded, controls need to be discriminatory1, so as to 
allow, for instance, equity inflows and discourage debt flows.  
But controls come at a very high price. Capital flows were subject to controls in all countries 
until  the  end  of  the  sixties.  Moreover,  controls  were  also  in  place  for  lending  and  deposit 
rates, the volume of private sector credit, as well as for the business scope of certain groups 
of intermediaries. The positive effect of these controls was enhanced stability of the financial 
system: no banking crisis broke out during 1945–1971 (Eichengreen and Bordo, 2003). But 
the negative consequences were not negligible. Banks innovated less, they limited lending to 
large  and  secure  firms,  and  operated  on  a  less  efficient  basis.  Once  controls  provided 
protection  against  crises,  central  banks  became  less  interested  in  financial  stability  and 
preserved minimum expertise in this respect (Goodhart, 2010).  
There is also the issue of anteriority. Recent research concluded that controls yielded better 
results  in  countries  where  controls  had  been  in  place  beforehand.  Should  we  therefore 
consider preventive controls? This would mean ignoring the fact that large capital inflows are 
temporary in nature. Judging by the fact that controls are more efficient provided they are in 
place before the resumption in large capital inflows, should we use them from the very start 
                                                
1  A recent classification of control instruments is provided in Qureshi, M., Ostry, J., Ghosh, A., Chamon, M. (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of a wave of capital inflows, before resorting to macroeconomic policies? I don’t think so. And 
what would be the best choice for emerging countries that are members of economic areas 
based on free capital movement, such as the European Union?  
Any scheme indicating where controls should be positioned in the policy toolkit of emerging 
countries needs to be based on a clear-cut distinction between risks associated with large 
capital inflows and the actual quantities (flows). Controls have a direct impact on quantities. 
But macroeconomic policies can have an indirect influence on quantities. Once the exchange 
rate has appreciated enough to near its equilibrium level and foreign reserves have reached a 
point  beyond  which  any  further  purchases  are  suboptimal,  changes  in  macroeconomic 
policies may go on. 
We may move from a deficit position to public budget surplus. The lesson that can be drawn 
from  recent  experience  is  that  policymakers’  hesitations  in  this  regard  may  prove  costly. 
Monetary policy has room to lower interest rates just as long as this does not jeopardize the 
inflation target objectives. From that point on, fiscal policy is the only macroeconomic policy 
left in the fight against capital inflows. As soon as the bubble associated with massive capital 
inflows  unavoidably  bursts,  the  fiscal  surplus  will  help  the  government  make  up  for  the 
squeeze in private demand by allowing the public budget to slip into deficit.  
At the same time, potential risks associated with large capital inflows may be addressed via 
micro- and macroprudential measures. Two processes aimed at safeguarding the stability of 
financial institutions were initiated as early as the seventies, along with the liberalization of 
capital flows. One of these processes, set at microeconomic level, marked the establishment 
of a system of capital requirements. This led to Basel I back in 1986, followed by enhanced 
versions, including Basel III, which is a response to the ongoing crisis. 
The  other  process  consisted  in  creating  a  closer  link  between  prudential  regulations  and 
macroeconomic issues. In this vein, the Cooke Committee coined the term “macroprudential” 
in 1978. The concept was refined later on. Lamfalussy pointed out that the risk perception 
could  be  inadequate  since  it  focused  narrowly  on  the  past  performance  of  individual 
sovereign  loans.  The  Cross  Report  (ECSC,  1986)  warned  against  the  risks  that  financial 
innovation  (in  particular  derivatives  and  securitization)  posed  to  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole. Finally, Crockett (2000, 2001) referred to the impact of regulation on the procyclicality 
of  the  financial  system  and  the  implications  of  the  failure  of  systemically-significant 
institutions. 
Today we know that micro- and macroprudential measures are effective in addressing risks 
associated with capital inflows. But macroprudential measures need to be resorted to with a 
certain degree of precaution as well, since they may actually foster capital inflows and thus 
run counter to macroeconomic policies. Potential output declined severely in the aftermath of 
the crisis. A possible resumption in capital inflows would take aggregate demand higher and 
hence  generate  an  inflationary  production  gap.  Emerging  countries  would  resort  to  fewer 
forex market interventions, allowing their currencies to appreciate in order to contain inflation. 
However,  the  long-term  financial  stability  gains  derived  from  macroprudential  measures 
entail  further  capital  inflows.  The  tolerance  for  currency  appreciation  (fewer  interventions) 
may  be  reversed  in  light  of  the  larger  capital  inflows.  Moreover,  a  stronger  currency  may 
foster further inflows of portfolio investment. This goes to prove that not all measures trying 
to  fend  off  capital  flows  are  necessarily  successful  in  reducing  the  incentives  for  capital 
inflows. 
Let me conclude by saying that the available measures to address large capital inflows are 
not  safe  from  side  effects.  The  policy  mix  needs  to  be  conceived  so  as  to  maximize  the 
benefits of capital inflows while insulating against related risks (Zhu, 2011). In a world where 
sustainable  economic  growth  hinges  on  free  markets,  capital  controls  should  only  be 
considered as a measure of last resort, if at all. Prudential measures should be designed to 
minimize the distortions they trigger and should be resorted to only after all macroeconomic 
options have been exhausted. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Foreign-owned banks – asset or liability? 
4. 
Another  dominant  paradigm  which  came  under  scrutiny  in  recent  years  is  that  of  the 
superiority  of  foreign-owned  banks  vis-à-vis  domestically-owned  banks,  both  in  times  of 
sustained growth and in times of crisis. The arguments for this view are well-known and they 
have to do with improved efficiency, better expertise, alleviation of the shortage of domestic 
capital, and increased competition. Also, some authors (for instance, Haas and Lelyveld in 
2009) claim that the presence of international banking groups on local markets has a positive 
effect in mitigating the consequences of a crisis. 
Before making my own remarks on this matter, let me introduce some caveats: first, nobody 
disputes the superiority of foreign-owned private banks with respect to domestically-owned 
state  banks  in  newly  emerged  market  economies.  The  comparison  needs  to  be  made 
between foreign-owned private banks and domestically-owned private banks. In this respect, 
it is worth mentioning that Central and Eastern Europe is the only region in the world where 
foreign-owned banks dominate as a share of total assets, whereas in the developed markets, 
Latin  America  or  Asia,  domestic  private  banks  are  prevalent.  Second,  this  dominance  is  a 
relatively new phenomenon: the share of foreign-owned banks became prevalent as late as 
the  first  years  of  this  century,  even  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  In  other  words,  it  has 
been possible to verify the paradigm in practice only in the last few years. 
It  is  fair  to  say  that  foreign-owned  banking  prevalence  in  Central  and  Eastern  European 
countries has happened more by default than by design. After a few banking crises which hit 
the region in the late nineties, the lack of domestic private capital, combined with the fragile 
situation of the state budgets, made it compulsory to privatize the existing banks by selling 
them to foreign entities.  
I  must  confess  that  I  also  advocated  the  penetration  of  foreign  capital  into  the  Romanian 
banking sector. When my tenure as Prime Minister ended in late 2000, one piece of advice I 
gave  to  my  successor  was  that  the  privatization  of  banks  should  continue  as  a  means  to 
promote restructuring of the loss-incurring SOEs and to stimulate convergence to the EU. I 
still  believe  that  it  was  the  right  call,  as  foreign-owned  banks  had  a  favorable  impact  on 
economic  growth  and  therefore  played  their  part  in  the  catching-up  process,  even  if  –  ten 
years later – Nouriel Roubini sees the large share of foreign-owned banks in the Romanian 
banking system as a liability. 
The  counterfactual  argument 
the  performance  of 
domestically-owned  private  banks?”  does  not  withstand  scrutiny:  domestic  private  capital 
simply  did  not  exist.  However  this  intellectual  exercise  is  worth  doing,  given  some 
shortcomings of foreign-owned banks, which were revealed afterwards. 
One  such  shortcoming  was  the  excessive  euroization  of  some  economies  in  the  region 
(Romania, Hungary, Baltic states), given the reliance of foreign-owned banks on their parent 
banks for cheap financing. Excessive euroization has proved to be a liability for all parties 
concerned:  for  the  public,  which  became  hostage  to  exchange  rate  risk  without  being 
properly hedged, for the central banks, which saw their transmission mechanism eroded, and 
even for the commercial banks themselves, which quite often had a large mismatch between 
loans and deposits in foreign currency. Moreover, some of the banks have extended credit in 
“exotic” currencies (Swiss franc, Japanese yen), the strict regulations in their home countries 
(Austria,  Belgium)  notwithstanding,  thereby  increasing  the  vulnerability  to  adverse  shocks 
(Banai, Kiraly and Varhegyi, 2009). Would a predominantly domestically-owned private bank 
system  have  behaved  differently?  Probably,  given  the  limited  access  to  external  financing 
and hence a more balanced portfolio. Witness in this respect the situation in Asia or Latin 
America, where foreign exchange credit did not skyrocket in the same way, even in times of 
economic boom. 
Other  criticisms  related to  the  behavior  of foreign-owned  banks  during  times  of  boom  are, 
probably, undeserved: first, the claim that their lending went mainly into non-tradables, such 
as retail or real estate, where profits were larger and more rapidly made. Domestic private 
“What  would  have  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
banks would have probably done exactly the same: empirical evidence points to the fact that 
they  were  not  longer-sighted  than  their foreign-owned  competitors.  Second, foreign-owned 
banks are often criticized for “cherry-picking”, their customers being highly profitable, reliable 
corporations  (often  headquartered  in  the  same  state  of  origin).  I  think  this  criticism  is  also 
undeserved,  because  the  alternative  of  lending  indiscriminately  to  unknown  clients  (into 
which many banks have indulged) has proved to be even worse.  
Turning to the behavior of foreign-owned banks during the recent crisis, the evidence is also 
mixed. On one hand, it is true that international banking groups are the ones which easily 
spread  the  contagion  (Goldberg,  2009).  Even  in  the  absence  of  abrupt  deleverage, 
foreign-owned banks had to cope with much diminished foreign financing and shifted from 
financing the private sectors to financing the public sectors of their host countries. Despite 
the reductions in monetary policy rates, credit in domestic currency remains sluggish at best. 
For the time being, however, it is fair to say that foreign parent banks have maintained their 
support for the branches and subsidiaries in Central and Eastern Europe. Most of them had 
not been engaged into trading sophisticated instruments such as derivatives, so that this type 
of  losses  has  been  relatively  contained.  It  has  also  helped  that  the  banks  present  in  the 
region  are  not  major global  players,  so  that  contagion  is  often  limited. On  the  other  hand, 
many of the banks had been involved into financing the real estate boom, and the ensuing 
losses are only gradually being recognized.  
As a conclusion to this paradigm, the dominance of foreign-owned banks proved to be both 
an  asset  and  a  liability  and  it  is  too  early  to  draw  a  final  balance  before  the  international 
financial  crisis  is  over.  Another  conclusion  is  that  in  an  environment  of  good,  swiftly  and 
decisively-implemented  policies  that  are  accepted  by  the  public,  the  euroization  of  the 
economy is not mandatory. Witness in this respect is the experience of the Czech Republic, 
which has brought inflation down early on, making lending in domestic currency as attractive 
as that in foreign currency. 
Central bank’s objective: should financial stability be added? 
5. 
Before the outbreak of the global financial crisis, the conventional lines of thought advocated 
the  idea  that  markets  do  self-correct  always.  The  overconfidence  in  the  infallibility  of  the 
invisible hand of the market generated a widespread belief that ample interventions by the 
authorities were not warranted in order to contain economic and financial imbalances at an 
early stage.  
Moreover,  there  was  a  prevailing  view  in  the  academic  world  that  inflation  was  the  main 
culprit  for  financial  instability.  By  way  of  consequence,  safeguarding  price  stability  was 
looked upon as an almost sufficient prerequisite for promoting financial stability. Against this 
background,  central  banks’  core  contribution  to  preserving  and  strengthening  financial 
stability consisted in delivering low inflation rates. 
However,  not  everyone  agreed.  Prior  to the  outburst  of the  crisis,  several  economists  had 
publicly  expressed  doubts  on  the  viability  of  mainstream  economic  thought  or  had  warned 
against  some  of  its  vulnerabilities.  Special  mention  deserves  Crockett,  who  claimed  ever 
since 2003 that the “peace dividend” yielded by the successful war against inflation had not 
lived up to expectations and therefore the battlefront against financial instability should not be 
overlooked.  Also  worth  mentioning  is  Caruana,  who  pointed  out  in  2005  that,  while  a 
highly-developed  decision-making  framework  was  in  place  for  pursuing  monetary  policy, 
financial  stability  was  less  deeply  looked  into.  Let  me  add  that,  back  in  2006,  the  key 
message of my dissertation at the University of Piteşti was that financial stability is, in turn, 
instrumental to monetary policy effectiveness and hence to safeguarding price stability. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  it  was  the  global  crisis  that  invalidated  once  and  for  all  certain 
elements of mainstream economics. Nothing new, as a matter of fact: economic thought has 
always been influenced and spurred by major crises.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It became readily  visible that threats to financial stability do not necessarily go away once 
inflation is brought down to a low level – they merely change their nature. And this has been 
shown at a global level by the “detail” (after all, “the devil is in the details”, as Professor John 
Bonin kindly reminded us from the very title of the presentation he delivered earlier) that the 
financial  crisis  broke  out  in  an  economic  environment  with  relatively  low  inflation  rates.  In 
other words, the price stability that set in during the Great Moderation could not prevent the 
start of the Great Recession.  
Furthermore, the “mop up after” strategy in the aftermath of the financial crisis proved much 
costlier than “leaning against the wind” would have been. It was now visible to the naked eye, 
without  requiring  sophisticated  econometric  models,  that  distortions  from  relatively  high 
inflation are second order relative to losses from financial sector distortions (Stiglitz, 2010). 
That  being  said,  it  is  safe  to  assume  the  crisis  also  shattered  the  illusion  that  the  great 
challenges to the monetary policy decision-making framework have been overcome at least 
in  part.  Reality  proved  much  too  complicated  to  be  managed  based  strictly  on  ideal 
theoretical schemes. In other words, textbook economics was no longer in tune with financial 
market  realities.  This  also  calls  for  rethinking  the  connections  or  retracing  the  boundaries 
between price stability and financial stability.  
The global crisis has once again drawn the attention of economic policymakers and theorists 
to the issue of separating or integrating price stability and financial stability tasks. The idea 
that the two tasks should be completely separated had gained ground before the outbreak of 
the  crisis.  The  rationale  behind  this  view  was  to  free  the  monetary  policy  conduct  from 
conflicting  objectives  and  thus  render  policymakers’  mission  and  life  easier.  Following  this 
line  of  thought,  it  was  considered  that  two  distinct  entities  should  be  in  charge  of  the  two 
tasks respectively. In particular, it was advocated that banking sector supervision should no 
longer be assigned to the central bank, but rather to an independent agency (which might 
also ensure the consolidated supervision of all financial markets). 
I, myself, found the idea rather interesting at the end of the nineties, when the collapse of 
several  Romanian  banks  influenced  the  decision-making  process  at  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania. I realized at the moment how costly it was in terms of reputation for a central bank 
to be in charge of supervision and prudential regulation – not to mention that the separation 
appeared quite fashionable after the newly-established FSA had become operational in the 
UK.  At  the  same  time,  I  vividly  remember  the  conflict  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability, when I had to mediate the divergent positions taken during Board meetings by the 
deputy governors coordinating the two functions, not by virtue of personal affiliations, but due 
to the very nature of the specific task they had been entrusted with.  
Romania  opted  for  preserving  banking  supervision  as  a  prerogative  of  the  central  bank, 
despite  some  talks  on  “outsourcing”  this  activity.  Moreover,  the  concern  for  ensuring  and 
strengthening financial stability in Romania was visible in several significant changes of the 
institutional framework, which were operated prior to the outbreak of the global economic and 
financial crisis. Specifically, the NBR’s Financial Stability Department was created as early as 
2004, with the first edition of the annual Financial Stability Report being released two years 
later. The year 2007 saw the establishment of the National Committee for Financial Stability, 
whose key objective is to ensure the exchange of relevant information, as well as to prevent, 
appraise and manage any issues with a potentially systemic impact. The acting Chairman of 
the  National  Committee  for  Financial  Stability  is  the  NBR  Governor,  while  its  members 
include the Minister of Public Finance, the President of the National Securities Commission, 
the President of the Insurance Supervisory Commission, the President of the Private Pension 
System Supervisory Commission, and the CEO of the Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund. 
At hindsight, I believe we have made the right choice – although at the end of the nineties I 
was  wondering,  in  light  of  the  aforementioned  Board  disputes,  whether  separating  the 
monetary policy and the supervision functions was preferable, at the end of the day, I think it 
is  better  to  sort  out  such  disputes  under  the  same  roof.  Moreover,  the  ongoing  complex 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
challenges to financial and economic stability call for identifying, using and corroborating tons 
of  information  in  order  to  articulate  the  adequate  policies.  The  central  bank  relies  on  its 
database  and  expertise,  which  are  prerequisites  for  managing  such  a  challenging 
environment.  Besides,  clearly  acknowledging  the  links  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability  means  that  they  need  to  be  taken  into  account  when  formulating  the  monetary 
policy. 
The  issue  of  multiple  objectives  that  may  sooner  or  later  become  conflicting  objectives 
remains,  of  course,  a  matter  of  concern.  There  is  a  single  monetary  policy  rate  and  its 
adequate level, at a given point in time, for reaching the inflation target may well differ – or 
even  completely  differ  –  from  the  level  required  for  ensuring  financial  system  soundness. 
Hence, macroprudential policies need to play a very important role. 
But what a central bank can or cannot do is and will remain an interesting topic of debate. It 
now  seems  beyond  all  doubt 
first”  approach  may  become 
counterproductive  in  an  environment  of  financial  instability,  which  would  rather  call  for 
preserving a certain tactical flexibility in conducting the monetary policy.  
Over  the  medium  and  long  term,  failure  to  maintain  financial  stability  may  only  lead  to  a 
renewed  flare-up  in  inflation.  This  reminds  me  of  standard  aircraft  safety  instructions, 
according to which, in case of cabin depressurization, the parent should put the oxygen mask 
on his own face and only afterwards tend to the child (who, in most cases, is the parent’s 
reason  to  live).  While  looking  at  long-term  price  stability  as  its  fundamental  objective,  the 
central bank needs to keep a close eye on financial stability and, I would add, on the overall 
developments  in  macroeconomic  indicators.  Otherwise,  disinflationary  gains  –  however 
spectacular they might seem at a given point in time – would become utterly unsustainable. 
“inflation 
that 
the 
The adequate level of inflation: “low and stable” vs. “moderate and stable” 
6. 
The  present  crisis  brought  forward  for  discussion  not  only  the  primary  objectives  of  the 
monetary policy I have  already referred to, but also the adequate level  of such objectives. 
Apart  from  semi-accepting  the  idea  that  financial  stability  must  be  a  monetary  policy 
objective, economists have also called into question the inflation level that must be targeted.  
Recently,  Blanchard  et  al.  (2010)  stated  that  “it  was  tempting  for  macroeconomists  and 
policymakers alike to take much of the credit for the steady decrease in cyclical fluctuations 
from  the  early  1980s  on  and  to  conclude  that  we  knew  how  to  conduct  macroeconomic 
policy.  We  did  not  resist  temptation.  The  crisis  clearly  forces  us  to  question  our  earlier 
assessment”. 
Since  we  participate  today  in  a  seminar  dedicated  to banking  and financial  history,  please 
allow  me  to  put  things  into  perspective.  In  the  1970s,  inflation  was  high  and  there  was  a 
divorce between theoreticians and practitioners concerning the monetary policy effectiveness 
on  real  variables.  In  line  with  Sargent  and  Wallace’s  Policy  Ineffectiveness  Proposition 
(1976),  towards  the  end  of  the  1970s  many  were  thinking  of  monetary  policy  as  being 
powerless  also  in  the  short  term,  not  only  in  the  long  term,  as  Friedman  (1968),  Phelps 
(1968)  and  Lucas  (1972)  had  already  stated.  However,  practitioners  were  aware  that  their 
monetary policy decisions were effective in the short run with respect to both inflation and 
activity.  
This  divorce  lasted  for  a  while,  until  the  New  Keynesian  economists,  starting  with  Fischer 
(1977)  and  up  to  Taylor  (1980)  and  Calvo  (1983),  found  solutions  to  incorporate  nominal 
rigidities into their models with a view to putting them in line with practice. The economists 
belonging to the Real Business Cycle mainstream opted for exploring the lack of rigidities to 
the  maximum  and  created  general  equilibrium  models.  Later  on,  the  two  mainstreams 
merged in order to create the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models based on which 
monetary policy has been conducted ever since the early 1990s. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
After practitioners and theoreticians agreed on the above mentioned issue, low and stable 
inflation became the main, and sometimes the only objective of monetary policy. Blanchard 
et al. (2010) showed that “this was the result of a coincidence between the reputational need 
of central bankers to focus on inflation rather than activity (and their desire, at the start of the 
period, to decrease inflation from the high levels of the 1970s) and the intellectual support for 
inflation  targeting  provided  by  the  New  Keynesian  (NK)  model”.  According  to  the 
NK standard  model,  low  and  stable  inflation  is  indeed  the  best  policy  to  pursue,  since  the 
“divine coincidence”, as Blanchard and Gali (2006) called it, is assumed to hold, so that by 
maintaining  a  stable  inflation,  the  output  gap  equals  zero.  Thus,  within  this  framework, 
central  bankers  were  able  to  take  care  of  production  without  further  debating  the  issue. 
Moreover, this suited the practitioners since, according to this model, the interest rate was 
the only instrument resorted to for attaining the inflation target, just like in practice. 
Nevertheless,  preserving  stable  inflation  does  not  ensure  a  zero  output  gap,  where  the 
economy also faces other imperfections than the nominal ones. Although both theoreticians 
and practitioners were aware of this, they maintained their view that low and stable inflation 
was  beneficial  for  the  economy.  However,  some  economists  suggested  that  low  inflation 
might  be  detrimental  should  real  rigidities  and  shocks  arise.  Gertler  and  Trigari  (2004), 
Shimer (2005), Hall (2005), Krause and Lubik (2007), Christoffel and Linzert (2005) and Faia 
(2006), as well as Blanchard and Gali (2008) introduced labor market in the standard New 
Keynesian  model  along  with  real  wage  rigidities.  For  instance,  Blanchard  and  Gali  (2008) 
showed that “in the presence of labor market frictions and real wage rigidities, strict inflation 
stabilization does not deliver the best monetary policy [...] the reason is that distortions vary 
with  shocks.  As  a  result,  strict  inflation  stabilization  can  lead  to  inefficient,  large,  and 
persistent  movements  in  unemployment  in  response  to  productivity  shocks.  [...]  Optimal 
monetary  policy  implies  some  accommodation  of  inflation  and  limits  the  size  of  the 
fluctuations in unemployment”. 
On the other hand, in spite of sticking to their message on low and stable inflation, central 
bankers were flexible in implementing this model as shown by three practices in particular 
(Blanchard  et  al.,  2010).  The  first  one  refers  to  the  return  to  the  inflation  target  after 
experiencing  certain  deviations,  which  was  smooth  rather  than  abrupt.  The  second  one 
refers  to  the  fact  that  supply  side-induced  deviations  from  the  target  were  allowed  when 
expectations were well-anchored. Finally, many central bankers, myself included, were of the 
opinion that fluctuations in asset prices, especially those in the exchange rates, should be 
considered not only in relation with their impact on inflation, but also in connection with their 
effects on the competitiveness of the economy and on balance sheets. In practice this was 
seen as a heresy and faced severe criticism. 
The ongoing crisis brought to the fore the liquidity trap that economists have lately analyzed 
especially  in  light  of  the  Japanese  experience.  The  Great  Moderation  had  given  the 
impression  that  shocks capable  of  pushing  inflation  down  to  zero  might  no  longer  emerge 
and therefore the issue saw little debate. The Great Moderation showed that low and stable 
inflation  may  induce  complacency,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  expectations  to  become 
exuberant.  
The  present  crisis  has  proved,  however,  that  a  low  inflation  level  –  somewhere 
below  2%  –  may  not  be  adequate.  At  this  low  level,  in  the  context  of  larger  cyclical 
fluctuations  –  such  as  the  ones  we  have  been  experiencing  recently  –  inflation  can  easily 
enter  negative  territory,  whereas  policy  rates  cannot  go  below  the  zero  bound.  From  that 
point on, monetary policy must resort to quantitative easing in order to boost the economy 
that runs the risk of recession. This is the reason why Blanchard et al. (2010) proposed a 
change  in  the  inflation  target  to  more  than  2%  to,  maybe,  4%,  to  give  the  central  bank 
enough  room for  maneuver  to  lower  the  interest  rate.  As  recent  as  in  January  2012,  Paul 
Krugman said in an interview for Le Monde that “inflation is not the problem, but the solution”. 
Likewise,  my  advisor  on  monetary  policy  issues  is  of  the  opinion  that  Minsky’s  Financial 
Instability Hypothesis teaches the lesson that when a credit-fuelled bubble bursts, it is better 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
if inflation is high in order to support balance sheets. He proposes to enhance the monetary 
policy  objective  from  “low  and  stable  inflation”  to  “moderate  and  stable  inflation”  (Croitoru, 
2012). 
Although I  am  not  opposed  to the  aforementioned  judgments  and  to  the  idea  of moderate 
and stable inflation, I believe that “moderate inflation” should be clearly defined. However, I 
am afraid that, from this point on, my views depart from the theories of moderate inflation, 
because, in my opinion, “moderate” as it might be, inflation needs to be low enough in order 
not  to  trigger  adverse  consequences  such  as  disanchoring  inflation  expectations  and  the 
emergence  of  a  wage-inflation  spiral,  in  which  widespread  wage  indexation  magnifies  the 
impact  of  inflationary  shocks  and  hampers  monetary  policy  effectiveness.  Experience  has 
taught me that inflation is an insidious disease and should not be toyed with. As a matter of 
fact,  one  of  the  first  pieces  of  advice  I  received  as  Governor  from  experienced  central 
bankers  was  that  for  a  Governor  there  is  no  such  thing  as  too  low  inflation  and  too  high 
foreign exchange reserves. 
Conclusions 
7. 
By way of conclusion, I would say that, during periods of great transformations, while theory 
should still guide reasoning, close contact with the shifting economic reality is essential for 
efficient  policy  action.  Therefore,  in  such  circumstances,  the  normal  rule-based  monetary 
policy should probably give way to a larger degree of flexibility. 
Regardless of the objectives and rules set for monetary policy conduct, they should not be 
pursued  or  applied  mechanically.  A  central  banker  cannot  afford  to  live  in  an  ivory  tower; 
quite on the contrary, he needs to keep at all times abreast of the latest developments and 
trends  economy-wide  and  in  the  financial  system.  Such  an  approach  should  not  be 
assimilated  to  promoting  a  discretionary  stance,  but  rather  to  a  solid  anchoring  in  the 
day-to-day  realities,  which  often  prove  more  complex  than  imagined  by  policymakers  or 
theoreticians.  
When faced with completely unexpected developments requiring swift action, one cannot rely 
solely on recommendations derived from more or less mainstream economic theory. In spite 
of  the  significant  progress  achieved  over  the  past  decades,  both  monetary  theory  and 
economic  science,  in  general,  have  their  limits  and  imperfections.  A  full  understanding  of 
economic  and  financial  realities  –  which  stubbornly  evade  the  patterns  put  forth  by 
researchers – also calls for steady and diligent efforts to monitor and interpret such realities  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 