Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in unconventional times 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
ECB  colloquium  held  in  honour  of  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
16 May 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear José Manuel, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you here today on the occasion of this colloquium on “Monetary 
Policy in unconventional times”. It is held in the honour of José Manuel González-Páramo to 
mark the end of his eight-year term as Member of the ECB’s Executive Board. 
The topics of today’s colloquium are not only of great relevance, but I believe also very close 
to your heart, José Manuel, as they reflect two of the main areas which you have dealt with 
during much of your career:  
The  first  topic  concerns  the  experiences  gained  with  the  ECB’s  non-standard 
measures and monetary policy during crisis times. José Manuel was closely involved in 
shaping  these  measures  during  his  time  at  the  ECB,  having  been  in  charge  of  monetary 
policy operations for several years, also prior to the financial crisis.  
José  Manuel  joined  the  ECB  in  times  that  seemed  very  different  from  today.  Financial 
markets seemed to work rather efficiently in an environment of low volatility and seemingly 
little  risk.  Liquidity  was  distributed  by  stable  and  efficient  interbank  markets  at  (almost) 
uniform prices throughout the euro area. The operational framework served well its purpose 
of  transmitting  the  decisions  by  the  Governing  Council  on  policy  rates  to  market  rates. 
Monetary  policy  relied  on  standard  monetary  policy  operations.  Money  market  rates  were 
quite stable and close to the ECB’s main refinancing rate, with fluctuations in money market 
rates being within a few basis points.  
How times have changed! Over the past few years, a number of standard and non-standard 
measures  have  been  implemented  as  the  Eurosystem’s  response  to  the  dysfunctions  in 
money markets caused by the financial and sovereign debt crises. You have been involved 
in the design and the implementation of these measures in all phases of the recent crisis: in 
the  early  phases,  the  ECB  mainly  responded  to  the  crisis  by  adjusting  the  timing  of  its 
liquidity provision and the lengthening of the maturity of its open market operations, which 
helped to stabilise short term rates in an environment of high volatility and extreme distrust.  
Later on, we dealt with the design and the launch of longer-term refinancing operations, the 
adjustment  of  the  collateral  framework,  and  the  various  purchasing  programmes  that  were 
necessary  to  maintain  an  efficient  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  throughout 
the euro area.  
At  the  same  time,  for  several  years  you  were  overseeing  the  ECB’s  research  department, 
which  contributed  with  in-depth  analyses  on  related  topics,  such  as  the  effects  of 
non-standard  measures,  or  monetary  policy  around  the  zero  lower  bound.  All  this  was 
achieved with the input, great effort and expertise of you and your staff.  
I hope that the interventions in the first half of today’s colloquium will provide us with some 
important insights on the effects of these measures and relationship with standard monetary 
policy. 
The  second  topic  of  today’s  colloquium  will  look  at  the  interaction  of  private  and 
public  debt,  deficits  and  monetary  policy.  As  Professor  of  Economics  from  the 
Universidad Complutense in Madrid, José Manuel had of course already dedicated a lot of 
thought and work to these issues prior to the start of his career as a central banker. In fact, 
José  Manuel  headed  the  Public  Finance  Department  of  the  Universidad  Complutense  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
many  years  and  has  published  numerous  important  academic  articles  in  this  area  and  a 
reference university textbook on the economics of the public sector. He has also played a 
leading  role  in  many  of  the  most  prestigious  academic  journals  on  economics  and  public 
policy  in  Spain.  He  also  helped  lead  the  work  of  the  prestigious  Centre  for  Monetary  and 
Financial  Studies  in  Spain  better  known  as  the  CEMFI  Foundation  of  which  he  was  an 
Executive Board Member. 
José Manuel was able to combine his depth of academic knowledge and experience with a 
brilliant  career  as  a  central  banker  in  Banco  de  España.  This  background  and  wealth  of 
experience  proved  to  be  an  invaluable  asset  after  he  joined  the  Executive  Board  and 
Governing Council of the ECB in June 2004. 
One can say that José Manuel had foreseen some of the pressing problems of the euro area 
today: the need for tax reforms and fiscal consolidation, the issue of sustainability of fiscal 
reforms and economic growth, to name a few. You have asked the question how to achieve 
permanent  reductions  in  public  deficits  in  order  to  achieve  fiscal  reform,  pointing  to  the 
reduction  of  structural  public  expenditure.  You  have  also  asked  the  question  on  regional 
divergences in the euro area, pointing to the need for structural reforms. 
Some of these topics are now at the forefront of the questions that European policy makers 
are confronted with, how to reduce fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances, how to achieve 
growth, and how to combine these goals with the necessary fiscal discipline that serves to 
balance the interests among the present and future generations.  
Important  steps  have  been  taken  on  the  European  level  as  regards  the  implementation  of 
fiscal  rules  and  consolidation  measures.  The  euro  area  general  government  deficit  has 
declined significantly; public debt should stop rising next year and decline thereafter.  
The  extent  of  the  progress  on  this  front  is  insufficiently  acknowledged  and  worth  noting. 
Everywhere governments have undertaken significant and difficult reforms and continue to 
do  so.  Although  more  work  is  certainly  needed,  we  should  appreciate  how  quickly  things 
improve when serious action is taken. 
To  foster  employment  and  growth  policy  makers  have  to  address  macroeconomic 
imbalances in the euro area. While monetary policy will continue to ensure price stability in 
the euro area as a whole and cannot address inflation rates in individual countries, relative 
competitiveness adjustments can and need to occur at the country level. These adjustments 
need  to  be  driven  by  national  policies.  The  countries  that  experienced  unit  costs 
systematically  above  the  euro  area  average  and  lost  competitiveness  will  have  to  regain 
competitiveness. This can be achieved through a combination of cost moderation – including 
in  some  specific  cases  of  past  excesses,  decisive  adjustments  –  productivity  gains  and 
technological change.  
In this process, they should experience unit costs below the euro area average – possibly for 
a sustained period in case of large earlier competitiveness losses. The ECB’s focus on price 
stability in the medium term for the euro area will contribute to an anchoring of longer-term 
inflation expectations in all countries.  
Before  concluding,  let  me  comment  briefly  on  the  difficult  situation  in  Greece.  Since  the 
Treaty does not foresee anything on exit, this is not a matter for the ECB to decide. While the 
ECB will continue to comply with the mandate of keeping price stability over the medium term 
in line with Treaty provisions and preserving the integrity of our balance sheet, I want to state 
that our strong preference is that Greece will continue to stay in the euro area. 
Dear José Manuel, you joined the Executive Board of the European Central Bank 8 years 
ago, in 2004. Since 2006, we were both members of the Governing Council, and I still recall 
extensive meetings in which José Manuel presented to the Governing Council one item after 
another on a very wide variety of subjects – ranging from the implementation of monetary 
policy  to  the  new  series  of  banknotes  or  to  complicated  statistical  and  risk-management 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
issues  –  with  the  same  degree  of  commitment  and  full  command  of  the  most  technical 
details.  
And of course we became even closer colleagues last fall when I moved to Frankfurt to join 
the  Executive  Board.  It  is  with  warmth  and  admiration  of  your  professional  skills  and 
congenial nature that I look at our common experiences.  
Having  now  nearly  completed  your  full  term  as  ECB  Executive  Board  member,  you  have 
witnessed  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises  from  the  start.  Even  though  we  will 
welcome a new highly experienced member to this team in a few weeks’ time, we will greatly 
miss your personal experience and judgement. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me close by wishing you a very interesting colloquium. We have 
highly  distinguished  speakers  from  Europe  and  overseas,  and  I  look  forward  to  some 
interesting discussions. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
