Nils Bernstein: The fiscal compact 
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the hearing on 
the fiscal compact conducted by the European Affairs Committee of the Danish Parliament, 
Copenhagen, 9 February 2012. 
 What is the essence of the fiscal compact? 
The new element is that there will be even more focus on the structural budget balance and 
that the commitment to fiscal discipline will be anchored in national legislation. The structural 
balance  is  the  cyclically  adjusted  budget  balance  stripped  of  the  effects  of  cyclical 
developments and special circumstances. In Denmark’s case, special circumstances include 
pension  yield  tax,  proceeds  from  North  Sea  oil  and  this  year  also  reimbursement  of  early 
retirement  contributions.  In  future,  it  will  be  a  requirement  that  the  structural  deficit  for  a 
single year does not, as a main rule, exceed ½ per cent of GDP, and that any substantial 
deviation will trigger an automatic adjustment mechanism to restore the structural deficit to 
balance or surplus. As I have already mentioned, these provisions are to be incorporated into 
national legislation. At a later point, the Commission will issue guidelines for the content of 
the  automatic  adjustment  mechanism.  Indications  are  that  it  will  be  an  obligation  to  take 
action, not an automatic mechanism as such. The structural deficit is an expression of the 
“sustained” balance situation, be it a budget deficit or surplus. 
Until now, the main focus area – besides observing the 3-per-cent requirement for the actual 
budget  balance  –  has  been  to  ensure  continuous  annual  improvement  of  the  structural 
balance by at least 0.5 per cent of GDP for member states not observing the medium-term 
objective  of  balance  or  surplus.  In  practice,  one  of  the  weaknesses  has  been  that  the 
adjustment  process  has  been  too  slow.  Another  weakness  has  been  that  the  structural 
balance was overestimated in the good times before the financial crisis. The value of current-
account deficits, housing bubbles and loss of competitiveness as indicators that output and 
employment were well above the underlying potential was underestimated. 
This pattern has exacerbated the deficit during the cyclical downturn so that, on aggregate, 
debt has increased over the business cycle. 
If  the  government  budget  must,  as  a  main  rule,  be  structurally  in  balance  every  year,  this 
reduces  the  likelihood  that  the  total  debt  grows  over  time.  Deficits  in  bad  times  must  be 
matched by surpluses in good times. 
Under the existing Stability and Growth Pact, the structural balance has mainly been used to 
lay down a medium-term objective – that is, a target to be met sometime in the future. And by 
then things will have improved, or so we assume in our planning. 
Now  the  structural  balance  will  be  an  annual  target  which  can  only  be  deviated  from  in 
exceptional circumstances or in the event of a severe economic downturn. 
Will the new fiscal compact mitigate the debt crisis? 
First and foremost, the new fiscal compact is aimed at preventing a recurrence of the present 
situation  in  the  euro  area  –  with  a  debt  crisis  in  several  euro  area  member  states  that  is 
threatening to spread. Here it could be argued that serious observance of the existing rules 
combined  with  responsible  macroeconomic  and  macroprudential  policies  could  have 
provided the same result. 
The  fiscal  compact  and  other  initiatives  will  ensure  that  deviations  are  to  a  larger  extent 
exposed – and addressed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
So agreement between the euro area member states and other member states on the fiscal 
compact  may  help  to  boost  market  confidence  in  Europe  in  general.  But  the  present  debt 
crisis  should  primarily  be  addressed  through  direct  measures  in  the  member  states  in 
question and via the international assistance programmes already in place. 
So what are the advantages of the compact? 
The  main  advantages  of  aiming  for  and  realising  a  structural  balance  are  that  growth  in 
government debt over the business cycle is curbed and that each member state has fiscal 
scope  to  stimulate  its  economy  in  a  recession.  The  foundations  must  be  laid  when  the 
economy is not under pressure. 
The fiscal scope is greater if the structural balance is positive. 
But it is important to realise that aiming for sound public finances is not enough. Wage and 
productivity  developments  and  other  structural  factors  impacting  on  competitiveness,  the 
labour  market  and  the  balance  of  payments  must  also  contribute  to  a  sustainable 
development. This is also an element of fiscal policy. 
Viewed in a broader perspective, the fiscal compact – together with the new six-pack, which 
focuses on issues such as member states’ broad macroeconomic development and tightens 
the  sanctions  regime  against  euro  area  member  states  –  is  a  prerequisite  for  preventing 
future debt crises that bring the coherence of the euro area into question. 
Like  other  EU  member  states,  Denmark  has  benefitted  hugely  from  the  European  project, 
including the single market and the euro. 
This project cannot be rolled back without substantial costs. So it is very much in Denmark’s 
interest that the European project does not strand. 
Are there no drawbacks or reservations in relation to the fiscal compact? 
In an ideal world, I believe that each member  state should be free to  conduct responsible 
economic policy without the need for a legal framework that is controlled by courts of law. No 
legislation takes into account the multitude of factors at play in real life. Undoubtedly, issues 
such as how to calculate the structural balance, whether exceptional circumstances exist or 
when a downturn can be characterised as “severe” will give rise to disagreement. As a result, 
the legal rules may have to be expanded or clarified at some point. Europe is wrapping its 
economic policy in red tape. But I have to say that this is necessary in the current situation. 
The  risk  is  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  system  will  not  be  sufficiently  flexible  to  allow  for 
appropriate adjustments, and, on the other hand, flexibility will be used to avoid implementing 
the required adjustments. Experience shows that particularly the large member states find it 
difficult to accept regulative restrictions in good times. We’ll just have to see what happens. 
Should Denmark adopt the fiscal compact? 
Despite my reservations, the answer is yes. 
Being  a  small  country  with  an  open  economy,  we  will,  at  any  rate,  have  to  observe  the 
standards it sets for responsible budget policy. Irrespective of the fiscal compact, a Danish 
Budget Act is forthcoming that is to prevent overspending year after year. It is long overdue. 
And being a small country with an open economy, we need to be present when the external 
framework for our economic policy is laid down. That is our best opportunity to have a say  
– be it ever so small – and to learn what is going on. It is in our own interest to comply with 
the obligations we are now essentially taking on. That gives us greater freedom to determine 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
our own policies. At the same time, we are signalling to the world that Denmark wishes to 
remain committed to stability-oriented economic policy. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
