Richard W Fisher: “Not to be used externally, but also harmful if 
swallowed” – projecting the future of the economy and lessons learned 
from Texas and Mexico 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Dallas Regional Chamber of Commerce, Dallas, Texas, 
5 March 2012.. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
I have been asked to speak about the economy. I am going to take a different approach than 
is typical for a Federal Reserve speech. I’ll eschew making the prototypical forecast, except 
to note that from my perch at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, I presently see that: a.) On 
balance, the data indicate improving growth and prospects for job creation in 2012. However, 
the  outlook  is  hardly  “robust”  and  remains  constrained  by  the  fiscal  and  regulatory 
misfeasance of Congress and the executive branch and is subject to a now well-known, and 
likely well-discounted, list of possible exogenous shocks – the so-called “tail risks” – posed 
by possible developments of different sorts in the Middle East, Europe, China and elsewhere. 
And  b.)  While  price  stability  is  being  challenged  by  the  recent  run-up  in  gasoline 
prices  –  which  has  yet  to  be  reflected  in  the  personal  consumption  expenditure  and 
consumer price indexes but may well make for worrisome headlines when February data are 
released  –  the  underlying  trend  has  been  converging  toward  the  2  percent  long-term  goal 
formally adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at its last meeting.1  
As to the outlook envisioned by the entire FOMC, you might wish to consult the forecasts of 
all 17 members, which include those of yours truly, that were made public after the January 
meeting – though I think a puckish footnote appended to the internal document laying out a 
component  of  the  December  1966  FOMC  forecast  might  still  apply:  “Not  to  be  used 
externally, but also harmful if swallowed.”2  
Speaking  of  harmful  if  swallowed,  I  might  add  that  I  am  personally  perplexed  by  the 
continued  preoccupation,  bordering  upon  fetish,  that  Wall  Street  exhibits  regarding  the 
potential  for  further  monetary  accommodation  –  the  so-called  QE3,  or  third  round  of 
quantitative  easing.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  over  $1.6  trillion  of  U.S.  Treasury  securities 
and  almost  $848  billion  in  mortgage-backed  securities  on  its  balance  sheet.  When  we 
purchased  those  securities,  we  injected  money  into  the  system.  Most  of  that  money  and 
more  has  accumulated  on  the  sidelines:  More  than  $1.5  trillion  in  excess  reserves  sit  on 
deposit at the 12 Federal Reserve banks, including the Dallas Fed, for which we pay private 
banks  a  measly  25  basis  points  in  interest.  A  copious  amount  is  being  harbored  by 
nondepository  financial  institutions,  and  another  $2  trillion  is  sitting  in  the  cash  coffers  of 
nonfinancial businesses.  
                                                 
1  Gasoline  prices  were  not  a  major  factor  in  January’s  headline  index,  at  least  relative  to  the  normally  wild 
swings we see in the price of gasoline. On a seasonally adjusted basis, gasoline prices increased 0.9 percent 
in  January  (not  annualized)  and  contributed  roughly  0.3  annualized  percentage  points  to  the  headline  rate. 
Based on weekly data collected by the Department of Energy, the price of gasoline in February is on pace for 
an increase of 6.3 percent over January. Given that the typical seasonal pattern has gasoline’s price falling 
1.1 percent  in  February,  we  should  see  a  roughly  7.4  percent  seasonally  adjusted  increase  when  personal 
consumption expenditures (PCE) data for February come out at the end of March. Gasoline alone may end up 
contributing  about  3  annualized  percentage  points  to  February’s  headline  PCE  rate.  A  more  thorough 
discussion can be found here: www.dallasfed.org/data/pce/2012/pce1201.cfm. 
2  FOMC Greenbook forecast, December 1966. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Trillions  of  dollars  are  lying  fallow,  not  being  employed  in  the  real  economy.  Yet  financial 
market operators keep looking and hoping for more. Why? I think it may be because they 
have become hooked on the monetary morphine we provided when we performed massive 
reconstructive surgery, rescuing the economy from the Financial Panic of 2008–09, and then 
kept the medication in the financial bloodstream to ensure recovery. I personally see no need 
to  administer  additional  doses  unless  the  patient  goes  into  postoperative  decline.  I  would 
suggest to you that, if the data continue to improve, however gradually, the markets should 
begin preparing themselves for the good Dr. Fed to wean them from their dependency rather 
than administer further dosage.  
I am well aware of the salutary effect of accommodative monetary policy on the equity and 
fixed-income markets – remember, I am the only member of the FOMC who used to be on 
the  other  side.  My  firms’  record  of  substantially  outperforming  the  equity  and  fixed-income 
indexes  over  a  prolonged  period  before  I  hung  up  my  investment  business  and  entered 
public service in 1997 was achieved by focusing on the long-term fundamentals of the real 
economy and the underlying value of the securities we purchased or sold – not by depending 
on central bank largesse. Counting on the Fed to perpetually float returns is a mug’s game.  
From my present perspective on the side of the angels, as a member of the policymaking 
team on the FOMC, I believe adding to the accommodative doses we have applied rather 
than beginning to wean the patient might be the equivalent of medical malpractice. Having 
never before pursued this course of healing, we run the risk of painting ourselves further into 
a corner from which we do not know the costs of exiting. It is my opinion that we should run 
that  risk  only  in  the  most  dire  of  circumstances,  and  I  presently  do  not  see  those 
circumstances obtaining.  
So much for forecasting and monetary policy. Let me now walk you through an overview of 
the Texas economy to set the stage for a broader discussion of what I believe continues to 
bedevil a lasting recovery and more efficient job creation in the United States. 
I will use some slides to illustrate key points.  
The National Bureau of Economic Research, the arbiter of when recessions begin and end, 
dates the onset of the Great Recession as December 2007. The economic performance of 
Texas since December 2007 can be summarized with the chart projected on the screen. It 
depicts  employment  growth  in  the  12  Federal  Reserve  districts.  In  the  Eleventh  Federal 
Reserve  District  – or  the  Dallas  Fed’s  district  –  96  percent  of  economic  production  comes 
from the 25.7 million people of Texas. As you can see by the red line, we now have more 
people  at  work  than  we  had  before  we  felt  the  effects  of  the  Great  Recession.  All  told  in 
2011, Texas alone created 212,000 jobs.3 
                                                 
3  According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the nation went into recession in December 2007 
and came out in June 2009. According to the Dallas Fed’s Texas Index of Coincident Indicators, Texas went 
into the recession in August 2008 and came out in December 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Only  two  other  states  can  claim  they  surpassed  previous  peak  employment  levels:  Alaska 
and North Dakota. 
Readers of this speech abroad – say, in Washington or New York – might think our growth 
last year came only from the burgeoning oil and gas patch. They would be right to describe it 
as  burgeoning:  30,000  jobs  were  added  in  oil  and  gas  and  the  related  support  sector  last 
year. Texas now produces 2.1 million barrels of oil per day, the same amount as Norway; we 
produce 6.7 trillion cubic feet of natural gas a year, only slightly less than Canada.4  
With  25  percent  of  U.S.  refinery  capacity  and  60  percent  of  the  nation’s  petrochemical 
production located in Texas, we most definitely benefit from both upstream and downstream 
energy production.  
                                                 
4  Texas compares with some international producers of oil and gas as follows: 
 
World 
United States
Canada 
Texas 
Norway 
Mexico 
Crude + natural gas liquids 
(mb/d) 
Natural gas 
(trillion cu ft, annual)
84.60 
 8.58 
 3.38 
 2.13 
 2.13 
 2.95 
119.39 
 22.47 
 6.91 
 6.71 
 3.85 
 1.72 
SOURCE: Energy Information Administration. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
And yet other sectors gained more jobs than the oil and gas sector and its support functions 
in  2011:  58,000  jobs  were  added  in  professional  and  business  services,  nearly  46,000  in 
education and health services and more than 41,000 in leisure and hospitality. Manufacturing 
–  which  accounts  for  approximately  8  percent  of  total  Texas  employment  –  added  over 
27,000 jobs. 
All  told,  the  private  sector  in  Texas  expanded  by  266,400  jobs  in  2011,  while  the  public 
sector  contracted  by  54,800,  due  primarily  to  layoffs  of  schoolteachers.  In  sum,  Texas 
payrolls grew 2 percent, significantly above the national rate of 1.3 percent. 
This performance is not unique to last year. As you can see from this graph of nonagricultural 
employment  growth  by  Federal  Reserve  district  going  back  to  January  1990,  the  Eleventh 
District has outperformed the nation on the job front for over two decades. Note the slope of 
the top line, which depicts job growth in the Eleventh District compared with each of the other 
districts and, importantly, relative to employment growth for the U.S. as a whole – denoted by 
the black line, the seventh one down. 
 As was pointed out in high relief by the media when a certain Texas governor was briefly in 
the hunt for his party’s presidential nomination, we do have some serious deficiencies in the 
Lone Star State. We have a very large number of people earning minimum wage; we have 
an unemployment rate that, while trending downward, is still too high, abetted by continued 
inflows of job seekers from less-promising sections of the country. But I’ll bet you that those 
who constantly enumerate our deficiencies and are given to habitual Texas-bashing would 
give their right – or should I say, left – arms to have Texas’ record of robust long-term job 
creation instead of the anemic employment growth of other megastates such as California 
and New York. Or even the job formation record of many other countries! The following chart 
shows  that  over  the  past  two  decades,  the  rate  of  employment  growth  in  Texas  has 
exceeded that of the euro zone and its two anchors, Germany and France, as well as that of 
two natural-resource-intensive countries with populations comparable to Texas’, Canada and 
Australia.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Now, is all this just prototypical Texas brag, or are there lessons the nation can learn from 
the success that is enjoyed here? Texans are hardly given to modesty, but I believe there are 
some undeniable lessons being imparted here. 
One lesson I draw from comparative state data is that monetary policy is a necessary but 
insufficient tonic for economic recovery. The Fed has made money cheap and abundant for 
the entire country. The citizens of Texas and the Eleventh Federal Reserve District operate 
under the same monetary policy as do our fellow Americans. We have the same mortgage 
rates  and  pay  the  same  rates  of  interest  on  commercial  and  consumer  loans,  and  our 
businesses  borrow  at  the  same  interest  rates  as  their  brethren  elsewhere  in  the  country. 
Which raises an important question: If monetary policy is the same here as everywhere else 
in the United States, why does Texas outperform the other states? 
The answer is no doubt complicated by the fact that Texas is blessed with a comparatively 
great amount of nature’s gifts, a high concentration of military installations and what some 
claim are other “unfair” advantages.  
But  many  of  these  “unfair”  advantages  are  man-made:  They  derive  from  a  deliberate 
approach  by  state  and  local  authorities  to  enact  business-friendly  regulations  and  fiscal 
policy. For example, if you examine the differences between Texas and two states that have 
been underperforming for a prolonged period – California and New York – you will note that 
these  former  power  states  have  less-flexible  labor  rules.  Due  to  local  taxes,  differences  in 
zoning practices and myriad other factors, the cost of housing and the overall cost of living in 
California and New York are significantly higher than they are here. And due to differences in 
policies  governing  education,  the  scores  measuring  middle-school  students’  proficiency  in 
math are lower in both California and New York than they are in Texas, and in reading, are 
lower in California and only slightly higher in New York.5  
Taken together, these factors, alongside whatever natural advantages we may enjoy (though 
it is hard to compete with the physical beauty of California and the Great Lakes region or the 
cultural  splendor  of  New  York),  affect  where  firms  choose  to  locate  and  hire  and  where 
people choose to raise their families and seek jobs.  
                                                 
5  See The Nation’s Report Card, http://nationsreportcard.gov. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
I would argue that an additional factor favors Texas: We have a Legislature that under both 
Democratic  and  Republican  governors  has  over  time  deliberately  crafted  laws  and 
regulations,  and  tax  and  spending  regimes,  encouraging  business  formation  and  job 
creation.  
Just last month, Fairfield, Calif.-based vehicle reseller Copart Inc. announced that it will move 
its headquarters to Texas, citing “greater operational efficiencies.”6 The CEO for the owner of 
Hardee’s and Carl’s Jr. restaurants, Andy Puzder, claims it takes six months to two years to 
secure permits in California to build a new Carl’s Jr., whereas in Texas, it takes six weeks. 
These  two  anecdotes  from  California  alone  clearly  illustrate  that  firms  and  jobs  will  go  to 
where it is easiest to do business – not where it is less convenient and more costly.  
Both state and federal authorities need to bear this in mind as they plot changes in the fiscal 
and regulatory policy needed to restore the job-creating engine of America. As an official of 
the Federal Reserve charged with making monetary policy for the country as a whole, I am 
constantly mindful that investment and job-creating capital is free to roam not only within the 
United  States,  but  to  any  place  on  earth  where  it  will  earn  the  best  risk-adjusted  return.  If 
other  countries  with  stable  governments  offer  more  attractive 
tax  and  regulatory 
environments,  capital  that  would  otherwise  go  to  creating  jobs  in  the  U.S.A.  will  migrate 
abroad, just as intra-U.S. investment is migrating to Texas.  
Thus, even if one were to somehow have 100 percent certainty about the future course of 
Federal Reserve policy and be completely comfortable with it, without greater clarity about 
the future course of fiscal and regulatory policy and whether that policy will be competitive in 
a globalized world, job-creating investment in the U.S. will remain restrained and our great 
economic potential will remain unrealized. 
I pull no punches here: We have been thrown way off course by congresses populated by 
generations of Democrats and Republicans who failed the nation by not budgeting ways to 
cover the costs of their munificent spending with adequate revenue streams. The thrust of 
the political debate is now – and must continue to be – how to right the listing fiscal ship and 
put it back on a course that encourages job formation and gets the economy steaming again 
toward  ever-greater  prosperity.  No  amount  of  monetary  accommodation  can  substitute  for 
the need for responsible hands to take ahold of the fiscal helm. Indeed, if we at the Fed were 
to abandon our wits and seek to do so by inflating away the debts and unfunded liabilities of 
Congress, we would only become accomplices to scuttling the economy. 
I was in Mexico last week. Mexico has many problems, not the least of which is declining oil 
production, low school graduation rates and drug-induced violence. But on the fiscal front, 
the  country  is  outperforming  the  United  States.  Mexico’s  government  has  developed  and 
implemented better macroeconomic policy than has the U.S. government.  
Mexico’s economy contracted sharply during the global downturn, with real gross domestic 
product (GDP) plummeting 6.2 percent in 2009. But growth roared back, up 5.5 percent in 
2010  and  3.9  percent 
its  prerecession  peak  after 
12 quarters – three quarters sooner than in the U.S. Mexico’s industrial production passed its 
prerecession peak at the end of 2010; ours has yet to do so.  
Now hold on to your seats: Mexico actually has a federal budget! We haven’t had one for 
almost  three  years.  Furthermore,  the  Mexican  Congress  has  imposed  a  balanced-budget 
rule  and  the  discipline  to  go  with  it,  so  that  even  with  the  deviation  from  balance  allowed 
under emergencies, Mexico ran a budget deficit of only 2.5 percent in 2011, compared with 
8.7  percent  in  the  U.S.  Mexico’s  national  debt  totals  27  percent  of  GDP;  in  the  U.S.,  the 
debt-to-GDP ratio computed on a comparable basis was 99 percent in 2011 and is projected 
to be 106 percent in 2012. Imagine that: The country that many Americans look down upon 
in  2011,  with  output  reaching 
                                                 
6 
“California Auto Parts Company Moving to Texas,” by Steve Brown, Dallas Morning News, Feb. 4, 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and consider “undeveloped” is now more fiscally responsible and is growing faster than the 
United States. What does that say about the fiscal rectitude of the U.S. Congress?  
Here is the point: As demonstrated by the relative and continued, inexorable outperformance 
by  Texas  –  which  is  affected  by  the  same  monetary  policy  as  are  all  of  the  other 
49 states – the key to harnessing the monetary accommodation provided by the Fed lies in 
the hands of our fiscal and regulatory authorities, the Congress working with the executive 
branch.  As  demonstrated  by  the  fiscal  posture  of  Mexico,  a  nation  can  effect  budgetary 
discipline and still have growth. 
One might draw two lessons here. 
The  first  comes  from  Germany’s  finance  minister,  Wolfgang  Schäuble,  who  from  my 
perspective was spot on when he said, “If you want more private demand, you have to take 
people’s  angst  away”  by  having  responsible  and  disciplined  fiscal  and  regulatory  policy.7 
Clearly, there is less angst involved in conducting business in Texas. 
The  second  is  a  broader,  macroeconomic  truism:  that  fiscal  and  regulatory  policy  either 
complements monetary policy or retards its utility as a propellant for job creation. Mexico is 
proof  positive  that  good  fiscal  policy  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  thoughtfully  conducted 
monetary  policy,  which  is  what  the  Banco  de  México  –  whose  independence,  incidentally, 
was  enshrined  by  a  constitutional  amendment  in  1994  –  has  delivered  under  its  single 
mandate of inflation control and by applying the tool of inflation targeting.  
I should be injecting some levity into the event, though it is hard to do so when one talks 
about our feckless fiscal authorities. But there are witty people who have found a way to do 
so.  Take  a 
found  on  YouTube: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Li0no7O9zmE. 
There you have the prevailing modus operandi of our fiscal authorities: pass the bill rather 
than the American dream to our children. What a sad tale! 
You asked me to talk about the economy. In a nutshell, my answer is this: Monetary policy 
provides the fuel for the economic engine that is the United States. We have filled the gas 
tank  and  then  some.  And  yet  businesses  will  not  use  that  fuel  to  a  degree  necessary  to 
realize our job-creating potential and create a better world for the successor generation of 
Americans until Congress, working with the executive branch, does the responsible thing and 
pulls together a tax, spending and regulatory program that will induce businesses to step on 
the  accelerator  and  engage  the  transmission  mechanism  of  job  creation  so  they  and  the 
consumers they create through employment can drive our economy forward.  
this  parody  of  Congress 
that  my  staff 
look  at 
                                                 
7 
“Q&A: German Finance Minister Takes On Critics,” by Marcus Walker, William Boston and Andreas Kissler, 
Wall Street Journal, Jan. 29, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
