Mohammed Iqbal Belath: Role of Islamic finance in the development of 
Africa 
Address by Mr Mohammed Iqbal Belath, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, 
at the opening ceremony of the seminar on the “Role of Islamic finance in the development of 
Africa”, Balaclava, 6 September 2012. 
 Governor  Bheenick,  Excellencies  from  the  Diplomatic corps,  Chief  Executives  of Banks  & 
Financial  Institutions,  Chief  Executive  of  the  MBA,  Mr  Jaseem  Ahmed Secretary General 
of the IFSB, Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen, 
A  very  good  morning  to  you  all.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  at  the 
Seminar on the Role of Islamic Finance in the Development of Africa. 
Some  of  you present  today have  travelled  from  far  to  attend this  Seminar in this beautiful 
corner  of  the  island. We  hope  that  the  arrangements put  in  place  meet your expectations 
and wish you a most pleasant stay among us. 
This  is  the  second  time  that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  organizing an  event  of  this scale  to 
promote  Islamic  Finance  in  Mauritius.  The  first  time  was  in  May  2009,  the  Bank 
successfully  co-organised  the  Seminar  on  Islamic  Capital  Markets  in collaboration with 
the Financial Services Commission and IFSB. 
I  hope  that  this  seminar  will  provide  you  opportunities  to  discuss  and  raise  issues  in 
Islamic  finance,  common  to  Africa.  Although  many  issues  will  probably  still  remain 
unresolved,  you  will leave with more fruitful ideas than before. This gathering  of  new  ideas 
and  schools  of  thought  on  Islamic  finance  will  intensify awareness on the  role of Islamic 
finance  in  the  development  of  Africa.  Sharing  of  each-others’  experience,  enhancing 
networking  and  promoting  awareness  would probably be the main ingredients to make this 
seminar successful. 
In  order  to  access  a  wider  audience  from  all  walks  of  life  and  across  all  communities  in 
Mauritius,  I  mean  those  non-experts  who  are  interested  but  not closely acquainted with 
Takaful,  Mudarabha,  Ijarah,  to  name  a  few  of  the  jargon,  the  Bank  is  hosting  a  Public 
Forum  on  this  Friday,  to  demystify  Islamic  Finance.  I  hope  that  the  Public  Forum  will 
reach  a  larger  mass  and  help  to  create  more awareness  around  Islamic  finance  as  an 
alternative way  of doing  banking  in  our society. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  not  an  expert  in  the  field  of  Islamic  Finance,  so  I  will  not 
venture  to  make  any  comparison  between  Islamic  finance  and  conventional banking, or 
to  dwell over  the  merits  of  one  system over  the  other. I  would  rather say  that  we  can  all 
learn from each other and explore different approaches for the benefit of all stakeholders. 
Two  important  aspects  of  Islamic  Banking  that  I  would  like  to  safely  highlight today  are 
that 
involving  greater 
participation  of  both  banker  and  customer,  a  notion  that  could  easily  be  adopted  by 
conventional banking  and  of  course  the  proscription of  Usery or  Riba in  Islamic  Finance. 
In  fact  usery  has  also  been  condemned  in  the  Vedic  texts  as well  as  in  religious texts 
from  Budhism,  Judaism,  Christianity  and  Islam.  At  times  many  ancient  nations,  such  as, 
China,  Greece  and  Rome,  have  outlawed  loans  with  interest.  The  pivotal  change  took 
the  English-speaking  world  through  “An  Act  Against  Userie” 
place 
promulgated  during  the  reign  of  King Henry the VIII.  While  others  followed  suit, 
the 
Muslims  kept  to  their  traditions  alongside conventional banking. 
Allow  me,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  to  share  with  you  our  views  on  Islamic  Banking  in 
Mauritius. One participant Dr Manfred had a comment yesterday on how we are promoting 
Islamic  Banking  when  Muslims  are  modestly  represented  here.  First  of all,  we  should be 
finance  encourages  profit  and 
risk  sharing, 
in  1545 
Islamic 
thus 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
clear  in  our  mind  that  IB  is  not  reserved  for  Muslims  only.  There  is  no  such  tag  on  IB 
products  either  in  Mauritius  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  The  products  are  designed 
according 
to  defined  principles  and  are  vetted  by  learned  scholars.  If  you  like  the 
product,  you  adopt  it.  Mr  Jaufeerally,  our  first speaker yesterday, referred to a  very basic 
example, that of chicken briani. All of you  may know  that  Briani is  a  very popular dish  for 
local  Muslims.  I  would  go  further  by  saying  that  as  Muslims  (again  I  am  not  a  scholar 
here)  there  can  never be  any  harm  to  share  a  halal  product.  The  reverse  may  not  be 
permissible.  Our objective  at  the  Central  Bank  is  to  offer  an  alternate  mode  of  finance 
to  local stakeholders and also to enlarge our offerings in the offshore financial domain. 
The  tendency  to  focus  on  profits  alone  may  not  always  be  socially  desirable. Of course, 
we  do  not  dispute  the  fact  that  banks  should  be  profitable,  but  in  these  crisis  times 
where  customers’  rights  are  being  propelled  in  the  forefront,  banks should also consider 
to share the burden of customers. 
Islamic finance in Africa 
Modern  Islamic  finance  was  born  in  Egypt  when  a  commercial  bank  opened  its  Cairo 
branch to process the financial transactions relating to the construction of the Suez  Canal  in 
1890  and  the  notion  of  interest  or  riba  was  criticized  by  the  then  Islamic  scholars. 
Consequently, the Muslim world witnessed the establishment of its first Islamic commercial 
bank. Islamic finance extended quickly to other parts of the world, most of which during the 
past thirty years or so. 
Other  Maghreb  countries,  Morocco  and  Tunisia  began  the  experience  of  Islamic finance 
by  allowing  conventional banks  to  offer  certain  Islamic  products  but  these institutions are 
faced  with  strong  competition  from  the  region’s  conventional  banks.  Remarkably, Sudan 
only established its first Sharia-compliant bank in 1977 and the country’s  Islamic  economic 
system  has since  then been  continuously developing. Sudan  is  the  only  country  in  this 
part of the world to  have a wholly Islamic financial sector. 
Within  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  South  Africa 
largest 
international  Islamic  banking  conglomerates  namely  Al-Baraka  Banking  Group  having 
been  present  there  for  the  last  20  years  alongside  other  institutions  conducting  Islamic 
finance  in  the  country.  More  recently,  other  countries  have  joined  the  league  namely 
Kenya,  Tanzania,  Botswana  and  Nigeria.  Governments  of  Ghana,  Uganda,  Ivory  Coast, 
Somalia,  Malawi  and  Zambia  are  working  towards  introducing  Islamic  banking  in  their 
respective countries. 
Presently,  the  African  continent  hosts  over  250  Islamic  financial  institutions  that  offer 
Islamic  financial  services  including  Islamic  banks,  Takaful  companies,  Islamic  funds, 
Mudarabahs and Islamic microfinance.  Noteworthy also is that over the  last  two  years,  the 
African  continent  has  demonstrated  interest  in  creating  an  Islamic  capital  market  via 
initiatives  for  issuance  of  Sovereign  Sukuks  in  a  few countries  including  Nigeria,  Kenya, 
South  Africa  and  Senegal.  As  of  date,  two  countries  have  successfully  issued  their 
Soveriegn Sukuks namely Sudan and Gambia. 
The  rapid  pace  of  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  leaves  no  doubt  among policy 
makers  all  over  Africa  including  Mauritius  that  Islamic  finance  presents many  prospects 
for  development.  Considering  Africa’s  population  of  nearly  one  billion  people,  half  of 
which  are  of  Muslim  faith,  and 
the  numerous  hurdles  to  financial  access  on  the 
continent, Islamic finance could become a key factor in the promotion  of  financial  inclusion 
by  appealing  to  a  large  Muslim  population  in certain parts of Africa. 
the  way,  with  one  of 
the 
led 
The Mauritian experience 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  over  the  past  three  years,  The  Mauritian  Authorities  took  some 
initiatives towards the promotion of Islamic banking and finance in our jurisdiction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      The  banking  legislation  has  been  amended  to  enable  banks  to  conduct  Islamic 
banking business exclusively or through a window; 
Fiscal  reforms  were  brought  in  to  eliminate  tax  disadvantages  that  would 
otherwise have materialised in the Islamic mode of finance; 
We  joined  the  IFSB  to  facilitate  the  rapid  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  the 
country; 
In 2010 the  Bank of Mauritius became one  of the  founder members with 11 other 
countries, 
Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation,  a 
supranational body engaged in the issue of high-rated Islamic liquidity instruments; 
We  have  also  initiated  work  on  the  development  of  an  Islamic Interbank Money 
Market  that  will  provide  a  platform  for  interbank  dealings  and  facilitate  liquidity 
management for Islamic banking institutions. 
We  are  presently  finalizing  the  framework  to  undertake  Commodity  Murabahah 
transactions  with  commercial  banks  in  the  domestic market,  as part of our Open 
Market  Operations  and  as  an  instrument  for  the  management  of  liquidity  in  the 
domestic system. 
International 
the 
Our  jurisdiction  presently  incorporates  window  operations  by  an  international  banking 
institution, and one entity that conducts Islamic banking business exclusively. We  have  also 
one  large conglomerate that offers Ijarah and Takaful within its group entities. 
Concluding remarks 
As  things  stand  now,  I  can  confidently say  that  the  Mauritian financial sector  has crossed 
the  initial  stage  of  accommodating  Islamic  financial  services,  however much  remains  to 
be  done.  We  are  yet  to  issue  our  first  Sovereign  Sukuk  which  will  take  us  one  step 
nearer  to  our  objective  to  project  Mauritius  as  a  reputable destination for the parking and 
transit of Islamic capital flows. 
Sustainable  prosperity  in  Africa  may  be  achieved  with  the  inclusion  of  Islamic finance. 
Africa  will  however  have  to  face  the  daunting  task  of  increasing  awareness and  gradually 
building customer allegiance. It is acknowledged that the speed at which Islamic banking will 
grow will hinge – to a large extent – on how far depositors and investors are well informed 
about the philosophy underlying Islamic  finance,  its  inherent  risks  and  opportunities,  as 
well  as  on  whether  it  is perceived as a transparent and soundly regulated financial activity. 
Before concluding, I  would like  to  thank  Mr  Jaseem Ahmed,  the  Secretary General of  the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  and  his  Team  for  their  support  in organising this 
event  in  Mauritius  together  with  my  colleagues  from  the  Bank. I would  like  also  to  take 
this  opportunity  to  thank  Bramer  Banking  Corporation,  Century  Bank,  HBL  and  HSBC 
for  having  kindly  sponsored  specific  part  of  the  seminar.  You  will  appreciate  that  their 
contributions  have  indeed  enabled  us  to  offer  you  this  world-class  seminar  at  no  extra 
costs. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  thank  you  for  your  kind  attention.  I  wish  you  all  fruitful 
deliberations over these two days. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
