Hirohide Yamaguchi: The European debt problem, Japan’s economy, and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Kagawa, 2 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me an opportunity to exchange views with administrative and business 
leaders in Kagawa Prefecture. Today marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of the 
Bank of Japan’s Takamatsu branch. The branch has been operating steadily in this area for 
such a long time, thanks to your understanding and cooperation. I also express my gratitude. 
Kagawa Prefecture is a memorable place for me. I worked at the Bank’s Takamatsu branch 
as General Manager for about two years since May 1996. During my stint, I visited frequently 
many local business managers and learned about local economic and financial conditions in 
detail.  Extraordinary  managerial  efforts  I  witnessed  at  that  time  still  vividly  remain  in  my 
memory. I will also never forget that I had delicious Sanuki udon here many times. 
Today,  I  will  talk  about  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  and  its  medium-  to  long-term 
challenges,  and  viewpoints  of  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  while  focusing  on  the 
European  debt  problem  which  is  the  greatest  concern  for  the  global  economy  for  the  time 
being.  
I. 
Developments in overseas economies and the current situation of the 
European debt problem 
Overseas economies have been on a decelerating trend, and are expected to recover 
moderately in the future 
Let me start with the developments in overseas economies. Following the Lehman shock in 
2008,  the  global  economy  was  recovering,  led  by  emerging  economies,  but  the  pace  of 
recovery has been slowing since around the middle of last year.  
By  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately.  Recently,  there  have  been 
some  bright  signs  in  consumption  and  production,  and  the  market’s  view  has  become 
somewhat  optimistic.  The  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  remain  vulnerable  with  the 
housing market in the midst of a protracted slump and the unemployment rate hovering at a 
high  level  of  more  than  8  percent.  Therefore,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  is  likely  to 
remain moderate for the time being. 
The  European  economy  has  become  increasingly  stagnant as  a  whole on  the  back  of  the 
debt problem in Greece and other countries, which continues to be a great concern for the 
global economy. I will later talk about that problem in detail. 
While emerging and commodity-exporting countries have been maintaining somewhat high 
growth rates as a whole, the pace of growth has been slowing recently and the degree of a 
slowdown in growth and the decline in inflation rates have started to differ among countries. 
For  example,  in  India  and  Brazil,  the  inflation  rates  remain  high  despite  a  pronounced 
slowdown in economic activity. In China, a slowdown in growth and a decline in inflationary 
pressure  have  been  progressing  moderately,  showing  signs  that  the  economy  is  heading 
toward a successful soft-landing, albeit lingering uncertainty.  
According  to  the  latest  World  Economic  Outlook,  which  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF) published last week, the global economic growth rate is projected to be 3.3 percent in 
2012.  While  the  projection  has  been  revised  downward,  due  mainly  to  the  European  debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
problem, a view that the global economy will gradually recover led mainly by emerging and 
commodity-exporting economies has been basically maintained. 
in 
the  economy, 
thereby  make 
turn  put  downward  pressure  on 
The European debt problem that became increasingly serious toward the end of last year 
Let  me  turn  to  the  European  debt  problem,  which  has  been  the  focal  question  now.  The 
problem  started  with  the  fiscal  problem  in  Greece.  In  October  2009, as  for  Greece’s  fiscal 
deficit, it became clear that the existing statistics did not reflect the actual conditions and the 
actual  deficit  was  much  larger.  Therefore,  skepticism  spread  about  whether  Greek 
government bonds could be orderly redeemed, and the prices of Greek government bonds 
fell  substantially.  In  other  words,  yields  soared  and  have  recently  been  hovering  above 
30 percent.  As  Greece  could  not  raise  funds  under  such  circumstances,  it  has  been 
implementing  various  fiscal  reconstruction  measures  while  receiving  financial  assistance 
from  other  European  countries  and  the  IMF.  There  has  been  a  vicious  cycle  in  that  those 
measures 
fiscal 
reconstruction itself a difficult one. Therefore, in Greece, to reduce the heavy debt burden 
itself, discussions on how to handle the debt in the future are going on, including partial debt 
cancellation by private investors concerning their exposure. 
The Greek problem spilled over to Portugal and Ireland which also had concern over fiscal 
conditions and those countries have also received financial assistance including that from the 
IMF.  Market  concern  also  heightened  for  fiscal  conditions  of  larger  countries  such  as  Italy 
and  Spain,  the  third  and  fourth  largest  economies  in  terms  of  GDP  in  the  euro  area.  Italy 
faced  a  tough  situation  as  the  yield  of  Italian  government  bonds  once  surged  to  above 
7 percent at around the end of last year. Thereafter, both in Italy and Spain, due partly to the 
announcement  of  fiscal  reconstruction  measures  under  new  governments,  the  yield  on 
government  bonds  has  recently  declined  slightly.  There  is  uncertainty  whether  the 
reconstruction  measures  will  be  surely 
implemented,  and  as  massive  past-issued 
government bonds will reach maturity through this spring, whether refunding will be smoothly 
made is drawing attention. With respect to Portugal, partly due to the notable downgrading of 
government bonds, concern over fiscal conditions has recently been increased and the yield 
of government bonds has been hovering at a high level exceeding 15 percent.  
As  the  yields  of  European  government  bonds  soared,  in  other  words,  the  prices  declined 
substantially,  European  financial  institutions,  which  held  a  huge  amount  of  government 
bonds on the assumption that they were safe assets, incurred huge losses. As a result, those 
financial institutions lost market confidence, facing a rise in funding costs and difficulties in 
funding  themselves.  The  situation  got  worse  toward  the  end  of  last  year,  and  there  was 
growing concern that financial institutions’ behavior, including a credit crunch by institutions 
that  struggle  with  funding,  could  further  affect  significantly  the  already  stagnant  real 
economy.  
Strains have somewhat mitigated since the turn of the year, and yet vigilance is required 
In  such  a  situation,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  implemented  a  measure  last 
December to massively provide extraordinarily long-term funds, a loan period of three years, 
to  the  financial  market.  Meanwhile,  major  six  central  banks  in  Japan,  North  America,  and 
Europe have also made united efforts, including strengthening their supply of dollar funds, to 
stabilize international financial markets. As a result, market strains have somewhat mitigated 
since the turn of the year, such as a decline in interest rates of the dollar funds transactions. 
That  is  only  slight  mitigation  of  anxiety  over  funding  for  the  time  being,  and  European 
financial institutions are suspected of still being burdened with huge losses and, in relation to 
that,  lacking  capital.  While  they  are  required  by  the  financial  authorities  to  increase  their 
capital ratios by the end of June, if they cannot secure sufficient capital, they have no choice 
but to reduce assets, which is the denominator in calculating the capital ratio, to raise their 
capital  ratios.  Such  reduction  of  assets,  the  so-called  deleveraging,  has  already  started  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
occur, and attention should be paid to whether it further affects borrowers of funds, including 
firms,  and  emerging  economies  which  have  substantial  borrowing  from  European  financial 
institutions. In short, we should not lack vigilance about whether a vicious cycle – a problem 
which has originated on the fiscal front spreads over to the financial front and further to the 
real economy – will further expands globally. 
Fundamental character of the European debt problem 
II. 
Why  is  Europe  burdened  with  the  big  problem?  Broadly  speaking,  the  problem  has  two 
aspects.  One  is  a  manifestation  of  a  weakness  that  has  said  to  be  inherent  in  monetary 
union,  in  which  17  countries  share  the  single  currency  “Euro”.  The  other  is  an  aspect 
common to other advanced economies, that is, worsening of fiscal conditions as a result of 
the burst of a global bubble that had been created until after the mid-2000s. 
Discipline on public finance and competitiveness inevitable for monetary union did 
not function 
Let us start with the issue of “Euro”. In the euro area, which now consists of 17 countries, 
currency  is  unified  under  the  single  monetary  policy,  that  is,  the  single  policy  rate,  but, 
needless  to  say,  countries  remain  separate.  Therefore,  if  a  difference  in  competitiveness 
between  individual  countries  widens,  trade  surplus  accumulates  in  countries  with  strong 
competiveness,  while  trade  deficit  accumulates  in  countries  with  weak  competitiveness.  If 
individual countries are using different currencies, through changes in the foreign exchange 
rate in which a currency of trade surplus country becomes strong and a currency of trade 
deficit  country  becomes  weak,  a  difference  in  competitiveness  will  be  narrowed,  thereby 
might  mitigate  trade  imbalances.  As  long  as  the  single currency  was  adopted,  one  cannot 
expect  such  power  of  foreign  exchange  markets.  In  addition,  individual  countries  cannot 
pursue different monetary policy according to the respective economic conditions. Of course, 
as those issues were understood from the outset, rules were made to encourage countries 
with weak competitiveness to increase competitiveness, so that there would be no significant 
difference  in  competitiveness.  The  “Stability  and  Growth  Pact”  that  incorporated  such 
obligations as containing fiscal deficit at 3 percent of GDP or lower, is one of such rules. It 
was considered that, if a limit on fiscal deficit was firmly set, it would become difficult to make 
up  a  decline  in  competitiveness  with  fiscal  spending  and  countries  had  no  choice  but  to 
strengthen their economic power. 
However, in reality, the rule was not applied stringently, partly due to policy responses on the 
fiscal front after the Lehman shock, and fiscal discipline gradually became loose. As a result, 
a difference between countries with strong competitiveness, including Germany, and those 
with  weak  competitiveness,  including  Greece,  became  increasingly  large,  and  trade 
imbalance bloated. The trade deficit countries have to cover their deficit by borrowing from 
other  countries,  and  financial  institutions  and  investors  in  other  countries  continued  to 
purchase government bonds of Greece and others with low yields, partly because they did 
not need to worry about the risk of foreign exchange fluctuations under the single currency 
euro.  Consequently,  trade  deficit  countries  increased  borrowing  from  other  countries  more 
than  their  potential,  and  could  not  put  a  brake  at  an  earlier  stage.  Thus,  in  the  case  of 
Greece, it became difficult for excessively issued government bonds to be repaid in full after 
all, and such situation surfaced as this time’s debt problem. 
There is also a problem of ballooning fiscal deficit after the Lehman shock, which is 
common to Japan, the United States, and Europe 
Excessive  government  debt  has  been  accumulated  as  there  was  a  weakness  in  the 
mechanism of monetary union in the euro area. On the back of the European debt problem, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
there is also an aspect of deterioration in fiscal conditions due to the burst of a global credit 
bubble, which is common to other advanced countries.  
Looking  back,  due  partly  to  the  rise  of  emerging  economies  and  financial  innovation,  the 
global  economy  had  been  enjoying  high  growth  without  inflation  until  after  the  mid-2000s. 
That  situation  was  also  referred  to  as  “Great  Moderation”,  and  especially  the  U.S.  and 
European  economies  became  increasingly  confident  in  their  future.  In  the  United  States, 
however,  the  subprime  mortgage  problem  aggravated  and  eventually  led  to  the  Lehman 
shock and it became clear that no small part of the past high growth was nothing more than 
an  unsustainable  bubble.  Also  in  Europe,  during  the  phase  of  global  growth,  real  estate 
investment surged, mainly in Ireland and Spain, and real estate prices plunged with the burst 
of  a  credit  bubble.  As  a  result,  massive  public  funds  were  used  for  bailing  out  financial 
institutions and for an economic stimulus, and fiscal conditions deteriorated rapidly. Also in 
the United States, fiscal deficit surged after the Lehman shock, and there were moves that a 
rating agency downgraded the U.S. government bonds from the highest AAA last summer. In 
Japan, while fiscal deficit has always been a grave problem due partly to rapid aging, fiscal 
conditions  also  further  aggravated  due  to  a  series  of  economic  stimuli  after  the  Lehman 
shock. 
In  general,  for  fiscal  reconstruction,  namely,  for  reducing  government  debt,  it  is  necessary 
not only to address the public finance itself on both the revenue and expenditure fronts, but 
also  strengthen  economic  growth  potential  to  secure  tax  revenue  which  is  a  resource  to 
repay  the  debt.  For  example,  in  the  cases  of  Portugal  and  Italy,  the  market  is  concerned 
about fiscal conditions and even more about weakness in growth potential.  
As  the  global  economic  growth  prior  to  the  Lehman  shock  had  been  inflated  by  a  credit 
bubble to begin with, the global economy cannot return again to such inflated state at this 
point. To steadily promote fiscal reconstruction, it is necessary to create a new growth model 
corresponding to changes in economic structure after the Lehman shock and strengthening 
growth  potential  over  the  future.  While  I  talk  about  Japan  later,  that  point  is  existing  as  a 
daunting challenge common to Europe, the United States, and Japan. 
It will take time to solve the European debt problem 
Keeping in mind the aforementioned situation, I will address measures toward the solution of 
the  European  debt  problem.  As  I  have  said  earlier,  market  strains  have  been  somewhat 
mitigated, due partly to massive funds provision of the ECB and others. That is only an arrest 
of  bleeding  for  the  moment.  Given  the  basic  character  of  the  problem,  the  following  more 
fundamental responses will be necessary. First, as I said before, problem countries should 
tackle  restoring  fiscal  soundness  and  strengthening  growth  potential.  Second,  prepare  a 
sufficient mechanism on the funds front to support such efforts by the problem countries and 
to  rebuild  the  financial  system.  Third,  to  avoid  a  recurrence  of  the  problem,  strengthen  a 
governance  mechanism  so  as  to  exert  sufficient  discipline  on  public  finance  and 
competitiveness. And fourth, avoid a financial crisis like that at the time of the Lehman shock. 
While  there  have  been  some  steps  forward  in  the  first  through  the  third  responses,  given 
difficulties of the issues, it is likely to take a while to solve them. For example, to restore fiscal 
soundness,  the  government  should  make  the  public  receptive  to  considerable  patience.  In 
addition, as measures to provide financial assistance to problem countries, the establishment 
of a new funds supplying framework called “the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)” and 
assistance measures from outside the region have been examined. As there is also a risk for 
fund providers, it is not going to be an easy examination. In terms of avoiding a recurrence of 
the problem, at the recent EU Summit, many member countries have moved forward in the 
direction of signing a new treaty that includes reinforcement of fiscal discipline, but there are 
issues,  including  specific  steps  to  take  from  now  on,  that  remain  to  be  settled.  Even  that 
should eventually overcome the problem the euro area had from the outset, that is, to what 
extent one can intervene in each sovereign nation’s economic policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Keeping in mind the history of the euro area, which was established by holding an ideal of 
creating  peace,  prosperity,  and  stability  in  Europe  and  being  supported  by  strong  political 
determination,  it  is  likely  that  monetary  union  will  further  go  again  toward  the  evolution  of 
monetary  union  by  using  the  crisis  as  a  springboard.  In  fact,  the  European  authorities  are 
continuing  to  make  exceeding  efforts.  Given  a  bumpy  road  to  the  end,  we  could  not 
completely  rule  out  a  possibility  that  strains  in  financial  systems  will  increase  extremely 
triggered by some events or, in the worst case, a possibility that market confidence in the 
maintenance  of  monetary  union  itself  will  decline.  We  should  pay  close  attention  to  future 
developments while recognizing a risk that has extremely low probability to manifest itself but 
will have a grave impact once it manifests itself, the so-called tail risk. I have earlier said, as 
the  fourth  response,  that  a  crisis  like  the  Lehman  shock  should  be  avoided,  and  that  was 
indeed based on the awareness mentioned above. 
I  have  so  far  described  the  current  situation  of  the  European  debt  problem  and  its 
fundamental  character.  Keeping  those  in  mind,  in  the  remaining  time,  I  will  refer  to  the 
developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  thinking  of  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
III. 
Prospects for Japan’s economy and medium- to long-term challenges 
From a somewhat longer-term perspective, the economy will return to the sustainable 
growth path with price stability 
Japan’s economy declined significantly following the earthquake disaster in March last year 
and  thereafter  recovered  at  a  pace  faster  than  envisaged  thanks  to  efforts  by  firms  and 
people. Since early autumn, the slowdown in overseas economies, the appreciation of the 
yen,  and  the  flooding  in  Thailand  have  been  affecting  the  economy,  and  Japan’s  recent 
economic activity has been more or less flat.  
In  such  situation,  the  Bank  published  last  week  its  latest  economic  outlook  through  fiscal 
2013. In terms of the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, the real GDP growth 
rate  is  projected  to  be  at  –0.4  percent  in  fiscal  2011  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the 
earthquake disaster and the slowdown in overseas economies. For fiscal 2012, the economy 
is expected to grow by 2.0 percent as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picks up, 
led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  reconstruction-related  demand 
gradually  materializes.  The  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2013  is  projected  to  be  at  1.6  percent. 
Under  such  circumstances,  the  year-on-year  rates  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index 
(CPI) for all items less fresh food are expected to remain at around 0 percent for the time 
being, but expected to gradually rise to 0.1 percent in fiscal 2012 and 0.5 percent in fiscal 
2013.  As  just  described,  while  it  still  takes  some  time  to  overcome  deflation,  from  a 
somewhat longer-term perspective, Japan’s economy is expected to return to the sustainable 
growth path with price stability. 
However, there are high uncertainties, including the effects of the European debt 
problem 
The  outlook  is  associated  with  various  uncertainties.  While  the  biggest  risk  is  the 
aforementioned European debt problem, there are other risks we should be aware of. The 
aforementioned  recovery  scenario  for  Japan’s  economy  assumed  that  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies would increase the pace of growth again, with a decline in 
inflationary pressure, thereby leading the global economy. Even for such basic assumption, 
we  should  monitor  without  prejudgment  whether  it  will  become  a  reality  as  assumed. 
Geopolitical risk concerning Iran is also a source of concern. If there is mounting tension and 
oil prices surge, it will be an upward pressure on prices in Japan, while economic activity will 
deviate downward from the baseline scenario through a deterioration in corporate profits. As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
a  surge  in  oil  prices  could  also  lead  to  a  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  sufficient 
attention should be paid to future developments. 
As  for  domestic  factors,  there  is  a  possibility  that  conditions  surrounding  electric  power 
supply  and  demand  will  become  increasingly  severe  toward  this  summer  in  a  wide  area 
including  the  Shikoku  region.  In  addition,  if  the  overseas  transfer  of  Japanese  firms’ 
production bases proceeds rapidly against a backdrop of the entrenched appreciation of the 
yen  and  a  rise  in  electricity  costs,  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  could  be 
lowered, which continues to require attention. 
Medium- to long-term challenges for Japan’s economy: strengthening growth 
potential and ensuring fiscal sustainability 
The  risk  that  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  might  be  lowered  is  not  a  new 
problem.  In  fact,  Japan’s  economic  growth  rate  has  been  on  a  downtrend  and,  especially 
since the 1990s, chronic low growth has been continuing. In my view, primary reason is that, 
despite  rapid  aging,  Japan’s  economy  has  not  been  sufficiently  equipped  with  power  to 
quickly  gauge  changes  in  the  demand  structure  and  foster  new  industries.  Given  further 
population  aging  in  the  future  and  high-level  government  debt,  Japan’s  economy  is  faced 
with an imminent challenge of becoming serious about strengthening medium- to long-term 
growth potential while promoting fiscal structural reform. 
Strengthen growth potential by a two-pronged strategy of external and domestic 
demand 
Strengthening  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  is  not  an  easy  task.  Nevertheless,  it 
should be achieved by all means while keeping in mind the following four. 
First,  incorporate  global  demand  as  much  as  possible.  To  that  end,  it  is  vital  for  firms  to, 
through exports, and further more through aggressive overseas expansion, accurately gauge 
local  needs  and  tap  the  market.  As  for  firms’  overseas  expansion,  unless  the  pace  of 
expansion  is  too  fast,  it  would  not  necessarily  be  a  factor  in  causing  the  hollowing  out  of 
domestic employment. If a cycle will be established that firms increase profits overseas, pass 
them on domestically, and invest in research and development of new products and services, 
more  high  value-added  jobs  will  be  generated  in  Japan,  thereby  could  contribute  to 
strengthening  foundations  for  economic  growth.  Efforts  to  increase  foreigners  who  stay  in 
Japan  for  the  purpose  of  tourism  and  business  and  prepare  an  environment  that  attracts 
investment from overseas will also be an effective strategy in incorporating global demand 
and increasing domestic employment together. 
Second,  tap  potential  domestic  demand.  An  aging  society  will  have  its  own  new  potential 
needs, and there will be plenty of room for coping thoroughly with the diversified concept of 
values and life styles. There is much potential in the domestic market, let alone healthcare, 
including services for firms and households based on information technology. While I have 
earlier  referred  to  concern  over  electric  supply  and  demand,  on  the  other  hand,  efforts  to 
overcome such challenge, including saving energy and developing new alternative energies, 
could lead to a generation of new added-value. 
Third, enhance the flexibility of the labor market. To lessen the likelihood of a labor shortage 
associated with aging being a binding factor for economic growth, it is necessary to promote 
employment of the elderly and women. Preparing an environment that facilitates job transfers 
and  the  start  of  new  businesses  will  lead  to  the  effective  use  of  human  resources  or  the 
activation of metabolism in the entire economy. Fostering global human resources will also 
be imperative. 
Fourth, strengthen the function of financial and capital markets. For the development of new 
markets, it is critical to take risks. To support that, accepting risks by investors and financial 
institutions, namely, a provision of risk money is necessary. Japan’s households have almost 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
1,500 trillion yen of financial assets, and there are ample deposits in financial institutions. It is 
important to steadily make efforts to transform even part of those deposits into risk money. 
I  have  so  far  explained  how  to  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  from 
several angles. While there might be more, a basic pillar to strengthen growth potential will 
be to tap new markets both in terms of external and domestic demand, as well as to promote 
activation of labor and capital markets that support such challenge. 
Fiscal sustainability should be ensured before market confidence is lost 
Together  with  strengthening  growth  potential,  it  is  necessary  to  steadily  make  efforts  to 
ensure  fiscal  sustainability.  Japan’s  government  debt  outstanding  exceeds  200  percent  of 
nominal GDP, which is the highest level among advanced economies. Nevertheless, yields 
on government bonds remain low and stable. In my view, the most fundamental reason is 
that  the  market  trusts  that  the  Japanese  people  have  a  strong  will  to  achieve  fiscal 
soundness  and  thus  Japanese  government  bonds  will  continue  to  be  safe  assets  in  the 
future. 
Having said that, given that national debt is still increasing, one cannot rule out the possibility 
that  confidence  in  the  government  bond  market  might  collapse  at  once  triggered  by  some 
cue. If that becomes a reality, there will be a significant impact on the financial system and 
the real economy, as the actual case of Europe proved. Given that increasing pressure on 
social security costs is likely to continue amid further aging, it is difficult to blaze a path for 
fiscal soundness just by strengthening growth potential. It is necessary to proceed with fiscal 
structural reform both in terms of expenditure and revenue before the market confidence is 
lost. 
IV. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Pursuing powerful monetary easing toward overcoming deflation 
Based  on  the  aforementioned  outlook  and  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  for  Japan’s 
economy, let me talk about the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy. The Bank recognizes that 
Japan’s economy is faced with a critical challenge of overcoming deflation and returning to 
the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  With  such  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been 
pursuing powerful monetary easing in the framework of “comprehensive monetary easing”.  
Specifically, first, the Bank lowered the policy rate to around 0 to 0.1 percent, which can be 
deemed a virtually zero interest rate.  
Second, the Bank is clearly committed to continuing with this virtually zero interest rate policy 
until it judges that price stability is in sight. With respect to the meaning of price stability, the 
Bank  clearly  stated  in  a  specific  expression  that  “on  the  basis  of  a  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI,  it  falls  in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  centering  around 
1 percent”.  The  Bank  calls  the  expression  “understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price 
stability”.  The  central  bank  of  the  United  States  newly  introduced  last  week  a  “longer-run 
goal” with respect to the inflation rate and drew attention from the market. As is the case with 
the Bank of Japan, it also aimed at numerically clarifying the meaning of medium- to long-
term price stability. 
Third,  the  Bank  established  the  “Asset  Purchase  Program”,  and  purchases  government 
bonds  and  other  various  financial  assets.  It  is  a  measure  to  facilitate  monetary  easing  to 
steadily spread to firms’ funding costs through encouraging a decline in longer term market 
interest  rates.  The  total  size  of  the  Program  is  about  55  trillion  yen,  which  corresponds  to 
more than 10 percent of Japan’s GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Tap external and domestic demand by utilizing extremely accommodative financial 
conditions 
With  such  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary  easing,  at  present,  ample  liquidity  is  provided  to 
Japan’s financial markets and firms’ funding conditions are quite accommodative. It is quite a 
contrast  to  international  financial  markets  which  are  under  enormous  stain  due  to  the 
European  debt  problem.  If  such  domestic  accommodative  financial  conditions  are  utilized 
aggressively  for  tapping  external  and  domestic  demand,  I  believe  Japan’s  economy  can 
emerge from deflation. In that regard, the Bank itself has been implementing a measure to 
supply  long-term  and  low  interest  rate  funds  to  financial  institutions  that  made  lending  or 
investment which contributed to strengthening foundations for economic growth. Through the 
measure, the Bank has been supporting firms and financial institutions efforts to utilize the 
accommodative financial conditions. 
Constantly review monetary policy conduct and prepare a system for a rainy day 
Toward  overcoming  deflation  and  strengthen  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential,  the 
Bank  will  consistently  make  utmost  contributions  as  a  central  bank  as  well  as  strive  to 
continue to take appropriate policy responses with due recognition that there is a high degree 
of uncertainty for the time being, including the effects of a slowdown in overseas economies 
and the appreciation of the yen. The Bank believes it is important to review its conduct of 
monetary  policy  constantly  with  composure  and  in  an  objective  manner,  including  how 
communication  with  the  market  should  be.  Besides,  as  for  the  European  debt  problem,  I 
have said that, while the possibility might be extremely low, we also need to prepare for a 
rainy day when financial markets become chaotic. In that regard, the Bank will continue to 
firmly monitor the financial system, payment system, and financial institution management, 
and,  while  closely  working  together  with  the  government  and  central  banks  overseas,  the 
Bank will cover all the bases so as to ensure financial market stability even in an emergency. 
Concluding remarks 
I  am  running  out  of  time.  Let  me  conclude  today’s  speech,  touching  on  the  economy  of 
Kagawa Prefecture. 
There are many firms in this region that have the largest market share in the world in specific 
areas,  and,  during  my  visit  this  time,  I  was  able  to  learn  about  the  eagerness  to  further 
develop the growing markets from a global perspective. In addition, Kagawa Prefecture built 
a prefecture-wide medical records sharing system ahead of other prefectures in Japan, and, 
based on the system, “the Kagawa medical and welfare special zone” was established last 
December. I strongly expect that such joint efforts of the public and private sectors will tap 
potential demand from elders and others, and become a model case for the development of 
domestic demand.  
To wrap up my speech, I quote the word “dogan” which Mr. Haruo Maekawa, who had been 
General Manager of the Takamatsu branch for about one and a half years from 1954 and 
later became Governor of the Bank, fondly used. The word is originally quoted from a line in 
Mr.  Yukichi  Fukuzawa’s  book  and  the  meaning  is  “a  goose  who  takes  a  role  in  paying 
attention  to  changes  in  the  surroundings  to  protect  neighbors  from  outside  enemies”. 
Mr. Maekawa often compared a central bank to “dogan” and emphasized that it is important 
for a central bank “not to be influenced by the flavor of the time but appeal to the world by 
anticipating changing times and future directions always from an objective viewpoint”. In my 
view,  the  phrase  holds  true  not  only  for  a  central  bank  but  also  for  people  who  are  in 
responsible  positions  in  the  region’s  administration,  finance,  and  the  economy.  Amid 
globalization, the demographic vortex, and various challenges the regional economy is faced 
with,  everybody  here  has  been  anticipating  changing  times  with  composure  and  exerting 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
strong leadership to guide regional neighbors to perfect answers. The Bank will also steadily 
continue with its contribution as the central bank and support your positive efforts.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
