Karolina Ekholm: Macroprudential policy and clear communication 
contribute to financial stability 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Swedish 
Banker’s Association, Stockholm, 30 March 2012. 
 The views expressed in this  speech are  my own and are  not necessarily shared  by the other  members of the 
Executive Board of the Riksbank. I would like to thank Mr Johan Molin and Mr Per Sonnerby for all their help with 
writing this speech. 
A  new  policy  area  has  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  recently  –  an  area  that  has  come  to  be 
called macroprudential policy. Macroprudential policy entails focusing on the financial system 
as a whole instead of on the health of an individual institution, as is the case in traditional 
supervision.  In  my  view,  such  a  broad  approach  is  an  important,  and  perhaps  even  a 
necessary, complement to traditional supervision. However, we must of course be realistic 
about what macroprudential policy can actually achieve, particularly as monetary policy and 
fiscal policy are also important to the stability of the financial system.  
Today I will speak about how I believe macroprudential policy can be used as an element of 
the work to prevent financial crises. This also gives me the opportunity to mention that we 
have recently taken a step towards a broader approach to promoting financial stability. We 
have  namely  set  up  a  council  for  cooperation  on  macroprudential  policy  together  with 
Finansinspektionen. I will tell you how we expect this council to work and I will also touch 
upon the need to develop communication concerning financial stability. However, already at 
the outset I would like to emphasise that this macroprudential council should be seen as a 
temporary solution while awaiting a more permanent framework for macroprudential policy in 
Sweden. In the longer term, we need to clarify where responsibility for macroprudential policy 
should lie. It is also important that there are clear and well-defined tools for macroprudential 
policy.  
The financial crisis in the United States became a debt crisis in Europe 
What began as a financial crisis in the United States in 2007–2008 has now become a debt 
crisis in Europe. However, the current problems in a number of euro countries are basically 
due to the fact that they pursued policies that were not in line with economic development. 
The introduction of the euro meant that the euro countries lost the possibility to conduct their 
own  monetary  policies.  All  of  the  responsibility  for  stabilising  an  economy  when  it  was 
exposed to asymmetric shocks fell instead to fiscal policy. But fiscal policy has not been used 
to  the  full  in  this  way  in  several  euro  countries.  In  countries  such  as  Greece  and  Ireland, 
growth and inflationary pressures have been much higher than the average for the euro area. 
These  countries  should  have  conducted  a  much  tighter  fiscal  policy  in  order  to  counteract 
this. But, unfortunately, they did not. The budget rules at the national level were too weak to 
enforce an effective fiscal policy. And the EU rules that are intended to promote sound public 
finances, the so-called Maastricht criteria, simply did not work.1  
What  appeared  to  be  the  emergence  of  an  acute  crisis  at  the  end  of  last  year  has  been 
averted,  partly  by  measures  taken  by  the  European  Central  Bank.  This  has  provided  a 
necessary  breathing  space,  but  it  has  not  solved  the  fundamental,  underlying  problems. 
                                                 
1   The lack of budget discipline cannot only be blamed on the countries that have now been hit hardest. The 
relaxation of discipline really began some 10 years ago, when both Germany and France deviated from the 
Maastricht criteria. Today, 23 of 27 member States fail to meet these criteria. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Growth prospects have weakened, partly as a result of the consolidation measures that the 
crisis has forced governments to take. Unfortunately, there are no good alternatives to such 
measures. If the countries that have the weakest public finances refrain from implementing 
them the interest rates on their sovereign debts will rise and there will thus be a risk of the 
crisis spreading to other countries. 
We  have  also  seen  some  signs  of  credit  tightening  in  parts  of  the  euro  area.2  One  of  the 
factors  contributing  to  this  may  be  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  recommendation  to 
introduce a capital adequacy requirement of at least 9 per cent for European banks no later 
than June this year.3 However, as in the case of the impact of consolidation measures on 
growth prospects, one could argue that the alternative to requiring a higher level of capital 
adequacy would be even worse. Without such requirements for banks with a low degree of 
capitalisation, there is a risk that the crisis will spread to other banks through poorer access 
to market funding. Although we ourselves do not belong to the euro area, we are still highly 
affected by developments there. Sweden is a small, export-dependent country and our most 
important export markets are in Europe. It is therefore of crucial importance to the Swedish 
economy that the euro crisis is managed in an orderly way. 
Can crises be avoided with different fiscal and monetary policies? 
As  the  European  drama  has  unfolded,  many  observers  have  asked  how  we  can  prevent 
similar crises from occurring in the future. When, like me, you come from a central bank, it is 
natural to ask whether a different monetary policy had been able to prevent the crisis. Some 
analysts have identified the low interest rates that prevailed in many countries, and above all 
in the United States, for some years before the crisis as an important cause of unsustainable 
increases in indebtedness and property prices.  
Before the crisis, the most common view among central bankers was that monetary policy 
should  only  react  to  sharp  increases  in  indebtedness  and  asset  prices  if  these  could  be 
expected to lead to overheating in the economy as a whole and thus to a too high rate of 
inflation. Otherwise, the central bank should wait-and-see before adjusting monetary policy, 
but be prepared to quickly cut the policy rate if a burst asset-price bubble initiates a dramatic 
fall in demand in the economy.  
However, this view has been called into question recently. Many observers, including myself 
in one of my first speeches as a member of the Executive Board, have asked themselves 
whether monetary policy shouldn’t also be used to counteract the development of bubbles.4 
Would it have been possible, for example, to prevent this financial crisis if monetary policy 
had been tighter in the United States in the years leading up to 2007, when the problems on 
the US financial market began? As can be seen in Figure 1, the actual real policy rate was 
relatively low in this period. However, it is doubtful whether a higher policy rate would have 
been  able  to  bring  growth  in  property  prices  and  credit  to  a  more  moderate  pace  in  the 
United States without driving the economy into a recession at the same time.5  
                                                 
2   See for instance BIS (2012): European bank funding and deleveraging, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2012. 
3  EBA (2011): EBA recommendation on the creation and supervisory oversight of temporary capital buffers to 
restore market confidence (EBA/REC/2011/1) 
4   Ekholm (2009): Some lessons for monetary policy from the financial crisis, speech held on 4 December 2009. 
5   See for example Bernanke (2010): Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble, speech held on 3 January, 2010, 
and Dokko, Doyle, Kiley, Kim, Sherlund, Sim and Van der Heuvel (2009): Monetary Policy and the Housing 
Bubble, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-49, Federal Reserve Board.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 1 
Policy rates minus actual inflation (CPI change), 1998–, 
per cent 
Sources: Central banks and statistics agencies in the respective countries 
 Countries  such  as  Ireland  and  Spain  have  also  seen  a  bubble-like  development  of  their 
housing markets: first a situation with gradually rising prices over a long period of time which 
was then followed by a rapid fall. Would it have been possible to avoid this if the ECB had 
conducted a tighter monetary policy and what would this tighter policy have cost in terms of 
unemployment  and  possible  deflation  in  countries  such  as  Germany,  where  the  economy 
was developing quite differently?6 
I  have  no  clear  answers  to  these  questions.  But  even  though  it  is  possible  that  an 
expansionary  monetary  policy  contributed  to  the  development  of  housing-price  bubbles  in 
some  countries,  it  is  still  the  case  that  other  factors  were  the  prime  causes  of  the  global 
financial crisis. The Federal Reserve began raising the interest rate already in 2004. Over the 
course of two years it increased by more than four percentage points, at the same time as 
loans continued to grow. In the United States, deficiencies in the regulation of the mortgage 
market and a housing policy that promoted homeownership among low-income earners were 
more prominent contributing factors.  
A study based on Swedish data has indicated that low real interest rates in combination with 
increasing incomes have been important factors behind the increases in prices for housing in 
Sweden.7 As both real interest rates and incomes are affected by monetary policy it should 
be  possible  to  say  that  movements  in  housing  prices  have  been  indirectly  affected  by 
monetary policy. However, the same study points out that if monetary policy had been used 
                                                 
6   A study that shows that asset prices are dampened to only a relatively limited extent by a policy rate increase 
while the negative effect on GDP is relatively substantial is Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010): Credit 
and Bubbles, Economic Policy, July 2010.  
7   Claussen,  Jonsson  and  Lagerwall  (2011):  A  macroeconomic  analysis  of  housing  prices  in  Sweden,  The 
Riksbank’s commission of inquiry into risks on the Swedish housing market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  stem  housing-price  increases,  then  this  would  have  been  extremely  costly  in  terms  of 
lower growth and lower employment.8  
So, although we cannot entirely discount the role of monetary policy as a tool for averting 
financial crises, it is not reasonable to assume that monetary policy can do this on its own:9 
at  least  not  without  risking  serious side  effects  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The  repo  rate 
affects the entire economy and cannot be directed at specific markets alone. It can thus have 
a negative impact on sectors that are not overheated. Increasing the repo rate in order to 
mitigate  household  credit  growth  and  increases  in  housing  prices  also  makes  it  more 
expensive  for  firms  to  fund  new  investments.  In  situations  in  which  investment  is  low  and 
unemployment is high this is something one wants to avoid. In such situations it would be 
inappropriate to use the repo rate as a means of pursuing macroprudential policy. My view is 
that it is only justifiable to use the repo rate in this way in cases where there is reason to 
believe  that  the  central  bank  is  the  only  body  that  can  take  measures  to  counteract  what 
appears to be an unbalanced development. 
So  what  about  fiscal  policy?  Can’t  fiscal  policy  be  used  to  counteract  an  unbalanced 
development?  Yes,  under  certain  circumstances.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  stricter  budget 
discipline would probably have counteracted overheating in some European countries, but it 
could not of course have averted the financial crisis, which was largely “imported”. On the 
other hand, a tighter hold on the reins during the good years preceding the crisis would have 
increased resilience and provided more room for manoeuvre to manage the crisis when it did 
occur. It would then have been possible to manage the crisis within a couple of years and we 
wouldn’t still have to be dealing with it today.  
My  conclusion  is  that  well-balanced  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  offer  the  best  possible 
chances of preventing financial crises, but essentially other measures are needed. We need 
tools that are specially designed for working with the stability of the financial system. 
Macroprudential policy – a new policy area 
Traditionally,  financial  supervision  has  had  a  rather  one-sided  focus  on  the  health  of 
individual financial institutions. In practice this has also been the case in Sweden, although 
formally Finansinspektionen has the task of working for a stable and efficient financial system 
alongside its consumer-protection tasks.  
However, the fact that individual parts of the financial system appear to be healthy does not 
mean that they are immune to contagion from other parts of the system. The institutions have 
exposures to one another and it is sometimes unclear who is exposed to what risks. When 
an individual institution experiences problems, this may then have serious repercussions for 
the financial system and, ultimately, the real economy. However, traditional supervision has 
not  sufficiently  taken  into  account  the  risk  of  financial  problems  becoming  contagious. 
Monitoring those risks is also a rather different process to monitoring the risks in an individual 
institution. 
Traditional  regulation  and  supervision  have  also  found  it  hard  to  handle  the  tendency  to 
rollercoaster  behaviour  of  the  financial  sectors.  In  good  times,  there  is  almost  always  a 
tendency to expand lending and to ignore the risks this entails. However, when the downturn 
comes,  the  same  players  tend  to  run  for  the  exits  at  the  same  time,  which  serves  only  to 
                                                 
8   According  to  the  analysis,  a  monetary  policy  designed  such  that  housing  prices  continued  to  rise  in 
accordance with the trend in the period 2000-2004 would have entailed a repo rate around 8.5 per cent, an 
inflation rate of –4.3 per cent and a level of GDP growth of –0.6 per cent in 2007, that is in the year before 
Sweden was hit by the global financial crisis (see Claussen et al., 2011). 
9   Monetary policy is also ineffectual if one wants to counteract contagion risks due to the size and complexity of 
the banks and their exposures to each other. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
make  the  downturn  worse.  A  vicious  circle  arises  when  a  credit  crunch  leads  to  lower 
production  and  lower  employment,  which  in  turn  feed  back  into  in  the  financial  sector  by 
making loan losses even higher. This type of feedback effect between the financial system 
and the macro economy is not the province of traditional financial supervision either. 
This  is  where  the  concept  of  macroprudential  policy  comes  in.  Quite  simply,  financial 
supervision must be complemented by a much broader approach. This broader approach is 
usually referred to as macroprudential policy.  
At  the  European  level,  the  efforts  to  develop  a  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  have 
resulted in the formation of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). This body, in which 
the  Riksbank  is  represented,  will  be  responsible  for  overall  macroprudential  policy  for  the 
financial system in the EU. 
The ESRB’s tasks include identifying and ranking systemic risks. When such systemic risks 
are  discovered  and  are  deemed  to  be  significant,  the  ESRB  should  issue  warnings  and, 
when appropriate, recommend that corrective measures should be taken. When necessary, 
the  ESRB  will  make  these  warnings  and  recommendations  public.  A  so-called  comply  or 
explain mechanism is linked to these recommendations. This means that the recipient of a 
recommendation is expected to comply with it or otherwise explain why it will not do so.  
The ESRB thus has no direct regulatory tools. In order for this to work, there must therefore 
also  be  effective  frameworks  for  macroprudential  policy  at  the  national  level.  It  is  at  the 
national level that the ESRB’s warnings and recommendations must be met. It is also at the 
national level that the actual macroprudential policy decisions must be made. Each country 
thus needs an institutional framework for this. There is also a need for concrete tools that the 
national authorities can use for the exercise of macroprudential policy.  
What tools are needed and how do they work? 
But what tools are we talking about? Work is now underway in various international forums to 
develop  a  toolbox  for  macroprudential  policy.  So  far,  however,  relatively  few  specialised 
macroprudential-policy  tools  have  emerged.  The  tool  that  is  probably  attracting  most 
attention  at  the  moment  consists  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers  that  have  been 
adopted within the framework of the Basel III Accord. The aims of these buffers are to make 
the  banks more  resilient  and  to  dampen  the  cycles  in  credit  growth  and  asset  prices.  The 
idea is that the authorities should force the banks to hold extra capital in good times, when 
lending  is  beginning  to  increase  too  quickly,  in  order  to  be  able  to  reduce  capital 
requirements  later  when  times  are  not  so  good.  This  will  make  it  more  expensive  for  the 
banks to build up risks in good times at the same time as buffers are created that the banks 
can use in bad times when the risks materialise. However, this thus means that there must 
be a national authority that can decide when the countercyclical buffers should be turned on 
and off.  
The tools that can be characterised as “specialised” macroprudential-policy tools also include 
capital  requirement  surcharges  for  systemically-important  financial  institutions.  Apart  from 
this, most of the tools that can be considered for macroprudential policy are those that in one 
way  or  another  are  already  included  in  financial  supervision’s  toolbox.  These  include,  for 
example, the so-called mortgage cap, although this is usually justified in terms of consumer 
protection. However, as development in this area progresses it is probable that the number 
of specialised macroprudential-policy tools will increase.10  
                                                 
10   The  Bank  of  England  recently  carried  out  an  inventory  of  the  tools  that  could  be  used  to  conduct 
macroprudential  policy,  see  Bank  of  England  (2011):  Instruments  of  Macroprudential  Policy:  A  Discussion 
Paper prepared by Bank of England and Financial Services Authority staff, December 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
But  do  we  really  need  any  new  tools  in  this  area?  Isn’t  it  enough  that  the  supervisory 
authority can introduce a mortgage cap for consumer protection reasons and that the central 
bank  can  raise  the  interest  rate  to  stabilise  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  when  credit 
growth is high? No, I don’t think so. Referring to consumer protection seems to be an overly 
narrow approach in the face of a rapid growth in lending to households and rising housing 
prices. On the other hand, the impact of the interest rate is too wide-ranging to be effective 
and risks doing more harm than good.  
A  tool  such  as  the  countercyclical  capital  buffers  may  seem  to  be  so  wide-ranging  that  it 
should be able to work in approximately the same way as the interest rate. Both tools affect 
the  price  of  credit  in  the  economy.  When  the  banks  are  forced  to  hold  more  capital  their 
funding costs increase, as they do when the interest rate is raised, and the price of credit 
also increases. However, there are important differences between the impact of the interest 
rate  and  the  impact  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers.  As  different  types  of  asset  on  the 
banks’ balance sheets have different risk weights, not all types of lending are affected in the 
same way when the authorities increase or reduce the buffers. It is easier for the banks to 
increase  the  buffers  by  reducing  lending  that  is  relatively  risky  rather  than  reducing  other 
lending. An interest-rate increase, on the other hand, makes all lending more expensive. The 
countercyclical capital buffers thus have a more direct impact on that part of lending that is 
associated with high risk, which is just that part that is important to financial stability. 
As opposed to the interest rate, countercyclical capital buffers do not have an obvious impact 
on  the  exchange  rate.  All  else  being  equal,  a  repo-rate  increase  is  expected  to  lead  to  a 
strengthening of the exchange rate as the expected return on financial assets denominated 
in kronor increases. Raising the capital buffers, on the other hand, could therefore possibly 
be used to dampen a domestic expansion of credit without undermining the competitiveness 
of the export industry. 
Obviously  there  is  a  great  interest  from  the  banks  to  find  out  how  countercyclical  capital 
buffers could be applied in Sweden, However, at this point in time it is too early to tell. For 
instance, I shall soon explain that we do not have a permanent macroprudential framework in 
place yet. 
Responsibility for macroprudential policy in Sweden?  
So who should be responsible for the macroprudential-policy tools? In Sweden, as in many 
other countries, there has long been a lack of a clear mandate and a clear division of labour 
and responsibility for this type of supervision. Initiatives have therefore been taken in several 
parts  of  the  world  recently  to  fundamentally  reorganise  financial  supervision.  In  the  United 
Kingdom, for example, the main responsibility for macroprudential policy has been given to 
the Bank of England.  
In Sweden, both Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank have tasks relating to the stability of 
the financial system. Both authorities also have a role to play in the prevention of financial 
crises.  
Finansinspektionen  has  the  task  of  exercising  supervision  over  financial  companies,  in 
particular  those  that  are  of  the  greatest  significance  to  the  stability  of  the  system,  and  of 
working  for  orderly  financial  markets  by  supervising  securities  trading  on  stock  exchanges 
and other marketplaces.  
The  Riksbank  has  the  task  of  promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system,  which  in 
practice  means  that  the  Riksbank  has  a  broad  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  The 
Riksbank  oversees  the  development  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  with  a  focus  on 
institutions,  markets  and  infrastructure  of  importance  to  financial  stability,  and  presents  its 
views on risks in, and the efficiency of, the financial system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank thus have partly overlapping tasks, but have different 
ways  and  means  of  performing  these  tasks  and  base  their  analyses  and  assessments  on 
slightly different perspectives.  
A council for cooperation on macroprudential policy 
How Sweden should best organise macroprudential policy for the financial system is one of 
the – very difficult – questions currently being addressed by the Financial Crisis Commission.  
While awaiting the report of the Commission and a future parliamentary decision on a long-
term solution for a macroprudential policy framework we will have to try to make the most of 
the existing arrangements. It makes sense that a small country like Sweden should utilise the 
expertise  and  know-how  that  already  exist  at  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen.  In 
January  2012,  these  two  organisations  set  up  a  joint  council  for  cooperation  on 
macroprudential policy. The idea behind this council is that the authorities should consult and 
exchange  information  concerning  their  assessments  of  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole,  and  discuss  appropriate  measures  to  prevent  these  risks.  Another  task  will  be  to 
discuss the development of tools and methods in the area of macroprudential policy.  
The  first  meeting  of  the  council  was  held  on  24  February  and  the  aim  is  that  the  council 
should meet at least twice a year. The minutes of the meeting are available on the websites 
of  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen.  The  intention  is  to  publish  the  minutes  of  all  the 
meetings.  
Great need for clear communication 
The  publication  of  these  minutes  is  an  expression  of  the  ambition  to  be  open  and 
transparent – an ambition that has become something of a trademark of the exercise of 
public authority in Sweden. Openness and transparency facilitate democratic control and 
evaluation. This is an area very close to my heart, so I would like to say a little more about it 
before I go on to present my view of how macroprudential policy can be developed further.  
The  Riksbank  is  often  ranked  as  one  of  the  most  open  central  banks  in  the  world.  At  the 
Riksbank  it  is  now  self-evident  that  we  should  strive  be  open  and  accessible.  The  only 
exception is when limits are imposed by the regulations and legislation on secrecy.  
In  the  field  of  monetary  policy,  the  Riksbank  was  one  of  the  first  central  banks  to  publish 
attributed minutes of its monetary policy meetings. We were also one of the first to publish 
our own path for the policy rate – the repo-rate path.  
How we communicate is not only of importance to monetary policy, but also to the work with 
financial stability. In this field, the Riksbank has strictly speaking no tools with which to affect 
the  behaviour  of 
its  warnings  and 
recommendations. This of course demands a high degree of credibility. The Riksbank broke 
new ground when the first stability report was published in the autumn of 1997. Other central 
banks  were  also  somewhat  surprised  when  we  published  the  results  of  stress  tests  for 
individual major Swedish banks for the first time.  
It  is  our  belief  that  openness  and  transparency  are  important  components  of  the  effort  to 
prevent financial crises. Many crises, not least the most recent one, have been preceded by 
a  lack  of  transparency  in  the  financial  system.  During  the  latest  crisis,  the  lack  of 
transparency  made  it  almost  impossible  to  know  which  participants  were  exposed  to  the 
most  serious  risks.  This  impenetrable  uncertainty  was  one  of  the  main  factors  that 
contributed to the paralysis of the world’s financial markets in the autumn of 2008. It is often 
uncertainty  about  the  true  state  of  things  that  in  itself  makes  people  nervous  and  that 
sometimes leads to bank runs and panic selling, which in turn can lead to devastating chain 
reactions in the financial system. Of course, the need to increase transparency primarily falls 
financial  agents  other 
to  communicate 
than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
on  the  participants  in  the  financial  system.  But  the  Riksbank  can  also  contribute  by  being 
open about its assessments and analyses of the state of the financial system, for example by 
publishing stress tests.  
How  open  the  Riksbank  should  be  about  its  assessments,  its  preparedness  and  its  own 
measures  is  determined  by  how  this  can  be  expected  to  affect  confidence.  In  a  crisis 
situation,  we  may  of  course  be  forced  to  carefully  consider  what  can  or  cannot  be  said. 
However,  the  fundamental  rule  is  that  it  is  better  to  be  open  and  clear  than  to  be 
uncommunicative and ambiguous. A “negative” but reliable announcement can therefore be 
better  for  confidence  than  a  “positive”  but  uncertain  announcement.  Openness  about  the 
problems that underlie a crisis may therefore be the key to regaining confidence. This is a 
lesson we learned from the Swedish banking crisis of the early 1990s11 – and a lesson that 
proved useful during the crisis of 2008–09.12 
How  we  communicate  is,  however,  something  that  we  need  to  work  on  and  develop 
constantly.  At  present,  we  are  trying  to  improve  our  communication  concerning  our 
assessments of the risks in the financial system. Not least, we want to be even clearer about 
how we want the banks and other financial agents to respond to these assessments. We are 
therefore currently developing ways and means of presenting our recommendations to the 
participants in the financial sector. From this it follows that we also need to review ways and 
means of following up the recommendations we have made.  
The recently-formed macroprudential council also means that we will be able to coordinate 
our communication with that of Finansinspektionen to a greater extent than before. 
Macroprudential policy needs clear mandates and effective tools 
The  cooperation  between  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  will  probably  lend  greater 
weight  to  the  communication  of  risks  and  countermeasures,  which  is  good.  But  the  new 
macroprudential council does not make any decisions on its own. The council will not alter 
the  independence,  responsibility  and  decision-making  powers  of  the  Riksbank  and 
Finansinspektionen. Consultating and “communicating” risks are all very well, but in the long 
term we probably need something more than an advanced forum for discussion.  
This  is  why  I  believe  that  the  macroprudential  council  is  only  a  temporary  solution.  To 
become  really  effective,  macroprudential  policy  needs  to  acquire  the  distinct  status  of  an 
independent policy area with its own tools for promoting stability in the financial system as a 
whole.  There  are  a  number  of  factors  that  I  believe  are  particularly  important  in  order  to 
create an effective institutional framework. 
1. 
The  power  to  make  decisions.  This  presupposes  a  clear  mandate  and  effective 
and clearly defined tools. However, as macroprudential policy is a policy area that is 
still under development, the legislation also needs to clarify how new tools can be 
added to the toolbox in the future. 
Independence.  The  body  that  is  given  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy 
should be free from external pressure, both from the political sphere and from the 
financial sector. I believe that this is particularly important, as macroprudential policy 
will entail making many unpopular decisions.  
Accountability.  If  a  body  for  macroprudential  policy  is  given  a  high  degree  of 
independence, it must also be made accountable for the actions it has taken – or 
2. 
3. 
                                                 
11   Ingves  &  Lind  (1996):  The  management  of  the  bank  crisis  –  in  retrospect,  Sveriges  Riksbank  Economic 
Review 1996:1. 
12   See for example Hallvarsson & Halvarsson (2010): The communication of the major banks and the authorities 
during the financial crisis 2007–1 July 2009. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
failed  to  take.  This  means  that  both  the  mandates  and  the  tools  must  be  clearly 
defined. For example, the mandate could include demands that the body must take 
action,  or  publicly  explain  why  it  refrains  from  taking  action,  when  certain 
predetermined  levels  for  key  variables  are  passed.  Accountability  would  also  be 
facilitated by demands for far-reaching transparency and reporting, for example to 
the Riksdag.  
Macroprudential policy is only a complement 
I  have  now  expressed  my  heartfelt  support  for  the  need  to  make  it  possible  to  conduct 
effective macroprudential policy in Sweden. However, I would like to conclude by referring 
back to what I said initially about having realistic expectations of what macroprudential policy 
can achieve. We can ask ourselves, for example, if we would have avoided the stress on the 
financial markets that we have seen recently if an effective macroprudential policy had been 
conducted  in  the  euro  area.  No,  we  probably  wouldn’t  have,  because  the  problems 
essentially relate to the fact that monetary policy and fiscal policy have not been appropriate 
given  the  economic  development  in  a  number  of  euro  countries.  Macroprudential  policy 
cannot take the place of well-designed monetary and fiscal policies. But it can act as a well-
needed  complement,  as  well-designed  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  provide  no  guarantees 
against being hit by financial crises.  
Thank you! 
References 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Katrin  and  Gerlach,  Stefan  (2010):  Credit  and  Bubbles,  Economic 
Policy, July 2010, 437–482. 
BIS (2012): European bank funding and deleveraging, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2012. 
Bank  of  England  (2011):  Instruments  of  Macroprudential  Policy:  A  Discussion  Paper 
prepared by Bank of England and Financial Services Authority staff, December 2011. 
Bernanke, Ben (2010): Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble, speech held on 3 January, 
2010. 
Claussen, Carl Andreas, Jonsson, Magnus and Lagerwall, Björn (2011): A macroeconomic 
analysis of housing prices in Sweden, The Riksbank’s commission of inquiry into risks on the 
Swedish housing market. 
EBA (2011): EBA recommendation on the creation and supervisory oversight of temporary 
capital buffers to restore market confidence (EBA/REC/2011/1). 
Dokko, Jane, Doyle, Brian, Kiley, Michael, Kim, Jinill, Sherlund, Shane, Sim, Jae and Van 
der  Heuvel,  Skander  (2009):  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Housing  Bubble,  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2009–49, Federal Reserve Board. 
Ekholm, Karolina (2009): Some lessons for monetary policy from the financial crisis, speech 
held on 4 December 2009. 
Hallvarsson & Halvarsson (2010): The communication of the major banks and the authorities 
during the financial crisis 2007–1 July 2009, report for FSPOS. 
Ingves & Lind (1996): The management of the bank crisis – in retrospect, Sveriges Riksbank 
Economic Review 1996:1. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
