DeLisle Worrell: Four pillars of a forward-looking forex-driven growth 
strategy for Barbados 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados 
International Business Association’s Monthly Luncheon, Bridgetown, 24 January 2012. 
 The average Barbadian fully understands that the immediate priority for economic policy is 
stability. If you are out fishing and you get caught in the midst of a sudden storm you batten 
down  the  hatches  and  keep  things  shipshape  until  the  storm  passes.  By  analogy,  it  is 
reasonable to expect renewed growth in the Barbadian economy only when we have found a 
way out of the present international economic tempest.  
The  actions  of  the  social  partners  in  Barbados  have  so  far  succeeded  in  stabilising  our 
economy. The evidence is that we lost only 1 percent of foreign exchange reserves last year, 
and the value of the Barbados dollar is as well protected now as it was a year ago. Barbados 
has been able to stabilise the economy and still maintain a good quality of life because we 
have  a  very  high  level  of  human  development,  as  measured  by  the  United  Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP). We have also contained job losses, thanks largely to the 
strength of our acclaimed social partnership. 
The second element of economic policy is to make use of the current period to cement the 
foundations  of  future  economic  growth.  Those  foundations,  which  are  the  subject  of  my 
lecture today, are: 
Tourism; 
A. 
International Business and Financial Services (IBFS); 
B. 
C. 
Alternative Energy; and 
D. 
Integrated Agriculture. 
In  each  of  these  Barbados  is  internationally  competitive,  or  can  be.  Investment  should  be 
concentrated in these areas, for the medium term. In the short term the Balance of Payments 
should be kept stable; that is the best we can do. But the investments we are doing and need 
to  do  in  2012  can  secure  us  a  future  of  modest  but  steady  growth,  which  is  exactly  what 
Barbados needs to further improve the already superior quality of life our citizens enjoy. 
the  availability  of 
Tourism 
Barbados aims to be the Lexus of the tourism market. We are known in North America and 
much  of  Europe  as  a  high-end  destination,  because  of 
luxury 
accommodation, the quality of our infrastructure, our ideal climate and the authenticity of the 
Barbadian  experience.  The  company  that  makes  the  Lexus  also  makes  Toyotas,  and 
Barbados does have accommodation to suit all pocketbooks. However, just as Toyota makes 
its highest margins on its luxury brand, so too we ground our tourism at the top end, where 
the  returns  are  highest.  Recent  investments,  ongoing  projects  and  forecast  investment  in 
tourism all fortify Barbados’ competitive position in the top end of the market. That is why the 
Four Seasons is such an appropriate and timely investment, and an excellent opportunity for 
the NIS to diversify its portfolio in the interests of the economic development of the country.  
A second strength of Barbados’ tourism is market diversification. Visitors come from Caricom 
countries,  the  US,  and  elsewhere,  as  well  as  the  UK,  our  largest  market.  Thirdly,  the 
Barbadian vacation experience is quite varied, in terms of the cultural and sporting activities 
on offer, although this is an area where much additional investment is needed, to enrich the 
visitors’ menu of choices. Our foremost challenge in tourism, one which affects other leading 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sectors as well, is to achieve and maintain acceptable professional standards of service at all 
times. 
The International Business and Financial Services Sector (IBFS) 
Thirty years of effort and initiative have yielded Barbados an IBFS sector which is second in 
importance  as  a  foreign  exchange  earner,  though  a  long  way  behind  tourism.  We  have 
inherited  natural  advantages  of  climate,  good  international  connections,  the  English 
language,  and  a  convenient  time  zone.  We  have  added  a  network  of  Double  Taxation 
Agreements,  a  strong  regulatory  system  which  is  constantly  updated  as  international 
guidance  dictates,  and  a  small  pool  of  domestic  expertise.  I  will  end  this  talk  with  my 
reflections on the challenges we face in the IBFS sector, but first a few words on the other 
two pillars of the Barbadian economy’s growth. 
Agriculture and Agro-industry 
Our major success, one that we share with our Caribbean neighbours, is in the rum industry. 
The Caribbean, with help from the EU, has invested in the production and marketing of aged 
rums,  and  Barbados  now  earns  more  from  the  export  of  rum  than  from  sugar  exports. 
However,  a  strategy  has  not  yet  been  put  in  place  to  integrate  sugar  cane  and  other 
agricultural  production  into  a  layered,  mutually  reinforcing  agricultural  and  agro-industrial 
sector.  I  believe  that  an  integrated  sector,  building  on  the  established  institutions  in 
agriculture and food processing, has significant potential for foreign exchange earnings and 
growth. 
Alternative energy 
The substitution of alternative energy sources for fossil fuels as an energy source is the area 
where  Barbados  can  make  substantial  savings  in  foreign  exchange  spending.  The 
technologies  for  this  are  now  commercially  available,  and  they  can  be  made  affordable. 
Importantly, the fact that policy initiatives in this area are supported by IDB financing means 
that there is additional foreign exchange available to support the needed investment. Among 
major projects being contemplated are a wind farm, a waste-to-energy plant, and the use of 
renewables such as bagasse. However, the process where the country is most advanced is 
solar  generation.  Already  a  handful  of  businesses  and  individuals  have  installed  systems, 
and  gov’t  has  led  the  way  with  major  installations  at  Harrison’s  Cave  and  the  Ministry  of 
Transport  and  Works.  There  is  an  opportunity  here  for  retailers,  banks  and  financial 
institutions to sell household systems, tied to the grid, on the basis of down payments and 
monthly payments that the middle class can afford. 
The quality of service 
There  remains  a  major  threat  to  Barbados’  competitiveness  in  all  sectors,  and  it  is  our 
inability to guarantee consistently high standards of service in the private and public service. 
It is not enough that we should have examples of service excellence, and we do. What we 
really need is an average standard that is outstanding, by international comparisons, and a 
minimum  standard  that  never  falls  below  the  acceptable.  This  is  absolutely  essential, 
because we compete on quality, not price. This is not the place to elaborate, but this is, I am 
convinced, THE threat to the future growth and prosperity of this country. 
What about construction and other sectors? 
They cannot lead because they need foreign exchange to expand, and they do not generate 
any foreign exchange. So they must depend on the foreign exchange provided by tourism, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the IBFS sector, agriculture and agro-industry, and on the foreign exchange saved from the 
use of alternative energy. 
Strategies for the IBFS sector and role of Central Bank 
I am not the expert on the sector, but it is my understanding that the IBFS sector has had to 
reinvent itself on more than one occasion. It may be time for another reinvention, to address 
changing circumstances and opportunities in the international market. The challenges arise 
from  the  on-going  need  to  upgrade  our  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  in  line  with 
international standards as well as those of countries with which we do business. Barbados 
has  begun  to  respond  appropriately  to  these  challenges,  but  we  need  to  up  our  game  in 
every case. I will touch on the Global Forum, the FSB, the FATF, and recent changes in the 
practices of the Canadian Revenue Authority. 
The Global Forum 
The Global Forum has been set up to provide a more transparent means of certifying that 
countries  meet  an  agreed  standard  for  the  exchange  of  tax  information  and  other  related 
practices. Former Prime Minister Arthur played an important role in the initiatives leading up 
to the establishment of the Forum, and Barbados is a member. We are participating in an 
ongoing international process of country evaluation. We have had some stumbles, but it is 
my understanding that we are recovering from them. There are others in the room who can 
better elaborate on this than I can. 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
We have also made a positive response to the initiatives of the FSB, the body charged with 
coordinating the reform of the international financial system. We have prepared two studies 
which we have aired at regional and international meetings, on the importance of the IBFS 
sector  to  Caribbean  economies,  and  documenting  the  measures  we  have  taken  and  are 
taking  to  ensure  that  our  regulatory  systems  are  kept  up  to  marks  with  the  guidelines 
published  by  international  bodies.  The  papers  can  be  accessed  on  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados  website.  We  are  also  gearing  up  for  our  next  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme (FSAP), more than a year away, and Central Bank and the Financial Services 
Commission (FSC) will be engaging with you on this. 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
With respect to the Global Forum and the Financial Stability Board, we now have reasonably 
transparent  international  processes  that  we  can  work  with.  That  is  not  yet  the  case  with 
FATF. Like the FSB, FATF is an exclusive members club which presumes to impose its rules 
on  countries  who  are  refused  membership.  Both  FSB  and  FATF  have  addressed  this 
anomaly, in a fashion, by establishing regional advisory groups. We have been able to use 
the Regional Consultative Group of  the FSB to  make the case for the Caribbean, and the 
Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (CFATF)  is  gaining  momentum  in  protecting  the 
interests of the region. In all three areas we need transparent processes by which countries 
may be certified as having achieved acceptable international standards.  
The Canadian Revenue Authority changes and the need to diversify markets 
Changes made recently redefine the competitive landscape in the Canadian market, and the 
fact  that  tax  information  exchange  agreements  may  now  provide  benefits  similar  to  those 
available under double taxation agreements exposes Barbados to competition from countries 
where  there  is  no  income  tax.  This  matters  a  great  deal,  because  so  much  of  our  IBFS 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
business  is  concentrated  in  the  Canadian  market.  We  must  market  the  other  factors  that 
make Barbados competitive, including our regulatory framework and superior infrastructure. 
We need to take appropriate measures to solidify our position in the Canadian market; we 
can’t  afford  to  lose  our  strong  companies,  and  those  of  long  standing.  However  we  must 
begin  a  deliberate  campaign  to  diversify  the  countries  that  use  our  international  financial 
centre,  to  reap  the  benefits  of  our  network  of  double  taxation  agreements.  That  is  an 
enterprise  which  we  need  to  embark  on  together,  the  industry,  the  community  of 
professionals  active  in  the  international  financial  centre,  Invest  Barbados,  the  Ministry  of 
International Trade, the Financial Services Commission and the Central Bank. 
Finally, a word on the role the Central Bank plays. Next month look out for the first issue of 
our new quarterly IBFS newsletter, to be published on our website. It will update you on all 
the latest developments affecting our IBFS sector. Our contributors are all leading players in 
the industry, and we invite anyone who might wish to contribute to be in touch with Neville 
Pollard  at  the  Central  Bank.  On  March  15  we  plan  our  second  annual  IBFS  conference, 
together with FSC and BIBA. Invitations will be sent out shortly. 
Thanks, and I am happy to entertain your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
