Harun R Khan: Issues and challenges in financial inclusion – policies, 
partnerships, processes & products 
Keynote address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
symposium  on  “Financial  inclusion  in  Indian  Economy”,  organised  by  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Public Administration, Bhubaneswar, 30 June 2012. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contribution  of  Rekha  Mishra,  Sushma  Vij,  Pankaj  Ekka,  Pallavi  Chavan  and 
Surajit Bose of Reserve Bank of India. 
It is a great pleasure to be in the midst of such a galaxy of eminent civil servants, serving and 
retired,  academics  and  corporate  citizens  associated  with  the  Indian  Institute  of  Public 
Administration (IIPA). IIPA was established in the year 1954 to undertake academic activities 
to enhance the leadership qualities and managerial capabilities. The idea is to build capacity 
for good governance and create mechanism for efficient delivery of public goods and welfare 
supporting benefits to the people, particularly the disadvantaged groups. And this is exactly 
what  we  need  to  do  for  the  success  of  financial  inclusion  in  a  framework  of  appropriate 
policies, supportive partnerships, efficient processes and suitable products. As we all know, 
financial inclusion has attained policy criticality to ensure growth with equity. In sync with the 
objective of inclusive growth, the Reserve Bank of India, the Government and civil society in 
India has been according high priority to the agenda of financial inclusion over the last  few 
years.  Let  me  begin  with  the  importance  of  financial  inclusion  in  the  context  of  Indian 
economy in general and the financial system in particular. 
Importance of financial inclusion 
In majority of the developing countries, access to finance is now being perceived as a public 
good,  which  is  as  important  and  basic  as  access,  say,  to  safe  water  or  primary  education. 
A question  that  arises  is  whether  financial  inclusion  can  be  interpreted  as  a  public  good. 
A good  is  considered  a  public  good  if  it  meets  the  conditions  of  “non-rivalness”  in 
consumption and non-excludability. I am sure you would agree that financial inclusion meets 
the two criteria. One of the important effects of financial inclusion is that the entire national 
financial system benefits by greater inclusion, especially when promoted in the wider context 
of  economic  inclusion.  The  concept  of  financial  inclusion  has  a  special  significance  for  a 
growing  economy  like  India  as  bringing  the  large  segment  of  the  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy  under  formal  financial  network  could  unleash  their  creative  capacities  besides 
augmenting  domestic  demand  on  a  sustainable  basis  driven  by  income  and  consumption 
growth from such sectors. Financial inclusion efforts do have multiplier effect on the economy 
as  a  whole  through  higher  savings  pooled  from  the  vast  segment  of  the  bottom  of  the 
pyramid  (BoP)  population  by  providing  access  to  formal  savings  arrangement  resulting  in 
expansion 
the 
BoP/under-banked population in the economy through the formal financial system could lead 
to  improvement  of  their  financial  conditions  and  living  standards,  enabling  them  to  create 
financial  assets,  generate  income  and  build  resilience  to  meet  macro-economic  and 
livelihood shocks. Government also immensely benefits by way of efficient and leakage-proof 
transfer  of  vast  amounts  of  welfare  benefits  to  the  targeted,  disadvantaged  groups  of 
population.  
investment  by  banks.  Deeper  engagements  of 
in  credit  and 
Concerns  relating  to  AML/CFT  get  addressed  through  financial  inclusion  efforts  without 
compromising  the  basic  KYC  requirements.  From  the  perspective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  greater  participation  by  all  the  economic  agents  in  the  financial  system  makes 
monetary  policy  more  effective  and,  thereby,  enhancing  the  prospects  of  non-inflationary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
growth.  It  also  reduces  reliance  on  the  informal  sector  which  tends  to  dent  the  impact  of 
monetary policy decisions. 
Financial Inclusion: India’s position compared with other countries 
The  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  India  is  found  to  be  higher  as  compared  with  many 
developed  and  some  of  the  major  emerging  economies.  The  wide  extent  of  financial 
exclusion in India is visible in the form of high population per bank branch and low proportion 
of  the  population  having  access  to  basic  financial  services  like  savings  accounts,  credit 
facilities,  credit  and  debit  cards. The following  table  summarises India’s  performance  in  the 
area of financial inclusion as compared with other developing as well as developed countries 
(Table 1). 
Table 1: Select indicators of Financial Inclusion – Cross Country Analysis  
Country  
Number of 
Branches  
Number of 
ATMs  
Bank  
credit  
Bank  
deposits  
(per 0.1 million adults) 
(as per cent of GDP) 
India 
Austria* 
Brazil 
France 
Mexico 
UK* 
10.91 
5.44 
43.62* 
60.11* 
11.81 
48.16 
35.26 
32.57 
13.76 
120.62 
29.04 
47.51 
43.11 
110.07 
56.03 
39.15 
15.22 
47.28 
16.19 
20.91 
25.51 
64.58 
467.97 
427.49 
United States 
35.74 
173.75* 
46.04 
53.14 
Korea 
18.63 
250.29* 
84.17 
74.51 
Afghanistan 
2.25 
0.50 
11.95 
21.4 
Philippines 
7.69 
14.88 
27.57 
53.02 
Source: World Bank, Financial Access Survey 
Note: Data pertains to 2010. For rows/cells indicated as  “*”  data pertains to 2009. 
As at end of 2010–11, the number of ATMs per 0.1 million stood at 6.3, bank credit 
and  bank  deposit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  stood  at  50.10%  and  66.10% 
respectively. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Measuring financial inclusion 
One of the measures of the level of financial inclusion is the Financial Inclusion Index. This 
index  is  based  on  three  basic  dimensions  of  an  inclusive  financial  system  –banking 
penetration, availability  of the banking services and usage of the banking system.1 Banking 
penetration  is  definitely  the  most  critical  parameter  for  measuring  the  depth  financial 
inclusion  and  is  measured  as  a  ratio  of  bank  accounts  to  the  total  population.  The  second 
parameter,  availability  of  banking  services  provides  an  indication  to  the  number  of  bank 
outlets available per 1000 people to deliver financial services. The bank outlets may include 
the  brick  and  mortar  branches,  ATMs,  business  correspondents,  etc.  The  third  parameter 
seeks to determine the usage of banking services going beyond mere opening of accounts. 
Therefore, this is evaluated on the basis of outstanding deposits and credits. Accordingly, the 
volume of outstanding deposit and credit as proportion on the net district domestic product is 
used for measuring this dimension. According to the value of the index, Indian States can be 
classified  into  three  categories,  i.e.,  states  having  high,  low  and  medium  extent  of financial 
exclusion. According to the empirical results, Kerala, Maharashtra and Karnataka are some 
of the States having wider extent of financial inclusion as compared to other States of India. 
Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Haryana fall under the 
category of medium financial exclusion. 
The extent of financial exclusion is found to be significantly low in North-Eastern and Eastern 
States, i.e., Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Odisha, Bihar, West Bengal, etc. Though the index 
and  findings  of  the  report  in  reference  are  based  on  empirical  study,  they  are  possibly  not 
way off the ground realities. 
 Indian approach to financial inclusion 
Financial inclusion can be construed in two ways. One is countering the exclusion from the 
payment system that is, not having an access to a bank account. The second is countering 
the  exclusion  from  the  formal  financial  services.  The  Indian  approach  in  recent  years  has 
been  to  establish  the  basic  right  of  every  person  to  have  access  to  a  bank  account.  This 
 1  Sarma,  M.  (2008)  “Index  of  financial  inclusion”  Working  Paper  No.  215,  Indian  Council  for  Research  on 
International Economic Relations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
approach  is  based  on  the  fundamental  principle  of  5A’s  of  ensuring  Adequacy  and 
Availability  of  financial  services  to  all  sections  of  the  society  through  the  formal  financial 
system covering savings, credit, remittance, insurance, etc. and, at the same time, increasing 
Awareness  of  such  services  and  ensuring  Affordability  and  Accessibility  of  the  appropriate 
financial  products  through  a  combination  of  conventional  and  alternative  delivery  channels 
and technology enabled services and processes. Against this background, we can see large 
variance  in  the  level  of  financial  inclusion  across  the  country.  The  Reserve  Bank  has 
therefore  been  pursuing  a  multi-pronged  strategy  for  enhancing  the  outreach  of  financial 
services  including  the  delivery  channels  across  all  sections.  The  entire  spectrum  of  the 
financial  system  which  comprises  commercial  banks,  regional  rural  banks  (RRBs),  urban 
co-operative banks (UCBs), primary agricultural credit societies (PACS) and post  offices is, 
therefore,  geared  for  this  purpose.  Besides,  self-help  groups  (SHGs)  and  Micro  Finance 
Institutions  (MFIs)  also  meet  the  financial  service  requirements  of  the  poorer  segments. 
Furthermore, banks have been encouraged to use a combination of strategies which include 
provision  of  new  products  and  relaxation  of  processes  coupled  with  leveraging  ICT  for 
efficient  handling  of  low  ticket  large  volume  transactions.  Broadly,  the  policy  approach 
adapted  to  financial  inclusion  in  India  can  be  divided  in  two  categories  –  the  minimalist 
approach and the expanded approach. 
The minimalist approach for financial inclusion focuses on the provision of a bouquet of basic 
financial  products  and  services,  including  thrift,  credit,  remittance  and  payment  facilities  for 
the vulnerable and financially excluded sections. Banks have been urged to include products, 
such  as,  savings  cum  overdraft  product,  remittance  product,  pure  savings  product  and 
entrepreneurial credit product while pursuing the objective of greater inclusion. The expanded 
approach for financial inclusion, on the other hand, focuses not only on the provision of the 
basic banking products but also other important ancillary financial products, such as, general 
insurance, health insurance, micro-pension, mutual fund, finance for affordable housing, etc. 
The expanded bouquet of financial inclusion would also entail focus on consumer protection 
and  education,  particularly  financial  literacy  for  the  new  entrants  to  the  formal  financial 
system. Sustainable and viable financial inclusion, which would be a win-win proposition for 
both those who supply financial services and those who demand the same, would also mean 
that financial inclusion in a sense forms a part of the broader context of economic inclusion. 
Against this background, I shall now touch upon some of the major issues and challenges in 
relation  to  partnerships,  processes,  policies  and  products  involved  in  Indian  efforts  at 
financial inclusion in the recent years. 
SHG-Bank Linkage Programme 
In  the  last  two  decades,  the  major  institutional  innovation  in  India  for  expanding  financial 
system access and usage for the poor and marginalized sections of the population has been 
the SHG-Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP). This was an outcome of pilot projects during the 
1980s  for  improving  access  of  rural  poor  to  formal  institutional  financial  services.  For  the 
banks,  it  was  a  way  of  reducing  their  transaction  costs  by  dealing  with  groups  of  people 
rather  than  individuals,  reducing  the  credit  risks  through  peer  pressure  and  making  people 
save.  Subsequently  in  the  year  1992,  the  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development  (NABARD)  started  a  pilot  project  of  linking  SHGs  with  branches  of  banks 
across the country. The project provided a cost-effective SBLP model for providing financial 
services to the underserved poor. Being a “savings-first, credit later” model, credit discipline 
became a norm for SHGs and “social collateral” made them bankable. The model was also 
successful  in  providing  solution  to  the  twin  problems  faced  by  banks,  i.e.,  low  recovery  of 
loans  in  rural  areas  and  high  transaction  costs  in  dealing  with  small  borrowers  at  frequent 
intervals.  One  of  the  major  positive  impacts  of  the  SBLP  was  social  and  economic 
empowerment of the membership. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Despite  the  noteworthy  accomplishments  of  SHGs  (Table  2),  certain  issues,  such  as, 
inadequate outreach in many regions, delays in opening of SHG accounts and disbursement 
of  loans,  impounding  of  savings  by  banks  as  collateral,  non-approval  of  repeat  loans  by 
banks  even  when  the  first  loan  was  repaid  promptly,  multiple  membership,  borrowings  by 
SHG  members  within  and  outside  SHGs,  adverse  consequences  of  unhealthy  competition 
between  NGO  promoted  SHGs  and  Government  promoted/subsidy  oriented  SHGs  and 
limited  banker  interface  and  monitoring  continued  to  affect  the  programme  in  many  areas. 
While the basic tenets of the SHGs being savings led credit product remain true even today, 
recent  developments  have  given  rise  to  the  need  for  crucial  changes  in  the  approach  and 
design of SBLP to make it more flexible and client friendly. The revised NABARD guidelines, 
popularly known as SHG2 (version 2), have sought to address some of the shortcomings of 
the earlier version. The major features of SHG2 are : (a) more focus on voluntary savings; (b) 
cash  credit  system  of  lending  over  three  to  five  years  cycle  to  minimize  the  problem  of 
inadequate finance and non-availability of repeat loans; (c) enabling creation of Joint Liability 
Groups  (JLGs)  within  SHGs  to  scale  up  economic  activities  by  more  entrepreneurial 
members of the group; (d) improving risk mitigation systems by bringing in third party audit; 
(e) building second tier institutions; (f) strengthening the self-monitoring mechanism and (g) 
meeting the training/capacity building requirements of the SHGs. 
Table 2: SHG-Bank Linkage Programme 
Particulars 
2009–10 
2010–11 
(numbers in millions) 
Total number of SHGs savings linked with banks 
6.95 
7.46 
Total savings amount of SHGs with banks 
₹61.98 billion  ₹70.16 billion 
Total number of SHG credit linked during the year 
1.58 
1.19 
Total amount of loans disbursed to SHGs during the year 
₹144.53 billion  ₹145.47 billion 
Total number of SHGs having loans outstanding 
4.85 
4.78 
Total amount of loans outstanding against SHGs 
₹280.38 billion  ₹312.21 billion 
Estimated number of families covered 
97.00 
97.00 
Source: Status of Micro Finance in India, NABARD 
Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) 
Given  the  limitation  of  scaling  up  SHG  movement  in  the  absence  of  human  and  financial 
resources and in the absence of deeper geographical penetration of formal banking system 
due  to  several  demand  and  supply  side  factors,  other  intermediaries  with  a  reach  to  the 
excluded segments of the society were required to augment the efforts. Semi-formal financial 
sector service providers like the MFIs fill this niche space and, to that extent, play a critical 
role in the financial inclusion. The MFIs have served the underserved/un-served populace in 
the  last  few  years  and  improved  access  to  credit  though  there  have  been  quite  a  few 
debatable issues on the style of corporate governance and ethics of conducting business on 
part of some of the MFIs. Despite these debates, it has been realized that the MFIs do help 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in  financial  deepening  and  can  remain  an  important  segment  of the  Indian  financial  market 
keeping  in  view  the  present  level  of  penetration  of  the  banking  system.  Many  of  the  MFIs 
have therefor ben conduits of credit flows from the banks whose capacities for last mile reach 
are constrained under various forms of MFI-bank partnership model. 
The  conceptual  framework  underlying  MFIs,  however,  requires  a  change,  more  so  in  the 
context of serious challenges the sector faces in post Andhra crisis phase. These institutions 
have to revisit their business models to support the income earning ability of the borrowers 
and, at the same time, themselves remain economically viable. MFIs will have to work hard 
in pursuit of transparency and responsible finance, shaking off the perception that their motto 
is  profiteering  at  the  cost  of  the  poor  but  not  profitability  for  sustainable  and  viable  growth. 
MFIs  will  also  have  to  take  initiatives  to  retool  the  product  redesign  for  garnering  new 
customers  and  acquiring  more  share  of  the  market.  At  the  same  time  they  need  to 
re-engineer  the  customer  responsive  processes  so  as  to  create  a  favourable  climate  for 
doing business. MFIs will have to revisit the mission and business strategy and reinvent the 
sector to remain relevant in the system. Creation of a new category of MFI-NBFC under the 
framework  prescribed  by  the  Malegam  Committee,  more  nuanced  appreciation  by  the 
financing  banks  of  the  difficulties  being  faced  by  some  of  the  MFIs  despite  having 
responsible and sustainable business model, greater sense of responsibility in the sector as 
evident  from  the  code  of  conduct  being  voluntarily  accepted  by  the  MFIs  and  the 
Microfinance  legislation  which  is  in  the  offing,  possibly  hold  key  to  future  success  and 
sustainability of the MFIs. 
Business Correspondents (BCs) 
the 
Due  to  the  constraints  involved  in  going for  a full-fledged  brick  &  mortar  branch  model,  the 
Reserve  Bank,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Internal  Group  on  Rural  Credit  and 
Microfinance,  adopted 
through  Business 
Facilitators (BFs)/Business Correspondents (BCs) for ensuring door step delivery of financial 
products and services. In January 2006, the Reserve Bank permitted banks to engage BFs 
and BCs like NGOs/MFIs set up under the Societies/Trust Acts, Section 25 companies, post 
offices, etc. as intermediaries for providing financial and banking services,  thus,  addressing 
the  proverbial  last  mile  problem.  The  approach  adopted  has  been  technology  and  delivery 
model neutral. Initially, the BC retail outlets were being created by the banks themselves. 
ICT  based  agent  bank  model 
that  can  work  as  agents  of  banks  (individuals 
Over  the  last  few  years,  however,  a  number  of  innovations,  in  particular  with  regard  to  the 
universe  of  entities 
like  retired 
bank/government  employees,  kirana/fair  price  shops,  insurance  agents,  operators  of 
common service centres, etc.), have been brought in under the BC model so as to scale up 
the financial inclusion drive in a sustainable manner, latest being the use of corporate entities 
as BCs of banks. The adoption of corporate entities as BCs has, however, raised a number 
of issues both for the partner banks and also for the regulators. On one hand, the corporates 
with a widespread retail network bring in larger resources, higher organizational strength and 
financial  backing  needed  for  a  large  network  of  BCs  besides  providing  financial  security  to 
the  bank.  The  outlets  of  corporates  being  familiar  to  the  local  populace  are  able  to  tap  the 
benefit of “one of us”. 
On the other hand, the challenges arise in the event of failure of a large corporate BC as this 
would translate into a reputation risk to the banks and endanger their substantive business. 
From the perspective of a regulator, the major cause of concern is that banking and financial 
services  should  not  be  thrust  on  the  uninformed  customers.  Corporates  in  the  interest  of 
revenue  maximisation  may  use  their  resources  and  network  to  push  banking  and  financial 
products,  unmindful  of  whether  they  are  suitable  or  appropriate  for  the  targeted  persons. 
There  is  also  the  issue  of  lack  of  grass-root  level  of  experience  of  rural  India  and  possibly 
lack  of  commitment  to  financial  inclusion  per  se  on  the  part  of  large  corporates/technology 
service providers. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Business  Correspondents  bridge  the  connectivity  gap  between  the  service  seekers,  i.e., 
under-served  populace,  and  the  service  providers,  i.e.,  the  banks.  Banks,  being  regulated 
entities,  are  governed  by  prudential  regulations  and  supervisory  rules,  e.g.  adherence  to 
KYC/AML,  consumer  protection  laws,  etc.  In  the  BC-oriented  model  of  financial  inclusion, 
pursuit  of  higher  volume  of  business  for  revenue  maximization  may  dilute  prudential 
requirements  exposing  the  banks  concerned  to  whole  host  of  risks  like  reputation  risk, 
strategic  risk,  compliance  risk,  operations  risk  besides  the  risk  of  contaminated  asset 
portfolio. In case of a cluster approach where a common BC could for many banks then there 
could be issue of concentration risk. These risks may get further aggravated if the monitoring 
systems  of  the  banks  are  not  strong  enough  to  detect  these  red  flags.  Given  the  lack  of 
financial strength of the BCs, risk of inability to fulfil commitments arising due to shortfalls in 
cash due to frauds, errors, etc. is high. Banks engaging BCs may, therefore, have to put in 
place  risk  mitigants  and adequate  checks  and  balances  to  prevent such  incidents  and  also 
ensure  proper  customer  redressal.  The  sponsoring  banks  are  expected  to  lay  down 
processes, procedures and practices for the BCs but there still exists a risk that some agents 
may end up pursuing activities or adopting processes which are inconsistent with the overall 
strategic  goals  of the  bank  concerned.  Further, banks  and  their  BCs  also  exposed  to  huge 
risk of cash management, particularly as cash dependence of the economy continues  to be 
very  high.  There  is  also  huge  requirement  of  hand-holding  and  training  of  the  BCs  to 
enhance the trust level  of the end customers. In this context, the current thinking of having 
lean,  brick  and  mortar  outfits  of  the  banks  (e.g.  ultra  small  branches)  to  provide  support  to 
and  supervise  work  of  certain  number  of  BCs  appears  to  be  a  step  in  right  direction.  The 
success of BC model also hinges on adoption of technology, which in turn, is dependent on 
the degree of compatibility and integration of technology being used by the banks and their 
BCs.  Lack  of  integration  of  technology  and  processes  may  lead  to  delay  in  submission  or 
submission of accurate information to the regulators or generating MIS for the internal use by 
the banks. There is a view that banks could also have their in-house BC outfits in the form of 
separate trusts/subsidiaries with separate recruitment and remuneration structure but under 
closer supervisory control. This idea is worth a trial. 
Viability of the BC model in general has remained a critical issue for which the model has not 
taken off as expected. There is a mismatch between the revenues earned and costs incurred 
while undertaking the BC operations, resulting in non-viability of the model. Hence, attempts 
to  employ  large  BCs  under  competitive  L-1  (lowest  one)  bidding  system  without  ensuring 
their  financial  and  technical  capabilities  and  without  assessing  the  performance  of  a  large 
number  of  existing  BCs  who  are  yet  to  become  viable,  run  the  risk  of  creating  huge 
uncertainty  for  the  whole  system  of  Bank-BC  partnership  model.  Many  of  the  BCs  became 
non-operational due to lack of timely payments by banks or inadequate commission paid by 
banks. It is extremely critical to ensure that the remuneration paid to the BCs is adequate to 
keep the model economically  viable and attractive.  A combination of fixed and variable pay 
would encourage BCs to strive harder for bringing in more business for the bank. Under the 
circumstances, 
is  structured 
appropriately,  supervised  closely  by  the  banks/regulators  and  scaled  up  in  a  calibrated 
manner after taking into account the problems encountered at the grass-root level. If this is 
not  done,  there  is  a  huge  risk  of  the  entire  model  being  discredited  with  all  its  adverse 
consequences for the financial inclusion efforts. 
the  Bank-BC  partnership  model 
imperative 
that 
is 
it 
Having  discussed  the  three  important  partnerships  in  the  pursuit  of  financial  inclusion,  I 
would now turn towards products and technology enabled processes in the next part of my 
address. 
Product initiatives 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  providing  policy  impetus  for  introduction  of  new  products 
and  innovative  intermediary  channels  to  enable  sustainable  and  meaningful  financial 
inclusion.  The  “no-frills  account”  (NFA)  has  been  one  of  the  landmark  financial  products 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
which allowed financially excluded individuals to access banking services for the purpose of 
savings and also had credit feature in the form of overdraft facility. To ensure that more and 
more people come within the banking fold and realizing that there is some stigma attached to 
the  NFA,  it  is  now  felt  that  banks  should  offer  all  the  customers  a  “basic  savings  deposit 
account”  with  certain  minimum  common  facilities  and  without  the  requirement  of  minimum 
balance. The services provided in this account should include deposit and withdrawal of cash 
at  the  bank  branches  as  well  as  ATMs,  receipt/credit  of  money  through electronic  payment 
channels or by means of deposit/collection of cheques drawn by Central/State Government 
agencies  and  departments.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  in  the  process  of  issuing 
guidelines  on  opening  of  such  basic  savings  bank  deposit  account  by  banks.  Another 
innovative  product  offered  by  the  banking  system  is  the  General  Credit  Cards.  This  was, 
however, preceded by Kisan Credit Cards which are likely to undergo major transformation 
when they become smart-card based cards. Innovation of products for the specific needs of 
the  poor  is  necessary for  achieving the  ultimate objective  of  inclusive  growth.  A  bouquet  of 
products may  be  offered  through the  BCs  instead  of  a  single  product  to make  the financial 
inclusion efforts viable. 
Rural customers are looking upon banks for insurance products in view of their confidence in 
the  banking  system.  Insurance  is  a  useful  way  for  households  to  protect  themselves  from 
financial  shocks  and  other  adverse  events.  Unfortunately,  although  a  range  of  insurance 
products is available, very few of them have migrated successfully downmarket to serve the 
poor, whose need for such protection is arguably more acute. One plausible reason holding 
back  the  diffusion  of  micro-insurance  is  transaction  costs,  i.e.,  the  cost  of  selling  and 
underwriting  insurance  and  evaluation  of  claims  in  a  timely  and  efficient  manner.  Using 
traditional  channels  and  processes,  insurance  companies  simply  cannot  write  policies  with 
values below a certain floor without pricing them unrealistically. Moreover, micro-insurance is 
a  low-cost,  high-volume  business;  therefore,  scale  of  economy  is  crucial  for  success. 
Currently, 
institutions, 
non-governmental  organizations  and  SHGs  are  allowed  to  sell  micro-insurance  policies, 
while a BC is authorized to offer banking services, such as, cash transactions to customers. 
The  BC  network  could  be  tapped  to  increase  penetration  of  micro-insurance  and  take 
insurance  to  the  uninsured  segments  of  the  country.  The  concern,  however,  remains  on 
account of the possibility of mis-selling. 
banks,  microfinance 
insurance 
company 
agents, 
only 
Tapping technology platforms 
It  has  been  observed  that  the  product  initiatives  are  usually  scaled  down  versions  of  the 
existing  products.  To  enable  a  successful  financial  inclusion,  innovation  of  products  for  the 
specific  needs  of  the  poor  is  not  only  necessary  but  also  an  essential  condition.  Today, 
banks  can  provide  a  bouquet  of  financial  services  through  the  various  networks  of  agents 
and branches by leveraging and fine tuning technology platforms. Technology holds the key 
to  providing  models  for  efficient  delivery  of  small  value  transactions  in  large  volumes  while 
reaping  economies  of  scale.  The 
implementation  of  such  effective,  scalable  and 
platform-independent technology will help drive down the cost of providing banking services 
to  the  poor.  Further,  technology  helps  in  spreading  financial  literacy  both  as  a  delivery 
channel and as an intrinsic part of the learning process (e.g., instructional computer). Today, 
both the service providers and service seekers have a number of technology options, such 
as, smart cards, micro-ATMs, ATMs, mobile technology, Aadhaar Enabled Payment Systems 
(AEPS),  etc.  to  choose  from  to  provide/seek  financial  services  irrespective  of  their 
geographic locations. 
Mobile banking 
Mobile  banking  transactions  have  been  defined  as  customers  undertaking  banking 
transactions  using  mobile  phones  involving  credit/debit  to  their  accounts.  With  the  rapid 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growth  in  the  number  of  mobile  phone  subscribers  in  India,  banks  in  collaboration  with 
telecom  companies  are  seeking  to  develop  an  alternate  channel  of  delivery  of  banking 
services.  Keeping  in  view  the  issues  relating  to  diversity  of  network  providers  in  India, 
remittance centric approach of such model and KYC related concerns, the Reserve Bank has 
advocated  bank-led  mobile  banking  model  and  issued  operative  guidelines  to  banks  for 
effecting  mobile  based  banking  transactions.  As  on  May  31,  2012,  the  Reserve  Bank  had 
permitted 69 banks to provide mobile banking services to their customers. During May 2012, 
about 3.34 million transactions amounting to ₹2.86 billion as against 1.28 million transactions 
amounting to  ₹0.91  billion  in  May  2011  were  transacted through  this channel.  Even  though 
the value and volume are increasing on month on month basis, the growth rate is low when 
compared  with  the  number  of  bank  accounts  and  the  vast  mobile  subscriber  base  of  more 
than  900  million.  This  indicates  that  banks  are  yet  to  fully  exploit  this  technology  even  for 
their  existing  customers.  While  the  Reserve  Bank  has  provided  the  policy  framework  for  a 
collaborative  relationship  between  the  banks  and  mobile  network  operators,  the  results  of 
this  collaboration  are  not  yet  fully  visible.  Some  of  the  likely  reasons  which  have  been 
flagged  relate  to  ownership  of  the  customer,  control  of  transactions  and  developing  an 
appropriate  revenue  sharing  model.  The  need  of  the  hour,  therefore,  is  that  the  banks  and 
the mobile operators reach a workable understanding while protecting their mutual interests. 
Such an approach would result in a “win-win” situation for both and, more importantly, serve 
the larger cause of public good of financial inclusion. 
The  Inter  Bank  Mobile  Payment  Service  (IMPS),  an  instantaneous  24x7  electronic  funds 
transfer  system  has  been  developed  by  the  National  Payment  Corporation  of India  (NPCI). 
Despite  tremendous  potential  of  the  product,  the  volumes  are  low,  probably  due  to  the 
reluctance  of  the  telecom  companies  to  offer  the  common  Unstructured  Supplementary 
Service  Data  (USSD)  platform.  The  USSD  platform  is  menu  driven  and  can  be  invoked  by 
dialling a number. Its main advantage is that even users with low-cost handsets can perform 
their  banking  transactions  through  the  mobile  phone.  It  is,  however,  gathered  that  the 
telecom  companies  prefer  negotiating  with  individual  banks  on  the  issue  rather  than  with 
NPCI  in  providing  such  a  common  USSD  platform.  Telecom  companies,  regulatory 
authorities, NPCI and all the stakeholders need to work together to draw up a roadmap for 
increasing the IMPS supported mobile banking transactions. 
Mobile based remittance services 
Many  countries  have  experimented  with  mobile  based  remittance  services  for  reaching  the 
unbanked  population.  The  success  story  cited  often  is  that  of  M-Pesa  in  Kenya.  Several 
mobile  based  remittance  services  are  operating  in  a  few  countries,  e.g.  Tigo  Cash  in 
Paraguay, Pago Movi in Peru, Nipper in Mexico and Oi in Brazil. The common thread running 
through  all  these  examples  have  been  the  successful  deployment  of  technology  to  service 
low income, financially excluded households. Most schemes use mobile phones for providing 
financial  service  platforms,  others  use  point-of-sale  (PoS)  devices  in  conjunction  with 
magnetic  stripe  cards  (mostly  in  Latin  America),  some  use  both  mobile  phones  and 
point-of-sale  devices  (e.g.  WIZZIT  in  South  Africa  and  Smart  in  the  Philippines).  In  Indian 
context,  among  others,  money  transfers  through  mobile  wallets  (upto  ₹50,000  for  the 
present)  leveraging  National  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  (NEFT)  platform  of  RBI  being 
promoted  by  a  few  telecom  companies  hold  a  great  promise  for  facilitating  small  value 
remittances. 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment Systems (AEPS) 
The  AEPS  architecture  designed  by  Unique  Identification  Authority  of  India  (UIDAI)  in 
collaboration with the NPCI is a platform which banks can leverage upon for expanding their 
financial  inclusion  initiatives.  The  basic  premise  of  AEPS  is  that  one  BC  Customer  Service 
Point  (CSP)  will  have  the  ability  to  service  customers  of  many  banks  based  on  the  unique 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
bio-metric identification data stored in the Aadhaar database. The AEPS platform is expected 
to  empower  a  bank  customer  to  use  Aadhaar  as  his/her  identity  to  access  the  respective 
Aadhaar enabled bank account and perform basic banking transactions like balance enquiry, 
cash  withdrawal  and  deposit  through  the  BC.  A  pilot  scheme  in  four  districts  of  Jharkhand 
state is currently being carried out under which MGNREGA wages to labourers are credited 
to  their  Aadhaar  enabled  bank  accounts.  The  beneficiaries  withdraw  the  amounts  through 
micro-ATMs  which  authenticate  their  Aadhaar  number.  There  is  a  need  to  scale  this  up 
across the country. 
Issues and challenges in ICT based financial inclusion 
Use of technology 
For  the  success  of  the  ICT-based  models,  resolving  technology  related  issues  is  the  key. 
One  of  the  major  constraints  of  the  ICT  based  BC  model  has  been  the  technical  problems 
associated with the model. It has been reported that devices, such as, hand held machines, 
smart cards, PoS terminals and utilities which are crucial to the functioning of the model are 
not properly functioning in many areas of the country. Limited number of technology service 
providers  to  cover  the  unbanked  villages  of  all  banks  as  well  as  limited  service  centres  for 
servicing devices has resulted in banking operations coming to a halt in many villages. Given 
the  literacy  level  of  the  rural  population,  availability  of  trained  manpower  in  the  villages  to 
ensure that transactions are carried out in a user friendly manner in the local language and 
that  the  customers  smoothly  transit  from  assisted  model  to  self-service  model  in  using 
technology, wherever feasible (e.g. use of ATMs/mobile/internet banking). This could lead to 
erosion of confidence on the ICT-based BC model. Technical glitches, therefore, need to be 
addressed  quickly.  Banks  also  have  to  ensure  that  the  turnaround  time  between  account 
opening and account operationalization has to be minimised so as to gain confidence of the 
customers in such models. 
Security concerns 
Given  the  increasing  reliance  on  technology  to  deliver  banking  services  to  customers,  it  is 
essential to that adequate attention is paid to security, especially IT security. Security related 
issues  resulting  in  frauds  have  the  potential  to  undermine  public  confidence  in  the  use  of 
electronic  payment  products.  Further,  they  could  also  lead  to  reputation  risks.  While 
preventing fraud through robust security measures, one should not lose sight of the fact that 
the ease and efficiency in operations for the customers is not unduly eroded. Cumbersome 
security  procedures  would  deter  customers  from  using  the  product  and  carrying  out 
electronic  transactions.  Accordingly,  a  proper  balance  should  be  struck  between  such 
apparently  conflicting  objectives.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  taking  several  measures  to 
strengthen  the  security  for  electronic  transactions  to  prevent  their  misuse.  For  instance 
Second  Factor  Authentication  has  been  made  mandatory  for  all  Card  Not  Present  (CNP) 
transactions  (e.g.  requirement  of  PIN  in  addition  to  CVV  while  putting  through  the 
transactions).  Similar  measures  are  going  to  be  implemented  for  Card  Present  (CP) 
transactions  (e.g.  use  of  chip  and  PIN  or  Aadhaar  cards)  over  a  defined  time  period.  SMS 
alerts  now  made  mandatory  for  all  card  related  transactions  is  another  added  security 
feature. Encryption of transactions for value above ₹5,000/– has also been mandated for all 
mobile based transactions as a better security protocol. 
Infrastructural limitations 
Power supply and network connectivity are issues in most parts of the country, especially, so 
in  the  rural/remote  areas.  While  banking  transactions  are  enabled  on  a  real-time  basis  in 
urban centres, it often takes more time to complete a transaction in remote areas due to poor 
internet  connectivity  and  frequent  power  failures.  To  overcome  this  in  the  North  Eastern 
states, the Reserve Bank had launched the Satellite Connectivity Scheme in 2009 to provide 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
100%  subsidy  to  bank  branches  in  the  North-East  Region  (NER)  subject  to  a  maximum  of 
₹12,000/–    per  month  or  the  actual  expenditure  incurred  by  the  bank,  whichever  is  less, 
subject  to  the  condition  that  the  branches  would  offer  services  of  electronic  funds  transfer 
free  of  charge  to  their  customers.  Of  the  total  1756  branches  in  the  North-East  region, 
762 branches (43.4 per cent) had taken satellite connectivity after the launch of the scheme. 
The  scheme  has  since  been  extended  by  another  year  and  Sikkim  has  also  been  brought 
under the ambit of the Scheme. 
Multiplicity of models 
Multiple  technologies  and  delivery  models  could  be  used  based  on  the  geographical 
peculiarities,  infrastructure  availabilities,  etc.  Too  many  disparate  technologies,  however, 
may prove counter-productive as there will be several challenges like integration with CBS, 
support issues and people at the operating level (i.e. at the level of  BFs and BCs) may not 
fully apprehend all the products and technologies. So it may be a better idea to narrow down 
to  a  few  stable  and  scalable  technologies  and  delivery  channels  and  build  the  financial 
inclusion products around them with inter-operability being the key theme. 
Way forward 
Meaningful collaborations 
those  who  desire 
Financial  inclusion  calls  for  significant  investment  in  technology  based  applications,  related 
research  and  development  efforts,  comprehensive  MIS  and  monitoring  and  evaluation 
systems.  Banks,  especially 
to 
under-banked/unbanked  population  could  collaborate  with  technology  service  providers 
(TSPs), mobile network operators (MNOs), corporate houses and various categories of BCs 
to  develop  efficient  delivery  models.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  a  few  banks  have  also 
started  taking  initiatives  with  couple  of  them  appointing  Mobile  Service  Providers  (MSP)  to 
act  as  their  BC.  The  strategy  should  aim  to  create  a  facilitating  eco-system,  leveraging  on 
technology  and  promote  partnerships  of  brick  and  mortar  branches  including  ultra-small 
branches with the ICT based BC outlets for evolving an effective financial inclusion delivery 
mechanism. 
longer  exposure 
to  have  much 
Innovative product lines & processes 
Banks have to look at their policies and procedures to develop new product lines rather than 
merely adopting the complex products of urban India in the rural milieu. Providing simple and 
basic  banking  services  in  the  form  of  deposit  account  with  remittance  services  and  small 
credit facility would ideally suffice for bringing the unbanked into the folds of banking system. 
This  will  require  easy-to-understand  documentation  process,  preferably  in  the  vernacular 
language,  sufficient  to  meet  the  legal  requirements  of  the  banking  entity  or  the  service 
provider. Innovations, however, should not be restricted merely to product designing. Given 
the fact that poor are generally susceptible to events that can adversely affect their already 
fragile livelihoods, more focus is required on enhancing the staying power of the poor. Here 
comes the importance of insurance which need to be enmeshed with banking products in a 
seamless  manner.  Banks  should  institute  systems  of  reward  and  recognition  for  personnel 
initiating, ideating, innovating and successfully executing new product initiatives and services 
in the rural areas. 
Financial literacy and awareness 
Campaigns for  spreading  awareness  about financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  need  to 
be  intensified. This  can  be  done  through  innovative  dissemination  channels  including  films, 
documentaries, pamphlets and road shows. Stakeholders, including the regulators and policy 
makers,  may  launch  large  scale  awareness  programmes.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
process of launching electronic Banking Awareness And Training (e-BAAT) programmes to 
increase awareness about technology enabled financial services. Initiatives need to be taken 
for  including  financial  literacy  as  a  regular  curriculum  in  school  syllabus.  Training 
programmes for bank staff, particularly for the frontline staff, should include aspects relating 
to  financial  education  of  the  customers.  There  is  also  a  great  need  for  certain  amount  of 
standardization  of  services/facilities  extended  by 
the  Financial  Literacy  and  Credit 
Counselling Centre (FLCC) being set up at several centre by the Lead Banks. Such facilities 
should  cover  the  entire  gamut  of  the  requirements  of  the  under-privileged/inadequately 
informed  customers  (e.g.  basic  financial  concepts,  appropriateness  of  savings  ad  credit 
products,  use  of  credit  cards,  financial  planning  and  debt  management,  retirement 
planning/micro-pension, insurance,  investment, grievance redressal mechanism, awareness 
about electronic banking and the safeguards to be followed, etc.). It is hoped that the efforts 
to evolve a nationwide strategy of financial literacy involving all the financial sector regulators 
across banking, insurance, capital market and pension products would bear the fruits. 
Customer service and consumer protection 
Along  with  financial  literacy  and  education,  customer  service  is  another  issue  that  needs 
closer attention. In recent years, the Reserve Bank has worked towards improving customer 
service through better dissemination of information to customers and also by  improving the 
mechanisms for redressing the grievances. Mind-set, cultural and attitudinal changes at the 
grass-root  levels  and  user  friendly  technology  at  the  level  of  branches  of  banks  and 
BC outlets are needed to extend holistic customer service to the new entrants to the banking 
system.  Government,  regulators  like  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  banks,  service  providers  and 
consumers themselves have to play important role in developing a comprehensive approach 
to consumer protection. 
Concluding thoughts 
Reserve Bank has been emphasizing that the bankability of the poor holds a major business 
opportunity for the banks in developing a stable, retail deposit base and in curbing volatility in 
earnings  with  the  help  of  a  diversified  asset  portfolio.  The  recent  crisis  has,  in  fact, 
underscored  the  need  for  reducing  banks’  reliance  on  wholesale  deposits  and  borrowed 
funds and cultivating a retail portfolio of assets and liabilities for financial stability. The current 
policy  objective  of  inclusive  growth  with  financial  stability  cannot  be  achieved  without 
ensuring universal financial inclusion. Pursuit of financial inclusion by adoption of innovative 
products and processes does, however, pose challenge of managing trade-offs between the 
objective of financial inclusion and financial stability. In the Indian context, Reserve Bank has 
always sought to balance the risk of partnerships and product innovations with the ability to 
achieve  greater  penetration  in  a  safe,  secured  and  prudentially  sound  manner.  The 
underlying belief is that only sound and strong institutions can promote financial inclusion in a 
sustainable manner and, towards this end, prudent regulations have to be in place to achieve 
inclusion  while  protecting  financial  stability  and  consumer  interest.  One  such  measure,  for 
example,  has  been  restricting  deposit  taking  to  banks  and  encouraging  the  non-bank 
financial companies to focus on innovative approaches to  lending under a lighter regulatory 
framework,  with  additional  regulations  for  systemically  important  NBFCs.  By  adopting 
appropriate  regulatory  framework  for  innovations  in  policies,  partnerships,  processes  and 
products  meant  for  financial  inclusion,  Reserve  Bank  has  sought  to  further  the  cause  of 
inclusion without falling short of the policy goal of financial stability. 
I am sanguine about rapid progress of financial inclusion efforts in India as the stakeholders 
have  come  to  realize  the  need  for  viable  and  sustainable  business  models  which  focus  on 
accessible  and  affordable 
financial  services,  products  and  processes,  synergistic 
partnerships  with  non-bank  entities  including  the  technology  service  providers  for  efficient 
handling  of  low  value,  large  volume  transactions,  particularly  in  remote,  banking  shadow 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
areas  and  appropriate  regulatory  and  risk  management  policies  that  ensure  financial 
inclusion and financial stability move in tandem. 
Thank you once again for giving me the opportunity to share some of my thoughts with such 
distinguished participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
