Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the 
Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 16 February 2012. 
 Demanding time for Europe 
“The year started without much hope, and it had to be expected that the pressure 
on business and industry would intensify, but however dim the prospects might 
have appeared, the outcome was darker than anyone had imagined. I need not 
enumerate the successive collapses that spread from country to country.” 
This was the opening of the annual address delivered by Norges Bank Director Nicolai Rygg 
80  years  ago.  Britain  had  abandoned  the  gold  standard  and  one  country  after  the  other, 
including  Norway,  followed  suit.  Interest  rates  had  increased.  Financial  markets  were 
turbulent. 
Although the tremors were on a greater scale in the 1930s, Nicolai Rygg’s description could 
serve as an apt retrospective today as well. In the course of the past two years we have seen 
economic  problems  spread  across  debt-laden  countries  in  Europe.  Greece  was  the  first 
country to experience a financial collapse. The Greek government had to resort to external 
financial assistance in spring 2010, followed by Ireland and Portugal. The turbulence spread 
further in autumn last year. Interest rates on public debt rose markedly for Spain and Italy 
and thereafter Belgium and France. 
Several  euro  area  countries  are  now  struggling  with  soaring  public  debt  and  weak 
competitiveness  in  addition  to  restructuring  and  public  budget  cuts.  Confidence  in  some 
countries’ ability to service debt has been weakened. The monetary union is under pressure. 
(Chart 1: Current account) 
The crisis has its roots in global trade imbalances, with high saving in emerging economies 
and  comparably  large  deficits  in  many  advanced  countries.  The  imbalances  drove  down 
long-term interest rates to very low levels and the appetite for risk grew. Inadequate financial 
sector  regulation  led  to  a  further  deepening  of  the  imbalances.  (Chart  2:  Yield  on  10-year 
government bonds) 
Four  years  after  the  financial  crisis  engulfed  the  world,  a  European  version  has  now 
emerged. Both market participants and the authorities failed in their assessments after the 
introduction  of  a  single  currency.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union,  there  were  wide  differences  between  interest  rates  facing  different  European 
countries,  which  primarily  reflected  different  inflation  expectations  across  countries.  But 
through  the  1990s,  long-term  interest  rates  drifted  down  to  German  levels.  Over  the  next 
10 years,  sovereign  interest  rates  were  fairly  similar  –  and  very  low  –  for  all  euro  area 
countries  despite  wide  differences  in  debt  levels,  budget  deficits  and  growth  rates.  Market 
participants  did  not  take  into  account  differences  in  sovereign  creditworthiness.  Sovereign 
debt was treated as virtually risk-free, both in the markets and by the authorities. The period 
contrasts  with  the  recent  two  to  three  years  during  which  interest  rates  on  sovereign  debt 
have widened sharply. For many countries, interest rates have reached very high levels. In 
retrospect,  we  see  that  market  participants  failed  in  their  risk  assessment  through  the  ten 
years following the introduction of the euro. 
Economic  policy  also  failed.  EU  rules  relating  to  budget  deficits  and  public  debt  were 
disregarded  early  on  when  Germany  and  France  exceeded  the  limits  they  had  so  eagerly 
advocated  when  the  European  Monetary  Union  was  established.  Other  countries  followed 
their example. Low interest rates made it easy to finance deficits by issuing new debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
When financial markets collapsed in autumn 2008, the authorities had to intervene. Bail-out 
packages  for  banks  shifted  debt  from  private  to  public  hands.  Governments  increased 
spending to curb the fall in activity. 
But  Keynesian  policy  –  increased  spending  to  stimulate  demand  during  a  downturn  – 
requires a willingness to exercise fiscal restraint during an upturn. Many countries had large 
budget  deficits  and  high  debt  already  before  the  crisis  despite  many  years  of  prosperity. 
Limited growth capacity in the private sector also came into evidence when some countries 
could no longer stay afloat on borrowed funds. Good times turned into bad with the need for 
crisis-related measures. The burden became heavy to bear. 
Many  countries  are  now  attempting  to  rein  in  large  deficits  and  rising  government  debt. 
Structural reforms are being implemented in Europe. Pension rules are being tightened and 
tax  systems  are  under  review.  The  cost  of  such  reforms  would  have  been  lower  in  good 
times. (Chart 3: Current account for selected countries) 
A  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  is  not  the  only  factor  behind  the  relatively  high  interest  burden 
facing Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy. Public deficits rose in tandem with a fall in private 
saving.  Countries  lived  beyond  their  means  and  accumulated  current  account  deficits  and 
substantial debt while their debt-servicing capacity weakened. The result is a deterioration in 
their creditworthiness. (Chart 4: Current account and fertility rate) 
The  combination  of  large  deficits  and  growing  demographic  problems  is  particularly 
challenging,  as  is  the  case  for  southern  European  countries  where  fertility  rates  are  well 
below the replacement rate and lower than the average for advanced countries. 
The demographic challenge will be even greater ahead. In some of the countries the number 
of  pensioners  will  be  close  to  the  number  of  economically  active.  The  basis  for  economic 
growth is thus weakened. The burden of rising debt and pension payments will be heavier. 
Financial  markets  are  already  now  demanding  a  high  interest  rate  on  loans  to  troubled 
countries. 
It takes a long time to reverse demographic trends. The ideals associated with fertility from 
the  mythologies  of  Aphrodite  and  Venus  might  provide  some  impetus  –  not  only  in 
Mediterranean countries, but in most OECD countries. Financial incentives would probably 
be  more  effective,  however.  Norway,  with  favourable  support  schemes  for  families  with 
children, has a relatively high birth rate. In other European countries, there is a risk that these 
hard times will exacerbate the demographic challenge. Unemployment, in particular among 
youth, has risen sharply and many people have a dark view of the future. 
In  the  meantime,  the  acute  crisis  in  the  euro  area  must  be  addressed.  Banks  and 
governments have fallen into a vicious cycle. Banks were rescued by extensive government 
measures  during  the  financial  crisis,  but  banking  sector  exposure  to  sovereign  debt  is 
substantial. This debt has not vanished, but shifted hands. When a country’s debt-bearing 
capacity is called into doubt, it also has an adverse impact on banks. 
The  events  of  recent  years  have  brought  fresh  experience  and  reminded  us  of  several 
historical lessons. 
Economic  policy  must  be  sustainable.  Governments  must  save  during  upturns  in  order  to 
weather  downturns.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  limits  to  what  economic  policy  can 
accomplish if the economic foundations are eroded. A competitive business sector is crucial 
to maintaining growth and welfare. This also applies to Norway. 
The financial crisis was a reminder of how risk can be mis-assessed. Moreover, risks that 
operators seem to be managing well individually may prove to be a considerable strain on 
the financial system as a whole, which warrants contemplation of the new macroprudential 
surveillance framework that is now in the making. 
Norway, which is in a surplus and net asset position, faces some particular challenges. As 
investor  and  manager  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund Global,  we  have  seen  that  prices 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  yields  can  react  strongly  to  uncertainty  about  the  future.  In  light  of  the  financial 
turbulence and shifts in the world economy, it is now appropriate to look at the investment 
strategy in connection with the management of our financial wealth. 
New steps in the management of financial wealth 
(Chart  5:  Government  Pension  Fund  Global)  Norway  invests  a  large  proportion  of  its 
petroleum revenues in international equity, bond and real estate markets via the Government 
Pension Fund Global. Norway’s welfare must continue to build on the value created within its 
own  borders.  The  investments  via  the  Fund  provide  us  with  a  share  of  the  value  created 
outside our borders. 
The  Fund  should  be  invested  with  a  view  to  maximising  future  purchasing  power.  At  the 
same time, investments must be diversified in order to reduce the risk of losses also during 
periods when markets are shrouded in fear and uncertainty. 
As investor, Norway is different from most others. The Fund does not need to borrow in order 
to  invest.  There  are  no  short-term  liquidity  requirements  or  regulation  that  can  force  it  to 
make  unfavourable  investment  choices.  These  distinguishing  features  allow  the  Fund  to 
apply a long-term horizon – to sit tight in periods of heightened uncertainty. Hence, equities 
make  up  the  largest  share  of  the  Fund’s  investment  portfolio  as  equities  are  expected  to 
provide a higher return than bonds over time. 
As a long-term investor, the Fund is well poised to take advantage of large swings. For us it 
can be profitable to buy equities following a price decline, if expected returns are high. During 
the financial crisis, the Fund’s ownership share in global production doubled. Such a counter-
cyclical  investment  strategy  –  also  known  as  rebalancing  –  can  be  implemented  more 
effectively if Norges Bank is given wider responsibility for balancing the Fund’s overall risk 
and return. A simplified, publicly available regulation for rebalancing the Fund would be an 
advantage. 
The value of the Fund – in krone terms – is continuously updated on our website and is now 
close to NOK 3.5 trillion. This is almost twice as high as mainland annual GDP. The size of 
the Fund allows us to take advantage of investment opportunities worldwide. The Fund has 
recently started investing in real assets. In the first round 5 percent will be allocated to real 
estate. (Chart 6: Growth in GDP) 
The  world’s  economic  geography  is  changing.  While  growth  in  advanced  economies  has 
been  weak  and  slowing,  growth  is  robust  in  Latin  America  and  Asia.  Several  countries  in 
Africa are now catching up. (Chart 7: Growth in GDP and real return on Government Pension 
Fund Global) 
In  line  with  the  guidelines,  the  Fund  has  considerable  ownership  interests  in  Europe.  Its 
holding in an average European company is around three times as high as in the Americas 
and Asia. The chosen regional distribution is related to Norway’s import pattern and can be 
viewed as a form of currency hedging. But the result has been that a large proportion of the 
Fund is invested in a region that has experienced weak growth over the past decade. 
A more even distribution of the Fund’s ownership will provide us with the opportunity to take 
part  in  the  value  creation  in  regions  with  strong  growth.  This  implies  a  reduction  in  the 
allocation  to  European  equities  and  an  increase  in  the  allocation  to  the  Americas  and 
emerging  economies.  High  economic  growth  in  Asia  can  provide  sound  returns  on 
investments in that region even though today’s equity prices already reflect expectations of 
higher growth in eastern than in western regions. A more even distribution will nonetheless 
improve the trade-off between risk and expected rewards. 
The  currency  composition  of  the  bond  portfolio  should  also  be  adjusted.  According  to  the 
guidelines, the distribution in the bond portfolio should be based on the volume of sovereign 
debt issued by each country. This has resulted in rising loans to countries that have issued 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
new  debt.  The  risk  linked  to  that  strategy  came  into  evidence  in  the  wake  of  the  financial 
crisis.  A  distribution  of  government  bonds  that  is  based  on  GDP  will  reduce  this  risk. 
Moreover, it has been proposed that government debt issued by emerging countries also be 
included in the portfolio. The consequence of this is the same as for the equity portfolio, that 
is to say a reduction in the Fund’s European holdings. 
The financial crisis showed that many securities move in tandem.  The number of bonds in 
the portfolio has been more than halved over the past few years. We can likely achieve the 
same risk distribution with substantially fewer securities. This will also reduce operational risk 
and bring down management costs in the long run. 
Petroleum revenue spending 
In the book “Over Evne”1 [Beyond our power] about the history of the Ministry of Finance, the 
historians Einar Lie and Christian Venneslan describe how the discovery of oil at the end of 
the 1960s brought bright prospects for the future and considerable eagerness to spend the 
revenues. Oil would give us a “qualitatively better society”2. But the oil nation stumbled at the 
start. The current account surplus at the end of the 1960s had been reversed to a deficit of 
12 percent of GDP by 1977. The deficit was three times as large as that recorded by Italy 
and  Spain  last  year.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  came  knocking  at  Norway’s  door. 
Fiscal policy had to be tightened and many Norwegians experienced a decline in income. 
Norway  was  hit  by  oil  price  shocks  in  the  following  years  and  economic  reforms  were 
implemented  in  several  areas.  After  a  period  it  became  clear  that  the  central  government 
budget would be in surplus and that transfers would be made to the Fund. 
Norway’s experience from its first 30 years as an oil-producing nation led to the introduction 
of the fiscal rule, which has been a key element of Norwegian economic policy for the past 
decade.  Report  no.  29  to  the  Storting  of  2001  laid  down  guidelines  for  the  phasing-in  of 
petroleum  revenues  into  the  Norwegian  economy,  establishing  two  main  principles: 
economic policy must contribute to stable economic developments and be sustainable over 
time. 
By linking petroleum revenue spending to the expected real return on the Fund – and not to 
current petroleum revenues – the fiscal rule provided for a gradual and sustainable phasing-
in  of  the  revenues.  If  we  can  restrict  spending  to  the  return,  the  Fund  will  never  shrink. 
Norway will also be less vulnerable to fluctuations in current petroleum revenues. (Chart 8: 
Effect on the size of GPFG of change in oil price and return) 
In the first ten years after the establishment of the fiscal rule, the pace of the Fund’s growth 
was determined by oil prices. Prospects in 2001 indicated that a 25 percent higher oil price 
over  a  10-year  period  would  increase  the  size  of  the  Fund  by  almost  NOK  800  billion. 
Uncertainty with regard to the return on the Fund was far less important for growth. 
This situation will change as the Fund grows and oil and gas production declines. From 2020 
to 2030, the oil price will play a less prominent role for the size of the Fund, while the return 
on the Fund will be all the more important. 
In the initial years, the actual return, adjusted for inflation and costs, was close to 4 percent. 
In  recent  years,  with  the  financial  crisis  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  real  return  has 
been lower, averaging about 2½ percent since 1998. 
                                                 
1   Source: Lie, E. and C. Venneslan: Over evne. Finansdepartementet 1965–1992 [Beyond our power. Ministry 
of Finance 1965–1992]. Pax forlag, 2010. 
2   See Report no. 25 to the Storting (1973-74): “Petroleumsvirksomhetens plass i det norske samfunn” [The role 
of petroleum activity in Norwegian society]. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We should be careful about taking a rear-view mirror approach to forming expectations about 
the future. Equity prices fluctuate considerably and there is a possibility that the results of the 
past  few  years  will  be  counterbalanced  by  good  years  ahead.  But  changes  in  the  global 
economy  affect  the  growth  outlook  and  the  balance  of  risks,  and  hence  financial  market 
returns as well. (Chart 9: Real return on 10-year government bonds) 
The  yield  on  the  presumably  safest  long-term  government  bonds  can  provide  a  basis  for 
estimating the return on the Fund. Returns exceeding this will reflect the risk we are willing to 
take. 
In  2001,  real  interest  rates  on  long-term  government  bonds  averaged  around  3  percent 
internationally. Real interest rates have since fallen and long-term real interest rates are now 
at a historical low of between 0 and 1 percent. 
At the moment, it would seem that economic growth ahead will be more modest than in the 
favourable pre-crisis years. We must therefore be prepared for an extended period of lower 
returns, even though growth and financial market returns do not always go hand in hand. 
Over time, we expect equities to yield a higher return than bonds. Over the past few years, 
the Fund has increased its allocation to equities, compensating to some extent for low bond 
yields. However, the excess return on equities must be considerable to keep up the overall 
return on the Fund. This is not impossible, but perhaps more than we can expect. A bolder 
investment strategy could compensate for low interest rates, although the risk of substantial 
losses would also increase. This is hardly a tempting path. (Table: Estimated real return) 
Today’s situation is different from when the fiscal rule was drawn up in 2001. At that time, a 
real  return  on  the  Fund  of  4  percent,  or  a  little  higher,  based  on  the  then  prevailing 
distribution between equities and bonds, was a reasonable assumption. Today, calculations 
yield a lower figure for expected real return3. 
The real return on bonds in the Fund’s portfolio can now be estimated at 1 percent. With a 
normal  risk  premium  on  equities,  the  real  return  on  the  whole  Fund  can  be  quantified  at 
3 percent. There is a possibility that the real return will be higher, but it may also be lower. 
If  we  spend  more  than  the  annual  return  on  the  Fund,  we  will  be  eating  into  the  savings 
portion. If the return on the Fund actually proves to be 3 percent, we will have drained almost 
NOK  1  trillion  from  the  Fund  over  the  next  20  years  with  the  current  4  percent  rule.  This 
corresponds to the value of the large North Sea oil discovery in the Johan Sverdrup field. 
The phasing-in of petroleum revenues through the public sector has the effect of crowding 
out exposed sectors. Even though petroleum revenues are phased in gradually, a phasing-
out  of  manufacturing  and  other  private  industries  may  not  be  as  smooth.  Entire  industries 
could be lost. If spending proves to be excessive, such structural changes may be difficult or 
impossible to reverse. 
The  conclusion  is  that  a  more  robust  approach  would  now  be  to  base  fiscal  policy  on  an 
annual expected real return on the Fund of 3 percent. Such an adjustment would underpin 
the  main  principles  that  were  behind  the  establishment  of  the  fiscal  rule  –  stability  and 
sustainability.  (Chart  10:  Structural  non-oil  deficit  and  different  rules  for  withdrawal  from 
GPFG) 
In 2011 the structural non-oil budget deficit was about 3 percent of the Fund, which is close 
to such a new path. Adapting petroleum revenue spending to a lower expected return should 
not therefore be particularly demanding. If we wait, a necessary policy adjustment could be 
far more painful at a later date. 
                                                 
3   See Norges Bank Staff Memo 6/2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Challenges to monetary policy 
Central banks in other countries are deploying strong measures to buoy up economic activity 
and inflation. Key interest rates in many countries are close to zero. Central banks in the US, 
UK and Japan have made large-scale bond purchases and thereby expanded their balance 
sheets in order to push down long-term interest rates. The European Central Bank (ECB) is 
still the bankers’ bank – not the government’s bank. But the ECB has also stretched itself, for 
example by providing long-term loans to banks, which must be seen in the light of low growth 
in Europe. 
The  EU  is  working  on  measures  to  restore  financial  market  confidence  –  and  public 
confidence. In March this year, 25 countries are to sign the fiscal compact – an agreement 
on stricter surveillance of fiscal policy and binding deficit limits. Banks have been instructed 
to  increase  their  core  capital.  Both  measures  could  contribute  to  improved  budgetary 
discipline  in  the  public  as  well  as  the  private  sector  the  next  time  they  are  tempted  to 
overspend. 
The  Norwegian  economy  is  still  well  equipped  to  withstand  the  negative  effects  of  the 
financial crisis. Oil prices are high and are in large part behind Norway’s favourable terms of 
trade.  Growth  is  being  sustained  by  high  activity  in  the  oil  industry.  We  have  room  for 
manoeuvre in economic policy. However, a number of enterprises are feeling the impact of 
the downturn abroad. Some segments of the export industry are feeling the effects of lower 
turnover  and  a  strong  krone.  At  the  same  time,  house  prices  and  household  debt  are  still 
rising. 
Investors’ view of the economic outlook has improved since the beginning of the year, and 
financial  market  funding  has  been  more  accessible.  Banks  should  make  use  of  the 
opportunity to obtain more long-term funding. This will increase their resilience to any further 
deepening  of  the  crisis  in  Europe.  The  current  optimism  may  be  fragile.  Should  credit 
markets dry up again, Norges Bank is prepared to implement measures to enable banks to 
maintain  normal  credit  standards.  However,  liquidity  provision  by  Norges  Bank  should  not 
replace  sound  liquidity  management  in  banks  or  banks’  long-term  market  funding.  Any 
decisions  regarding  the  use  of  the  government’s  or  taxpayers’  creditworthiness  to  enable 
banks  to  obtain  more  long-term  funding  are  the  prerogative  of  the  government  and  the 
Storting (Norwegian parliament). (Chart 11: Underlying inflation) 
The  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2.5 percent over time. Recently, inflation has been low, close to 1 percent. Inflation will be 
brought back to target, but how long this will take depends on the disturbances to which the 
economy is exposed and the effects on the prospects for the path for inflation and the real 
economy ahead. (Chart 12: Norges Bank’s key policy rate) 
In  order  to  prevent  inflation  from  becoming  too  low  and  to  dampen  the  impact  of  weaker 
developments  abroad  on  the  Norwegian  economy,  the  key  policy  rate  was  reduced  to 
1.75 percent  in  December  2011.  With  high  money  market  premiums  and  elevated  credit 
premiums, low key rates are not passing through fully to banks’ lending rates. The difference 
between  various  lending  rates  is  unusually  wide  at  present.  Many  households  pay  a 
mortgage interest rate of around 4 percent, and rates on corporate loans are between 5 and 
6 percent. 
Monetary  policy  is  the first  line  of defence  in demand  management.  Norges  Bank  still  has 
room for manoeuvre in interest rate setting – in both directions. 
The  question  nonetheless  remains  of  whether  it  is  desirable  to  use  monetary  policy  to 
accelerate the pace of inflation when the countries around us are in a recession. Even if the 
krone  depreciates  somewhat,  relatively  high  cost  growth  in  Norway  that  could  quicken  the 
pace of inflation might lead to a further deterioration in competitiveness. This cannot be the 
way to go. Moreover, low interest rates over a prolonged period tend to amplify an upward 
spiral in house prices and lending. Imbalances that build up in credit and property markets 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
can  have  severe  ripple  effects  further  ahead,  with  a  substantial  impact  on  output  and 
employment.  Many  Americans  and  Europeans  have  recently  experienced 
this,  as 
Norwegians did 20 years ago. 
Furthermore,  external  conditions  are  not  likely  to  help  push  up  inflation  in  Norway  in  the 
period ahead. Many countries are facing the prospect of stagnation or decline, and the rise in 
prices for imported goods is low. 
Our  objective  is  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  percent  over  time.  Inflation  will  be  brought  up 
gradually, but not so rapidly as to generate imbalances in the economy. Under the current 
outlook, it will likely take several years before inflation is back on target. 
New measures to promote financial stability 
There is an inscription on Åmodt Bridge here in Oslo– “100 mand kan jeg bære, men svigter 
under  taktfast  marsch”  [A  hundred  men  I  can  bear,  unless  in  step  they  march].  Bridge 
designers have long known that when a large number march across a bridge in step, self-
reinforcing oscillations can arise, causing the bridgeheads to collapse. 
Likewise,  financial  market  participants  can  trigger  self-reinforcing  economic  fluctuations. 
During upturns, banks tend to vie with one another to lend. House prices and other property 
prices rise, fuelling credit growth. Risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system increase. In 
downturns,  credit  lines  are  tightened,  and  households  and  enterprises  face  stricter  credit 
standards. When financial market participants march in step, fluctuations in the economy are 
amplified  –  potentially  forming  bubbles  that  burst.  The  events  of  autumn  2008  were  a 
reminder of this. 
As long as the music is playing, individual banks will be tempted to get up and dance. Banks 
and investors will not necessarily take into account the overall risk in the financial system. 
The  consequences  came  into  clear  evidence  during  the  financial  crisis:  banks  had 
inadequate equity capital, excessive short-term wholesale funding and insufficient buffers of 
highly  liquid  assets.  A  new  and  tighter  international  regulatory  framework  is  intended  to 
remedy this situation. Stricter capital adequacy and liquidity coverage standards are in the 
offing. The authorities will also be able to tailor banks’ capital requirements to the overall risk 
in the financial system. During upturns, these requirements can be raised, so that banks will 
have to hold more capital for their loans. This will smooth out lending growth and better equip 
banks to bear losses during downturns. It will ease the impact of the marching steps on the 
bridge. 
There will be a need for higher capital buffers when economic growth is solid and debt builds 
up.  This  may  restrain  the  build-up  of  imbalances.  But  when  there  are  no  clouds  on  the 
horizon, it is easy to lose sight of more long-term considerations. The government authorities 
should  therefore  provide  a  clear  mandate  that  ensures  independence  and  delegates  the 
responsibility for determining capital buffers. In this regard, we can build on the experience 
with  the  framework  for  monetary  policy.  And  any  change  in  capital  requirements  must  be 
made on the basis of an assessment of the overall risk in the financial system – not only in a 
single institution. 
During  the  financial  crisis,  extensive  government  bank  bailouts  were  necessary  in  many 
countries in order to sustain economic activity. When the bridge is unsteady, the authorities 
need to stabilise it. But when taxpayers foot the bill, banks take on excessive risk. Not until 
owners have to bear losses will banks’ balance sheets fully reflect risk. 
To  achieve  this,  there  is  an  international  effort  to  improve  tools  for  dealing  with  crises.  It 
should  be  possible  to  wind  up  banks  without  causing  major  economic  shocks  and  without 
governments assuming banks’ losses. Those who take risks must also bear them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
There  are  high  ambitions  behind  the  new  financial  regulations.  However,  it  would  be 
unrealistic  to  believe  that  we  can  eliminate  all  sources  of  financial  turmoil.  Unlike  the 
sergeant,  we  cannot  give  the  “route  step  march”  command  to  break  the  cadence  when 
bridges are to be crossed. Our ambition is not to control every step on the bridge. But we can 
make  considerable  headway  by  reinforcing  the  foundations  of  the  financial  system  and 
cushion the load from marching in step. 
Conclusion 
I began by quoting Nicolai Rygg’s annual address from 1932. Near the end of his speech, he 
turns his gaze towards the future: “Unfortunately, not much can be said about the outlook for 
the coming year. It appears to be shrouded in darkness.” 
Rygg  was  referring  to  the  international  credit  crunch  and  what  he  called  “intricate  political 
questions”.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  he  saw  possibilities:  “Successfully  solving  them  in  a 
satisfactory manner will undoubtedly have far-reaching consequences in the economic and 
financial spheres, and the year might end better than it began.” 
While times are difficult abroad in our day too, there are bright spots. Growth in Asia remains 
robust and some figures for the US economy have been positive recently. Europe is facing 
the challenge of remedying economic imbalances in the face of weak growth prospects. For 
many countries, demographic developments will in a few years add to the pressure on fiscal 
budgets. While austerity measures will improve government finances, in the short term they 
will stifle activity and delay a recovery. This is a very difficult balancing act. But euro area 
countries have no choice. There is a need to agree on measures to restore confidence in 
financial markets. 
Just  like  80  years  ago,  it  is  difficult  to  predict  where  we  are  heading.  The  Norwegian 
economy should be able to hold a steady course. But we will have to take into account that 
the return on the Fund’s investments may be lower than expected a decade ago. And wage 
and price inflation is likely to be low for some time to come. 
Rygg’s  hopes  were  partly  realised.  In  Europe  the  crisis  bottomed  out  in  1932.  Cycles  and 
confidence may shift rapidly and when we least expect it. After hard times come good times. 
Come what may. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
