Andreas Dombret: Global financial market regulation – need for a 
coordinated implementation and a global level playing field 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a seminar of the European Ideas Network and centre-right Think Tanks and 
Political  Foundations 
the  stability  and 
attractiveness of European financial markets”, Berlin, 20 January 2012. 
in  Europe  “Long-term  growth  –  organizing 
 1. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  introduce  this  round  table  on  global  financial 
market regulation.  
Cornerstones of the international reform agenda are in place 
2. 
To  begin  with,  I  wish  to  establish  the  fact  that  important  cornerstones  of  the  international 
financial reform agenda are in place. As examples of what has been achieved, take the new 
regulatory  standard  for  bank  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  –  “Basel  III”  –  and  the  policy 
framework for dealing with systemic important financial institutions, the so called SIFIs. With 
regard  to  the  latter,  policy  development  is  currently  progressing  on  how  to  extend  the 
framework from global SIFIs to non-bank and domestic SIFIs. 
Consistent implementation 
3. 
While  rule-making  at  the  global  level  is  a  necessary  prerequisite  for  a  global  level  playing 
field and financial stability, it is by no means sufficient. Rather, for the agreed reforms to be 
effective, they have to be translated into national laws and regulations in a globally consistent 
fashion and according to agreed timelines. 
Consistent global implementation is also highly relevant with respect to the ongoing debate 
on the introduction of a financial transaction tax. If not introduced globally – or at least at the 
most important financial centres – such a tax would set incentives to relocate either parts of 
the business or firms altogether. In turn, actual revenues generated by the tax will probably 
be lower than projected and competition between financial centres be distorted. I urge the 
governments  to  make  final  decisions  regarding  a  financial  transaction  tax  as  the  market 
place would benefit from clarity on this issue. 
Individual  countries  might  also  be  inclined  to  generate  competitive  advantages  for  market 
participants  or  financial  centers  domiciled  in  their  jurisdiction  at  the  expense  of  others  by 
implementing  internationally  agreed  reforms  only  half-heartedly,  or  belatedly.  Yet,  they 
should  be  aware  that  these  assumed  gains  in  competitiveness  may  be  short-lived  –  until 
another crisis strikes. 
Intensified implementation monitoring 
4. 
To prevent jurisdictions from pursuing such policies at the expense of others, implementation 
monitoring  is  being  intensified  at  the  international  level.  By  means  of  peer  pressure  and 
transparency, rigorous monitoring can contribute to ensuring a global level playing field. 
The  results  of  numerous  monitoring  exercises  are  summarised  in  regular  scoreboard  and 
progress reports to the G20. In addition, international standard-setting bodies are stepping 
up 
the  various 
instruments.  To  better  coordinate 
implementation  monitoring 
their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
mechanisms,  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  or  FSB  for  short,  and  the  relevant  standard-
setting  bodies  have  jointly  developed  a  coordinating  framework.  Within  this  framework,  six 
areas have been designated as deserving priority implementation and particularly intensive 
monitoring. 
I will now briefly address four of these priority areas – leaving out those dealing with SIFIs as 
another round table today is dedicated specifically to the regulation of SIFIs. 
Basel framework  
a. 
First,  the  crisis  made  painfully  clear  that  banks’  equipment  with  capital  and  their  liquidity 
positions were inadequate to withstand shocks to the financial system. The new regulatory 
standard  Basel  III  will  improve  the  resilience  of  individual  banks  with  respect  to  both  their 
capital and liquidity positions. 
Basel  III  allows  some  discretion  in  national  implementation:  For  example,  the  transition 
period permits jurisdictions to determine how quickly they adopt the new rules – which will 
depend  on  both  the  state  of  the  national  financial  system  and  the  macrofinancial 
environment. Moreover, as Basel III is an international minimum standard, jurisdictions might 
adopt  tougher  rules  than  the  internationally  agreed  versions.  Considering  the  significant 
differences  in  the  size  of  banking  sectors  relative  to  domestic  economies  and  the  implied 
potential consequences in case of bank failures, I believe this to be a sensible approach. 
At  the  same  time,  it  poses  the  danger  of  inconsistent  implementation  and  of  raising 
prudential  or  level  playing  field  issues.  Therefore,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS) will monitor on an ongoing basis the status of jurisdictions’ adoptions of 
the Basel rules, following a three-level approach: First-level assessments focus on whether 
the rules are adopted according to the agreed timelines while the second level deals with the 
content  of  the  domestic  rules.  The  third  level  extends  the  analysis  of  domestic  rules  to 
supervisory implementation at the individual bank level to assess whether they are delivering 
comparable outcomes. Initially, third-level assessments will focus on the calculation of risk-
weighted assets across banks and jurisdictions. 
As the adoption of Basel III – in contrast to its predecessors – has been fully integrated into 
the political process, the commitment to implement the new rules is extremely high. Europe 
is playing a pioneering role in the adoption process via the Capital Requirements Directive 
IV.  I  am  confident  that  the  comprehensive  monitoring  by  the  BCBS  will  be  supportive  in 
avoiding delays or departures from the agreed implementation plan in other jurisdictions. 
fact 
that 
Compensation practices  
the  widely  acknowledged 
b. 
A  second  priority  area  addresses 
inadequate 
compensation practices prior to the crisis led to excessive risk-taking and short-termism in 
financial institutions. 
To safeguard financial stability, remuneration systems in the financial sector must be better 
aligned with the long-term performance of firms. With the Principles for Sound Compensation 
Practices and their Implementation Standards, the FSB developed corresponding guidelines. 
The  2011  FSB  Peer  Review  on  compensation  practices  concluded  that  overall  good 
progress had been made in implementing the Principles and Standards. At the same time, 
the review highlighted that level playing field issues exist among supervisors and institutions. 
In response, the FSB is developing an ongoing monitoring mechanism to identify gaps and 
impediments  to  full  implementation.  As  part  of  that,  a  bilateral  complaint  handling  process 
between supervisors is being established to address level playing field concerns raised by 
institutions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Shadow banking system  
c. 
A third priority area deals with the so called shadow banking system. This is becoming more 
important  because  stricter  regulation  of  the  banking  sector  is  setting  incentives  to  move 
business into lightly or not (or not yet) regulated parts of the financial system. To ensure a 
level  playing  field  with  the  banking  sector,  intensified  monitoring  and  regulation  of  shadow 
banking activities is warranted. 
The FSB set out recommendations for effective monitoring which are now to be implemented 
by national authorities. Additionally, monitoring exercises to assess global trends and risks in 
the shadow banking system are conducted annually. 
Meanwhile,  work  at  the  international  level  is  ongoing  to  examine  potential  gaps  and 
inconsistencies  of  the  current  framework  and  to  develop  proposals  on  further  regulatory 
measures on different parts of the shadow banking system, including money market funds, 
securitisations and repos. 
OTC derivatives markets  
d. 
The  last  priority  area  I  am  addressing  is  reforms  in  Over-the-Counter  (OTC)  derivatives 
markets.  The  global  spillovers  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  Brothers’  failure  have 
impressively illustrated that OTC derivatives markets can be a source of systemic risk due to 
their size and low degree of transparency.  
The complexity of the markets and the lack of a single standard-setting body make regulation 
highly challenging. Accordingly, policy development is still ongoing.  
Even so, G20 member jurisdictions have already committed to new rules for OTC derivatives 
markets to be in place by late 2012. These include standardised contracts, central clearing 
on  exchanges  or  organised  platform  trading,  reporting  of  transactions  to  trade  repositories 
and higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives. 
However,  few  jurisdictions  have  the  necessary  legislations  and  regulations  in  place  yet. 
While the EU has made some progress with respect to the European Market Infrastructure 
Regulation  (EMIR),  legislation  in  the  US  is  still  outstanding.  In  all  jurisdictions  technical 
standards  and  details  are  yet  to  be  developed  and  actual  implementation  will  take  longer 
than originally planned. The delay and the lack of a robust global policy framework increase 
the probability of incomplete or inconsistent implementation of the agreed rules. 
Closing remarks 
5. 
Lagging  reforms  –  like  in  OTC  derivatives  markets  –  show  the  need  to  continue  exerting 
pressure on jurisdictions to push forward with financial sector reforms. Accordingly, the focus 
at  the  global  level  is  increasingly  shifting  from  policy  development  to  implementation 
monitoring.  Jurisdictions  and  authorities  should  be  aware  that  they  are  under  increasing 
scrutiny of the international community. For effective and timely national implementation of 
internationally agreed rules, political support remains essential. 
As 
is 
indispensable  for  ensuring  global  level  playing  fields  in  financial  market  regulation  and 
achieving the goal to counteract financial stability risks. 
I am looking forward to the ensuing panel discussion. 
Thank you for your attention! 
implementation  monitoring  by 
I  have  argued,  rigorous 
international  bodies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
