Njuguna Ndung’u: Update on the Credit Information Sharing Project 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
executives  dinner  to  launch  the  second  phase  of  the  Credit  Information  Sharing  Project, 
Nairobi, 16 February 2012. 
 Dr. Geoffrey Mwau, Economic Secretary, Ministry of Finance;  
Dr.  Yira  Mascaro  and  Mr.  Ulrich  Matthias  Zeisluft,  Representatives  of  the  International 
Finance Corporation and World Bank;  
Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association;  
Mr. Habil Olaka, CEO, Kenya Bankers Association;  
Chief Executives of Utility and Telecommunications Service Providers;  
Chief Executives of various Development Finance Institutions;  
Mr. Carilus Ademba, CEO SACCO Societies Regulatory Authority;  
Mr. Ben Nkungi, CEO, Association of Microfinance Institutions of Kenya;  
Chief Executives of Licensed Credit Reference Bureaus in Kenya;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am delighted to be here today to make some brief remarks at this very auspicious occasion 
of ushering in a new phase of the Credit Information Sharing (CIS) Project. On behalf of the 
Central Bank of Kenya which is co-hosting this event with the Kenya Bankers Association, let 
me  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  credit  providers  represented  here  today.  We  look 
forward  to  an  interactive  evening  of  sharing  our  past  successes  and  identifying  the 
opportunities for a broader collaboration between various market players.  
Before I proceed; let me thank our partners FSD Kenya for sponsoring this dinner event and 
for  their  continued  support  towards  the  development  and  rollout  of  the  CIS  mechanism  in 
Kenya.  In  addition,  we  are  extremely  grateful  to  the  Financial  and  Legal  Sector  Technical 
Assistance  Project  (FLSTAP),  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC),  and  United  States 
Agency for International Development (USAID) for their key contributions towards the early 
stages of the development and rollout of credit information sharing in the banking industry in 
Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Central Bank of Kenya has championed the cause for sharing 
of  credit  information  because  of  our  recognition  that  this  tool  creates  significant  impact  on 
efficiency and expansion of the credit markets. Much empirical work has been conducted on 
the  economic  impact  of  information  sharing  in  consumer  credit  markets.  The  broad  and 
consistent conclusions point towards (1) greater financial inclusion, (2) access to credit and 
(3) improved lending performance. Enhanced financial access arises whenever information 
collateral  is  built  into  credit  decisions.  The  outcome  is:  fewer  mistakes  by  lenders;  less 
default by borrowers and appropriate pricing of credit.  
Our partnership with the Kenya Bankers Association in this project has yielded considerable 
results. Two credit reference bureaus have been licensed and there is active engagement 
with  all  commercial  banks  and  the  Deposit  Protection  Fund  in  exchange  of  information  on 
Non-Performing  Loans.  A  total  of  1,306,439  and  6,041  credit  reports  have  so  far  been 
accessed by banks and bank customers respectively from the two licensed credit reference 
bureaus. This translates to a monthly average of 76,849 and 355 credit reports for banks and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
bank customers respectively. This uptake of credit referencing is quite encouraging and this 
will be a pillar of growth in the Kenyan financial sector.  
Having  said  that,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  are  alive  to  the  fact  that  the  current  CIS 
mechanism  has  a  number  of  challenges.  These  challenges  may  be  categorised  into  four 
broad  areas.  First  and  most  critical  is  that  the  current  system  is  limited  to  commercial 
banks and, very soon, to Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions. If this is allowed to 
continue,  various  credit  providers  may  create  “silo”  databases,  often  referred  to  as 
“segmented”  information  sharing.  Credit  reports  generated  by  such  systems  give  an 
incomplete  and  often  misleading  picture.  “Comprehensive”  systems,  by  contrast,  allow  a 
more  complete  credit  profile  of  a  consumer  to  be  drawn.  For  small  businesses,  it  also 
includes trade credit data and leasing arrangements. These non-financial services, such as 
utility  and  telephone  services,  are  usually  more  common  than  are  financial  payment  data, 
particularly in less developed markets, where, for example, the number of cell phone users 
may far outstrip the number of credit card users. The use of non-financial data in credit files 
offers  the  promise  of  a  diversified  information  capital  that  will  facilitate  extension  of 
reasonably-priced credit to those who have not previously accessed formal credit.  
The  second  challenge  is  the  need  to  move  towards  achieving  full  file  reporting  by 
participating  institutions.  Full  file  reporting,  that  is,  sharing  of  both  negative  and  positive 
information on customers is important as it enables risk based pricing through credit scoring. 
It is important to have full file reporting to facilitate credit scoring mechanism and enhance 
the  information  capital.  Further,  full  file  comprehensive  credit  reporting  systems  are  more 
successful at expanding access to credit, improving loan performance and preventing over 
indebtedness. We therefore appeal to the credit providers on the need to consider sharing 
full file information, in order for our market to enjoy the full benefits of the CIS mechanism.  
Thirdly: we face the challenge of ensuring that both lenders and borrowers are sufficiently 
sensitised on the merits of a robust credit information sharing mechanism and are able to 
use it to their advantage. This calls for well thought out awareness campaigns and capacity 
building  programs.  It  is  particularly  important  that  lenders  develop  skills  that  enable  them 
apply  credit  management  tools  as  effectively  as  possible  so  that  low-risk  customers  are 
rewarded appropriately.  
Finally,  the  success  of  this process  hinges  on  a robust legal framework  that  supports  a 
full-file comprehensive data sharing mechanism. We need to develop an effective legislation 
that  addresses  all  aspects  of  credit  bureau  operations,  data  management  and  consumer 
protection.  
The  challenges  in  the  current  system  call  for  collective  efforts  by  all  stakeholders.  I  am 
pleased to report that CBK and KBA through the Kenya Credit Information Sharing Initiative 
(KCISI) is keen to establish modalities that make the CIS mechanism more comprehensive. 
Indeed, we continue to receive requests from non-bank lenders to be allowed to participate in 
the mechanism. Further, the presence of key players in the credit market in this room today 
is a testimony to the high interest this mechanism has generated.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I conclude, let me take this opportunity to thank FSD Kenya, our 
development partner in several projects aimed at inclusive financial markets in Kenya; World 
Bank; Kenya Bankers Association who have been partnering with us in this initiative; and all 
market players who have played key roles in this process, but more importantly those who 
came  here  today  to  take  part  in  the  launch  of  the  second  phase  of  the  Kenya  Credit 
Information  Sharing  Mechanism.  I  do  believe  that  with  your  support  we  can  achieve  the 
desired  results  of  the  second  phase  and  that  the  ambition  of  developing  a  fully-fledged 
financial infrastructure will become a reality soon in Kenya.  
With these few remarks, I wish to declare the second phase of the Credit Information Sharing 
Project officially launched.  
Thank you all and enjoy the evening! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
