Ipumbu Shiimi: Addressing financial inclusion in Namibia 
Statement by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the official launch of 
the Nam-mic Payment Solution, Windhoek, 24 April 2012. 
 to 
join  you 
the  official 
in  witnessing 
Director of Ceremonies 
Members of the Board of Directors of Nam-mic Payment Solution 
Members of the Media  
Distinguished Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  pleased 
launch  of  Nam-mic  Payment 
Solutions,  which  will  be  a  second  mobile  payment  services  provider  authorised  by  the 
Bank. I am equally  pleased  to  note  that  Nam-mic  is  embracing modern technology to 
provide value added services to its 200,000 union members. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  The  Bank  welcomes  the  Nam-mic  Payment  Solution  because  it 
comes  at  a  time  when  there  is  a greater need to find accessible, affordable and inclusive 
payment  services  to  extend  financial  services  to  the  excluded  community.  I  therefore 
welcome  the  “Nam-mic CellCard”  authorised  by  the  Bank  as  an  electronic  wallet  card 
that  will  enable  payment  for  goods  and  services,  person-to-person  payments,  airtime  and 
electricity purchases. 
The  Bank  has  identified  financial  inclusion  to  be  an  important  thrust  in  the  Bank’s 
developmental  role  in  achieving  the  ideals of Vision 2030. The Bank, therefore, has made 
financial inclusion  as  one  of  the  key  strategic  objectives  of  the  Bank.  At the  centre  of  the 
Bank’s  agenda  to  address  financial  inclusion, is access to financial services and payment 
services. 
As  you  may  recall,  in  2011,  the  Bank  with  the  banking  industry  launched  the  National 
Payment  System  (NPS)  Vision  2015  document.  One  of  the  strategies  set  out  in  that 
document,  is  to  increase  the  accessibility  of  the  payment  system  by  providing  for  new 
types  of  participants,  but  at  the  same  time  maintaining  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the 
payment  system  by  adhering  to  sound  internationally  accepted  payment  system  risk 
principles. 
In  line  with  the  NPS  Vision  2015  the  Bank  issued  a  Determination  on  the  Issuing  of 
Electronic  Money  in  Namibia  which  became  effective  on  the  1st  of  March  2012.  This 
regulation essentially applies to all persons  who intend to issue e-money  in  Namibia. Both 
banking  institutions and  non-bank actors are permitted to apply for authorization to issue e- 
money. As such any persons operating and/or issuing electronic money without the distinct 
authorization  from  the  Bank  of  Namibia  is  committing  an  offence  in  terms  of  the  Payment 
System Management Act, of 2003, as amended. 
The determination on the issuing of electronic money paves the way for the development of 
innovative solutions which are supported  by  a  realistic  approach  to  regulation. Competition 
in the provision of innovative payment solutions, especially where such solutions are turned 
into  practical  products  that  are  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  financially  excluded,  is 
healthy. Although  we  expect  banking  institutions  to  continue  to  serving as the core of the 
payment system, it is non-banking institutions such  a  Nam-mic  Payment  Solutions  that  will 
be  contributing  to the  competitive  environment  in  the establishment of  payment methods 
and  delivery  channels  thus  serving  as  an  impetus  to innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  Bank 
inclusion.  In 
is  promoting 
to  increase  financial 
Electronic payment solutions and thus mobile payment solutions is one  of  many  initiatives 
that 
this  connection,  this 
initiative  of  enabling  money  to  be  transferred  across  the  country  from  person  to  person 
through  a  mobile  solution  at  affordable  costs  will  go  along  way  in  increasing  access  to 
financial services in line with broader National Objectives.  
In  conclusion,  Director  of  Ceremonies,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  we have  come  a  long  way 
in  establishing  a  safe,  sound  and  efficient payment system in Namibia. The challenge is to 
make them accessible,  affordable  and  inclusive.  Payment  systems  issues  are perpetual  on 
the  Bank’s  agenda  and  we  all  need  to  contribute  to  achieving 
twin  goals  of 
financial 
inclusion  and  provision  of  speedy,  efficient,  robust,  accessible,  safe  and 
affordable modern payment methods. 
Let  me  once  again  congratulate  Nam-mic  Payment  Solution  for  coming  up  with  this 
innovative  mobile  payment  services  for their members.  At  this  juncture,  I  now  declare  the 
“Nam-mic  CellCard” officially launched. 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
