John McDermott: The future of inflation targeting? 
Comments by Mr John McDermott, Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
prepared for the BIS Research Workshop “Globalisation and inflation dynamics in Asia and 
the  Pacific”,  hosted  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Hong  Kong  representative 
office, 19 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
Inflation  targeting  as  a  monetary  policy  framework  has  been  largely  successful  at  keeping 
inflation in check in the many countries that have adopted it over the past 20 years or so.1 
Certainly the inflation performance in New Zealand has been far superior under the inflation 
targeting regime (figure 1).  
I expect inflation targeting is very familiar to most people here but let me briefly recap what 
that framework entails in the New Zealand context. Then I will use the most recent business 
cycle  in  New  Zealand  to  illustrate  how  the  framework  coped  with  some  very  significant 
shocks to the New Zealand economy.  
Figure 1 
Headline CPI inflation 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
                                                 
1   Roger,  S  (2009)  “Inflation  targeting  at  20:  achievements  and  challenges”  IMF  working  paper,  WP/09/236, 
October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What inflation targeting looks like in New Zealand  
Inflation  targeting  frameworks  have  a  number  of  elements  including  an  explicit  numerical 
target to be met over a defined time horizon, as well as typically specifying a process for how 
the  central  bank  is  to  be  held  accountable  for  its  monetary  policy  actions  and  how  it  is 
expected to communicate its monetary policy decisions.  
In New Zealand, we aim to keep future consumer price inflation between 1 and 3 per cent on 
average  over  the  medium  term.2  Like  many  other  central  banks  we  have  a  range  of 
publications  we  can  use  to  provide  our  view  of  inflationary  pressure  and  explain  our 
monetary  policy  actions.  The  most  prominent  is  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Statement. 
Although the principles of inflation targeting are the same across countries there are some 
differences in the details. For example, New Zealand has a different accountability structure 
in  that  we  have  a  single  decision  maker  rather  than  a  committee  for  monetary  policy 
decisions. We also differ to most central banks in that we publish an interest rate track that 
we think would be necessary to achieve our inflation target. These differences do not appear 
have made a difference in the ability to achieve the inflation target. 
How did the inflation targeting framework cope with the most recent business cycle in 
New Zealand? 
The most recent business cycle in New Zealand was one of the longest and largest in the 
past 60 years.3 The Reserve Bank has been analysing this cycle to help assess its monetary 
policy. This analysis provides a useful case study on the use of inflation targeting in a small 
open  economy,  like  New  Zealand’s.  An  analysis  of  the  drivers  of  the  business  cycle  was 
published  in  the  Bank’s  March  Bulletin  while  a  discussion  of  monetary  policy  over  the 
business cycle will be published in the Bank’s June Bulletin in a few weeks.  
In  summary,  that  analysis  notes  that  the  New  Zealand’s  economy  expanded from  1998  to 
2007  and  then  had  a  six  quarter  recession  in  2008–09.  From  1998  to  2007  there  were  a 
number of significant shocks that determined the shape of the business cycle (figure 2). First, 
there  was  a  strong  and  unexpected  increase  in  population  growth  from  net  immigration  in 
2002/03. Second, there was a significant boost to the economy from a rising terms of trade 
from 2000, which accelerated late in the period. Third, oil prices roughly doubled from mid-
2007 to mid-2008. Fourth, government spending rose rapidly from 2005. This came at a time 
of pre-existing excess demand in the economy.  
                                                
2  
In New Zealand, the inflation targeting framework is founded on the Reserve Bank Act 1989 (the Act) and the 
Policy Targets Agreement (PTA). The Act makes price stability the primary function of monetary policy and 
gives  the  Reserve  Bank independence in  operating monetary  policy,  subject to  an agreement  between  the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Governor  (the  sole  decision  maker)  specifying  the  functional  target.  The  PTA 
defines price stability in the form of an inflation target, currently future annual CPI inflation “...between 1 per 
cent and 3 per cent on average over the medium term”. The PTA says that in pursuing price stability monetary 
policy should “seek to avoid unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate”. 
3   For details of the dating for New Zealand’s business cycles see Hall, V B and C J McDermott (2009) “The New 
Zealand business cycle” Econometric Theory, 25, 1050–1069. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 2 
Net permanent and long-term 
migration 
Real Dubai oil prices (1998 
prices) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
Terms of trade 
 
Source: Reuters, Haver Analytics, 
RBNZ calculation 
 Government spending 
(consumption plus investment, 
percent of annual GDP) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, 
RBNZ calculations 
In setting monetary policy we had to take a view both on how these shocks would unfold and 
how they might change the inflationary pressure in the economy, as summarised by our view 
of the output gap. As our forthcoming Bulletin article4 notes, throughout the recent boom we 
expected  the  output  gap  to  dissipate  rapidly.  However,  as  it  turned  out  the  output  gap 
remained positive for an extended period (figure 3).  
                                                
4   Chetwin, W (2012) “Business cycle review, 1998–2011” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin 75(1), 14–27. 
And  Chetwin,  W  and  M  Reddell  (2012)  “Monetary  policy  in  the  last  business  cycle:  some  perspectives” 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin 75(2), forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Output gap estimates from June quarter Monetary Policy Statements  
(percent of potential output) 
Figure 3 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ calculations 
With an extended period of excess demand pressure, average inflation tracked in the upper 
half of our target zone. While the persistent component of inflation was higher than we would 
have  ideally  liked  during  the  business  cycle  expansion,  it  did  remain  anchored  within  the 
target  zone.  That  outcome  was  far  superior  to  our  experience  of  the  1970s  when  inflation 
was persistently at double-digit levels. 
The  difficulty  of  anticipating  how  long  an  inflationary  shock  will  last  is  central  to  the 
forecasting process required for monetary policy. In many models that are used for monetary 
policy  analysis,  the  output  gap  often  quickly  returns  close  to  zero  following  a  simple 
aggregate demand shock, and it is natural to think in those terms.5 However, the interaction 
of  a  persistent  aggregate  demand  shock  and  inertia  in  the  economy  can  considerably 
prolong the time for which the economy is in a state of excess demand pressure. Figure 4 
illustrates this point by showing the response of an aggregate demand shock with a half-life 
of only two quarters in a stylised model of monetary policy with typical parameter settings. 
The  point  is  that  excess  demand  can  remain  material  in  the  economy  long  after  the 
underlying shock has gone. 
                                                
5   Here I am referring to the New Keynesian style models as described in, for example, Woodford, M. (2003). 
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton University Press; and Benes, J, A 
Binning, M Fukac, K Lees, T Matheson (2009) K.I.T.T.: Kiwi Inflation Targeting Technology, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Response of output gap and inflation to a persistent aggregate demand shock 
Figure 4 
 RBNZ calculations  
Of  course,  the  shocks  we  face  in  the  economy  can  be  far  more  complicated  than  in  this 
simple illustration. Three of the shocks shown in figure 2 delivered ongoing pressure to the 
economy.  Even  the  relatively  short-lived  large  inflow  of  migrants  in  2002/03  had  ongoing 
impacts. The housing stock cannot be increased as quickly as the changes in migrant flows. 
Consequently, house prices rose and, even after the boost to population subsided, continued 
to rise beyond all forecasters’ expectations. Higher house prices in turn stimulated a large 
construction boom which put further pressure on resources. Private sector credit started to 
expand  well  in  excess  of  the  nominal  growth  in  the  economy  (figure  5).  In  line  with 
conventional wisdom, we put relatively less weight on credit data than on interest rates.6 Had 
we had a higher weighting on credit growth data, our view of the persistence of pressure on 
resources would likely have been stronger much earlier in the boom. 
                                                
6   The  academic  consensus  on  monetary  policy  used  to  be  that  there  was  no  independent  information  for 
monetary formulation in money and credit numbers over and above that available in interest rates. See for 
example,  Gali,  J  (2008)  Monetary  Policy,  Inflation,  and  the  Business  Cycle:  An  Introduction  to  the  New 
Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press, Princeton. While this view was never completely accepted 
at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  (Bollard,  A  (2005)  “Housing  debt,  inflation  and  the  exchange  rate” 
Address  to  the  Employers  and  Manufacturers  Association  (Northern)  AGM))  money  and  credit  aggregates 
were never very prominent in the formulation of monetary policy. One of the processes we changed following 
the  global  financial  crisis  was  to  formally  present  information  on  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  to  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  assist  with  the  production  of  the  Bank’s  forecasting  in  its  Monetary  Policy 
Statement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Excess of domestic credit growth over nominal GDP growth 
Figure 5 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ calculations 
Monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand  is  also  complicated  by  exchange  rate  issues.  In  a  small 
open  economy  the  inflation  target  is  a  complement  to  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime. 
During the boom period expectations of tight monetary policy to offset the excess demand 
pressure probably contributed to the persistently high exchange rate throughout the period, 
causing  considerable  discomfort  and  worries  about  the  sustainability  of  parts  of  New 
Zealand’s tradable sector. 
After the global finance crisis there are new challenges for monetary policy to deal with. The 
current  recovery  in  the  business  cycle,  both  in  New  Zealand  and  in  other  advanced 
economies, is proving weaker than historical precedents. Our forecasting frameworks need 
to be expanded so we can examine possible sources of the disappointing recoveries, such 
as say the impact of the overhang of public and private debt on the economy. 
Inflation targeting works, and other lessons for the future 
Despite the challenges and the ongoing shocks to the economy, monetary policy did what it 
was supposed to do, keep inflation low. The framework maintained the Reserve Bank’s focus 
on  the  target  and  the  frequent  publication  of  forecasts  forced  us  to  constantly  update  our 
views of the economy and the inflation pressure within it. 
The  Bank’s  analysis  on  the  recent  business  cycle  underscores  that  the  inflation  targeting 
framework  is  an  effective  way  to  conduct  monetary  policy  under  a  range  of  testing 
circumstances and that the framework is a useful tool for future inflation control. 
With  low  inflation  and  the  credibility  of  inflation  targeting  came  much  lower  volatility  in  the 
general  level  of  prices.  That  is  helpful  for  resource  allocation,  affecting  longer  term 
performance,  and  for  macroeconomic  stability  over  the  medium  term.  This  credibility  was 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
very helpful when the global financial crisis hit. To help offset the very large negative shock 
the  Bank  started  lowering  interest  rates  even  while  annual  inflation  was  above  its  1  to 
3 percent target.  
Of course, that is not to say the framework cannot be improved in any way. Over the course 
of the past 20 years or so the framework has evolved to reflect lessons learned and is likely 
to evolve further in response to new developments. In particular, our monitoring of monetary 
and credit information has increased in the wake of the global financial crisis. The Reserve 
Bank has also been looking into the effectiveness of some macroprudential instruments that 
may limit build-ups of problems in future periods of rapid credit growth.7 
                                                
7   For details see Spencer (2012) “Prudential lessons from the Global Financial Crisis”, Presentation to Financial 
Institutions of New Zealand 2012 Remuneration Forum, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
