Kiyohiko G Nishimura: How to detect and respond to property bubbles – 
challenges for policy-makers 
Remarks  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia-BIS  Research  Conference  “Property  markets  and  financial 
stability”, Sydney, 21 August 2012. 
 Let  me  begin  by  commending  the  impressive  achievements  of  this  BIS  project,  as 
exemplified by the presentations yesterday and this morning. In this regard, I am sure you 
will join me in applauding the efforts of Frank Packer and his accomplished colleagues at BIS 
Asia & Pacific. In spite of this impressive progress, however, I still think that we are only at 
the  starting  line:  many  problems  remain  to  be  solved  before  this  project  can  provide 
guidelines for policy-making. Learned academics may be experts in “explaining” the causes 
and effects of past events that have shaken the world. To put it metaphorically, failures in the 
last war are always scrutinized thoroughly, and their lessons are presented. In contrast, we 
policy makers should be looking forward into the future. We should not be fighting the last 
war when things are changing rapidly, no matter how well we may have learned the lessons 
of the last war.  
The two main questions from the policy maker’s point of view are: How can we detect malign 
property bubbles? and, How should we respond to them? 
How to detect malign bubbles 
1.  
Let me start with the first question: How can we detect malign bubbles? Here we should be 
aware  that  not  all  property  bubbles  lead  to financial  crises,  and  not  all financial  crises  are 
preceded  by  property  bubbles.  International  panel  studies  have  shown  that  two-thirds  of 
46 systemic banking crises were preceded by house price boom-bust patterns, while 35 out 
of 51 house price-bust episodes were followed by a crisis.1 So there are both malign bubbles 
and benign ones. 
Then, what leads to a malign bubble? Looking back at past experience of malign bubbles, we 
find  another  factor  which  has  not  been  touched  upon  by  the  presentations  so  far:  the 
demographic transition from a “population dividend” to the “burden of an ageing population.” 
Let  us  look  at  the  charts  comparing  the  Japanese  property  bubble  of  the  1990s,  the  US 
house price bubble of the 2000s, and the possible Chinese property bubble. In these three 
charts,  I  juxtapose,  first,  the  ratio  of  working-age  population  to  the  rest  (the  inverse 
dependency ratio), second, the real property price index, and third, total loans in real terms.2 
In Japan (Chart 1), we have two peaks in the working-age population ratio, accompanied by 
two peaks in the real property price index, which is the real land price index. Of these two, 
                                                
1   Claessens,  Stijn,  M.  Ayhan  Kose,  and  Marco  E.  Terrones,  (2008),  “What  Happens  During  Recessions, 
Crunches and Busts?” IMF Working Paper 08/274 (Washington: International Monetary Fund) and Claessens, 
Stijn,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia,  Deniz  Igan,  and  Luc  Laeven,  (2010),  “Cross-Country  Experiences  and  Policy 
Implications from the Global Financial Crisis,” Economic Policy, Volume 25, pp. 267–293. 
2   The ratios of working-age population to the rest (inverse dependency ratios) are taken from the homepage of 
the  United  Nations.  Property  prices  in  real  terms  (CPI  adjusted)  are:  JAPAN:  Total  Average,  Urban  Land 
Nationwide, Urban Land Price Index, Japan Real Estate Institute, US: US 10 cities, S&P/Case-Shiller Home 
Price  Indices,  Standard  &  Poors,  and  CHINA:  Zhongfang  Shanghai  Residential  Property  Index,  Zhongfang 
Shanghai  Real  Estate  Index  Office.   Loans  in  real  terms  (CPI  adjusted)  are  JAPAN:  Loans  of  Depository 
corporations,  Flow of Funds, Bank of Japan, US: Loans and leases in bank credit, all commercial banks, not 
seasonally adjusted, Federal Reserve, and CHINA: Financial Institution Loans, People’s Bank of China. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  second  peak,  around  1991,  happened  to  be  a  malign  bubble  which  triggered  a 
subsequent  long  period  of  stagnation.  Then,  what  is  the  difference  between  the  two?  The 
volume of total loans in real terms may suggest an answer. Real loans were increasing at the 
time of the first peak, but their level was not as high as during the second peak. 
A remarkably similar picture is found in the United States (Chart 2). We have two peaks in 
the  working-age  population  ratio,  though  not  as  pronounced  as  in  Japan.  And  the  real 
property price index, which is the real house price index, seems to have two peaks, roughly 
coinciding with the demographic change. Again, the second peak triggered the financial crisis 
of 2008, though the first peak coincided with the S&L problem, which had a far less severe 
effect on the economy. Adding the real total loans to the chart, we find a quite similar pattern 
to the Japanese case. The level of the real total loans in the first peak was high, but far lower 
than in the second peak. 
The last chart shows the figures for China (Chart 3). China has not yet peaked with respect 
to working-age population ratio, but it is close. The property price index was taken from the 
web site of a Shanghai index provider, who unfortunately and unexpectedly shut down their 
site and vanished about a year ago (June 2011). I tentatively use this index since it has a 
longer span than other indexes, although I am not entirely sure how it was constructed. The 
chart  shows  a  clear  upsurge  in  property  prices  up  to  2010.  Again  the  real  total  loan  also 
shows a tremendous increase along with the working-age population ratio and the property 
price index. 
What lessons can we learn from this rather cursory examination of the recent history of two 
advanced economies and the present situation of one emerging economy? It is clear that not 
every bubble-bust episode leads to a financial crisis. However, if a demographic change, a 
property price bubble, and a steep increase in loans coincide, then a financial crisis seems 
more likely. And China is now entering the “danger zone.” 
Although demographic factors are not the subject of the studies in this conference, there is a 
growing  body  of  cross-national  evidence  that  compositional  change  in  population  has  a 
significant  effect  on  property  prices  (especially  the  land  component).3  This  comes  as  no 
surprise since, in the population dividend phase, young baby boomers want to buy more land 
and save more real money for their retirement. Since the supply of land is physically limited, 
the  real  price  of  land  will  go  up.  Similarly,  if  nominal  money  supply  is  held  constant,  the 
“price”  of  real  money  holdings,  which  is  the  inverse  of  the  price  level,  should  also  go  up, 
implying deflation. Being mandated to maintain price stability, the central bank is then likely 
to increase nominal money to keep prices stable. The result is an increase in property prices 
while general price levels remain stable.4 
However,  this  raises  the  problem  of  quantitative  significance.  Though  this  hypothesis  can 
explain  “correlation”  qualitatively,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  explain  these  malign  property  price 
bubbles  quantitatively.  The  magnitude  of  these  bubbles  is  simply  mind-boggling.  Also,  not 
every  country  experiencing this  sort  of  demographic  change  has  a malign  property  bubble 
and  a  financial  crisis.  Therefore,  we  should  not  think  of  this  strong  positive  correlation 
between demographic factors and malign bubbles as a strict causal relationship. Rather we 
should  regard  the  demographic  conditions  of  population  dividend  as  “fertile  ground”  for 
malign property bubbles. 
                                                
3   See, for example, Takáts, Elod (2012): “Aging and house prices”, Journal of Housing Economics, vol 21, no 2, 
June, pp 131–41, and Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (2011): “Population ageing, macroeconomic crisis, and policy 
challenges”, Panel discussion at the 75th Anniversary Conference of Keynes’ General Theory, University of 
Cambridge, 19–21 June 2011. 
4   See Nishimura and Takáts, “Ageing, Property Prices, and Money Demand” work in progress, which includes 
both theory and empirical analysis of a panel of 22 advanced economies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  the  final  analysis,  malign  property  bubbles  can  be  considered  a  manifestation  of  overly 
optimistic expectations at their extreme.5 Since the financial crisis, many attempts have been 
made in the economic profession to explain malign bubbles as the consequences of rational 
economic agents acting under circumstances of asymmetric information and certain not-so-
efficient  regulatory  conditions.  These  explanations  are  quite  ingenious,  using  arrays  of 
sophisticated neoclassical apparatus. However, from the practitioner’s viewpoint, it is more 
helpful simply to admit the frailties of human nature whereby we are so prone to be overly 
optimistic in some cases (and overly pessimistic in others), and our decisions are so easily 
influenced by other people’s opinions, especially the opinions of those in the higher realms of 
policy making. I will come back to this point later. 
How to respond to a malign bubble 
2.  
Let me now turn to the second issue, which is how we should respond to a malign bubble. 
Fundamentally, we should distinguish two stages in the history of a malign bubble. The first 
is the early or prevention stage of the bubble, while the second is the late or collapsing stage. 
When considering our response to the early or prevention stage of a bubble, a consensus 
seems  to  have  emerged  in  favor  of  the  so-called  BIS  view.  First,  use  various  macro-
prudential  policies  to  rein  in  overly  optimistic  expectations  in  the  market.  Second,  if  the 
bubble is truly malign, we should not hesitate to use monetary policy as well. Third, in using 
macro-prudential measures we should be aware of their long-run consequence of distortion 
in resource allocation. 
However,  in  practice,  I  have  strong  reservations  over  the  effectiveness  of  some  macro-
prudential measures in a malign bubble. Take the loan to value (LTV) ratio as an example. In 
the  heyday  of  a  ballooning  bubble,  the  denominator  of  the  LTV,  i.e.,  the  market  value  of 
property, goes up higher and higher. Thus, the LTV that seemed sufficient to cap the loan 
volume becomes grossly insufficient in a few months or even weeks. The same is true for 
quantitative  constraints  on  loans,  since  instruments  bypassing  the  constraints  emerge,  as 
exemplified in the experience of the Japanese property bubble of the 90s.6 Moreover, macro-
prudential  measures  are  sometime  used  to  halt the  advance  of  a  bubble  only  temporarily, 
which  eventually  comes  to  the  surface  again  later  with  greater  force  than  before.  So  an 
apparent success in the present may be an omen of failure in the future. 
There is another issue which has been unfortunately overlooked in the discussion of dealing 
with a bubble, but is potentially most problematic of all: communication with the public. How 
can policy makers convince the public that we are facing a ballooning malign bubble when 
there  is  no  apparently  imminent  threat  to  the  system?  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  persuade 
people who (want to) believe “this time is different” and are convinced they are now on the 
foothills of eternal prosperity, just as long as their path is not blocked by some stupid policy 
maker. In retrospect, I have to point out sadly that the public sector is often partly responsible 
for nourishing such overly optimistic expectations in the public.7 
Although I have expressed some reservations so far about the emerging policy consensus in 
the  early  or  prevention  stage  of  a  malign  bubble,  these  problems  are  almost  trifling  in 
                                                
5   From this perspective, both the malign property bubbles of Japan and the United States, and the European 
sovereign crisis  have a  similar  origin: overly  optimistic expectations  of  the  future  in the population  dividend 
phase. 
6   For more detailed discussion on macro-prudential policies in the case of the Japanese property bubble, see 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (2011) “Macroprudential Lessons from the Financial Crisis: A Practitioner’s View,” in: 
Kawai, Masahiro. and Eswar Prsard (eds.) Asian Perspectives on Financial Sector Reforms and Regulation: 
Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution Press, 180–195. 
7   See  Nishimura  (ibid.)  about  the  report  of  one  Japanese  government  agency  which  became  foundation  of 
overly optimistic view about the office-space demand in Tokyo in the late 80s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
comparison  to  the  daunting  policy  difficulties  faced  in  the  late  or  collapsing  stage.  To  my 
disappointment, there has been little discussion dealing squarely with these difficulties. 
In the late stage of a bubble, there is, on the one hand, a danger of restraining policy being 
“too little, too late”, and just postponing the collapse until a later stage and on a larger scale. 
On the other hand however, there is also the danger of too bold a policy leading to an “over-
kill” of the economy. 
Most  difficult,  however,  is  the  appropriate  response  during  the  collapsing  stage  of  malign 
bubbles. First, the magnitude of the collapse is mind-boggling. Chart 4 shows first the real 
property  price  movement  of  Japan.  Here  I  use  the  RRPI  index  for  greater  Tokyo  (roughly 
10% of the total population), which is the quality-adjusted condominium price index. Then I 
have added the US real property price movement of 10 cities (again roughly 10% of the total 
population),  which  is  based  on  the  S&P  Case-Shiller  index.  The  magnitude  of  the  price 
decline is clear: Japanese real residential property prices at their lowest point are only one 
third of their peak. In the United States, real residential property prices are currently more 
than 40% lower than their peak. At this moment, it is not clear whether US prices have hit the 
bottom. In any case, a decline of this magnitude implies a severe balance-sheet adjustment 
for the economy. 
Moreover, this severe balance-sheet adjustment, which is necessary for sustained recovery, 
is taking place when demographic factors are changing from positive (population dividend) to 
negative (burden of an ageing population) in Japan and the United States, as already shown 
in Charts 1 and 2. A severe balance-sheet adjustment under population ageing hampers the 
effectiveness  of  conventional  policy 
tools.  Moreover,  seemingly  overly  pessimistic 
expectations aggravate the problem of policy effectiveness. 
The disturbing fact is that little is known about the appropriate policy for the late or collapsing 
stage of a malign bubble. What tools are available? What are the pros and cons of their use? 
These  are  the  most  pressing  challenges  for  policy  makers,  and  they  should  form  the 
research agenda of the immediate future. 
So in conclusion, I’d like to reiterate again that we are still only at the starting line. Thank you 
for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
