K C Chakrabarty: Systemic risk assessment – the cornerstone for the 
pursuit of financial stability 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the International Seminar on “Operationalising tools for macro-financial surveillance: country 
experiences”,  organised  by  the  Financial  Stability  Unit  (FSU),  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
Mumbai, 3 April 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Dimple Bhandia in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
First of all, let me extend a warm welcome to all of you to this vibrant city called Mumbai. We, 
in  India,  often  call  this city  the  Maximum  City  –  it  is  undeniably,  like  the  punch  line  of  the 
advertisement  of  a  global  bank,  a  city  which  never  sleeps.  I  hope  all  of  you  also  take 
maximum advantage of your stay here in respect of the deliberations during the seminar and 
of the tremendous opportunities for entertainment that this city offers! 
The subject of this conference – “Operationalising tools for Macro-financial surveillance” is 
indeed very topical. Across the globe, in the wake of the financial crisis, efforts are underway 
to alter institutional arrangements to explicitly pursue financial stability as a policy objective 
and to put in place a framework for the macro-financial surveillance of the financial system. 
At the core of any robust framework for macro-financial surveillance lies a framework for the 
identification and assessment of systemic risks. A deeper understanding of systemic risks is 
the  cornerstone  of  the  policy  toolkit  for  pursuit  of  financial  stability  and  hence  this  is  the 
subject I thought I would dwell upon as I flag off the deliberations during this seminar. 
Abstracting from details, the prevalent policy framework prior to the crisis focussed on two 
main  tenets  –  a  monetary  policy  focus  for  achieving  price  stability  and  a  microprudential 
focus  for  ensuring  the  health  and  stability  of  individual  institutions.  The  crisis  turned  the 
foundations  of  existing  policy  frameworks  on  its  head  and  focussed  sharper  attention  on 
systemic risk assessment and on crisis prevention.  
Systemic risks – Definition 
So  what  are  systemic  risks.  There  is  no  commonly  accepted  definition  of  systemic  risk  at 
present. The precise meaning of systemic risk is ambiguous; it can mean different things to 
different people and different definitions have been attempted. The European Central Bank, 
for example, defines systemic risks as “risk that financial instability becomes so widespread 
that it impairs the functioning of a financial system to the point where economic growth and 
welfare suffer materially”1  
Over a decade ago, a G10 Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector (2001) suggested 
a working definition, which arguably remains relevant even today: “Systemic financial risk is 
the risk that an event will trigger a loss of economic value or confidence in, and attendant 
increases  in  uncertainly  about,  a  substantial  portion  of  the  financial  system  that  is  serious 
enough to quite probably have significant adverse effects on the real economy.” 
More recently, following the work of the IMF, FSB and BIS for the G202, systemic risk has 
been defined as “a risk of disruption to financial services that is caused by an impairment of 
                                                 
1   European Central Bank Financial Stability Report, June 2009 
2   Guidance  to  assess  the  systemic  importance  of  financial  institutions,  markets  and  instruments:  initial 
considerations, October 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
all  or  parts  of  the  financial  system  and  has  the  potential  to  have  serious  negative 
consequences for the real economy.”  
In another case, systemic risks have been defined in terms of a lower “normal” as the risk of 
a  phase  transition  from  one  equilibrium  to  another,  much  less  optimal  equilibrium, 
characterized by multiple self-reinforcing feedback mechanisms making it difficult to reverse3.  
These are just few of the definitions of systemic risk which abound in literature and amongst 
policy  makers,  though  a  universally  accepted  definition  remains  elusive.  Notwithstanding, 
there are several perspectives from which systemic risks can be viewed depending on how 
the risks originate, how they affect and how they are transmitted across different institutions, 
markets, market infrastructure and the real economy. Understanding these different facets of 
systemic risks is central to the understanding of systemic risks per se. 
One perspective is to describe systemic risk  as the risk of experiencing a strong systemic 
event  i.e.  a  “big”  shock  that  simultaneously  and  significantly  effects  most  or  all  of  the 
domestic economy. The risks of such a “macro” shock could emanate from an exogenous 
shock or could emerge endogenously – from within the financial system or from within the 
economy at large. 
Viewed from another perspective, systemic risks can be regarded as the risk of contagion. 
This  is  typically  defined  as  the  domino  effect  of  a  idiosyncratic  problem  affecting  one 
institution then affecting other institutions / markets in the cross section. Thus, the failure of a 
large bank could cause distress to other institutions connected to it directly or indirectly in a 
chain or “knock on” reaction. Systemic risks, viewed from this perspective, were aptly defined 
by Governor George of the Bank of England, way back in 19984:  
“What we mean by “systemic risk” specifically is the danger that a failure of one 
financial  business  may  infect  other,  otherwise  healthy,  businesses.  This  could 
happen in either of two ways: first through the direct financial exposures which tie 
firms together like mountaineers, so that if one falls off the rock face others are 
pulled off too; and second, by contagious panic which sweeps everyone off the 
mountain side like an avalanche.” 
Another facet of systemic risks arises in the context of the build up of widespread imbalances 
in  the  system  and  could,  inter  alia,  take  the  form  of  credit  booms,  build  up  of  similar  third 
party exposures, and of maturity and leverage mismatches. When these imbalances unravel, 
as they must at some stage, they adversely affect a large section of the financial system. The 
more similar the imbalances across institutions, the greater will be the systemic impact of the 
“correction”. 
Evolution of systemic risks 
While the recent global financial crisis has brought the concept of systemic risks to the centre 
stage, one only has to look back into the history of financial crises to appreciate the fact that 
each of these crises were triggered by systemic disturbances in one form or the other. But 
while the concept of systemic risks is not new, the concept has evolved over the decades, 
growing in complexity and becoming more pervasive over time.  
Till the mid-1980s, systemic risks essentially related to systemic disturbances that arose from 
bank  lending  and  affected  the  banking  sector.  Over  the  years,  different  dimensions  of 
systemic risk were revealed as markets grew and became more integrated; banks’ reliance 
                                                 
3   “Defining Systemic Risks”, Darryll Hendricks, Pew Financial Reform Project. 
4   “The  New  Lady  of  Threadneedle  Street”,  Vital  Topic  Lecture  at  the  Manchester  Business  School, 
E.A.J. George, Governor, Bank of England, 1998. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on funding markets grew; financial intermediation spread from banks to non-banking financial 
companies;  financial  and  technological  innovation  fostered  the  growth  of  markets  for 
derivatives  and  structured  products;  and  market 
the 
introduction of multilateral netting, central counterparty arrangements, etc. 
The concept of systemic risk concomitantly broadened along several dimensions to include 
non-banks along with banks; to include different kinds of financial activities and exposures in 
addition to traditional lending and to focus on interdependencies between market participants 
as  well  as  their  exposures  to  common  risk  factors,  including  institutions’  reliance  on  core 
parts of market infrastructure5.  
Appropriately,  in  this  context,  is  an  observation  made  in  an  IMF  Staff  Position  note6  in 
respect of the financial system prior to the crisis:  
infrastructure  developed  with 
“Financial systems and transactions became distorted along several dimensions, 
that  is,  financial  system  grew  highly  complex,  opaque,  over-leveraged  and 
heavily interconnected; liquidity risk was higher than recognized; large complex 
institutions  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  being  “too  important  to  fail”  and  financial 
intermediation has increasingly shifted to the shadow banking sector.” 
The two dimensions of systemic risks 
Cutting across specificities, the different perspectives of systemic risks can be grouped into 
two dimensions – a time dimension and a cross sectional dimension. 
The  time  dimension  of  systemic  risks,  or  what  is  more  commonly  known  as  procyclicality, 
relates  to  the  progressive  build-up  of  aggregate  risk  over  time.  The  second  dimension  of 
systemic risk – common exposures/interlinkages in the cross section focuses on how risk is 
distributed within the financial system at any given point in time. 
An analytical framework to identify systemic risks must operate in both dimensions. 
Assessing systemic risks 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  international  financial  crisis  has  refocused  policy  attention  on 
systemic risks and forced us all to think much harder – about what systemic risk means, how 
it  can  be  measured  and  what  implications  does  it  have  for  policy.  There  is  a  general 
consensus  that  systemic  risk  was  underestimated  across  the  board  before  this  crisis  and 
also that there is a pressing need to assess and evaluate such risks on an ongoing basis.  
Considerable  efforts  are  ongoing,  both  internationally  and  amongst  systemic  regulators 
domestically,  to  develop  a  framework  for  assessing  systemic  risks  and  for  potentially 
predicting  systemic  events.  The  objective  is  to  put  in  place  an  assessment  infrastructure 
which is capable of raising “flags” i.e., signalling trends that could make markets or countries 
vulnerable to unanticipated events. 
With the increasing realization that systemic risks per se are generally complex, very often 
opaque, and always multifaceted, came the realization that the identification of such risks is 
                                                 
5   “Risk measurement and systemic risk”, André Icard, Deputy General Manager of the  Bank for International 
Settlements, at the Fourth Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk, 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 8 November 2005. 
6   “Shaping  the  New  Financial  System”,The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  Staff  Position  Note  (SPN) 
SPN/10/15. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
also  far  from  straightforward.  It  was  felt  that  in  order  to  see  “both  the  forest  and  trees”7 
effectively; there is a need to have a wide range of measures and tools covering different 
aspects of systemic risks. The objective is to develop a diagnostic tool that simultaneously 
traces  the  development  of  macro-financial  conditions  which  pose  risks  to  financial  stability 
and identifies point in time risk conditions, while also assessing the joint impact of all these 
risk factors on systemic stability.  
A host of quantitative models attempting to incorporate one or more of these elements have 
emerged in the policy and the academic arena since the crisis. The models variously attempt 
to  quantify  the  contagion  risks  in  the  financial  system,  to  capture  distress  dependencies 
amongst financial institutions or to measure the systemic importance of financial institutions. 
Others attempt to develop early warning indicators while yet another class of models aim to 
utilize  aggregate  information  from  segments  of  the  financial  system  to  develop  coincident 
indicators  of  systemic  stress.  Yet  another  set  of  models  –  the  macro  stress  tests  –  try  to 
measure the resilience of the financial system or its key components to various stress factors 
by quantifying the link between macroeconomic variables and the health of either individual 
financial institutions or the financial sector as a whole.  
The emerging models vary in statistical techniques used as well as in the type of available 
information used. They range from general equilibrium to game-theoretic models and can be 
either  comparative  static  models  or  dynamic  models.  Some  models  attempt  to  assess 
systemic risks using credit risk conditions while others rely on data from financial markets.  
The development of these models is in a nascent stage and the learning curve is very steep. 
Identifying and assessing systemic risks requires a broad and deep information basis and a 
wide  range  of  tools  to  process  the  relevant  information  as  well  as  analytical  tools  and 
techniques. While fertile research on these issues is underway, especially since the crisis, 
the  progress  has  been  slow  given  the  large  mass  of  uncertainties  –  both  “known”  and 
“unknown”. Let me briefly highlight some of these.  
First,  while  the  notion  of  systemic  risks  is  clear,  there  is,  as  yet,  as  elucidated  earlier,  no 
universally  accepted  definition  of  systemic  risk.  Further,  there  is  little  agreement  amongst 
regulators  and  academicians  about  the  best  way  to  operationalise  a  framework  for  the 
identification  and  measurement  of  systemic  risks.  The  associated  issues  are  further 
complicated  by  the  fact  that  systemic  risks  are  inherently  unobservable.  The  main  factors 
resulting  in  systemic  risks  –  contagion  risks,  imbalances,  etc.,  are  also  difficult  to  observe 
and/or quantify. Adding to the difficulties are the facts that interconnections between financial 
institutions  and  correlations  of  risk  factors  often  tend  to  behave  differently  during  “peace” 
times and during times of “crisis”. The emergence of “wrong-way” risks in derivative contracts 
wherein counterparty exposures reverse signs under stressed scenarios is a case in point. A 
framework  for  assessment  of  systemic  risks  would  therefore  need  to  infer  or  “reverse 
engineer” assessments about the build up of systemic risks.  
Second, is the now well debated issue of data gaps. To state that better data is required to 
support  all  the  critical  initiatives  underway  to  identify  systemic  risks  and  to  put  in  place  a 
robust early warning framework is perhaps to state a truism. Regulators require better data at 
both the national and international level to ensure that they can recognise and address the 
build  up  of  risks  in  a  timely  manner.  Absent  such  improvements,  new  macroprudential 
processes will operate in an environment characterised by major gaps in information, and will 
remain at significant risk of missing, yet again, emerging vulnerabilities that threaten global 
financial stability. 
                                                 
7   “Seeing  Both  the  Forest  and  the  Trees-  Supervising  Systemic  Risk”,  José  Viñals,  IMF  Financial 
Counsellor and Director, Monetary and Capital Markets Department Opening Remarks at the Eleventh Annual 
International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector Washington D.C., June 2, 2011 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  recent  crisis,  the  lack  of  timely  and  accurate  information  has  arguably  proved  very 
costly. The current data architecture lags well behind the forces driving increased complexity 
and  globalisation  of  financial  systems,  institutions  and  markets.  There  is  currently  little 
consistent information on the major bilateral linkages between large financial institutions, and 
on  their  common  exposures  to,  and  funding  dependencies  on,  countries,  sectors  and 
financial  instruments.  Again,  there  are  significant  data  gaps  on  funding  risks  and 
dependencies,  on  leverage,  on  maturity  and  liquidity  mismatches  and  on  risks  exposures 
arising  from  off  balance  sheet  activities.  Adding  to  these  are  the  difficulties  in  collecting 
information from non-bank intermediaries and unavoidable reporting lags.  
Associated with the need for plugging of data gaps, is the need to address issues related to 
the quality of data. The general concerns about the quality of historical data which are used 
in models for the assessment of systemic risks, means that even with a long time series of 
data available for some of the models/ indicators for the assessment of systemic risks, it may 
be difficult to identify incipient risks/ crises with precision.  
There  are  efforts  underway  internationally  on  putting  in  place  a  framework  to  collect,  pool 
and share relevant data on global financial institutions that would provide authorities with a 
clear  view  of  the  financial  network  and  a  powerful  monitoring  tool  to  assist  them  in  their 
supervisory  and  macroprudential  responsibilities.  However,  it  appears  unlikely  that  these 
informational barriers can be overcome rapidly, and in the interim, assessment of systemic 
risks  will  remain,  at  the  most,  a  “best”  estimate.  The  role  of  judgement,  therefore,  for  the 
assessment of systemic risks will remain crucial, for the time being, at least.  
Third, even though an extensive analytical framework for identification of systemic risks is put 
in place, there are challenges in putting together all the “flags” being raised i.e. in connecting 
the  dots.  For  instance,  many  analysts  cautioned  against  “risk  concentrations”  in  U.S. 
housing,  but  there  were  few  suggestions  prior  to  the  crisis  that  this  could  lead  to  dire 
macroeconomic  consequences,  particularly  at  a  global  level.  The  risks  are  even  higher 
because systemic risk assessment remains an inexact science with considerable scope for 
missing  signals  and  raising  false  alarms,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  spur  concrete  policy 
action especially as such actions often involve taking away the proverbial punch bowl just as 
the party is going strong. 
These  challenges  do  not  imply  that  technical  work  on  measuring  and  monitoring  systemic 
risk should not go forward; only that the task ahead is as large and time consuming as it is 
critical. There is, therefore, a need that the momentum set in motion in the wake of the crisis 
be maintained. Promising work on measuring systemic risk is, in fact, now in progress – at 
international institutions such as the IMF, the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision and 
the Financial Stability Board; in central banks and other systemic risk regulators; and in the 
academic  world;  indeed  in  each  of  the  institutions  which  all  of  us  collected  here  today 
represent.  I  had  observed  that  the  learning  curve  with  respect  to  the  identification  and 
assessment  of  systemic  risks  is  steep.  However,  treading  on  these  unchartered  territories 
can  become  easier  and  swifter  through  sharing  of  experiences  and  through  greater 
collaborations. This seminar, a conglomeration of operational mangers/experts on financial 
stability management across the globe, I hope, will be a giant step forward in this direction.  
The Indian experience 
Before I conclude, let me spend a few moments in outlining the framework in place in India 
for macroprudential surveillance and for the pursuit of financial stability.  
In India, prior to the crisis, no agency was explicitly granted a mandate for financial stability 
though the Reserve Bank acted as the implicit systemic regulator for the country. In 2004, 
well  ahead  of  the  crisis,  the  Reserve  Bank  formally  added  financial  stability  as  a  policy 
objective, in addition to price stability and growth, in view of the growing size and importance 
of  the  Indian  financial  sector.  The  broad  compulsions  of  financial  stability  have,  in  fact, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
underlined  all  major  policy  initiatives  of  the  Reserve  Bank  especially  since  the  balance  of 
payment crisis of the early 1990s – much ahead of the articulation of financial stability as an 
objective. 
The Reserve Bank has, over the years, attempted to address both aspects of systemic risks 
–  the  time  dimension  (which  essentially  refers  to  procyclicality)  and  the  cross  sectional 
dimension (which refers to interconnectedness) within a macroprudential framework, without 
christening  these  policies  as  macroprudential  policies.  Organisational  developments  within 
the  Reserve  Bank,  over  the  last  couple  of  decades,  have  also  reflected  the  Bank’s 
commitment  to  maintaining  financial  stability.  Two  separate  Committees  of  the  Reserve 
Bank’s  Central  Board,  viz.,  the  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  (BFS)  and  the  Board  for 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS),  are  responsible  for  focused  regulation  and 
supervision  of  financial  institutions  regulated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  payment  and 
settlement  infrastructure,  respectively.  Towards  ensuring  a  coordinated  approach  to  the 
supervision  of  the  financial  system,  a  High  Level  Coordination  Committee  on  Financial 
Markets  (HLCCFM)  was  functional  since  1992  with  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as 
Chairman,  and  with  representations  from  the  sectoral  regulators  and  the  Finance  Ministry. 
The HLCCFM has now been replaced by the Sub-Committee of the Financial Stability and 
Development Council (FSDC). The FSDC is an inter agency forum set up in the wake of the 
crisis with a specific mandate, inter alia, for systemic financial stability. A Sub Committee of 
the FSDC, headed by Governor, Reserve Bank, functions as the primary operating arm of 
the FSDC. The Sub Committee has also set up a dedicated Crisis Management Framework 
to facilitate the handling of crisis situations, should they arise. 
Post the crisis, in July 2009, the Reserve Bank set up a Financial Stability Unit (FSU) with a 
mandate to, inter alia, conduct effective macro-prudential surveillance of the financial system 
on an ongoing basis to enable early detection of any incipient signs of instability. With the 
establishment  of  the  FSU,  the  Reserve  Bank  started  publication  of  half  yearly  Financial 
Stability Reports (FSRs) – which now forms a critical tool for the Reserve Bank in its attempt 
to communicate the potential systemic risks facing the financial system to all stakeholders of 
the system. Somewhat unique, in the Indian context, is the fact that our FSRs are discussed 
and deliberated upon in the meetings of the Sub Committee of the FSDC which enables the 
views of all the sectoral regulators and the Government on risks to systemic stability to be 
incorporated in the FSR. The FSR, thus presents, a holistic assessment of the risks to the 
stability of the Indian financial system.  
A number of initiatives have been taken to improve the financial stability analytics to take full 
account of the different sources of systemic risk. A series of indicators and indices have been 
developed to assess the health and resilience of the financial system on an ongoing basis. 
Let me discuss some of these very briefly as I am aware that there is a detailed presentation 
which will be made on these initiatives during the course of this seminar. 
Stability indicators and maps 
Stability  indicators  and  maps  represent  coincident  indicators  of  systemic  stress  in  the 
financial system. They are constructed by aggregating information from different segments of 
the  overall  financial  system  and  encapsulating  the  information  in  a  single  statistic  which 
measures the current state of instability in the financial system. 
The Financial Stability Map and Indicator in India depict the overall stability condition in the 
Indian  financial  system.  The  Financial  Stability  Indicator  is  based  on  the  three  major 
segmental  indicators  namely,  the  Macro  Stability  Indicator,  the  Financial  Markets  Stability 
Indicator  and  the  Banking  Stability  Indicator.  Each  of  these  indicators  is  in  turn  based  on 
contemporaneous  developments  in  a  number  of  risk  factors  relevant  to  the  respective 
segments.  The  Financial  Stability  Indicator  is  derived  using  a  simple  average  of  macro, 
financial markets and banking stability indicators. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Recognising the importance of fiscal health for financial stability, separate Fiscal Vulnerability 
and  Fiscal  Stress  Indices  have  been  developed  to  respectively  assess  inter-temporal 
changes in the vulnerabilities arising from the fiscal conditions and to indicate the likelihood 
of crisis like events. A Systemic Liquidity Indicator attempts to gauge the degree of stress in 
domestic liquidity conditions and to establish time frames for potential extreme events.  
Banking stability measures and Expected Shortfall 
Banking  stability  measures,  a  cross-sectional  econometric  framework,  capture  the  distress 
dependence among financial firms in a system using stock price data and thereby estimate 
the extent to which individual financial institutions contribute to overall systemic risk. These 
measures have been used in the Reserve Bank to measure the systemic importance of our 
banks through three different, yet, complementary perspectives; viz., (i) common distress of 
the  financial  institutions  in  a  system,  (ii)  distress  between  specific  institutions,  and  (iii) 
distress  in  the  system  associated  by  distress  in  a  specific  institution.  A  Banking  Stability 
Index  (BSI)  is  calculated,  which  captures  the  expected  number  of  banks  to  become 
distressed  given  that  at  least  one  bank  has  become  distressed.  Separate  Toxicity  and 
Vulnerability Indices capture distress between specific institutions while the Cascade Effect 
attempts  to  measure  the  distress  in  the  system  associated  with  the  distress  of  a  specific 
institutions. This method is also being used for estimation of Expected Shortfall of assets of 
banking system, in a bid to assess what would happen to a bank in an environment of a large 
negative shock. 
Network Analysis 
The  intertwined  nature  of  modern  financial  systems  was  amply  revealed  by  the  recent 
financial crisis. Such interconnected and complex financial systems make it particularly hard 
to  predict  the  manner  in  which  the  cookie  will  crumble  when  distress  situations  emerge. 
Network  models  attempt  to  capture  the  intricate  structure  of  linkages  between  financial 
institutions  by  depicting  the  causal  chains  between  nodes.  The  contractual  obligations 
between financial institutions comprise the bilateral flows of payoffs and determine the extant 
network  structures.  An  actual  crisis  with  default  of  counterparties  engenders  system  wide 
feedback loops and can trigger further contingent claims such as on derivatives obligations 
and also large losses at default due to collapse in asset markets.  
The techniques of network modelling have been used to develop a bespoke financial network 
analysis and contagion stress testing platform for the Indian financial system. The analysis 
primarily  looks  into  the  interconnections  that  exists  between  different  institutions  in  the 
financial  system  and  tries  to  identify  build  up  of  systemic  risk.  Graphical  network 
representations have been developed which are being used to assess the degree of system 
level  interconnectedness  and  the  stability  of  the  system.  A  contagion  simulator  helps  in 
assessing the possible loss of capital to the financial system due to a random failure of one 
or more financial institutions. 
Macro financial stress tests 
During  the  recent  financial  crisis,  macro  financial  stress  tests  were  used  by  some  central 
banks as a policy tool to restore market confidence and improve market functioning. Such 
stress  testing  addresses  the  need  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  system  wide  nature  of  risk 
drivers. Macrofinancial stress testing, quantifies the link between macroeconomic variables 
and the health of financial institutions and the financial system, to measure the resilience of 
the financial system to various stress factors. In India, we conduct two sets of macro stress 
testing  exercises  at  regular  periodicities.  The  first  set  of  stress  testing  exercises  use 
multivariate regression tools to evaluate the impact of a particular macroeconomic variable 
on the asset quality of banks and its capital adequacy ratio. The second set is based on a 
vector  autoregressive  (VAR)  model  which  assesses  the  impact  of  the  overall  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
stress situation on the asset quality and capital adequacy of the banking system taking into 
account the feedback effect of the macroeconomic performance of the economy on banks’ 
stability.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me finish with a final observation. The events of the last four to five years have placed 
pursuit  of  financial  stability  at  the  centre  stage  of  policy  makers  domestically  and 
internationally. The objective is to put in place a framework for macrofinancial surveillance 
which identifies, measures and manages systemic risks, as and when they occur, with a view 
to effective crisis prevention. The task is exciting. The challenge is to put in place a set of 
riskometers  which  help  identify  which  of  the  myriads  things  that  could  go  wrong  in  the 
financial system and the broader macro economy. For this, we will need both “thermometers” 
and “crystal balls” – thermometers to determine risk indicators that, metaphorically, a policy 
maker  can  plug  into  the  financial  system  to  read  off  its  “heat”;  and  crystal  balls  to  devise 
forward  looking  early  warning  indicators  that  –  to  some  extent  –  permit  a  glimpse  into  the 
future of financial stability conditions8. 
The next two days at hand, as I see from the schedule, will be quite hectic. But, I am sure 
that the deliberations in the Seminar will prove to be extremely useful for all the participants 
as  it  should  tend  to  create  an  inventory  of  hands-on  tools  to  manage  systemic  financial 
stability. I wish you all an enjoyable stay in Mumbai.  
                                                 
8   Systemic  Risk  Diagnostics,  Coincident  Indicators  and  Early  Warning  Signals,  Bernd  Schwaab,  Siem  Jan 
Koopman and André Lucas, ECB WORKING PAPER SERIES, NO 1327 / APRIL 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
