Gill Marcus: South Africa’s challenges at a difficult time for the global 
and domestic economy  
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Noah Gala 
fund-raising dinner, Sandton, 21 August 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, thank you for the invitation to address you this evening.  
The work that Noah does with orphans in our disadvantaged communities is admirable, and 
it is heartening to see the support that the organisation receives from the private sector at a 
very  difficult  time  for  our  economy.  It  is  estimated  that  the  HIV/AIDS  pandemic  will  leave 
more than 5 million children orphaned by 2015, which will add to the demands on the public 
sector and private sector organisations such as Noah. Helping to ensure a positive present 
and future for these children is not just a question of money. To achieve the aims and vision 
of  Noah  requires  dedication  and  commitment  to  train  and  build  capacity  to  foster  stronger 
communities capable of caring and providing for children, whether these children have been 
orphaned  by  AIDS  or  any  other  cause.  Noah’s basic  message  is  that  every  child  must  be 
allowed  the  possibility  to  dream  and  you  provide  that  hope  for  the  children  and  their 
communities.  
It was stated in the Noah Annual Report 2012 “Looking ahead” that “the key to success lies 
in a collective effort”. That “government … has laid a foundation for change (through) grants 
and payments for caregivers that make the Noah approach sustainable” and that “getting to 
all needy children is the problem”.  
While  there  is  much  negative  comment  about  government  policies,  it  is  important  to 
recognise that at the core of health care there has been a critical shift that holds the potential 
to improve collaboration across all sectors involved in primary care, and to reach the adults 
and  children  who  are  presently  underserved  or  excluded.  When  considering  Community 
Oriented Primary Care I am aware that the ideas are very familiar to many of you  in  your 
practice.  What  is  exciting  is  that  they  are  now  being  integrated  through  the  National 
Department of Health into the health care system. I will return to this in some detail later on.  
Noah  is  undertaking  this  work  at  an  extremely  difficult  time  for  the  global  and  domestic 
economy. Let me first deal with the advanced economies, particularly the Eurozone and the 
United  States.  The  crisis  in  the  advanced  economies  persists,  despite  the  temporary 
breather that global financial markets appear to be taking in the past few days. However, on 
the  ground,  growth  outcomes  and  prospects  have  been  deteriorating.  Growth  in  the 
Eurozone was negative in the second quarter, having contracted by 0,4 per cent, and eight of 
the 17 members experienced negative growth. The engine of growth of the region, Germany, 
barely managed to register positive growth, and the short term indicators are not promising. 
The UK remains in recession, growth in Japan declined sharply to 0,3 per cent in the second 
quarter, and the prospect of a sharp fiscal cutback in the US early next year remains a dark 
cloud  over  the  already  slowing  economy.  To  illustrate  the  depth  of  the  very  complex 
problems  faced,  Greece,  which  is  at  the  forefront  of  the  unfolding  tragedy,  is  expected  to 
have negative growth of some 6 per cent for 2012, with its GDP expected to have shrunk by 
around 20 per cent over the three-year period 2010–2012. Growth in the larger systemically 
important economies, notably China, India and Brazil, is also moderating under the strain of 
declining exports, illustrating the interdependent nature of the global economy.  
Behind  the  growth  numbers  are  the  millions  of  people  who  have  lost  their  jobs  and  their 
dreams. The unemployment rate in the Eurozone has now risen to 11,2 per cent, and youth 
unemployment to 22,4 per cent. This places enormous stress on the fabric of society which 
not only struggles to provide for those such as AIDS orphans, but now needs to deal with the 
demands  of  a  growing  number  of  people  around  the  world  who  previously  had  jobs  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
aspirations,  many  of  them  with  skills  and  education,  and  who  now  find  themselves  in  a 
situation where the chance of finding employment diminishes by the day. The demands on 
governments multiply under such circumstances, at a time when excessive fiscal austerity is 
the order of the day in the advanced economies, with large cutbacks in government spending 
and  provision  of  basic  social  services.  Unless  governments  can  get  growth  going  again, 
social and political disaffection is likely to spread, as we have already seen in a number of 
countries in Europe.  
But  not  all  of  the  challenges  facing  us  are  man-made.  While  growth  in  the  developing 
economies is more positive, the global economy and developing economies in particular are 
facing  new  danger,  and  that  is the  sudden  emergence  of  a  possible food  crisis  which  can 
only exacerbate the fragile social situation in many countries. The past few weeks have seen 
significant increases in several agricultural commodity futures prices, including grains, soya 
beans and cattle. Since the beginning of June, futures prices of maize and wheat traded on 
the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) have increased by around 60 per cent and 40 per cent 
respectively, and these increases are already having a global impact. On the South African 
Futures Exchange (SAFEX), for example, futures prices of wheat have increased by 20 per 
cent, and those of maize by 30 per cent since the beginning of June.  
The main cause of these price increases has been severe drought conditions in the United 
States in particular, which is said to be facing its worst drought in 56 years, with 88 per cent 
of the maize crop facing these conditions, and parallels are being drawn with the “dust bowl” 
episode in the 1930s. Similar conditions are being faced by the soya bean crop in the US, 
and much of the damage to the crops has already been done. This outcome, and its severity, 
was  quite  unexpected,  which  illustrates  our  vulnerability  to  global  weather  shocks.  As 
recently  as  June,  the  UN’s  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  (FAO)  was  predicting  an 
improved  outlook  for  world  cereal  production  in  2012,  based  on  expectations  of  a  much 
bigger maize crop in the United States. Furthermore, mild weather had led to early plantings 
of maize in the US which is now making the crop even more vulnerable to drought damage.  
While the US drought is the main factor behind these latest agricultural price developments, 
other food producing regions are also experiencing adverse weather conditions. The Black 
Sea region, which is a major wheat producing area, has reported dramatically reduced crop 
yields; the monsoon in India has been below average; and the development of an El Nino 
pattern in the South Pacific is raising fears of crop damage later in the year in India, China, 
South-East Asia and Australia.  
The food riots that were seen in a number of developing countries around the world at the 
time  of  the  global  food  price  spike  in  2008  are  a  stark  reminder  and  warning  of  how  the 
current food crisis could unfold. A lot will depend on how sustained the adverse weather will 
be in various countries, particularly in the United States and India, but there is no doubt that 
as countries begin to restrict food exports, the potential is there for these developments to 
spread beyond one of food affordability to one of food availability. As food prices increase, 
diets  deteriorate,  malnutrition  spreads  and  demands  on  public  health  services  increase 
further.  
The South African economy therefore finds itself in an extremely challenging environment, 
with  the  domestic  economic  growth  outlook  being  dependent  to  an  important  degree  on 
external developments. Given that the negative global growth outlook is likely to persist for 
some time, and we need to be mindful that the prevailing financial crisis has already lasted 
five years, with no end in sight, the challenges facing the domestic economy are daunting. 
But  not  all  of  our  problems  can  be  ascribed  to  these  global  factors.  There  are  numerous 
underlying  structural  problems  in  the  economy  which  are  exacerbated,  but  not  necessarily 
caused, by these global developments.  
In  line  with  the  weak  and  deteriorating  global  outlook,  the  Bank  has  been  progressively 
downgrading its economic growth forecasts over the past year. Growth in 2012 is expected 
to average around 2,7 per cent, down from 3,1 per cent in 2011. The most recent forecast for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2013 is a growth rate of 3,8 per cent, but the risks are seen to be on the downside. According 
to Reuters, the market consensus forecast for 2013 is 3,3 per cent.  
Growth rates of this order of magnitude will not have an appreciable impact on South Africa’s 
unemployment rate which currently stands at 24,9 per cent. It is instructive that during the 
high  growth  years  between  2004–2007,  when  growth  averaged  around  5  per  cent, 
unemployment declined to 21,9 per cent but this was quickly reversed following the crisis-
induced recession in 2009. So if these patterns are to be repeated, we would need a number 
of years of significantly higher growth than we are currently expecting simply to get back to 
pre-crisis levels of unemployment.  
However,  the  sustainable  growth  rate  itself  is  constrained  by  the  potential  output  of  the 
economy,  which,  in  turn,  is  determined  by  capacity  and  other  structural  constraints.  At  a 
simple  level  that  implies  that  if  we  have  unemployed  resources  or  spare  capacity  in  the 
economy, output can be increased in a non-inflationary manner. Research done in the Bank 
prior to the crisis showed that the potential output growth of the economy was between 4 and 
4,5  per  cent.  Since  the  crisis,  that  has  declined  to  around  3,5  per  cent.  This  decline  may 
have been due in part to some destruction of capacity and we also now know that growth will 
be constrained by the lack of adequate electricity provision until sometime next year at the 
earliest.  
I  should  note  that  this  does  not  imply  that  a  growth  rate  in  excess  of  3,5  per  cent  would 
necessarily be inflationary. Currently the economy still has a negative output gap, which we 
estimate to be around 3,5 per cent, which is indicative of excess capacity in the economy. 
This means that the economy should be able to grow at rates in excess of potential without 
creating inflationary pressure until that output gap is closed.  
South  Africa’s  patterns of  employment  strongly  suggest  that  the  unemployment  rate  is  not 
simply cyclical in nature, and is in fact structural. Even if we manage to grow at higher levels, 
it  will  be  difficult  to  absorb  such  vast  numbers  of  unemployed,  especially  in  the  short  to 
medium term. In other words the natural rate of unemployment in South Africa appears to be 
in excess of 20 per cent, and significant structural changes will be required in order to make 
inroads  into  this.  The  structural  nature  of  South  Africa’s  unemployment  and  the  structural 
constraints to growth are recognised in the various growth plans that have been published by 
government, the most recent being that of the National Planning Commission. It is generally 
accepted by growth theorists that sustained growth and structural change go hand in hand.  
So the challenges are to close the output gap by getting growth to increase to be in line with 
potential, and to increase the potential output itself. Monetary policy can help with the former, 
but it cannot increase the potential output of the economy. This requires structural change, 
which  includes  a  focus  on  investment  and  infrastructure  spending  to  unclog  some  of  the 
blockages in the economy.  
Since  the  crisis,  what  growth  we  have  had  has  been  mainly  driven  by  consumption 
expenditure.  However,  sustainable  economic  growth  needs  to  be  driven  by  investment.  A 
reliance on consumption as a driver of growth is neither sustainable nor desirable: it implies a 
lack  of  savings  and  a  build-up  of  imbalances,  notably  unsustainable  and  widening  current 
account deficits. While the favourable pre-crisis growth rates were driven in part by strong 
consumption  expenditure,  they  were  also  reinforced  by  strong  growth  in  investment 
expenditure.  Between  2003  and  2008,  growth  in  fixed  capital  formation  accelerated  and 
averaged  in  excess  of  12  per  cent  per  annum. The ratio to  GDP  averaged  around  20  per 
cent and peaked at 24,6 per cent in the final quarter of 2008. This compares favourably with 
the average of around 15,5 per cent of GDP in the previous 10 years.  
Not surprisingly, investment expenditure was one of the casualties of the crisis, and has still 
not recovered fully. This is part of the explanation as to why South Africa’s growth rates have 
lagged  those  of  its  peers.  Investment  expenditure  contracted  in  both  2009  and  2010,  but 
recovered somewhat in 2011 when it grew by 4,4 per cent. However, in the first quarter of 
2012,  while  public  corporation  and  general  government  fixed  capital  formation  grew  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
13,1 per cent and 9,3 per cent respectively, that of the private sector grew by a mere 1,8 per 
cent.  This  is  a  major  source  of  concern  should  this  trend  continue,  as  private  sector 
investment accounts for around 65 per cent of total fixed capital formation in the economy. 
The  lagging  private  sector  investment  is  consistent  with  the  recent  decline  in  business 
confidence that has been evident in the various indices. As a ratio to GDP, gross fixed capital 
formation had declined to 18,9 per cent in the first quarter of 2012. As a proportion of GDP, 
government and public sector investment now averages around 8 per cent, compared with 
4,4 per cent between 1994 and 2007.  
To achieve the desirable growth rate of 6 per cent will require an investment ratio of around 
25  per  cent.  We  are  far  from  this  and  therefore  require  much  higher  rates  of  growth  of 
investment from both the public and private sector over the next few years. To finance this in 
a  sustainable  manner  will  require  more  domestic  savings,  in  other  words  a  sacrifice  of 
current consumption for higher future growth and employment.  
While there are various and conflicting views on the role of government in the economy and 
in promoting growth, most people agree that an important job of government is to facilitate 
growth and investment by creating a positive investment environment as well as investing in 
infrastructure which enables growth directly and indirectly by freeing up logistical bottlenecks 
in  the  economy.  But  as  important,  if  not more  so,  is  investment  in  human  capital,  through 
provision  of  education  and  access  to  basic  services,  which  has  a  growth  support  and  a 
distributional element as well. This form of support includes the provision of public health.  
So let me turn to the matter of Community-Oriented Primary Care or COPC, which I have 
become aware of and wish to share as an example of what can and is being done. In 2010 
the Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, initiated a proactive household and community-
focused approach to promote healthy living, prevent, detect and treat disease early, and to 
manage,  rehabilitate  and  palliate  the  ill.  COPC  in  Tshwane  District,  for  example,  is  being 
implemented and is designed around health posts. These are structures that are physically 
located  in  communities,  with  are  health  care  practitioner  teams,  initially  comprising 
professional  nurses  and  community  health  workers.  As  teams,  their  responsibility  is  to 
interact in a proactive way with every household – as a collective as well as with individual 
members – in their jurisdiction. Their role is to promote health, prevent disease and detect 
disease early, and support treatment, rehabilitation and palliation; and to do this in a way that 
both develops capacity and shared responsibility for health care between service providers 
and service users.  
Since 2010, Community Oriented Primary Care has been implemented in Tshwane in nine 
ward-based sites built on a partnership between the University of Pretoria (Family Medicine), 
the  Department  of  Health  and  FPD  (Foundation  for  Professional  Development)  in 
collaboration with private sector companies especially IT, health care providers and NPOs. 
The  initiative  involves  inter-disciplinary  and  inter-professional  practice.  Schools  and  local 
NGOs are used as the premises for health posts and professional nurses head these PHC 
outreach  teams  and  provide  clinical  and  mentoring  support.  These  health  posts  work  very 
closely with health facilities within the geographic area and former home-based care givers 
are being trained to provide door-to-door services with each community health care worker 
being assigned 200 households.  
Households are registered using mobile phone technology, giving the care workers a more 
accurate  way  to  capture  data  and  focus  interventions.  The  GeoMed  system  currently 
registers households and has 8 modules to assess the health status of each family member. 
To date 14 745 households have been visited and registered and about 40,000 individuals 
have  completed  a  health  status  assessment.  Health  posts  have  begun  interventions, 
especially  around  TB  and  immediate  health  care  needs.  Fourth-year  medical  and  other 
University  of  Pretoria  students  are  attached  to  health  posts,  thereby  learning  on  site  and 
providing much-needed services, while community health workers are being trained on site 
and in a continuous way.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  this  way  the  five  principles  that  guide  COPC,  namely  local  situational  analysis, 
comprehensive care, equity, practice with science, and service integration around users, are 
being given effect, building communities and partnerships, and making a real difference to 
people’s lives.  
This is an example of how, working together, we can make a real difference to the lives of 
our people and communities. To get things done we need to work together, and this requires 
trust and confidence which is essential for building a healthy and equitable society.  
This evening you have all taken time out of your busy schedules to come here and contribute 
to Noah, an important initiative and example of the generosity of spirit and willingness to give 
both  financially  and  personal  time:  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  many  South  Africans.  Noah’s 
mission,  values  and  objectives  are  helping  build  a  resilient  and  resourceful  society,  which 
takes responsibility for those who are vulnerable, brings hope and a supportive environment. 
The character and strength of our democracy will be forged by, among other things, how we 
care for those who are vulnerable. Noah is an example of such commitment and care.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  join  you  this  evening,  and  I  wish  you  well  in  the  challenging 
times ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
