Patrick Honohan: Does credit matter for the SME? 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the 
Central Bank Conference on the SME Lending Market, Dublin, 2 March 2012. 
 Access of SMEs to credit and other financial services is a perennial topic for policymakers, 
besieged – as they often are – by frustrated entrepreneurs who, whether wishing to expand 
or  dodging  closure,  are  unable  to  access  the  credit  necessary  to  do  so.  The  pat  answer 
traditionally offered by market fundamentalists to the effect that, if creditworthy, the business 
would have secured financing from eager and shrewd financiers, wears thinner these days 
after we have seen the consequences of massive credit misallocation. 
Indeed  there  are  fundamental  reasons  why  –  even  in  the  non-crisis  environment  –  even 
well-run  small  and  medium  enterprises  whose  likelihood  of  creating  loan  losses  are  low 
nevertheless don’ t get credit. Information is the key. A key societal function of banks and 
other financiers is the gathering and processing of the information necessary to make good 
loan  decisions  and  to  continue  monitoring  the  performance  of  borrowers,  intervening 
promptly where necessary to protect the sums advanced. But gathering and processing that 
information is not cheap or easy, especially when the economy is changing gears and the 
external environment is uncertain, as it is now. 
Does  credit  matter  for  the  SME?  A  large  body  of  empirical  evidence  internationally  says 
“yes”, noting that access to finance can promote new firm entry, firm growth, innovation, the 
achievement of optimal firm size and risk reduction.  
Furthermore,  well-financed  small  firms  contribute  significantly  to  broader  economic growth. 
Admittedly, the much vaunted capacity of small firms to create employment is also matched 
by  an  above-average  incidence  of  job  destruction:  much  of  the  churn  in  any  economy 
happens in small firms. It’ s not a question, though, of whether big or small is best for growth; 
both are key. But the effectiveness of a financial system in catering for firm needs is best 
evidenced by its capacity to serve small firms; big firms can find their needs catered for even 
in poorly developed financial systems. 
It is, of course, possible to over-emphasize the importance of credit in the economy. Not only 
have we seen how too much credit can have devastating effects when it is proved to have 
financed wasteful or pointless projects. And, on the other hand, a number of countries have 
experienced (in recent decades) post-crisis recoveries that were virtually credit-less. 
What about Ireland? As I have noted in the past, Ireland’ s fast growth period in 1990s does 
not  seem  to  have  been  finance-rich:  before  the  property  bubble  Ireland’  s  growth 
performance had other drivers than the Irish financial sector both in good and in bad times. 
Partly  this  was  a  function  of  the  degree  to  which  many  of  Ireland’  s  leading  firms,  both  in 
manufacturing and services, have been foreign-owned and brought their finance with them. 
But I would be cautious about assuming that Ireland does not therefore need much credit in 
the years ahead of recovery. The recovery will need to maintain and strengthen the resumed 
relative importance of the export sector, including new subsectors, and likely an increased 
share  of  Irish-owned  firms,  alongside  the  MNCs.  Those  trends  may  well  call  on  locally 
provided credit to a greater extent than in the past. 
It is against this background that we need to consider the recent trends in credit for SMEs, 
the  topic  of  today’  s  conference  in  which  a  wide  range  of  new  statistics  and  analysis  are 
being presented. The picture cannot be said to be favourable. Indeed, as you will hear, credit 
conditions for SMEs are tougher in Ireland than anywhere elsewhere in the euro area both in 
terms of cost and availability. To be sure, the banking system is emerging from a major credit 
collapse and the economy is operating at only about 85% of its previous level of productive 
activity: in such circumstances there have of course been a large number of small firms who 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
cannot  get credit  because  on  any  assessment  they  are  not  creditworthy.  But  the  research 
reported in this Conference strongly suggests that credit constraints go beyond that. 
Given  how  depleted  personal  wealth  of  many  families  who  would  have,  in  more  normal 
times, been able to fund start-ups and small expansions with their own risk capital resources, 
the  lack  of  bank  credit  is  likely  to  be  a  more  serious  drag  on  the  recovery  than  it  might 
otherwise be. 
What  are  the  authorities  doing  about  this?  The  answer  is:  a  whole  lot.  Government  has 
arranged  to  recapitalise  the  main  banks  with  fiscal  injections  almost  unmatched  –  as  a 
percentage  of  national  GDP  –  in  World  history.  The  Central  Bank,  supported  by  the 
Eurosystem,  has  provided  open-ended  liquidity  to  ensure  that  shortage  of  liquid  assets 
cannot  have  been  a  constraint  on  lending.  True,  the  EU-IMF  agreement  requires 
deleveraging by the banks, but the authorities are closely monitoring this deleveraging to try 
to ensure that, as intended and agreed with the Troika, it falls mainly on non-core business 
(mostly  abroad)  and  run-offs.  The  intention  is  the  deleveraging  would  not  affect  credit 
availability for the recovery at home. 
Other measures (such as the work of the Credit Review Office – which has been effective in 
pinpointing  some  of  the  procedural  and  skill  shortfalls  in  the  banks’  procedures  for 
underwriting SME loans – and the proposed new partial credit guarantee scheme) could also 
be  mentioned.  In  any  market  economy,  though,  we  rely  on  banks  and  other  financiers  to 
make the underwriting decisions, and this is what needs to be right as the recovery expands. 
Many  SMEs  also  got  caught  up  in  the  property  bubble  so  that  their  balance  sheets  are 
weighed  down  with  under-water  property  investments  that  threaten  their  viability  and 
discourage outside financiers from sending good money after bad. Working out such problem 
lending relationships is challenging at the best of times. This reminds us that SME lending is 
not just a question of supply and demand, but has also had significant prudential and indeed 
financial stability dimensions. 
All of these dimensions, I am happy to say, receive attention in what seems to me to be a 
very promising agenda for today’ s timely conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
