Nils Bernstein: Developments in the Danish economy and mortgage-
credit system 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 29 March 2012. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
The global economy weakened in the 2nd half of 2011, chiefly as a result of the debt crisis in 
several European countries. Euro area GDP fell in the 4th quarter, but data releases point to 
stabilisation. 
In  the  USA  there  is  moderate  growth  and  recovery  in  the  labour  market.  Euro  area 
unemployment continues to rise, masking considerable differences across member states. In 
Germany unemployment is falling. 
Inflation has declined as previous increases in energy prices have dropped out of the year-
on-year statistics, but recent oil price rises pose a risk in this connection.  
Yield spreads to Germany have narrowed following the most recent measures taken by the 
European  Central  Bank,  as  well  as  further  steps  to  tighten  fiscal  policy  and  introduce 
structural reforms in the countries with the highest debts.  
The  growth  outlook  is  subdued.  The  latest  consensus  estimates  and  forecasts  from  the 
international organisations operate with a slight decline in euro area GDP in the first part of 
2012, while other advanced economies are expected to post moderate growth rates. Strong 
fiscal consolidation is underway in Europe in order to restore confidence in public finances 
and  create  a  basis  for  sustainable  growth.  In  contrast,  monetary  policy  is  highly 
accommodative and supports economic activity in all advanced economies. 
The  autumn  was  weak.  The  Danish  economy  virtually  moved  sideways,  reflecting  factors 
such  as  falling  public  consumption,  and  expectations  were  formed  in  the  shadow  of  the 
European debt crisis. However, the situation now seems to be improving somewhat. 
Our most recent forecast operates with output growth of just over 1 per cent this year. That is 
not impressive, but it is higher than the growth expectations for the euro area. 
The recovery is primarily expected to be domestically driven. 
For some time, households and firms have been consolidating strongly. In the case of the 
households,  this  reflects  value  losses  on  e.g.  houses  and  equities,  as  well  as  the 
employment  situation.  Firms,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  hesitant  to  invest,  so  that 
business investment has reached a very low level. 
Given the high savings ratio, wealth will, at some point, reach a level that the households find 
suitable  in  view  of  the  losses  they  have  had.  Normalisation  of  the  low  consumption  ratio 
could potentially lead to considerable growth since private consumption accounts for around 
half of total demand.  
Another reason why I believe we can say that the Danish economy is now slowly picking up 
is that the fundamental balances are sound. We have a large current-account surplus and a 
relatively strong labour market. Structural unemployment is low – and only slightly below the 
current  rate  of  unemployment.  Interest  rates  are  historically  low  and  underlying  prices  are 
stable. 
On the other hand, house prices have, on average, dropped by 20 per cent since the peak in 
2007 and fell by 8 per cent in 2011. Turnover is low despite the historically low interest rates, 
and the market seems to be in a deadlock. Given the current interest-rate and income levels, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
house  prices  should,  in  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  view,  not  be  as  low  as  they  are  at  the 
moment. Price falls may be self-reinforcing if buyers hesitate, expecting prices to come down 
even further. So it is difficult to say exactly when the market will turn, but experience from 
both Denmark and abroad shows that once the market begins to recover, it could move fast. 
An important factor behind the large fluctuations in house prices seen since the mid-2000s is 
the structure of housing taxes. If the property value tax in nominal terms is frozen, as it is 
now, the effective taxation rate declines when prices go up, and vice versa. Combined with 
deferred-amortisation loans, this has contributed to stronger fluctuations in house prices. The 
same applies to the cap on the increase in land tax. As a result, tax on the large increases in 
value  seen  during  the  boom  is  being  phased  in  now,  when  prices  are  falling,  making  the 
decline even stronger. 
As regards property value tax, the solution is, in principle, simple. Freeze the rate of taxation, 
not the amount in kroner. With the current outlook for the housing market, this will not lead to 
higher taxes right now. But more appropriate housing taxes will help to dampen fluctuations 
in the market – fluctuations that are detrimental to society and impede the implementation of 
economic policy. The large balance sheets of Danish households, with high gross debt and 
correspondingly large assets, also speak in favour of curbing house price fluctuations.  
 It is now around four years since the international financial crisis really hit Denmark. In the 
meantime,  it  has  led  to the  introduction  of  five  bank  rescue  packages,  each  one aimed  at 
solving  specific  problems.  In  addition,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  made  a  number  of 
adjustments  to  its  range  of  instruments  to  match  market  conditions,  and  credit  institutions 
have been offered extended credit facilities at Danmarks Nationalbank. The latest addition – 
the option to raise 3-year loans – has given credit institutions an extra source of long-term 
funding. In many ways, these options match those provided by the ECB for European banks. 
The ECB’s 3-year loans have been in high demand. 800 European banks participated in the 
most recent operation. 
The first 3-year operation in Denmark will take place tomorrow. The second operation will be 
in September, and I think it would be wise to consider the two operations overall. Needless to 
say,  interest  will  depend  on  the  individual  credit  institution’s  situation,  as  well  as 
developments in the private-sector capital markets. It is up to each credit institution to decide 
whether  or  not  it  wants  to  participate.  Seen  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  point  of  view, 
there is no reason to turn down this opportunity if it makes business sense. 
 A financial crisis has direct costs in the form of e.g. credit losses, but also indirect costs in 
terms of e.g. growth. So far, a characteristic of the Danish bank rescue packages has been 
that  the  sector  itself  has  borne  the  direct  costs  related  to  these  packages.  This  is  a  good 
principle, which has helped to reduce the negative impact on government finances. Events in 
Europe over the last year have highlighted the significance of sound public finances. It is of 
fundamental importance to us all that the Kingdom of Denmark has a high credit standing 
internationally. 
I think we can say that Denmark has addressed the problems as they arose. By this I mean 
that  distressed  banks  have  been  brought  to  our  attention,  and  we  have  found  solutions  – 
either winding-up via the Financial Stability Company, mergers with other banks or tailored 
solutions. The result is a banking sector with a number of large banks and many small banks.  
Some  Danish  banks  are  still  struggling,  and  the  near  future  will  also  bring  mergers  and 
perhaps resolution of banks. But I believe that the problems have now been reduced to a 
size that is manageable within the existing framework – although a few adjustments may be  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
necessary. As I see it, the model with the Financial Stability Company has worked well and 
provided a robust and constructive approach to solving the problems. 
 The  largest  credit  institutions  are  those  that  we  call  systemically  important  financial 
institutions,  or  –  in  financial  lingo  –  SIFIs.  These  institutions  are  important  to  society  as  a 
whole and to financial stability. For everyone’s sake it is essential that these private-sector 
enterprises do not suddenly find themselves in dire straits so that the government must take 
over.  In  future  these  large  institutions  must  therefore  be  required  to  have  extra  strong 
defences. For example, they must have extra capital, the option to convert loan capital into 
subordinate  capital  as  well  as  recovery  plans,  and  they  may  be  subject  to  additional 
supervision. The aim is to ensure that they do not end up in a situation where they become 
distressed.  The  Danish  government  has  set  up  a  committee  to  make  recommendations  in 
this area. Its work should have high priority. 
The  group  of  large  credit  institutions  also  includes  the  mortgage  banks.  You  are  already 
comprised by special legislation to ensure that confidence in the mortgage-credit system is 
always intact. As you often point out yourselves, this system has stood the test of a couple of 
centuries. Particularly during this financial crisis and the turbulent market conditions seen in 
the last four years, Danish mortgage bonds have proved their high quality and liquidity. 
In  my  opinion,  the  SIFI  committee  provides  a  welcome  opportunity  to  investigate  whether, 
ultimately, mortgage-credit legislation provides a sufficient and appropriate contribution to the 
defences protecting Danish mortgage bonds. 
 When  you  argue  the  case  for  the  strength  of  the  Danish  mortgage-credit  system  in  a 
historical context, it is also necessary to consider the major changes that have taken place 
over  the  last  10  years.  Firstly,  the  volume  of  adjustable-rate  loans  has  increased 
substantially. This has created a refinancing risk, as 30-year mortgage loans are financed by 
short-term  bonds,  often  with  maturities  of  only  1  year.  Secondly,  the  option  to  defer 
amortisation has made it possible for borrowers to borrow more with an unchanged monthly 
payment. This has pushed up house prices and increased the vulnerability of borrowers and 
mortgage  banks.  Thirdly,  the  requirement  to  pledge  top-up  collateral  for  covered  bonds  if 
house  prices  fall  has  given  mortgage  banks  an  extra  obligation.  The  rating  agencies  also 
contribute to this requirement. 
We have previously drawn attention to these factors and encouraged you to find solutions. I 
appreciate that you have put on your thinking caps. 
A number of good suggestions and ideas have been put forward, and I take this opportunity 
to  comment  on  them.  Several  aspects  must  be  taken  into  account  when  determining  the 
most  appropriate  measures.  Measures  which  respect  that  there  is  a  certain  degree  of 
standardisation of bonds, as this increases liquidity in the series and makes the market more 
transparent for investors. Two of the primary success criteria are the handing of refinancing 
risk  and  the  need  for  top-up  collateral,  but  stable  framework  conditions  for  the  housing 
market also play a significant role in the current situation. I also think that it would be wise for 
you already to start considering the future international liquidity requirements. 
In the long term, two-tier mortgaging and a conservative loan policy will reduce the need for 
top-up collateral in periods when house prices are falling. Two-tier mortgaging will have the 
faster impact of the two. I realise that you are facing different challenges in this area, and it 
may therefore be natural to choose different solutions. 
Danmarks Nationalbank has previously suggested another, more indirect way of reducing the 
potential  need  for  top-up  collateral  –  by  gradually  phasing  out  deferred  amortisation  for 
mortgage loans with a view to dampening fluctuations in house prices. A cautious approach 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to deferred amortisation would also support the robustness of both borrowers and mortgage 
banks.  
Turning  to  refinancing  risk,  you  have  sought  to  spread  the  auctions  for  refinancing 
adjustable-rate loans over the year as we agreed. This means that a smaller bond volume is 
refinanced  at  any  given  time.  So  if  an  auction  is  a  failure  and  the  number  of  investors  is 
insufficient, this situation will be easier to manage. One mortgage bank has already spread 
its auctions almost evenly on three dates. The rest have initiated the process and have from 
2011 to 2012 increased the share of underlying bonds that do not mature at the turn of the 
year from 14 to 23 per cent.  
But more can and should be done to reduce the refinancing risk. For example: 
– 
If refinancing is spread over the whole year and refinancing auctions are conducted 
well  in  advance,  this  will  reduce  the  impact  of  short-term  shocks  in  the  financial 
markets considerably.  
Use of longer-term financing will reduce the total volume of loans to be refinanced 
within a given period. That will increase robustness.  
 In addition, the ability of the individual borrower to bear the refinancing risk can be increased. 
If  individual  loans  are  financed  using  several  bonds  with  different  terms  to  maturity,  short-
term market turmoil will affect only a small share of each loan. This will strengthen investor 
confidence, even in a situation with a brief, but strong increase in interest rates.  
I  see  no  urgent  need  for  further  specific  legislation  in  these  areas  as  you  are  seriously 
addressing the challenges yourselves. 
Let me recapitulate: 
Solutions may differ, but should serve the following purposes – in random order: 
– 
refinancing risk must be reduced, – the need for any top-up collateral must be met 
before  it  becomes  relevant,  –  the  procyclical  impact  of  home  financing  should  be 
dampened,  –  and  the  vulnerability  of  homeowners  to  extraordinary  changes  in 
financing conditions must be reduced. 
It will require a huge effort, but you have already come a long way. Keep up the good work! 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
