Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Banking – serving people and growing with 
your clients 
Remarks  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at Citibank’s 200th Anniversary Cocktail Reception, Singapore, 21 August 2012. 
 Mr Vikram Pandit and friends,  
Thank you for inviting me to this celebration of Citigroup’s 200th anniversary.  
When we think about the history of economies, it’s sometimes best told through the history of 
individual firms and institutions. When we think of the history of the global economy too, the 
tumultuous changes that we’ve been through in the post-war era as well as the last hundred 
years,  let  alone  200,  it’s  again  very  interestingly  told  through  the  story  of  individual 
institutions – although few have survived that length of time. I think the history of Citi, in its 
own way, tells a fascinating story of what happened in the United States and what happened 
in the global economy.  
But the exhibits that I was looking at as I walked in say something that is worth reminding 
ourselves of – that despite all the transformations, all the new technologies that have been 
brought to bear, the new management methods and regulations, the innovations in finance, 
banking has still at its core to be about the basics – it still has to be about providing security 
to ordinary people, providing new standards for global trade, about growing economies. It’s 
about serving and growing with your clients.  
And I find it encouraging that Citi has been at the fore of this refocus on the basics of banking 
and finance. You’ve gone through a process of introspection in the last few years, because of 
the crisis and through the crisis, and you’ve come out stronger. Not just because of better 
capital and liquidity – although that’s obviously a pre-requisite for strength in the post-crisis 
era.  But  more  fundamentally  because  you’re  asking  yourselves  important  questions  about 
culture  –  questions  about  responsibility,  and  about  the  source  of  your  profitability  as  an 
enterprise that intends to be around for a long time to come.  
So the story of Citi, and like the story of several other global institutions, is also about the 
recurring importance of certain basics. And the most important basics in banking have to be 
about serving your clients and growing with your clients, and about managing risks well.  
There’s  a  risk  that  we’re  placing  a  too  much  importance  in  recent  policy  debates  on  the 
structure of banking. You read the headlines, you’ll find a continuing debate about how large 
banks should be, whether we should have narrow banks or universal banks, about the role of 
national  banks  and  global  banks,  about  the  role  of  commercial  banks  versus  investment 
banks  and  the  rest  of  the  shadow  banking  system.  These  are  important  questions  of 
structure, but I think we risk an overemphasis on structure and an inadequate focus on the 
culture  of  banking  and  finance,  and  an  inadequate  emphasis  on  the  need  for  active 
supervision. Those are absolute prerequisites for stability in banking. Active, and sometimes 
intrusive, supervision of banks, and particularly of global banks, has to be at the foundation 
for stable banking and finance.  
I don’t think any reconfiguration of the structure of banking and finance is going to get us to 
an intrinsically safer system, taken as a whole. And we have to remember that this last global 
crisis,  which  is  still  with  us  in  many  ways,  started  not  with  large  universal  banks  or  large 
global banks, but with narrow or specialised players. Countrywide (the mortgage provider) in 
the US, Northern Rock in the UK, investment banks like Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers. 
It was accentuated through AIG’s Financial Products division, which played a prominent role 
on the derivative markets. But it was not global banks that sparked off the crisis, although 
they helped propagate it globally. It bears reminding ourselves of that.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
No matter how we restructure the system, no matter how we cut down or dice the pieces, 
banking  will  involve  risk.  And  without  the  right  culture  –  whether  it’s  about  an  investment 
bank  or  commercial  bank  or  a  mono-line  player  –  and  without  the  active  and  intelligent 
supervision,  we’d  have  the  same  problems  over  and  over  again.  The  problems  that 
underpinned  this  global  crisis  were  old-fashioned  problems  –  property  booms  that  were 
misjudged by banks, regulators and borrowers; and the problem of banks relying too heavily 
on  borrowing  short  term  to  invest  long-term.  Old  fashioned  problems  that  recur  with  each 
crisis.  
So we have to refocus on the basics of financial stability – active, and sometimes intrusive, 
supervision,  which  is  a  responsibility  of  the  regulator;  and  a  refocus  on  a  culture  of 
responsibility within banks themselves. A culture where the board and the management keep 
asking questions, never get too mesmerised by the optimisation of statistical risks, and focus 
on  the  risks  that  can’t  be  quantified,  the  uncertainties  that  can’t  be  anticipated  well  in 
advance.  Asking  ourselves  that  question  on  a  regular  basis,  that’s  the  responsibility  of 
boards and management, and I’m glad to see how leading global banks are taking this very 
seriously, and drawing lessons from this crisis.  
I wanted too to thank Citigroup for doing what you’ve done together with us in Singapore. 
You’ve grown – almost ten thousand people now. In fact, just in the last three years, you’ve 
grown  your  employees  by  30%  in  Singapore,  with  the  bulk  of  that  growth  being  jobs  for 
locals,  good  jobs  for  locals.  You’re  taking  advantage  of  Asia’s  continuing  growth  and 
emergence, and in doing so, you’re also fortifying Singapore’s role as a regional and global 
financial centre. I think we’ll do well with our partnership for the future, and we’ll all do well if 
we stay focused on that culture of responsibility. As someone put it in the video just now, it’s 
all about wanting to do something meaningful in our lives.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
