Ben S Bernanke: The European economic and financial situation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Government Oversight and Reform, US House of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 21 March 2012. 
 Thank  you,  Chairman  Issa,  Ranking  Member  Cummings,  and  other  members  of  the 
Committee for inviting me to testify about the economic and financial situation in Europe and 
the actions taken by the Federal Reserve in response.  
Developments in Europe and their effects on the U.S. Economy 
For almost two years, developments in Europe have had an important influence on the tenor 
of global financial markets and on the global economy more generally. The combination of 
high debts, large deficits, and poor growth prospects in several countries using the euro has 
raised concerns about fiscal sustainability and, consequently, led to sharply higher sovereign 
borrowing costs – initially for Greece, but subsequently for other euro-area countries as well. 
Pessimism  about  these  countries’  fiscal  and  economic  situations,  in  turn,  has  undermined 
confidence in the strength of European financial institutions, increasing the cost and difficulty 
those  institutions  have  faced  in  obtaining  funding  and  reducing  their  willingness  to  supply 
credit.  
The  difficulties  in  the  euro  area  have  affected  the  U.S.  economy.  The  European  Union 
accounts  for  roughly  one-fifth  of  U.S.  exports  of  goods  and  services.  Not  surprisingly, 
U.S. exports to Europe over the past two years have underperformed our exports to the rest 
of  the  world.  In  addition,  weaker  demand  from  Europe  has  slowed  growth  in  other 
economies, which has also lowered foreign demand for our products.  
Financial strains in Europe have also shown through to our financial markets. During times 
when financial conditions in Europe were at their most turbulent, investors around the world 
retreated from riskier assets. In the United States, these pullbacks decreased stock prices, 
increased  the  costs  of  issuing  corporate  debt,  and  reduced  consumer  and  business 
confidence.  In  addition,  U.S.  financial  institutions  that  were  thought  to  have  substantial 
exposures to Europe saw their stock prices fall and their credit spreads widen.  
In the past few months, financial stresses in Europe have lessened, which has contributed to 
an improved tone of financial markets around the world, including in the United States. The 
improvement  reflects,  in  part,  a  number  of  actions  taken  by  European  policymakers.  First, 
measures  taken  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  including  implementing  two 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  and  easing  collateral  rules  and  reserve  requirements, 
have  allowed  European  banks  to  lock  in  funding  for  up  to  three  years,  thereby  alleviating 
concerns about their near-term prospects. With the benefit of this support, European banks 
in turn have increased their holdings of sovereign debt, contributing to lower borrowing costs 
for some countries.  
Second, euro-area leaders, the Greek government, and private-sector holders of Greek debt 
are taking steps to put Greece on a more sustainable fiscal path. Its sovereign debt has been 
significantly reduced,  the  Greek  authorities  are intensifying their  efforts to  implement  fiscal 
and  structural  reforms,  and  the  European  Union  and  International  Monetary  Fund  have 
pledged a considerable amount of new funds as part of a second assistance package. The 
Greek economy remains in a deep recession, however.  
Third and finally, leaders of most of the members of the European Union have approved a 
new  fiscal  compact  treaty  that  strengthens  fiscal  rules  and  their  enforcement.  This  treaty 
represents  a  positive  step  toward  resolving  the  fundamental  tension  inherent  in  having  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
monetary  union  without  a  fiscal  union,  and  thus  should  help  bolster  the  viability  of  the 
euro-area economy in the longer term.  
Although progress has been made, more needs to be done. Full resolution of the crisis will 
require a further strengthening of the European banking system; a significant expansion of 
financial backstops, or “firewalls,” to guard against contagion in sovereign debt markets; and, 
critically, continued efforts to increase economic growth and competitiveness and to reduce 
external imbalances in the troubled countries.  
Actions taken by the Federal Reserve 
The Federal Reserve has followed developments in Europe closely, and we are in frequent 
contact  with  key  European  policymakers.  We  are  particularly  focused  on  protecting 
U.S. financial institutions, businesses, and consumers from adverse financial and economic 
developments in Europe.  
To help calm dollar funding markets and support the flow of credit to U.S. households and 
businesses,  the  Federal  Reserve  acted  in  concert  with  major  foreign  central  banks  to 
enhance  the  U.S.  dollar  swap  facilities  that  were  originally  put  in  place  during  the  global 
financial crisis and reestablished in May 2010. Use of the reestablished lines was limited until 
late last year. However, in late November, the Federal Reserve agreed with the ECB and the 
central banks of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom to extend the swap 
lines through February 2013 and to reduce their pricing, from a spread of 100 basis points 
over the overnight index swap rate to 50 basis points.1  
The lower cost to the ECB and other foreign central banks enabled them, in turn, to reduce 
the  cost  of  the  short-term  dollar  loans  they  provide  to  financial  institutions  in  their 
jurisdictions.  As  a  result,  usage  of  the  swap  line  increased  considerably,  peaking  at 
$109billion in mid-February. The expanded use of the swap lines has helped to ease funding 
pressures  on  European  and  other  foreign  banks,  lower  tensions  in  U.S.  money  markets 
(in which  foreign  banks  are  major  participants),  alleviate  pressures  on  foreign  banks  to 
reduce  their  lending  in  the  United  States,  and  boost  confidence  at  a  time  of  considerable 
strain  in  international  financial  markets.  In  recent  weeks,  as  market  conditions  have 
improved, usage of the swap lines has fallen back to about $65 billion.  
I would add that the swaps are very safe from the perspective of the Federal Reserve and 
the U.S. taxpayer. They present no exchange rate or interest rate risk; each drawing has a 
short maturity and must be approved by the Federal Reserve; they are collateralized by the 
foreign  currencies  for  which  dollars  are  swapped;  and  our  counterparties  are  the  foreign 
central banks, not the foreign commercial banks that receive the dollar loans.2  
In addition to its actions to reduce pressures in global markets for dollar funding, the Federal 
Reserve  has  collaborated  with  other  agencies  –  both  bilaterally  and  through  the  Financial 
Stability  Oversight  Council  –  to  monitor  the  potential  vulnerabilities  of  U.S.  financial 
institutions and to work to enhance their resilience in the face of possible shocks to the global 
economy. Notably, U.S. financial institutions have very limited direct net credit exposures to 
                                                 
1  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), “Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address 
Pressures in Global Money Markets,” press release, November 30. Similar announcements appeared on the 
websites of the other participating central banks. 
2  For the outstanding amount of dollar funding through the swap lines as it appears each week in the Federal 
Reserve balance sheet, see www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41. For other relevant information and materials 
on the Federal Reserve’s website,  see  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm.  For  weekly 
information  on 
see 
www.newyorkfed.org/markets/fxswap/fxswap.cfm. Finally, for copies of the agreements between the Federal 
Reserve 
banks, 
see 
www.newyorkfed.org/markets/liquidity_swap.html. 
transactions  with  other 
the  Federal  Reserve’s 
central  banks, 
information, 
central 
swap 
other 
other 
well 
and 
as 
as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the most vulnerable euro-area countries, and U.S. money market funds also have almost no 
exposure to those countries.  
U.S. financial institutions do have some gross exposure to potential losses arising from sales 
of credit default swap (CDS) protection referencing European sovereign debt. However, for 
the  large  U.S.  dealer  banks,  these  sales  have  been  more  than  offset  by  purchases  of 
protection,  which  would  imply  that  in  the  event  of  a  sovereign  default,  U.S.  financial 
institutions would be net recipients of CDS payouts. These positions still carry some risk in 
that  some  U.S.  banks’  counterparties  might  conceivably  fail  to  make  good  on  their 
obligations, but such risk is mitigated by the fact that the counterparties to large U.S. dealer 
banks for sovereign CDS trades are dispersed, primarily across large financial institutions. 
And  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  these  institutions  post  collateral  to  each  other  to  help 
minimize possible losses.  
Although  U.S.  banks  have  limited  exposure  to  peripheral  European  countries,  their 
exposures  to  European  banks  and  to  the  larger,  “core”  countries  of  Europe  are  more 
material.  Moreover,  European  holdings  represented  35  percent  of  the  assets  of  prime 
U.S. money market funds in February, and these funds remain structurally vulnerable despite 
some  constructive  steps,  such  as  improved  liquidity  requirements,  taken  since  the  recent 
financial  crisis.  U.S.  financial  firms  and  money  market  funds  have  had  time  to  adjust  their 
exposures and hedge their risks to some degree as the European situation has evolved, but 
the risks of contagion remain a concern for both these institutions and their supervisors and 
regulators. In particular, were the situation in Europe to take a severe turn for the worse, the 
U.S. financial sector likely would have to contend not only with problems stemming from its 
direct European exposures, but also with an array of broader market movements, including 
declines in global equity prices, increased credit costs, and reduced availability of funding.  
To  address  these  broader  risks,  we  have  been  working  closely  with  large  U.S.  financial 
institutions. Most recently, on March 13, we released results from our Comprehensive Capital 
Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR)  –  a  supervisory  assessment  by  the  Federal  Reserve  of  the 
capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large, complex bank holding companies.3 
As part of this exercise, bank capital positions were evaluated under a hypothetical stress 
scenario that involved a deep recession in the United States (with unemployment reaching 
13 percent) and a notable decline in activity abroad, combined with sharp decreases in both 
domestic and global asset prices. This exercise was designed to capture both the direct and 
indirect  exposures  and  vulnerabilities  of  U.S.  financial  institutions  to  the  economic  and 
financial stresses  that might  arise  from  a  severe  crisis in Europe.  The  results  show  that  a 
significant  majority  of  the  largest  U.S.  banks  would  continue  to  meet  supervisory 
expectations  for  capital  adequacy  despite  large  projected  losses  in  an  extremely  adverse 
hypothetical scenario.  
Conclusion 
The recent reduction in financial stresses in Europe is a welcome development for the United 
States, given the important trade and financial linkages connecting our economies. However, 
Europe’s financial and economic situation remains difficult, and it is critical that the European 
leaders follow through on their policy commitments to ensure a lasting stabilization. I believe 
that  our  European  counterparts  understand  the  challenges  and  risks  they  face  and  are 
committed to take the necessary steps to address those issues.  
For our part, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor the situation closely, work with our 
financial  institutions  and  foreign  counterparts  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  our  financial 
                                                 
3  See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2012),  “Federal  Reserve  Announces  Summary 
Results of Latest Round of Bank Stress Tests,” press release, March 13. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
system,  and  be  ready  to  use  our  tools  to  help  stabilize  U.S.  markets  should  the  situation 
require such action.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
