Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thailand – assessment of recent economic performance and 
challenges for the period ahead 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Institute of International Finance Asia CEO Summit, Bangkok, 14 March 2012. 
 Distinguished speakers,  
Ladies and gentlemen.  
Let me begin by thanking our hosts – the IIF and Bangkok Bank, for inviting me to speak 
before  you  at  this  occasion.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  unique  forum  that  brings 
together so many experts from both the private and public sides of the international financial 
community.  I  would  also  like  to  congratulate  the  IIF  for  your  proud  30th  Anniversary.  My 
designated topic for today is on Thailand’s recent economic performance and challenges for 
the period ahead. In this audience, I think it is safe to presume that most of you are familiar 
with recent economic developments so I will be brief in this respect and focus most of my 
remarks on challenges going forward.  
So let me start by offering a recap on the events of 2011 up to now. The main theme during 
most of last year was maintaining growth momentum while keeping stability in check. 
As the economy gained traction, the balance of risks began to shift away from growth and 
towards  inflation.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  was  dedicated  to  normalizing  interest  rates. 
Then the table was turned. Threats to the global outlook began to intensify, driven primarily 
by  the  euro  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  signs  of  continued  fragility  in  the  US  economic 
recovery.  Domestically,  the  devastating  floods  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  caused 
severe  disruptions  to  our  agricultural  and  manufacturing  industries  in  affected  areas.  With 
upside  risks  to  inflation  deemed  to  be  contained,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
agreed that there was room to address the heightened risk to growth and the policy rate was 
reduced by a total of 50 basis points over two meetings.  
The current rate of 3.00 percent was judged to be accommodative for domestic recovery as 
well as supportive of long-term economic stability.  
This is the story up to now. While the overall environment is improving, one cannot afford to 
be complacent. The events over the past few years has reminded us that things that seem 
under control can get out of hand very quickly. So, let me take you farther down the road of 
2012–2013.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  key  issues.  The  first  concerns  future 
challenges facing Thailand. The second then addresses the Bank of Thailand (BOT)’s 
policy focus, going forward.  
First, on the challenges.  
On  the  external  front,  uncertainties  surrounding  the  global  recovery  remain 
substantial.  Major  advanced  economies  are  still  grappling  with  structural  weaknesses  in 
their economies. Most prominent is the substantial debt-overhang. In the euro area, this is 
mainly in the form of sovereign debt. In the US, the problem lies primarily with private sector 
debt. While the US is more advanced in the de-leveraging process, the debt-overhang will be 
a  drag  on  growth  in  both  regions  well  into  2012.  Dealing  with  such  deep-rooted  problems 
require tough, unpopular, actions at the fundamental level. A critical challenge is in justifying 
these  actions  to  an  increasingly  skeptical  public.  Thus  the  implementation  of  the  required 
policies is just as hard, if not harder, than coming up with the solution. The political risks 
involved in all this is a key source of uncertainty that we must be mindful of.  
While global financial markets in recent months appear to be coping better with this nagging 
uncertainty, we are definitely not out of the woods. And the risks are much compounded 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
towards  economic 
given  the  limited  room  for  additional  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  remaining  in  the 
advanced economies.  
Looking  closer  to  home,  the  rising  contribution  of  Asia  to  the  global  economy  is 
reassuring.  Despite  the  slowdown  in  exports  on  the  back  of  a  softer  global  economy, 
domestic  demand  in  many  Asian  economies  remains  robust.  The  expanding  role  of  China 
and  ASEAN’s  commitment 
integration  will  offer  vast  economic 
opportunities for the region. However, as will be discussed later, taking advantage of such 
opportunities will neither be automatic nor easy. The key challenge for Thailand is to make 
sure  that  we  harness  the  opportunities  and  incentives  generated  by  this  process  to 
achieve fundamental restructuring of our economy and raise our potential growth.  
On  that  note,  let  me  turn  to  the  domestic  challenges.  This  year,  Thailand  must  stay 
focused on ensuring post-flood recovery and restoring confidence. The damage of the 
floods  was  severe.  Economic  activity  contracted  by  9  percent  year-on-year  in  the  final 
quarter of last year and the economy barely grew over the year as a whole. However, the 
impact of a  one-time shock of this kind will likely be temporary and there is no doubt that 
Thailand  will  recover  strongly.  Indeed,  notwithstanding  some  slight  delays  associated  with 
the need to import machinery and the processing of insurance payouts, the recovery process 
is  well  under  way.  We  expect  that growth  will  rebound  to  4.9  percent in  2012  (figure  from 
MPC January Meeting), boosted mainly by post-flood spending of both the private and public 
sectors. In 2013, momentum is expected to pick up, resulting in an expansion of 5.6 percent.  
This  optimistic  outlook  reflects  key  fundamental  strengths  in  Thailand’s  economy. 
First,  Thailand’s  human  capital  remains  intact  and  strong,  ready  to  support  business 
expansion.  Second,  the  corporate  sector  continues  to  enjoy  healthy  balance  sheets  from 
accumulated savings and profits. This strong financial position will enable future investment 
and restoration. Third, Thailand’s financial sector is well positioned to provide the financing 
necessary  to  facilitate  the  investment  cycle.  Although  the  new  Financial  Institutions 
Development  Fund  (FIDF)  fee  will  detract  from  banks’  bottom  line,  the  impact  should  be 
marginal and manageable. Finally, Thailand is well positioned geographically to serve as a 
supply-chain  hub  for  many  industries,  and  stands  to  gain  from  the  expanding  set  of 
opportunities created by a growing and more integrated Asian economy.  
Thailand’s underlying strength places us in a position to reap the substantial benefits 
from such regional expansion and integration. However, realizing these benefits will be a 
challenge and requires considerable adjustments. The key task is to ensure the necessary 
structural reforms to enhance Thailand’s international competitiveness. Factors of production 
will  need  to  be  relocated  from  sunset  to  sunrise  sectors.  The  quality  of  our  human  capital 
should  be  continuously  strengthened  to  handle  broadened  and  more  complex  activities  as 
well  as  competition.  Logistics  and  basic  infrastructure  need  to  be  upgraded  to  support 
increased flows of goods and services. Government policies, rules, regulations and the legal 
framework must be improved and updated to facilitate all of this. In a world with so much 
uncertainty,  what  is  certain  is  that  we  cannot  simply  make-do  with  the  status  quo. 
Lifting our growth potential requires vigorous change and transformation in what we 
do and how we do it.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
As  the  familiar  French  proverb  –  “Rome  was  not  built  in  a  day”  goes;  these  structural 
challenges  cannot  possibly  be  addressed  in  the  short-term.  Successful  implementation  of 
this reform agenda requires a medium- to long-term perspective. The public sector will play a 
critical  role  in  this.  This  brings  me  to  the  final  part  of  my  address,  the  BOT’s  policy  focus 
going forward.  
Starting with monetary policy, the primary aim at the current juncture is to strike the 
right balance between accommodating domestic recovery while ensuring stability in 
the long-term. As mentioned earlier, recent monetary policy actions were geared towards 
temporarily  addressing  risks  to  growth.  In  the  context  of  a  sharp  contraction  in  economic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activity  from  the  floods, moderating  inflationary  risks,  and  pronounced  headwinds  from  the 
global  economy,  the  MPC  judged  this  to  be  most  appropriate.  Such  policy  actions  have 
helped  to  shore  up  confidence  and  hasten  the  recovery  process.  However,  with  clearer 
signs of a pickup in economic activity and the recent rise in global oil prices, upside 
risks  to  inflation  has  become  more  elevated.  It  is  unlikely  though  that  inflation  would 
accelerate to the extent that would threaten economic stability. Nonetheless, monetary policy 
will  remain  watchful  as  the  pick-up  in  public  and  private  spending  and  cost-side  pressure 
stemming from various government stimulus packages may add extra inflationary pressure in 
the period ahead.  
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  let  me  reiterate  our  commitment  to  the  inflation 
targeting framework.  Since its adoption over  10 years ago, this framework has  endowed 
monetary policy with a degree of flexibility and credibility that has proved extremely valuable. 
Especially through trying times with high levels of uncertainty, the framework has imparted a 
degree of stability by helping to anchor public expectations of monetary policy. In delivering 
our  primary  mandate  of  macroeconomic  stability,  inflation  targeting  will  continue  to  be  a 
central pillar.  
At  a  more  structural  level,  the  BOT  can  also  act  as  a  catalyst  to  help  enhance 
competitiveness  and  augment  economic  adaptability.  One  key  avenue  is  through 
fostering financial sector development. Here, the main thrust of our policy focus will 
be to enhance the effectiveness of the financial sector in serving as intermediaries of 
capital  through  further  liberalization.  The  aim  is  to  achieve  improvements  in  four  key 
dimensions.  They  are:  (1)  greater  financial  innovation  and  expansion  of  available  financial 
instruments;  (2)  broader  choice  of  services  to  suit  households  and  firms’  needs;  (3)  lower 
costs of such services; and (4) improvement in financial access.  
Starting with the banking sector, which plays the most prominent role in our financial 
system,  we  will  be  taking  steps  to  enhance  competition.  In  the  spirit  of  progressive 
liberalization  under  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC),  Thailand’s  formula  for  the 
banking  sector  will  be  guided  by  the  second  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan.  This  year,  we 
enter the second phase of this plan, which would allow existing foreign bank branches and 
subsidiaries  up  to  a  maximum  of  20  branches  and  20  off-premise  ATMs.  New  service 
providers  may  be  allowed  under  a  restricted  license  to  close  any  remaining  gaps  in  the 
system. In the final phase in 2014, additional new licenses may also be considered.  
Complementing  this  push  will  be  efforts  to  boost  financial  market  development 
through a more streamlined capital account and foreign exchange regulatory regime. 
This is part of a broader Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan aimed at facilitating and 
encouraging more outward investment by Thai residents in foreign assets.  
At  the  same  time,  we  are  mindful  that  financial  sector  development  cannot  be 
sustained without adequate attention to risk management. I should briefly mention here 
that we are moving steadily forward with Basel III implementation. The overall implication of 
this new regime is a shift in bank capital structure that should result in greater resilience to 
liquidity  shocks  and  less  pro-cyclicality.  From  a  macro-prudential  perspective,  the  new 
regime implies more pre-emptive policy actions and a greater mix of policy options. In 
this respect, there is a balance to be achieved. On the one hand, tighter regulatory structure 
and more active use of macroprudential policies may imply higher costs for banks. On the 
other hand, these costs, some of which can be offset through efficiency gains, represent a 
price worth paying for a safer and more stable financial system.  
In terms of implementation, the BOT is currently finalizing the national standards and 
time-frame for adoption. The Thai banking sector can expect the first draft of the Basel III 
capital regulatory framework and liquidity risk management guidelines to be available later 
this  month,  with  an  industry  hearing  in  the  second  quarter  to  gather  feedback.  Ongoing 
Impact  Study 
monitoring  will  be  supplemented  by 
the  conduct  of  a  Quantitative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
semi-annually.  This  is  to  address  any  unintended  consequences  and  maintain  on-going 
communication and feedback with the industry.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me conclude by stressing that the BOT has a significant contribution to make in 
helping Thailand upgrade competitiveness and achieve long-term macroeconomic and 
financial  stability.  However,  we  cannot  do  this  alone.  A  common  vision  and  strong 
commitment among all stakeholders are necessary pre-conditions when it comes to 
long-term structural reforms. Rest assured that the BOT is committed to push forward the 
national agenda on reforms, particularly on issues involving the public sector, to ensure that 
our economic system attains greater efficiency.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
