William C Dudley: Remarks at panel discussion on fiscal challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  panel  discussion  at  2012  US  Monetary  Policy  Forum, 
sponsored  by  The  Initiative  on  Global  Markets,  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School  of 
Business, New York City, 24 February 2012. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today on a panel with Charles Plosser 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and Juergen Stark, formerly of the European 
Central Bank. Our topic today is fiscal policy–for central bankers always dangerous waters to 
swim  in.  I  will  focus  my  remarks  on  the  United  States  as  others  are  better  qualified  to 
comment on the situation in Europe and elsewhere.  
To  start,  let  me  stress  that  it  is  essential  that  the  United  States  put  in  place  a  credible 
program  of  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  that  addresses  our  sizeable  and  growing 
structural deficits in a manner that is consistent with supporting ongoing economic recovery. 
Today  I  am  going  to  discuss  two  specific  issues  relevant  to  U.S.  fiscal  policy.  First,  I  am 
going to highlight the importance of taking the increase in debt service costs into account that 
will take place when economic conditions permit the normalization of monetary policy. I will 
argue  that  we  are  in  an  unusual  period  in  which  net  interest  expense  is  temporarily 
depressed. This will not last and the fiscal authorities need to factor this in when considering 
what needs to be done to put the federal budget deficit and the nation’s debt burden on a 
sustainable path. 
Second,  I  will  argue  that  fiscal  consolidation  should  take  into  consideration  the  offsetting 
adjustments needed to keep the economy on an even keel. While fiscal consolidation is a 
necessary condition for a healthy economy over time, it is not a sufficient condition. Fiscal 
adjustments require offsetting changes in private-sector spending and saving behavior, and 
in the trade sector. Prudent economic policies and international coordination can help ensure 
that such adjustments take place in ways that support economic activity (and, by extension 
also support government revenue). 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and opinions and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
As we all are aware, the federal budget deficit is very high and the federal debt burden has 
climbed sharply as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) (Figure 1). 
Despite this, the net interest burden on the outstanding debt remains low as a share of GDP 
(Figure 2).  
This is due, of course, to the unusually low level of short- and long-term interest rates.  
These  unusually  low  interest  rates  are  the  result  of  monetary  policy  actions  taken  by  the 
FOMC. The sole purpose of these actions has been to promote the dual mandate objectives 
of maximum employment and price stability in the wake of the financial crisis. The FOMC has 
stated that it currently anticipates keeping short-term interest rates exceptionally low until late 
2014 and this has contributed to the decline in long-term rates. In addition, large-scale asset 
purchases and the maturity extension program have pushed down longer-term interest rates 
by  removing  duration  from  the  private  market.  As  a  result,  both  the  U.S.  government  and 
private-sector borrowers have benefited from unusually low borrowing costs. 
Indeed,  the  net  interest  burden  data  shown  in  Figure  2  actually  overstates  the  net  cost  to 
Treasury. That is because the interest payments from the Treasury to the Federal Reserve 
are included in the net interest cost shown in Figure 2, but no offsetting adjustment is made 
for the fact that the Fed remits almost all of the interest it receives from the Treasury and on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
its other portfolio holdings right back to the Treasury. The Federal Reserve’s remittances to 
the Treasury are included in the budget separately in the miscellaneous receipts category. 
Thus, one should deduct these receipts from the debt service numbers to properly measure 
the Treasury’s net interest burden. 
Normally,  this  adjustment  doesn’t  change  the  picture  much.  However,  it  is  relevant  now 
because Federal Reserve remittances are unusually high. This is because the Fed’s balance 
sheet  is  unusually  large,  as  a  result  of  asset  purchases  undertaken  to  promote  the  dual 
mandate,  and  because  the  spread  between  the  cost  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  liabilities 
(mainly the  0.25 percent rate that the Fed pays on excess reserves) and the return on its 
assets is unusually high. As shown in (Figure 3), the Fed’s net remittances to the Treasury 
have climbed sharply in recent years, rising to more than $75 billion per year over the past 
two years, after averaging about $27 billion over the 2005–07 period.1  
Subtracting net remittances from the Fed from the Treasury’s net interest cost (as a share of 
GDP), one can see that the increase in our enlarged federal debt has not yet generated a 
significant rise in the net debt service burden (Figure 4). However, the low interest rates and 
enlarged  balance  sheet,  which  has  generated  these  reduced  borrowing  costs,  will  not  be 
sustained over time. Recall that the Federal Reserve’s policy decisions are motivated solely 
by monetary policy considerations–how best to achieve maximum sustainable employment 
and price stability.  
This  means  that  the  ancillary  effects  on  the  federal  deficit  from  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy 
actions  are  incidental  and  will  prove  temporary.  Eventually,  as  economic  and  financial 
conditions improve, the pursuit of the dual mandate will lead to a different monetary policy 
stance, one that requires higher short-term interest rates. And, the Federal Reserve will also 
eventually  shrink  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet.  These  actions  will  tend  to  increase  the 
Treasury’s  net  interest  costs  and  pull  down  the  Federal  Reserve’s  remittances  to  the 
Treasury. Together, these two effects will sharply push up the Treasury’s net interest burden. 
To show how this may play out, let’s use as an illustration a “current policy” baseline based 
on  information  provided  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  including  its  macroeconomic 
assumptions.  Under  these  assumptions,  the  output  gap  is  closed  and  monetary  policy  is 
normalized by 2017. As shown in Figure 5, net debt service is projected to rise to 3.3 percent 
of GDP by fiscal year 2020 up from 1.0 percent in 2011, based on an assumption that the 
interest  rate  for  three-month  Treasury  bills  will  rise  from  around  10  basis  points  today  to 
3.8 percent  by  2020  and  the  interest  rate  on  benchmark  10-year  Treasury  securities  will 
increase from around 2 percent today to 5 percent by 2020. 
On top of this, Federal Reserve remittances are projected to fall sharply. In its recent current 
law baseline projection, the CBO calculates that net remittances will decline from a peak of 
0.55  percent  of  GDP  in  2011  to  a  long-run  average  of  around  0.2  percent  by  2017  and 
beyond. Thus, on the current policy baseline, the combined effect of higher debt service and 
lower remittances will total 2 ¼ percent of GDP by fiscal 2020 relative to the current fiscal 
year (Figure 5).  
Of course, this assumes that interest rates follow the trajectory used in the CBO baseline. If 
interest rates rose faster and reached a level 100 basis points higher in 2020 than what the 
CBO  has  assumed,  the  net  debt  service  burden  would  be  about  3  ¼  percentage  points 
higher  by  2020,  all  else  equal.  Given  the  uncertainties  around  economic  forecasts  that  far 
into  the  future,  it  would  be  highly  desirable  for  the  fiscal  authorities  to  put  in  place  a 
medium-term program of fiscal consolidation now, while market conditions are benign. 
At the same time, I think we must be careful and not focus exclusively on the imperative of 
fiscal consolidation. That is because fiscal policy adjustments have important implications for 
                                                 
1  The 2011 remittance figure is a preliminary unaudited estimate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  level  and  composition  of  economic  activity  more  broadly–both  here  and  abroad.  If  we 
must undertake fiscal consolidation– and over time we must–then we need to be cognizant 
that  this  adjustment  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  other  offsetting  changes  in  the 
composition of economic activity in our and the global economy.2 
One  way  of  illustrating  these  interrelationships  is  to  use  the  following  accounting  identity, 
which imposes an adding up constraint on the overall economy: 
If you define private-sector net saving as the private balance and public sector net saving as 
the public balance, then: 
Private balance + public balance = current account balance. 
At the outset of the financial crisis, the private balance, which was negative, swung sharply 
into  surplus,  and  this  was  largely  accommodated  by  a  decrease  in  the  public  balance–in 
other words, an increase in the government deficit. 
Recently,3 this accounting identity looked roughly like this: 
6.5% of GDP private balance + (–9.5% of GDP) public balance = –3% of GDP 
current account balance 
Realistically, the public balance4 needs to be reduced to about –3 percent of GDP over the 
next five years or so for the ratio of federal debt held by the public-to-GDP to stabilize around 
75 percent to 80 percent of GDP. One might reasonably do more, but this just strikes me as 
the  minimum  adjustment  that  would  be  prudent  and  sustainable.  This  requires  a  large 
change  from  where  we  are  today.  For  the  accounting  identity  to  continue  to  hold,  which  it 
must,  there  needs  to  be  sizable  shifts  in  the  private  balance  and/or  the  current  account 
balance. This is not a policy choice – it is basic math – but policy choices can help ensure 
that the adjustments take place in a way that is supportive of economic activity. 
The private balance can be further divided into two pieces–the household balance and the 
business  balance.  Currently,  for  the  United  States,  the  household  balance  is  about 
2.5 percent  of  GDP  and  the  business  balance  is  about  4  percent  of  GDP.  As  shown  in 
(Figure 6), which shows these two components over time, the business balance is currently 
unusually  high;  that  is,  businesses  have  very  high  cash  flows  relative  to  their  investment 
outlays. This suggests that some of the required adjustment could occur by fostering greater 
investment spending as a share of GDP.  
For this to occur, it will be important that economic policies promote long-term growth and 
financial  stability,  and  ensure  that  the  United  States  is  a  competitive  place  to  base 
production,  with  a  well-functioning  infrastructure,  a  skilled  workforce  and  a  reasonable  tax 
and regulatory system.  
In addition, it seems desireable that some of the adjustment should take place in the trade 
sector. Although a current account deficit of 3 percent of GDP by itself would be sustainable 
over time, for the household balance to remain close to current levels and the public balance 
to sharply narrow, then the current account may need to move further toward balance. 
For  this  to  occur,  there  needs  to  be  two  offsetting  adjustments.  On  one  hand,  the 
U.S. economy  must be reoriented toward global demand and stronger net exports. On the 
other hand, there will have to be offsetting adjustments elsewhere in the world. After all, on a 
global basis, the current account balance–properly measured–must sum to zero. This means 
                                                 
2  See "Securing the Recovery and Building for the Future." Remarks by William Dudley at United States Military 
Academy at West Point, New York, November 17, 2011, for a more detailed discussion of this issue. 
3  Third quarter 2011, the latest period for which data are available. 
4  The federal public balance is roughly equivalent, though not identical, to the federal budget deficit; the overall 
public balance numbers provided here include state and local government. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
that countries with significant trade surpluses will need to reorient their economies over time 
toward increasing domestic demand and running smaller trade surpluses. 
To sum up, the United States faces substantial fiscal challenges in the years ahead. And, in 
one  important  respect–net  interest  expense–these  challenges  may  be  more  daunting  than 
fully appreciated currently. In particular, the interest bill on the growing federal debt burden 
has  been  temporarily  restrained  by  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  high  level  of 
remittances  from  the  Federal  Reserve  to  the  Treasury.  In  addition,  while  significant  fiscal 
adjustments  must  take  place,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  such  efforts  will  necessitate 
offsetting shifts in private domestic spending and production both here and abroad. Finding 
ways for these adjustments to occur smoothly is an important challenge for economic policy. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
