Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in Uttarakhand 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
G.B. Pant University of Agricultural Technology, Pantnagar, 31 August 2012. 
 The assistance provided by P K Nayak and S Suraj in preparation of the speech is acknowledged.  
I thank Professor Murthy for inviting me to share my thoughts with a young audience in an 
institution which has a formidable reputation in agricultural research as having pioneered the 
“Green Revolution”. In my talk today, I propose to briefly outline the economic and financial 
structure of the State as well as highlight various financial inclusion initiatives taken by the 
Reserve  Bank.  I  will  then  indicate  a  few  policy  challenges  in  sustaining  the  growth 
momentum. I conclude with some thoughts on the agricultural economy.  
I  will  trace  the  economic  development  starting  from  the  early  2000s  mainly  because 
Uttarakhand  was  instituted  in  2000  as  the  27th  State  of  the  Republic  of  India.  The  State 
known  as  the  abode  of  gods  is  truly  a  paradise  for  nature  lovers  and  adventure  sports 
endowed  with  the  natural  bounty  of  glaciers,  rivers  and  forests.  It  is  one  of  the  thinly 
populated States accounting for 1.6 per cent of the total geographical area of the country and 
0.8  per  cent  of  the  national  population.  Located  in  the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas, 
Uttarakhand’s  terrain  and  agro-climatic  conditions  obviously  provide  unique  challenges  as 
well as opportunities for growth and development. 
Macroeconomic trends  
In  the  2000s,  the  Indian  economy  witnessed  acceleration  in  economic  growth.  It  is 
noteworthy that the State registered even higher growth thus emerging as one of the fastest 
growing states in India (Chart 1).  
The  growth  acceleration  in  the  State  was  also  reflected  in  the  per  capita  income  which 
increased by 168 per cent from ₹19,457 in 2001–02 to ₹52,125 by 2011–12. The increase in 
the  State  per  capita  income  was  much  sharper  as  compared  to  the  all-India  per  capita 
income  which  increased  by  81  per  cent  from  ₹20,943  to  ₹37,851  during  the  same  period 
(Chart 2). This enabled the State to significantly improve its rank among the 28 states from 
17th to 10th during the same period. 
The growth impulses in the initial phase during 2001–08 emanated mainly from industry and 
services. In the latter phase of 2009–12, growth was driven by the services sector. However, 
in both the phases agricultural growth remained low and volatile (Chart 3).  
Reflecting  the  divergence  in  sectoral  growth  trends,  the  contribution  of  agriculture  to  the 
gross  state  domestic  product  (GSDP)  declined  while  that  of  industry  and  services  sectors 
rose  (Chart  4).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  growth  of  industrial  sector  in  the  State  has  been 
significant despite the constraints of the terrain and topography. 
An  analysis  of  the  trends  at  a  more  disaggregate  level  suggests  that  growth  was  led  by 
manufacturing, construction and trade & hotels (Chart 5). 
The  composition  of  the  labour  force  mirrored  the  composition  of  GSDP.  The  share  of 
employment  in  agriculture  at  33  per  cent  remained  significantly  lower  than  the  national 
average  of  around 52  per  cent. The share  of  construction, trade  and manufacturing  in the 
labour force remained higher compared to the national average (Table 1). However, labour 
force  participation  rate  at  around  47  per  cent  in  2010–11  was  lower  than  the  labour 
participation rate of 53 per cent at the national level indicating higher level of unemployment 
in the State. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Socio-economic indicators 
The  State  has  the  potential  to  achieve  faster  growth  by  harnessing  the  large  proportion  of 
working age population by encouraging quality vocational and professional education (Chart 6). 
The  share  of  informal  sector  in  employment  generation  in  the  State  is  very  minimal  as 
compared  with  other  states  (Chart  7).  Hence,  the  development  of  the  informal  sector  is 
important  as  it  could  help  harness  the  demographic  dividend  bestowed  on  the  State.  The 
informal sector can also play a significant role in improving credit absorption. 
The standards of life indicators for the State compare favourably with the national average. 
The share of households having access to basic civic amenities such as safe drinking water 
and electricity was relatively high compared to the national average. Similarly ownership of 
household  assets  such  as  television,  telephone  and  mechanised  personal  transport  was 
higher than the national average. The population of households having banking facility was 
also higher than the national average (Table 2). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Notwithstanding the economic growth and better access to amenities, the State lags behind 
in  certain  human  development  aspects.  Despite  high  literacy  and  high  per  capita  income, 
there  is  high  incidence  of  poverty  and  life  expectancy  rate  is  lower  as  compared  with  the 
national  average.  The  State  ranked  14  among  the  23  States1  in  terms  of  Human 
Development Index 2007–08 (Chart 8). 
Fiscal trends 
The  State  has  initiated  various  fiscal  reforms  which  include  implementation  of  VAT, 
enactment  of  fiscal  responsibility  legislation,  introduction  of  a  new  pension  scheme, 
imposition  of  ceiling  on  guarantees  and  constitution  of  consolidated  sinking  fund  and 
guarantee  redemption  fund.  Under  the  rule  based  fiscal  framework,  fiscal  position  of  the 
State  witnessed  improvement  and  the  State  achieved  revenue  surplus  in  2006–07.  Gross 
fiscal deficit as a ratio to GSDP also declined to 2.4 per cent in 2006–07. However, declining 
trend in revenue receipts coupled with increase in expenditure turned revenue account into 
deficit during 2009–10. With the improvement in overall macroeconomic conditions, the State 
has resumed the process of fiscal correction. While revenue account turned surplus during 
2011–12 (RE), GFD-GSDP ratio has increased due to higher capital outlay (Table 3).  
                                                
1  North Eastern States excluding Assam was taken together as one entity and therefore only 23 States were 
compared for HDI ranking in the India Human Development Report 2011, Government of India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Financial indicators  
The level of financial development is critical for driving higher economic growth. The formal 
financial system in India is dominated by banks and same is the case with Uttarakhand. The 
average population per bank branch in the State was favourable at 7,300 in March 2012 as 
compared  to  all-India  average  of  12,700.Though  the  banking  penetration  is  relatively  high 
compared  to  all-India,  there  is  considerable  scope  for  increasing  coverage  given  the 
dispersed nature of villages (Chart 9).  
The credit deposit (C-D) ratio of the State at 34.2 per cent in December 2011was significantly 
lower than the C-D ratio at the all-India level of 75.7 per cent. Though the C-D Ratio of the 
State  has  shown  signs  of  improvement  in  recent  years,  it  still  significantly  lags  behind  the 
all-India average underscoring the scope for further credit penetration (Chart 10). 
Another measure of credit intensity is the ratio of bank credit to the GSDP which is low in the 
State compared to all-India level indicating the need for further credit expansion (Chart 11).  
Not only is the overall C-D ratio low but also there is considerable variability across districts 
(Chart 12). The wide disparities in the distribution of credit indicate that greater attention is 
needed to enhance availability of financial services in the hill regions of the State.  
At  the  disaggregated  activity  level,  the  share  of  agricultural  credit  was  relatively  low  with 
considerable inter-district variability (Chart 13). Agriculture being the main livelihood for the 
hill districts, the uneven distribution of credit across the districts is not conducive to inclusive 
growth.  
Financial inclusion 
Against this background, let me now turn to the financial inclusion strategy of the Reserve 
Bank and what are the specific steps taken for Uttarakhand? It is important to bring the poor 
and under-privileged sections of the society within the banking fold for inclusive growth. In 
this context, our recent financial inclusion drive has four key elements. 
First,  provision  of  a  set  of  basic  financial  products  and  services  for  the  vulnerable  and 
financially excluded sections. This includes a savings cum overdraft product in the form of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
no-frills account, and entrepreneurial credit in the form of Kisan Credit Card (KCC)/General 
Credit Card (GCC) (Table 4). 
Second, spread of financial literacy across all sections of the society by creating awareness 
about financial products and services among the population. 
Third,  greater  regulatory  incentives  through  liberalisation  of  interest  rates  and  branch 
licensing. Banks have been given complete freedom to price their advances so that lending 
in the rural areas could be a commercial proposition. Given the lower penetration of formal 
credit and recourse to money lenders what matters is the availability of credit rather than the 
cost. Banks have also been given the freedom to open branches in centres with population of 
less than 1,00,000.  
Fourth, use of technology and innovative delivery models so that the cost for providing large 
quantum of small-ticket transactions could be brought down. This initiative included putting in 
place  a  system  of  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  Model  to  provide  door-step  delivery  of 
financial  products  and  services  by  authorized  agents  of  banks;  and  Electronic  Benefit 
Transfer (EBT) for routing of payments of the central and state government welfare schemes 
like  social  security  pensions,  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee 
Scheme  (MNREGS),  National  Old  Age  Pension  Scheme  (NOAPS)  directly  to  the  bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries.  
In  this  direction,  the  effort  so  far  has  been  to  make  basic  banking  facility  available  to  all 
villages  with  a  population  of  over  2,000  by  end-March  2012.  The  progress  in  banking 
coverage over the last two  years has indeed been substantial. The next step is to provide 
banking facilities with population below 2000. State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs) are 
preparing  roadmaps  for  banking  facilities  in  these  villages  in  a  time  bound  manner.  For 
meaningful  financial  inclusion,  it  is  envisaged  that  banks  would  set  up  brick  and  mortar 
branches in a cluster of 8–10 BC units in a reasonable distance of 3–4 kilometers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Financial inclusion in Uttarakhand 
Banks  in  Uttarakhand  have  made  provision  for  banking  facilities  in  226  identified  villages 
having  population  of  more  than  2000  by  March  2012.  Of  these,  18  villages  are  covered 
through  bricks  and  mortar  branches,  198  villages  through  appointment  of  BCs  and 
10 through kiosks. 
Furthermore,  the  State  Government  has  identified  259  clusters  of  small  villages  as 
Nyaypanchayats, of which 108 were provided with banking facilities and the rest 151 will be 
covered during 2012–13. Further, 743 villages with the population between 1000 and 2000 
have been identified for provision banking facilities in 2012–13. 
By June 2012,8.6 lakh no-frill accounts were opened. During 2011–12, 1.2 lakh KCCs and 
1200  GCCs  were  issued  and  2600  SHGs  were  formed.  Out  of  the  13  districts  10  have 
FLCCs. 
In  addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  initiated  a  campaign  of  financial  inclusion  through 
outreach programmes by the executives of the Bank to have grassroots level understanding 
of  accessibility  of  financial  services  and  to  promote  financial  inclusion.  I  will  be  visiting 
Mayarampurnear Nanitaltomorrow for the outreach programme. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Policy challenges 
Let  me  now  turn  to  a  few  broader  macroeconomic  policy  challenges  for  the  development 
planning in the State. 
First, there is a need to promote diversification in agriculture consistent with the agro-climatic 
conditions.  It  will  help  to  address  regional  disparity  and  facilitate  poverty  alleviation. 
Agricultural growth needs to be supported by adequate storage, warehousing and marketing 
facilities which will generate employment in the informal sector. 
Second,  initiatives  need  to  be  taken  to  promote  sustainable  industrial  development 
compatible  with  the  unique  bio-diversity  of  the  State  which  in  turn  could  generate  local 
employment  and  reduces  migration.  Since  the  State  is  rich  in  water  resources,  there  is  a 
comparative  advantage  in  developing  the  hydro-electric  sector  in  an  environmentally 
sustainable manner. 
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  bridge  the  infrastructure  deficit  in  the  State  with  the  active 
participation  of  the  private  sector.  Better  infrastructure  will  enable  harnessing  the  tourism 
potential. Identified tourist zones can be connected by better quality roads besides exploring 
the possibilities of providing air links over the medium-term. 
Fourth, 
through 
knowledge-based industries. It is, therefore, important to set up quality higher learning and 
professional education centres to provide knowledge-workers. 
Fifth,  there  is,  a  need  to  improve  credit  culture  where  banks  can  explore  innovative 
customized business models  with a greater emphasis on group lending. This in turn could 
help reduce inequality in credit distribution.  
Sixth, the financial sector in the State is dominated by commercial banks. Hence, the spread 
of banking services is important for greater economic activity. In this context, the quantitative 
achievement  of  banking  coverage  reflected  in  increase  in  no-frills  accounts  need  to  be 
converted into meaningful financial inclusion by active loan and deposit transactions in these 
accounts.  The  geographical  peculiarities  of  the  State  along  with  small  size  of  scattered 
settlements make  it  difficult for  physical  location  of  branches.  Therefore,  emphasis  can  be 
placed on mobile branches with greater reliance on information technology. In this process, 
all the stake-holders – banks, the State Government and the Reserve Bank – need to work in 
close co-ordination: banks by ensuring that the BCs are active and by gradually increasing 
the  number  of  branches  in  the  unbanked  areas;  the  State  Government  by  ensuring  that 
social  benefit  transfers  progressively  take  place  through  bank  accounts;  and  the  Reserve 
Bank by effective monitoring and active co-ordination of the financial inclusion action plan in 
the State.  
literacy  provides  opportunity 
further  growth 
the  high 
level  of 
for 
Conclusion 
I briefly reviewed the recent economic and financial developments in Uttarakhand and made 
a few suggestions for sustainable inclusive growth. Let me conclude with some thoughts on 
the agricultural economy as this university has been the cradle of technological breakthrough 
in agriculture. 
As we discussed, there has been a sharp drop in the share of agriculture in the national as 
well  as  in  the  State  GDP.  However,  52  per  cent  of  our  work force  and 69  per  cent  of  the 
population  at  the  national  level  are  still  dependent  on  agriculture  directly  or  indirectly  for 
livelihood.  Hence,  agricultural  growth  is  central  to  inclusive  sustainable  overall  growth. 
However, stagnation in agriculture is increasingly emanating as a major constraint to growth. 
This has manifested itself in several ways: low productivity and high volatility in production 
across crops, low per capita availability of food products as well as high and persistent food 
inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  geo-climatic  conditions  have  also  changed  with  more  frequent  visitation  of  natural 
calamities on a wider global stake. As the net cultivable area of 142 million hectares in the 
country is not likely to increase, the gain in food production will have to be met by increasing 
productivity. In this context, there is a need for another wave of technological breakthrough in 
developing short-duration drought-resistant high yielding seeds not only for cereals but also 
pulses  and  oilseeds.  Given  the  fragmented  land  holding  pattern  in  the  country,  it  is  also 
important  to  develop  appropriate  technology  for  small  farm  size.  There  is  also  a  need  for 
developing better farming practices in horticulture, poultry, dairy and fishery, the consumption 
of  which  is  going  to  increase  substantially.  In  this  endeavour,  agricultural  scientists  and 
leaders like you have an important role in ushering in another Green Revolution for which 
this university has prided itself. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
