Charles I Plosser: Restoring central banks after the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  conference  of  the  Global  Interdependence  Center  / 
Bank of France, Paris, 26 March 2012. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
I am delighted to be here today in this beautiful city and to have the honor to serve on such a 
distinguished  panel  with  friends  and  colleagues.  David  Kotok  has  been  the  guiding  force 
behind the GIC conferences over the past several years. He and his team at the GIC never 
fail to gather an interesting and knowledgeable group of people to discuss important topics 
on truly global issues. So, I want to thank him and the GIC for their efforts and contributions. I 
also want to thank our hosts, Christian Noyer and the Banque de France. 
I am going to take a little different tack on the subject matter of this gathering. Rather than 
focus on what new orthodoxy we should take away from the financial crisis, I want to argue 
that we need to restore some of the old orthodoxy. David did suggest that he wanted to have 
a conversation on important issues, so I intend to be somewhat provocative in an effort to 
stimulate such conversation. As usual, I want to stress that my views are my own and not 
necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 
I will focus my remarks on two related topics that have emerged as a consequence of the 
crisis. The first is the relation between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The second topic 
involves the role of a central bank’s balance sheet as a policy tool. These are issues that I 
believe are of fundamental importance to the role of central banks in our economies. 
The relationship between monetary and fiscal policies 
Let me begin by sharing some thoughts on the appropriate relationship between monetary 
and  fiscal  policies.  In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  ensuing  recession,  many 
countries  around  the  world  responded  with  a  significant  increase  in  government  spending. 
Some of this increase came about through what economists call automatic stabilizers. But 
there has also been a dramatic expansion in budget deficits attributable to deliberate efforts 
to  apply  fiscal  stimulus  to  improve  economic  outcomes.  This  expansion  in  government 
spending has been very significant in the U.S., but it has also occurred in other countries. So 
what does this have to do with monetary policy? Well, it turns out, a great deal. It is widely 
understood  that  governments  can  finance  expenditures  through  taxation,  debt  –  that  is, 
future  taxes  –  or  printing  money.  In  this  sense,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  are 
intertwined through the government budget constraint. 
For good reasons, though, societies have converged toward arrangements that provide a fair 
degree  of  separation  between  the  functions  of  central  banks  and  those  of  their  fiscal 
authorities. For example, in a world of fiat currency, central banks are generally assigned the 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining the value or purchasing power of the nation’s 
unit  of  account.  Yet,  that  task  can  be  undermined,  or  completely  subverted,  if  fiscal 
authorities set their budgets in a manner that ultimately requires the central bank to finance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
government expenditures with significant amounts of seigniorage in lieu of current or future 
tax revenue.1 
The  ability  of  a  central  bank  to  maintain  price  stability  can  also  be  undermined  when  the 
central  bank  itself  ventures  into  the  realm  of  fiscal  policy.  History  teaches  us  that  unless 
governments are constrained institutionally or constitutionally, they often resort to the printing 
press  to  try  to  escape  what  appear  to  be  intractable  budget  problems.  And  the  budget 
problems  faced  by  many  governments  today  are,  indeed,  challenging.  But  history  also 
teaches  us  that  resorting  to  the  printing  press  in  lieu  of  making  tough  fiscal  choices  is  a 
recipe for creating substantial inflation and, in some cases, hyperinflation. 
Awareness of these long-term consequences of excessive money creation is the reason that 
over  the  past  60  years,  country  after  country  has  moved  to  establish  and  maintain 
independent  central  banks  –  that  is,  central  banks  that  have  the  ability  to  make  monetary 
policy decisions free from short-run political interference. Without the protections afforded by 
independence,  the  temptation  of  governments  to  exploit  the  printing  press  to  avoid  fiscal 
discipline  is  often  just  too  great.  Thus,  it  is  simply  good  governance  and  wise  economic 
policy  to  maintain  a  healthy  separation  between  those  responsible  for  tax  and  spending 
policy and those responsible for money creation. 
It  is  equally  important  for  central  banks  that  have  been  granted  independence  to  be 
constrained  from  using  their  own  authority  to  engage  in  activities  that  more  appropriately 
belong  to  the  fiscal  authorities  or  the  private  sector.  In  other  words,  with  independence 
comes responsibility and accountability. Central banks that breach their boundaries risk their 
legitimacy, credibility, and ultimately, their independence. Given the benefits of central bank 
independence, that could prove costly to society in the long run. 
There are a number of approaches to placing limits on independent central banks so that the 
boundaries between monetary policy and fiscal policy remain clear. 
First, the central bank can be given a narrow mandate, such as price stability. In fact, this 
has been a prominent trend during the last 25 years. Many major central banks now have 
price stability as their sole or primary mandate. 
Second, the central bank can be restricted as to the type of assets it can hold on its balance 
sheet. This limits its ability to engage in credit policies or resource allocations that rightfully 
belong under the purview of the fiscal authorities or the private marketplace. 
And third, the central bank can conduct monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner, 
which  limits  the  scope  of  discretionary  actions  that  might  cross  the  boundaries  between 
monetary and fiscal policies. Milton Friedman’s famous k-percent money growth rule is one 
example, as are Taylor-type rules for the setting of the interest rate instrument.  
Unfortunately,  over  the  past  few  years,  the  combination  of  a  financial  crisis  and  sustained 
fiscal imbalances has led to a breakdown in the institutional framework and the previously 
accepted barriers between monetary and fiscal policies. The pressure has come from both 
sides.  Governments  are  pushing  central  banks  to  exceed  their  monetary  boundaries,  and 
central  banks  are  stepping  into  areas  not  previously  viewed  as  appropriate  for  an 
independent central bank. 
Let me offer a couple of examples to illustrate these pressures. First, despite the well-known 
benefits of price stability, there are calls in many countries to abandon this commitment and 
create higher inflation to devalue outstanding nominal government and private debt. That is, 
some suggest that we should attempt to use inflation to solve the debt overhang problem. 
                                                 
1  See Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (Fall 1981), pp 1–17. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Such policies are intended to redistribute losses on nominal debt from the borrowers to the 
lenders. Using inflation as a backdoor to such fiscal choices is bad policy, in my view. 
Pressure on central banks is also showing up through other channels. In some circles, it has 
become fashionable to invoke lender-of-last-resort arguments as a rationale for central banks 
to  lend  to  “insolvent”  organizations,  either  failing  businesses  or,  in  some  cases,  failing 
governments.  Such  arguments  go  beyond  the  well-accepted  principles  established  by 
Walter Bagehot,  who  wrote  in  his  1873  classic  Lombard  Street  that  central  bankers  could 
limit  systemic  risk  in  a  banking  crisis  by  “lending  freely  at  a  penalty  rate  against  good 
collateral”.  Central  bankers  have  abandoned  this  basic  Bagehot  principle  in  the  last  few 
years but have not replaced it with a clear alternative. Indeed, actions were often confusing 
and  unpredictable  and  lacked  a  coherent  framework.  I  believe  that  central  banks  need  to 
think  hard  about  how  and  when  they  exercise  this  important  role.  We  need  to  have  a 
well-articulated  and  systematic  approach  to  such  actions.  Otherwise,  our  actions  will 
exacerbate moral hazard and encourage excessive risk-taking, thus sowing the seeds for the 
next  crisis.  Unfortunately,  neither  financial  reform  nor  central  banks  have  adequately 
addressed this dilemma.  
Breaching the boundaries is not confined to the fiscal authorities asking central banks to do 
their heavy lifting. The Fed and other central banks have undertaken other actions that have 
blurred  the  distinction  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy,  such  as  adopting  credit 
policies that favor some industries or asset classes relative to others. Such steps were taken 
with the sincere belief that they were absolutely necessary to address the challenges posed 
by the financial crisis. 
The clearest examples can be seen when the Federal Reserve established credit facilities to 
support markets for commercial paper and asset-backed securities. Most notable has been 
the  effort  by  the  Fed  to  support  the  housing  market  through  its  purchases  of  mortgage-
backed securities. These credit allocations have not only breached the traditional boundaries 
between fiscal and monetary policy, they have generated pointed public criticisms of the Fed. 
Once  a  central  bank  ventures  into  fiscal  policy,  it  is  likely  to  find  itself  under  increasing 
pressure  from  the  private  sector,  financial  markets,  or  the  government  to  use  its  balance 
sheet to substitute for other fiscal decisions. Such actions by a central bank can create their 
own  form  of  moral  hazard,  as  markets  and  governments  come  to  see  central  banks  as 
instruments  of  fiscal  policy,  thus  undermining  incentives  for  fiscal  discipline.  This  pressure 
can  threaten  the  central  bank’s  independence  in  conducting  monetary  policy  and  thereby 
undermine monetary policy’s effectiveness in achieving its mandate. 
In my view, this blurring of the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies is fraught 
with risks. As I said, these boundaries arose for good reason, and we ignore their breach at 
our peril. I believe we must seek ways to restore the boundaries.  
The central bank’s balance-sheet policy 
Another  related  issue  facing  central  banks  arises  from  the  degree  to  which  central  banks 
have  expanded  their  balance  sheets.  There  are  two  dimensions  to  this  issue.  One  is  the 
composition of the balance sheet. In the U.S., for example, the balance sheet of the Federal 
Reserve  has  changed  from  one  made  up  almost  entirely  of  short-term  U.S.  Treasury 
securities to one that is mostly long-term Treasuries, plus significant quantities of long-term 
mortgage-backed securities. This concentration of housing-related securities is problematic 
because  it  is  a  form  of  credit  allocation  and  thus  violates  the  monetary/fiscal  policy 
boundaries I just mentioned.  
The second aspect is the overall size of the balance sheet. Many central banks expanded 
their balance sheets in an effort to ease monetary policy after their usual policy instrument  
– an interest rate – had reached the zero lower bound. Do central bankers anticipate that 
their balance sheets will shrink to more normal levels as they move away from the zero lower 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
bound? Is it desirable to do so? Or should monetary policy now be seen as having another 
tool, even in normal times? Some have suggested that central banks adopt a regime in which 
the monetary policy rate is the interest rate on reserves rather than a market interest rate, 
such  as  the  federal  funds  rate.  This  would  then  permit  the  central  bank  to  manage  its 
balance  sheet  separately  from  its  monetary  instrument,  freeing  it  to  respond  to  liquidity 
demands of the financial system without altering the stance of monetary policy. In principle, 
this would take pressure off central banks to shrink their balance sheets from the current high 
levels and simply rely on raising the interest rate on reserves to tighten monetary policy.  
The alternative is to return to a more traditional operating regime in which the central bank 
sets a target for a market interest rate, such as the federal funds rate in the U.S., above the 
interest rate on reserves. Implementing this regime would require a smaller balance sheet.  
I  am  very  skeptical  of  an  operating  regime  that  gives  central  banks  a  new  tool  without 
boundaries or constraints. Without an understanding, or even a theory, as to how the balance 
sheet  should  or  can  be  manipulated,  we  open  the  door  to  giving  vast  new  discretionary 
abilities to our central banks. This violates the principle of drawing clear boundaries between 
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  When  markets  or  governments  come  to  believe  that  a 
central  bank  can  freely  expand  its  balance  sheet  without  directly  impacting  the  stance  of 
monetary policy, I believe that various political and private interests will come forward with a 
long list of good causes, or rescues, for which such funds could or should be used. 
Economic theory and practice teach us that monetary policy works best when it is clear about 
its  objectives  and  systematic  in  its  approach  to  achieving  those  objectives.  Granting  vast 
amounts of discretion to our central banks in the expectation that they can cure our economic 
ills or substitute for our lack of fiscal discipline is a dangerous road to follow.  
In June, the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Committee outlined some principles that would 
guide its exit from this period of extraordinary monetary accommodation. In my view, those 
principles  represented  an  important  first  step  in  the  FOMC’s  attempt  to  restore  the 
boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies. In particular, the FOMC clearly stated its 
desire to return to an operating environment in which the federal funds rate is the primary 
instrument  of  monetary  policy.  To  achieve  that  objective,  the  Fed  will  have  to  shrink  its 
balance sheet to a more normal level. I interpret this as saying that our balance sheet should 
not be viewed as a new independent instrument of monetary policy in normal times. The exit 
principles  also  indicated  the  Committee’s  desire  to  return  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  to  an 
all-Treasuries portfolio. This re-establishes the idea that the Fed should not use its balance 
sheet to actively engage in credit allocations. 
In other speeches, I have outlined a framework that I have termed a “new accord” between 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury.  It  would  enable  the  central  bank  to  act  in 
emergencies when requested by the Treasury or the fiscal authorities, but it would be clear 
up  front  that  any  non-Treasury  assets  that  accrued  on  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet 
would  be  swapped  for  government  securities  within  a  specified  period  of  time.  This  would 
ensure that fiscal policy decisions remain under the purview of the fiscal authorities, not the 
central bank. 
Summary 
To summarize, it is important for governments to maintain independent central banks so that 
they are better able to achieve their mandates. It is also sound policy to limit the discretionary 
ability of central banks to engage in policies that fundamentally belong to fiscal authorities or 
private markets. Establishing and maintaining clear boundaries between monetary and fiscal 
policies  protects  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  and  its  ability  to  carry  out  its  core 
mandate – maintaining price stability. Clear boundaries and resisting the use of the balance 
sheet as a new policy tool would also improve fiscal discipline by making it more difficult for the 
fiscal authorities to resort to the printing press as a solution to unsustainable budget policies.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
