William C Dudley: The competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s economy 
– reducing the cost of doing business and improving labor market 
opportunities 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS),  before  the  Puerto  Rico  Chamber  of  Commerce  Annual  Convention,  Fajardo, 
Puerto Rico, 29 June 2012. 
 Good morning and greetings from New York City. I sincerely thank the Chamber for giving 
me  the  opportunity  to  address  your  annual  meeting.  Unfortunately  I  am  unable  to  be  in 
Puerto Rico in person, because I have a broken leg and am under doctor’s orders not to fly. 
The good news is that I am on the mend and that I have this opportunity to speak to you via 
video. 
We at the New York Fed are pleased that Puerto Rico is part of the Second Federal Reserve 
District that we represent in the Federal Reserve System. We are committed to the people of 
the Island and to its growth and prosperity. Our commitment is reflected in our ongoing work 
with  our  many  partners  on  the  Island.  Last  spring,  with  the  Puerto  Rico  Chamber  of 
Commerce  and  other  local  partners,  we  co-sponsored  a  forum  aimed  at  helping  small 
businesses  in  Puerto  Rico  learn  about  export  opportunities.  We  have  been  involved  with 
education on the Island for two decades, including by helping to set up the Alianza. Today 
we help promote financial literacy through a video competition in partnership with the Puerto 
Rican Bankers Association.  
Our  banking  supervisors  work  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  so  it  can  readily  supply 
credit to families and businesses, while our research economists monitor and analyze local 
economic conditions. This analysis – along with similar analyses from other regions across 
our nation – feeds into the decisions the Federal Reserve makes on monetary policy.  
In support of this work, I and other senior officials have traveled to Puerto Rico a number of 
times in recent years and met with a wide range of stakeholders, including university officials, 
students, business leaders, entrepreneurs, bankers and government officials.  
What we learn during these engagements helps to shape our understanding of the Puerto 
Rican economy and our efforts to support it. I have seen numerous examples of expansion 
and growth. This gives me confidence that Puerto Rico has the capability to be an economic 
success  story.  Nevertheless,  these  local  engagements  have  also  confirmed  to  me  that 
conditions are not what we want them to be  – in particular, growth and expansion are not 
happening broadly enough.  The task of putting the Island on a path of robust, sustainable 
and inclusive growth remains a work in progress.  
During my visit here in March 2011, a number of business and community leaders expressed 
their concern that the economy had loss competitiveness. These local leaders asked if we 
would look at what might be holding back growth on the Island. Much high quality work has 
already been done on this subject by local experts. However, they thought it might be helpful 
for  the  New  York  Fed,  as  an  independent  third  party,  to  evaluate  what  might  be  done  to 
promote competitiveness and productivity on the Island. 
I  readily  agreed  that  we  would  do  so.  I  commissioned  a  team  of  economists  from  our 
Research group and other experts from our international and outreach teams, to analyze the 
challenges facing Puerto Rico. I asked them to put forward some recommendations on how 
to capitalize on the Island’s strengths and restore growth.  
The report released today on the competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s economy, is the product 
of their work and extensive consultation with local, national and international experts. I have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
read  it  closely  and  commend  it  to  your  attention.  The  report  is  intended  as  nonpartisan 
technical  analysis  and  should  be  viewed  in  that  vein.  Even  those  who  do  not  agree  with 
every aspect of the analysis, I hope, will acknowledge that this is a serious, good-faith effort 
to examine, in detail, a number of important issues that deserve attention. Of course, many 
of these issues can only be considered as part of the political process. It is for the people of 
Puerto Rico to judge the appropriate trade-offs involved – not me, certainly, or my staff at the 
New York Fed. 
In a few moments Jamie McAndrews, executive vice president and director of research, will 
summarize the report and its recommendations. Before he does so, I would like to share with 
you my assessment of economic conditions on the mainland and in Puerto Rico. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
National economic conditions 
The  mainland  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  slowly  recover  from  the  after-effects  of  the 
housing  boom  and  bust  and  the  financial  crisis.  But  the  recovery  has  been  disappointing. 
Despite  a  monetary  policy  that  has  been  extraordinarily  accommodative  by  historical 
standards, the economy has grown only about 2 percent over the past year. After a brighter 
start to the year, economic momentum has slowed in the last few months. (This may partly 
be  a  payback  for  the  mild  winter,  which  brought  forward  some  spending.)  Employment 
growth  remains  positive,  but  has  slowed  considerably  of  late  as  the  economy  has  lost 
forward momentum, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. 
The headwinds retarding recovery are well known. Many consumers have been deleveraging 
in  response  to  the  large  losses  in  wealth  generated  mainly  by  the  collapse  in  home 
prices. The  supply  of  credit  –  particularly  mortgage  credit  –  to  many  families  remains 
constrained, limiting the degree to which many households can fully benefit from low interest 
rates. 
Although  there  have  been  some  positive  signs  in  the  housing  market  recently,  housing 
activity nevertheless remains at very low levels. The sector has been restrained by several 
factors including the large shadow inventory making its way through the foreclosure pipeline, 
tight  underwriting  standards  for  new  mortgage  origination,  and  the  sharp  slowdown  in 
household formation. 
Although the corporate sector as a whole is now relatively healthy, there still is a significant 
constraint  on  the  availability  of  credit  to  small  business. Business  investment  continues  to 
expand, but at a restrained pace.  I presume that this partially reflects uncertainty over the 
economic outlook, including the risks around the evolution of U.S. fiscal policy and the crisis 
in Europe. 
Fiscal  policy  has  already  become  restrictive  as  state  and  local  governments  have  cut 
expenditures in response to revenue shortfalls. Moreover, we face the so-called “fiscal cliff” 
at the start of next year. At the beginning of 2013, federal fiscal policy is scheduled under 
current  law  to  become  sharply  contractionary,  with  abrupt  increases  in  taxes  and  cuts  in 
spending.  Businesspeople  tell  me  that  the  uncertainty  about  how  Congress  and  the 
Administration  will  deal  with  the  fiscal  cliff  –  and  our  fiscal  challenges  more  broadly  –  is 
already  inhibiting  hiring  and  investment.  The  fiscal  cliff  represents  a  threat  to  the  recovery 
that is wholly avoidable. But we will only avoid it if our politicians act responsibly. We need a 
credible  strategy  for  bringing  down  the  federal  budget  deficit  over  time  in  a  manner 
supportive  of  ongoing  economic  recovery.  Any  plan  should  start  slowly,  but  build  steadily 
over time. It should be bipartisan in nature so that the plan is viewed as sustainable across 
the political cycle. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Meanwhile the crisis in the eurozone has resulted in a sharp slow-down in economic growth 
in Europe and tighter financial conditions globally. It has hurt U.S. consumer and business 
confidence  and  is  already  a  material  drag  on  U.S.  growth.  Economic  momentum  in  many 
other regions of the world has also slowed somewhat and this is also restraining the demand 
for U.S. exports. 
Assuming  that  Congress  avoids  the  fiscal  cliff and  European  leaders successfully  manage 
through  their  challenges,  there  are  solid  grounds  for  expecting  that  growth  will  gradually 
strengthen in coming years. U.S. banks are healthier and credit conditions, while still tight, 
are gradually easing, the housing sector is showing early signs of recovery, and households 
appear quite far along in the deleveraging process. 
On the inflation side, we have succeeded in delivering inflation very close to our 2 percent 
price stability objective. Over the past year or so, price trends have been a bit stickier than 
one  might  have  anticipated  given  the  large  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy. To  some 
degree,  this  likely  reflects  earlier  upward  pressures  on  commodity  prices,  the  anchoring 
exerted by stable inflation expectations, and the stickiness of nominal wages. With gasoline 
prices now falling sharply and upward pressures from apparel prices now appearing likely to 
dissipate, I expect that inflation will decline a bit in coming months, falling somewhat further 
below our 2 percent objective. 
More generally, there are several reasons to think that inflation will remain moderate. First, 
the  economy  continues  to  operate  with  significant  slack. Second,  measures  of  underlying 
inflation show little upward pressure, and the growth rate of nominal labor compensation is 
low and stable. Moreover, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. Taking into account 
all these factors along with our current stance of monetary policy, I anticipate that inflation 
will be slightly below our 2 percent long-run objective over the next few years. 
One  of  the  challenges  I  face  as  a  policymaker  is  how  much  to  adjust  my  medium  term 
economic  forecast  in  response  to  near-term  developments,  particularly  when  there  is 
elevated  uncertainty.  Although  I  have  made  some  adjustments  of  late,  they  have  been 
relatively modest to date. That is because there are important issues – such as the outlook in 
Europe and the degree to which we have lost underlying momentum at home – where more 
information is needed before making an informed judgment. 
Although some of the current uncertainties will take time to resolve, I can imagine material 
data on a number of dimensions could become available in the coming weeks and months 
that could lead me to adjust my forecast further. I will be paying particularly close attention to 
whether domestic momentum and hiring picks up now that the pay-back for the mild winter is 
over,  and  whether  financial  conditions,  which  are  heavily  influenced  at  present  by 
developments in Europe, ease or tighten further. 
I am the vice-chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed committee that sets 
monetary  policy  to  promote  its  statutory  goals  of  full  employment  and  price  stability.  Last 
week, the committee reaffirmed that it currently anticipates that the Federal Reserve’s federal 
funds rate target will remain exceptionally low – which I understand to mean at its current 
level  –  at  least  through  late  2014.  The  FOMC  also  voted  to  provide  additional  support  for 
economic  activity  by  extending  its  maturity  extension  program  –  popularly  referred  to  as 
Operation Twist – through the end of the year. This extension means that we will be buying 
an additional $267 billion of longer term Treasury securities, paid for by selling or redeeming 
the same amount of shorter term Treasuries.  
This action reduces the supply of longer dated Treasury securities on the market and lowers 
longer term interest rates relative to where they would otherwise be in the absence of such a 
program. That puts downward pressure on corporate borrowing costs and mortgage rates, 
and supports asset prices such as housing and equities – all of which promotes growth.  
In addition, the FOMC adopted new language to describe its policy outlook, stating that it is 
“prepared to take further action as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
sustained  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  in  a  context  of  price  stability.”  I  will  let 
those words speak for themselves.  
turn 
let  me 
to  economic  conditions 
Local economic conditions 
Now 
in  Puerto  Rico.  Puerto  Rico’s  real,  or 
inflation-adjusted Gross National Product has declined for the past four years and this has 
been accompanied by a sharp decline in the real income of Island residents. According to a 
monthly  index  of  economic  activity  produced  by  the  Government  Development  Bank  for 
Puerto Rico, economic activity began to decline as far back as 2005. Although the index has 
been stable for the past several months and this may be a signal that the economic downturn 
on the Island may have ended, a solid recovery has yet to take hold and conditions remain 
challenging. 
The  job  market  remains  a  trouble spot  for  the  Island’s  economy.  Total  employment  fell  by 
about 13 percent or roughly 140,000 jobs, between its peak back in 2005 and mid-2010. This 
is nearly double the 7 percent job loss on the mainland. For the past two years, employment 
has appeared to have bottomed out, but there has been little evidence of recovery. 
The Island’s unemployment rate has fallen by more than a percentage point over the past 
year, but this is not necessarily good news. The fall was largely the result of a fall in labor 
force participation. At 14.8 percent the unemployment rate remains unacceptably high.  
High unemployment and low labor force participation remain perhaps the biggest challenges 
to the Puerto Rico economy. Even in relatively prosperous times, the unemployment rate on 
the Island has been more than double the rate on the mainland. High unemployment and low 
labor force participation are especially serious problems for young workers and are perhaps 
the clearest evidence that Puerto Rico needs to make better economic progress.  
Many of the current problems facing Puerto Rico relate not just to cyclical weakness but to 
deeper structural challenges. This brings us to the subject of the report we issued today.  
I do not presume that this report is the last word on these important questions. We do not 
presume  to  claim  that  we  have  all  the  answers.  Rather,  I  hope  that  it  is  the  start  of  a 
constructive and bipartisan debate that will advance good public policy and a better future for 
the  people  of  Puerto  Rico.  I  also  hope  that  it  will  be  read  and  considered  beyond  the 
business and government community, across the society at large. The goal we seek is not 
simply business success and expansion, but broad-based prosperity with rising standards of 
living and greater opportunities for all Puerto Ricans. 
I  want  to  thank  you  again  for  the opportunity  to  address  the  Chamber. Jamie  McAndrews, 
executive vice president and director of research, will now talk about the report we released 
and lay out its findings and recommendations. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
