Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  on  the  2012  BBC  Today 
Programme Lecture, London, 2 May 2012. 
 Fifty years of rising living standards came to an end with the financial crisis. As a nation, we 
are  now  significantly  worse  off  than  we  were  four  years  ago.  The  crisis  has  cast  a  long 
shadow. Of course, the immediate challenge is to get our economy growing again. But fifty 
years from now will our grandchildren ask why we lacked the courage to put in place reforms 
to stop a crisis happening again? I hope not – and that’s why I want to speak to you tonight 
about the changes we need to make. 
Believe it or not, it’s more than seventy years since the Governor of the Bank of England last 
gave a talk on radio in peacetime. In March 1939, Montagu Norman spoke to the BBC in the 
wake of the economic slump that we now call the Great Depression. Just listen for a moment 
to the 1930s version of Evan Davis introducing the broadcast: 
AUDIO INSERT: 
“The  Rt  Honourable  Montagu  Norman,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England, 
speaking in the Empire Series on the City of London.”  
More the presenter of “yesterday” than “today”! 
In those days, the Bank of England, known affectionately as the “Old Lady of Threadneedle 
Street”, was a private bank performing the role of a central bank only by custom and practice. 
Here  is  how  Norman  described  the  relationship  between  the  Bank  of  England  and  the 
Government in the 1930s: 
AUDIO INSERT: 
“The Bank of England has always been constitutionally a private body... but what 
matters is not the position on paper but the position in practice. In monetary as in 
other matters the Government of the day must have the final word and this is fully 
recognised.”  
Today, the position on paper and the position in practice are the same. Our job is given to us 
by the Government and by Parliament.  
But for me, the story of the modern independent Bank of England began exactly fifteen years 
ago  in  early  May  1997.  It  was  a  Bank  Holiday  Monday,  immediately  following  the  general 
election. After an early morning tennis match, I returned home to find a message from the 
Governor, Eddie George. He wanted to meet me in the Bank as soon as possible. An hour 
later we met in his office, alone in the imposing building known to most of you only by the 
facade shown on television. Eddie told me of his meeting that morning with the Chancellor, 
Gordon Brown, who had explained the proposal for Bank independence. It was something for 
which  Eddie  and  I  had  worked  for  five  years  since  Britain’s  departure  from  the  Exchange 
Rate Mechanism in 1992. Now we had a chance to show what an independent central bank 
could do. Although far from clear at the time, the later decision to remove from the Bank of 
England the power to regulate banks would return to haunt us. 
Over the next decade, the new Monetary Policy Committee established a track record of low 
and remarkably stable inflation. In my first speech as Governor in 2003, I warned that this 
stability was unlikely to continue. And it didn’t. Within a few years, and despite low inflation, 
the advanced economies of the world were plunged into a financial crisis which led to the 
sharpest  decline  in  world  trade  since  the  1930s,  recessions  across  the  world,  rising 
unemployment and the near collapse of our banking system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
So tonight I want to try to answer three questions. First, what went wrong? Second, what 
are the lessons? Third, what needs to change? 
Let me start by pointing out what did not go wrong. In the five years before the onset of the 
crisis,  across  the  industrialised  world  growth  was  steady  and  both  unemployment  and 
inflation were low and stable. Whether in this country, the United States or Europe, there was 
no unsustainable boom like that seen in the 1980s; this was a bust without a boom.  
So  what  was  the  problem?  In  a  nutshell,  our  banking  and  financial  system  overextended 
itself. That left it fragile and vulnerable to a sudden loss of confidence.  
The most obvious symptom was that banks were lending too much. Strikingly, most of that 
increase  in  lending  wasn’t  to  families  or  businesses,  but  to  other  parts  of  the  financial 
system. To finance this, banks were borrowing large amounts themselves. And this was their 
Achilles’  heel.  By  the  end  of  2006,  some  banks  had  borrowed  as  much  as  £50  for  every 
pound  provided  by  their  own  shareholders.  So  even  a  small  piece  of  bad  news  about  the 
value of its assets would wipe out much of a bank’s capital, and leave depositors scurrying 
for  the  door.  What  made  the  situation  worse  was  that  the  fortunes  of  banks  had  become 
closely tied together through transactions in complex and obscure financial instruments. So it 
was  difficult  to  know  which  banks  were  safe  and  which  weren’t.  The  result  was  an 
increasingly fragile banking system.  
So how did banks find themselves in such a precarious position? Banks are a vital part of our 
economy. They run the payment system, allowing us to pay our bills and receive our wages. 
They finance businesses investing in new ventures and families buying a new home. Without 
a  banking  system  our  economy  would  grind  to  a  halt.  Because  of  that,  markets  correctly 
believed that no government could let a bank fail since that would cause immense disruption 
to the economy. This meant that large banks in particular benefited from an implicit taxpayer 
guarantee, enabling them to borrow cheaply to finance their lending. In good times, banks 
took the benefits for their employees and shareholders, while in bad times the taxpayer bore 
the costs. For the banks, it was a case of heads I win, tails you – the taxpayer – lose.  
This cheap funding fuelled lending. Banks got bigger. In the UK, their balance sheets rose 
from  around  one-half  to  more  than  five  times  our  national  income  in  a  generation.  As  the 
banks  got  bigger,  so  did  the  implicit  subsidy  –  by  the  time  of  the  crisis  it  reached  many 
billions  of  pounds  a  year.  The  bigger  banks  became,  the  more  they  were  seen  as  too 
important to fail, and the surer markets became that the taxpayer would bail them out. But 
there are only so many good loans and investments to be made. In order to expand, banks 
made increasingly risky investments. To make matters worse, they started making huge bets 
with each other on whether loans that had already been made would be repaid. The seeds of 
the eventual downfall of the financial system had been sown. As loans and investments went 
bad, those seeds started to sprout. 
In August 2007 came the moment when financial markets began to realise that the emperor 
had no clothes. The announcement by the French bank BNP Paribas that it would suspend 
repayments from two of its investment funds triggered a loss of confidence and a freezing of 
some capital markets. A month later, the crisis claimed its first victim when Northern Rock 
failed.  In  the  months  that  followed,  there  was  a  steady  procession  of  banking  failures 
culminating  in  the  collapse  of  the  American  bank  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008. 
Financial waters, already extremely chilly, then froze solid. Banks found it almost impossible 
to finance themselves because no-one knew which banks were safe and which weren’t.  
From the start of the crisis, central banks provided emergency loans but these amounted to 
little  more  than  holding  a  sheet  in  front  of  the  emperor  to  conceal  the  nakedness  of  the 
banks. They didn’t solve the underlying problem – banks needed not loans but injections of 
shareholders’ capital in order to be able to absorb losses from the risky investments they had 
made. From the beginning of 2008, we at the Bank of England began to argue that UK banks 
needed extra capital – a lot of extra capital, possibly £100 billion or more. It wasn’t a popular 
message. But nine months later, market pressure forced banks to raise new capital or accept 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
it from the state. UK tax payers ended up owning large portions of two of our four biggest 
banks, Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds TSB, but almost all banks would have failed had 
not taxpayer support been extended. That bold action in October 2008 could have happened 
sooner. But the most important thing is that it was done. And the policy of recapitalising the 
banks was soon copied by other countries. 
Bailing out the banks came too late though to prevent the financial crisis from spilling over 
into  the  world  economy.  The  realisation  of  the  true  state  of  the  banking  system  led  to  a 
collapse of confidence around the world and a deep global recession. Over 25 million jobs 
disappeared worldwide. And unemployment in Britain rose by over a million. To many of you 
this will seem deeply unfair, and it is. I can understand why so many people are angry. 
It’s vital that we learn from the crisis. A good place to start is to ask, as the Queen famously 
did, “Why did no-one see this coming?” The answer is extremely simple: no-one believed it 
could happen. Recessions were supposed to follow booms and high inflation, not periods of 
steady and sustainable growth with low inflation. There seemed to be no reason to expect 
the worst recession since the 1930s. After the ravages of inflation in the 1970s – younger 
listeners  might  need  to  be  reminded  that  inflation  hit  27%  in  1975  –  it  was  I  think 
understandable  that  we  focussed  on  the  need  to  bring  inflation  down.  But  conquering 
inflation was not enough to ensure stability. Although inflation was under control, fragilities 
were  building  in  the  banking  system.  On  all  sides  there  was  a  failure  of  imagination  to 
appreciate the scale of the fragilities and their potential consequences. No-one could quite 
bring  themselves  to  believe  that  in  our  modern  financial  system  the  biggest  banks  in  the 
world could fall over. But they did.  
That  isn’t  to  say  we  were  blind  to  what  was  going  on.  For  several  years,  central  banks, 
including the Bank of England, had warned that financial markets were underestimating risks. 
So why, you might ask, did the Bank of England not do more to prevent the disaster? We 
should have. But the power to regulate banks had been taken away from us in 1997. Our 
power was limited to that of publishing reports and preaching sermons. And we did preach 
sermons  about  the  risks.  But  we  didn’t  imagine  the  scale  of  the  disaster  that  would  occur 
when the risks crystallised. With the benefit of hindsight, we should have shouted from the 
rooftops that a system had been built in which banks were too important to fail, that banks 
had  grown  too  quickly  and  borrowed  too  much,  and  that  so-called  “light-touch”  regulation 
hadn’t  prevented  any  of  this.  And  in  the  crisis,  we  tried,  but  should  have  tried  harder,  to 
persuade  everyone  of  the  need  to recapitalise the  banks  sooner  and by  more.  We  should 
have  preached  that  the  lessons  of  history  were  being  forgotten  –  because  banking  crises 
have happened before.  
In  the  1930s,  the  Great  Depression  saw  a  collapse  of  the  banking  system  in  the  United 
States. So severe was it that President Franklin Roosevelt, only a week after his inauguration 
in March 1933, announced a bank holiday shutting the banks to provide a breathing space so 
that confidence could be restored. Here he is, in his first fireside chat, explaining banking to 
the American people: 
AUDIO INSERT: 
 “My friends I want to talk for a few minutes with the people of the United States 
about  banking…  We  have  had  a  bad  banking  situation.  Some  of  our  bankers 
have shown themselves either incompetent or dishonest in their handling of the 
people’s funds. They had used some money entrusted to them in speculation and 
unwise loans. This was of course not true in the vast majority of our banks but it 
was true in enough of them to shock the people of the United States for a time 
into a sense of insecurity and to put them in a frame of mind where they did not 
differentiate but seemed to assume that an act of a comparative few had tainted 
them all. And so it became the government’s job to straighten out this situation 
and to do it as quickly as possible and that job is being performed.”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We  too  have  had  a  “bad  banking  situation”.  Roosevelt  showed  bold  and  decisive  political 
leadership in explaining to his listeners the reasons why they should not fear banks but trust 
their Government to ensure that the economy could be saved from the bank failures that had 
led to the Great Depression. 
For the sake of future generations, we too must be bold and decisive and, while the memory 
is fresh, learn the lessons from this crisis. Reform is essential.  
Three  reforms  top  my  list.  The  first  concerns  regulation  of  banks.  Next  year,  the 
responsibility for regulating banks will return to the Bank of England. 
Next time we find ourselves with steady growth and low inflation, but with risks building in the 
financial sector, we shall be able to do something about it. The Bank’s new Financial Policy 
Committee  will  have  the  power  to  step  in  and  prevent  a  hangover  by  taking  away  the 
punchbowl just as the party in the financial system is getting going.  
We  believe  that  successful  regulation  means  understanding  and  guarding  against  the  big 
risks, not compliance with ever more detailed rules. That means focussing on the wood not 
the trees, looking not just at individual banks but also at how their fortunes are tied together 
with other banks and with the rest of the economy. For example, the biggest risk to banks at 
present stems from the troubles in the euro area. These are far from over. That’s why we’ve 
been pushing banks to pay out less to their shareholders and employees and instead retain 
profits as a cushion against possible losses.  
In future, to protect the rest of the economy from failures in the banking system, we need to 
ensure  that  more  of  banks’  shareholders’  own  money  is  on  the  line,  and  banks  rely 
correspondingly less on debt. If banks and their shareholders have more to lose, they will be 
more careful in choosing to whom they lend. And, when banks make losses, there is more of 
a cushion before the bank fails, and less chance that the taxpayer will have to foot the bill.  
Nevertheless, bank failures will happen from time to time – indeed failure is part and parcel 
of a prosperous market economy. So the second reform on my list aims to make sure badly 
run banks can fail safely – that is, without causing damage to ordinary depositors and the 
rest of the economy, and without billing the taxpayer. That requires a special legal framework 
to allow a failing bank to continue to provide its essential services while its finances are being 
sorted  out.  Such  a  framework  is  called  a  resolution  mechanism.  It’s  precisely  what  was 
lacking  when  Northern  Rock  failed  in  2007,  leaving  nationalisation  as  the  only  alternative. 
That  painful  lesson  has  been  learnt,  and  the  2009  Banking  Act  introduced  a  resolution 
mechanism  in  Britain  for  the  first  time.  But  that  won’t  work  for  big  global  banks  with 
operations around the world. So there is much more to do. 
The third reform is to restructure the banking system. In so doing we must recognise the 
crucial distinction between essential banking services to people like you and me, on the one 
hand,  and  complex  and  potentially  risky  trading  activities,  on  the  other.  We  don’t  build 
nuclear  power  stations  in  densely  populated  areas;  nor  should  we  allow  essential banking 
services and risky investment banking activities to be carried out in the same “too important 
to  fail”  bank.  Last  autumn,  the  Independent  Commission  on  Banking,  chaired  by 
Sir John Vickers  and  comprising  some  of  our  most  brilliant  bankers  and  economists, 
published recommendations on how to do this. It’s vital that Parliament legislates to enact 
these proposals sooner rather than later. 
Regulation, resolution and restructuring of the banks are the three Rs of a new approach to 
make banking, and so our economy, safer. 
The three Rs will be central to the work of the Bank of England. And all of that will come on 
top  of  our  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  to  reduce  inflation  while  supporting  a  gradual 
recovery of our battered economy. It’s the biggest challenge the Bank has faced for decades.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We are up to the task. Already we see vested interests rise up to defend their bonuses and 
profits. But, as an independent central bank with over three centuries of history, we can resist 
those short-term pressures and take the longer view needed to prevent another crisis. 
Independence is, however, not the discretion to do as you wish, but the exercise of specific 
powers  delegated  to  us  by  Parliament  to  meet  a  remit  set  by  Parliament.  So  with 
independence  come  the  responsibilities  of  transparency  and  accountability.  Back  in  1997, 
with independence to set interest rates, we revolutionised the openness of monetary policy. 
Our  decisions,  deliberations  and  even  the  disagreements  within  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee are open to public scrutiny. I want to build on that track record to do the same for 
our new tasks because in everything the Bank does, I and my colleagues are conscious that 
we are accountable to you.  
The Bank of England has changed radically since that Bank Holiday Monday in 1997 when 
Eddie George and I sat in the Bank contemplating our new role, unaware of the roller coaster 
ride on which we were about to embark. The Bank will change again next year with its new 
responsibilities. But some things don’t change. Here again is Mr. Montagu Norman: 
AUDIO INSERT: 
“I  would  sum  up  the  vital  characteristics  of  the  Bank  as  experience  in  affairs, 
cooperation on all sides, independence of judgement. But you know these three 
things  –  experience,  cooperation,  independence  –  are  no  good  unless  people 
have confidence in you. I like to believe that the Bank, with its long history and 
tradition, stands high in public esteem. But only by service to the community can 
that esteem be maintained through times good and bad.” 
That’s true not just for Montagu Norman’s day, but for today too.  
The  present  crisis  is  far  from  over,  as  events  in  the  euro  area  illustrate  weekly.  Our  own 
economy is still not back to health. Although inflation has fallen back in recent months, it is 
still  too  high.  And  despite  efforts  to stimulate  the  economy,  the  recovery  is  proving  slower 
than  we  had  hoped.  It  will  come.  But  dealing  with  the  consequences  of  our  “bad  banking 
situation” is likely to be a long, slow process.  
Just as, if not more, important, in my view, is to look further to the future, to the economic 
possibilities for our grandchildren. To give them the prospect of economic stability, we must 
reform the three Rs of our financial system. We have an historic opportunity, and a duty, to 
do that.  
The day-to-day tasks of controlling inflation and curbing the excesses of the financial system 
will fall to the Bank of England. When, as it will, the economy returns to normal, our role will 
be to take away the punchbowl just as the next party is getting going. That won’t make us 
popular among bankers, politicians and even at times some of you, and it’s not supposed to. 
But it will, I hope, reflect the trust and confidence that the citizens of this country can place in 
the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
