Christian Noyer: Basel III – CRD4: impact and stakes 
Introductory speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Autorité de contrôle 
prudentiel (ACP) conference, Paris, 27 June 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am delighted to welcome you today to this new conference organised by the Autorité de 
contrôle prudentiel (ACP). This morning, the conference will be dedicated to the impact and 
stakes of the Basel III reform and, this afternoon, to the supervision of business practices in 
banking  and  insurance.  I  would  like  to  thank  all  the  participants  for  the  interest  they  have 
shown in these crucial exchanges between regulators, supervisors and market participants. 
This  conference  is  being  held  against  the  backdrop  of  an  economic  and  financial 
environment that remains very difficult, characterised in particular in Europe by the ongoing 
sovereign debt crisis. Many questions surround the future of the European banking system, 
which  has  already  undergone  major  transformations  in  the  recent  period  while  significant 
changes  in  its  prudential  framework  and  the  organisation  of  its  supervision  are  currently 
being reviewed. Far from putting on the back burner questions concerning Basel III and its 
application in Europe, that is to say CRD IV and its project to create a “single rule book” for 
European banks, I believe, on the contrary, these developments underscore the importance 
of better understanding the current reform and taking time to reflect, in order to ensure that 
the new framework for banking regulation and the distribution of supervisory responsibilities 
in Europe will deliver all their expected benefits.  
Before leaving you to discuss in greater detail the impact and stakes of the Basel III reform, I 
would like to make a few remarks on this topic in relation to the current environment.  
1. 
Basel III and CRD IV represent a quantitative and qualitative leap aimed at 
addressing the shortcomings highlighted by the current financial crisis  
First, I believe that it would be useful to rapidly place the Basel III reform in its context, in 
order to fully understand its scope.  
Basel III is first and foremost a response to the financial crisis that started in 2007. This crisis 
and  the  subsequent  wave  of  shocks  to  the  banking  system  have  not  merely  resulted  in  a 
temporary loss of output for the major advanced economies. They have also had a lasting 
impact  on  employment,  industrial  production,  the  confidence  of  investors  and  households, 
and  needless  to  say  on  public  finances,  which  make  crisis  exit  even  more  difficult.  In 
response  to  these  developments,  the  international  community  adopted  in  2009,  under  the 
impetus  of  the  G20,  an  ambitious  reform  programme  including  Basel  III,  which  is  a  key 
element for the banking sector. Indeed, a banking system that is more robust as a whole and 
capable of absorbing major shocks is vital to avoid the repetition of such chain reactions in 
the  future.  In  this  respect,  despite  the  delay  in  the  reform  agenda  in  the  United  States, 
Europe must clearly press forward: the credibility of our banks and our economies is at stake. 
Basel III is naturally based on Basel II which establishes the current capital adequacy rules. 
However, Basel III goes further than merely changing and updating the existing rules.  
– 
Basel III indeed considerably strengthens the capital requirements that banks must 
meet,  but  this  reform  is  more  extensive  in  that  it  significantly  enhances  the 
prudential  framework:  in  addition  to  capital  requirements,  it  establishes  liquidity 
requirements, and a leverage ratio is set to be introduced in the medium term. From 
this point of view, Basel III is a far-reaching reform of banking regulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Furthermore, and most importantly, I believe that Basel III is a major step forward in 
that it leads to a much closer interaction than has been the case to date between the 
individual  supervision  of  banks,  known  as  microprudential  supervision,  and  the 
overall  supervision  of  the  banking  and  financial  system,  or  macroprudential 
supervision.  This  broader  view  of  banking  supervision,  taking  account  of  all  its 
facets,  translates  into  a  number  of  provisions  and  notably  introduces  additional 
capital buffers (a capital conservation buffer, a countercyclical buffer and a buffer for 
systemically important financial institutions) in excess of the regulatory minimum.  
Basel III therefore represents a quantitative and also a qualitative leap. Given the magnitude 
of the changes to be made, Basel III has major repercussions on market participants, who 
must  adapt  to  this  new  environment.  These  repercussions  are  both  anticipated  and 
desirable,  but  the  potentially  negative  consequences  of  this  reform  must  be  kept  to  a 
minimum. In this respect, many associated risks were highlighted during its drafting and even 
more so recently, due to the current economic and financial difficulties. These included the 
risk of a rise in the cost of credit or of a credit crunch. Hence, the impact and stakes of Basel 
III must be carefully analysed and addressed.  
2. 
The difficult economic environment stresses the importance of implementing 
Basel III in an appropriate manner but does not call into question the rationale 
of the reform 
Without playing down the potential risks associated with the implementation of Basel III, to 
which  the  ACP  pays  close  attention,  I  believe  that  this  reform  can  be  successfully 
implemented. Allow me to mention some reasons for this conviction and offer some avenues 
for actions: 
– 
First,  French  banks,  which  have  complied  with  Basel  2.5 
rules  since 
December 2011,  are  in  a  strong  position  to  meet  the  new  capital  adequacy 
requirements when they come into force. Moreover, French banks are ahead of the 
Basel  III  schedule.  Currently  with  Core  Tier  1  capital  ratios  of  over  9%,  the  main 
French  groups  demonstrate  their  ability  to  meet  the  European  Banking  Authority 
deadline  of  30  June  2012.  They  should  also  fully  comply  with  the  new  Basel  III 
requirements by 2013.  
The ACP is closely monitoring credit institutions’ preparations for Basel III. By doing 
so,  any  problems  can  be  identified  at  an  early  stage  and  issues  relating  to  its 
implementation  can  be  addressed,  which  I  believe  is  essential  for  a  smooth 
transition.  More  generally,  in  addition  to  the  individual  monitoring  of  banks’ 
preparation,  coordination  between  supervisors  and  the  players  concerned  is  also 
important  to  ensure  a  clear  understanding  of  the  rules  and  identify  any  questions 
relating  to  the  reform  and  their  potential  consequences.  The  ACP  liaises  on  a 
regular  basis  with  the  profession  on  all  prudential  matters.  Indeed,  today’s 
conference is a prime illustration of this. 
It is also essential to closely monitor and take into account the impact of the new 
regulations  on  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  and  to  assess  the  different 
interactions  in  order,  if  necessary,  to  deal  with  the  unforeseen  consequences  of 
Basel  III.  In  this  respect,  the  ACP,  which  maintains  close  links  to  the  Banque  de 
France  and  operates  under  its  aegis,  is  naturally  particularly  attentive  to  and 
involved in all these matters. This is why we are accompanying the prudential reform 
with more general and macroeconomic reflections on the financing of the economy, 
and  in  particular  on  credit  developments  and  the  relationship  between  banking 
regulation and monetary policy. The new liquidity ratios therefore cannot be applied 
as  they  stand  as  they  do  not  take  into  account  all  their  consequences  and 
interactions beyond the prudential objectives themselves, which include in particular 
the functioning of the interbank market, the level of intermediation or the conditions 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  monetary  policy  implementation.  I  therefore  believe  that  the  work  underway  on 
the  calibration  of  these  ratios  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  order  to  properly 
manage all the consequences of these new rules.  
 
  Before  handing  the  floor  to  Danièle  Nouy,  Secretary  General  of  the  Autorité  de  contrôle 
prudentiel, I would like to conclude with a few words on recent developments in Europe. You 
are aware of my commitment to full harmonisation in Europe: this “single rule book” is the 
only way to achieve a truly efficient single market. You are also aware that the negotiations 
between  the  European  Council  and  Parliament  might  reintroduce  the  national  options  that 
the  Commission  had  removed.  They  may  also,  under  a  compromise  text,  render  partly 
redundant and ineffective the responsibilities of supervisors of home and host countries, as 
well as those of micro-prudential and macro-prudential supervisors. In this context, I believe 
that the creation of a banking union is to be supported. It would be a major development for 
banking supervision in Europe, which would bring numerous benefits and would enable us to 
efficiently address the current difficulties. Such a development would most likely have very 
positive consequences in that it would be a step towards greater European harmonisation. 
Naturally, the benefits of such a reform would be more far-reaching but such questions go 
beyond the scope of today’s conference. Questions regarding the impact and stakes of Basel 
III will already give ample food for thought in the rich debates and discussions this morning. 
I wish you all a fruitful conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
