Michael Gondwe: Mobile payments and mobile banking in Zambia 
Opening address by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 4th Annual 
Celpay Mobile Payments Conference, Lusaka, 12 September 2012. 
 The Chairman of the Board of Celpay Zambia, Dr. Jacob Mwanza  
The Chief Executive of Celpay International, Mr. Lazarus Muchenje  
Senior Government officials  
Representatives of Embassies  
Chief Executives Officers of Commercial banks and Financial Institutions  
Representatives of International Business Organisations  
Representatives of Zambian Business Organisations  
Distinguished participants  
Members of the press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It is an honour and privilege to officiate at the 4th Mobile Payments Conference being hosted 
by  Celpay  Zambia  Limited  under the  theme “1st Decade Mobile Payments, 2nd Decade 
Universal  Mobile  Banking  services”.  The  Theme  for  this  conference  is  appropriate  and 
timely as it provides an opportunity for participants, and especially stakeholders, to not only 
reflect  on  what  has  been  a  decade  of  tremendous  achievement  and  growth,  where  major 
changes  have  occurred in  banking  due  to  the  introduction  of mobile  payments  and mobile 
banking, but also an opportunity to gaze into the future and take a pioneering role in charting 
out how mobile payments can ultimately provide more banking services remotely, and away 
from traditional banking. It is now accepted that the advent of the internet coupled with the 
emergence  of  mobile  phones  have  greatly  enriched  the  banking  experience  whilst 
simultaneously  serving  as  the  core  technologies  assisting  Africans  and  most  of  the 
developed world to start accessing financial services.  
Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  extremely  proud  that  this  mobile  banking  and  mobile  payments 
revolution  that  has  changed  the  face  of  banking  forever  was  started  right  here  in  Lusaka, 
Zambia by Celpay Zambia, who on April 24, 2002 made the very first mobile payment and in 
doing  so  ignited  a  banking  revolution  that  is  bringing  affordable,  accessible  payments  and 
banking  services  to  previously  financially  excluded  societies  and  families.  I  would  like  to 
congratulate Celpay on this momentous achievement and on their 10th Anniversary. I trust 
that as you go through your deliberations over the next two days, this pioneering spirit will be 
enthused into your discussions and debates and you will chart the way forward for the next 
decade so that more banking services can be delivered through this innovative channel to 
even more people.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to take a moment to dwell on the global environment. 
Since 2008 the world has gone through an unprecedented financial crisis, which led to the 
collapse  of  some  major  global  financial  institutions  and  also  resulted  in  some  countries 
requiring significant amounts of debt to bail them out of the crisis.  
This  environment  has  ameliorated  somewhat,  but  continues  to  simmer  in  the  Eurozone, 
where Greece, notably, has gone through some major difficulties. The affected countries in 
many cases have been the traditional donor and investor countries. The knock on effect of 
these  changes  is  that  many  corporations  have  scaled  back  on  their  corporate  expansion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
plans,  donor  countries  and  donor  organizations  have  also  put  in  place  austerity  measures 
resulting in less donor funding globally.  
Chairperson,  I  am  sure  you  would  agree  that  against  this  background,  it  becomes 
imperative  to  ensure  that  the financial  sector  is sound  and  can  withstand  shocks,  whether 
from within or external, as well as to have the capacity and capital to support local ventures 
including large corporate expansion programs.  
We  have  seen  moves  aimed  at  ensuring  stability  of  the financial  sector  in  places  such  as 
Nigeria and Ghana, where the capital requirements for banks were raised in recent times. In 
Zambia we have also introduced new capital requirements for Commercial banks that have 
to be in place by the end of this year. I am happy to inform you that the Bank of Zambia is 
working  with  each  Commercial  Bank  to  ensure  that  this  requirement  is  met  in  order  to 
strengthen the banking industry in Zambia.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia has also embarked on some key projects that 
shall have a lasting and beneficial bearing on the Zambian economy, such as the rebasing of 
the Zambian currency as well as the branchless banking initiative.  
The currency  rebasing  shall  be  implemented  effective  1  January  2013, and  is  expected to 
bring efficiency in the Zambian currency as a medium of exchange and store of value. As 
you  may  be  aware,  the  Bank  is  re-introducing  coins  which  will  encourage  the  use  of 
mechanisms such as pay phones, vending machines, car parking meters and other related 
technologies.  
Mr. Chairperson, According to the Finscope Zambia survey conducted in 2009 only 33,7% 
of Zambian adults have access to financial services, leaving 66,3% financially excluded. This 
is despite the growth in the number of banks and indeed branches in Zambia. It is obvious 
that  at  the  current  growth  rate  of  the  penetration  of  banking  services,  if  this  is  left  to 
traditional banks alone, it may mean that the majority of Zambians will be financially excluded 
for a long time to come.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, given the above challenge, it is quite appropriate to conclude that 
the mobile payments industry provides Zambia with a unique opportunity to accelerate the 
provision of banking services in rural and remote areas at an affordable cost to the Zambian 
people.  To  this  extent  I  am  happy  to  inform  you  that  since  the  enactment  of  the  National 
Payments  Systems  Act  of  2007,  when  we  only  had  one  designated  Payments  Business, 
which  was  Celpay,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  now  registered  28  Designated  Payments 
Businesses.  The  Bank  continues  to  encourage  growth  of  the  mobile  payments  sector  and 
other  initiatives  that  promote  financial  inclusiveness.  For  instance,  the  Bank  supports  the 
initiative of Branchless Banking as an innovative way of growing the banking industry.  
Mr  Chairperson,  another  important  facet  in  the  development  of  the  mobile  payments 
industry shall be the ability of the individual payments systems to interoperate and settle real 
time across different payment systems through shared infrastructure. This should be one of 
the  objectives  of  the  Zambia  Payments  Systems  Association,  and  therefore  urge  that  the 
Association  adopts  this  objective  as  part  of  their  medium  term  plan.  The  Bank  of  Zambia 
welcomes initiative that will bring down costs and ultimately make mobile payments services 
affordable to the people.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the conference theme looks to the next decade in mobile banking 
and talks about universal mobile services, I am glad that this theme is being explored here. 
Our understanding of this theme is twofold: firstly, that in the next decade all adult Zambians 
will have access to financial services and secondly that financial services shall be available 
to the majority of our people through this delivery mechanism. This is indeed an ambitious 
target and can only be achieved through forums like this one where industry experts come 
together to share ideas and chart the way forward. As the regulator the Bank shall continue 
to provide policy guidance and regulations that are clear and unambiguous in support of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growth of this industry. Further, our obligations extend to ensuring that as these technological 
advancements occur:  
1. 
2. 
The consumer remains protected;  
Anti  Money  laundering  and  Counter  Terrorism  Financing  regulations  are  in  place; 
and  
Business continuity is assured.  
3. 
Chairperson, I wish you good deliberations over the next two days, the Bank of Zambia will 
be expecting a report from the conference. I wish to thank Celpay for once again arranging 
and hosting this event, and I congratulate you on your 10th Anniversary.  
I now declare the 4th Annual Celpay Mobile Payments Conference officially open.  
I thank you and may you have inspired deliberations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
