Benoît Cœuré: The euro area sovereign debt market: lessons from the 
crisis 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  12th  IMF  Annual  Forum  on  Managing  Sovereign  Risk  and  Public  Debt:  “Managing 
Sovereign  Debt:  A  Seismic  Shift  in  demand  and  Supply  Dynamics?”,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  
28–29 June 2012. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Maximilian  Freier  and  Wolfgang  Lemke  for  their  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Mr Deputy Managing Director, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  to  you  here  today  at  the  12th  IMF  Forum  on  Managing 
Sovereign Risk and Public Debt. Clearly, this topic has never been more relevant than today.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  the  experience  in  the  euro  area  and  consider  the 
following  three  questions:  First,  what  has  characterised  the  pricing  of  sovereign  credit  risk 
over  the  last  two  decades?  Second,  what  is  the  relevance  of  the  sovereign  debt  market 
tensions for monetary policy? And third, what lessons have we learnt? 
What has characterised the pricing of sovereign credit risk over the last two decades? 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  question,  the  pricing of  sovereign  risk.  Looking  at  the  sovereign 
debt markets of the euro area over the past two decades, it is possible to clearly distinguish 
three main periods. They all display distinct patterns of government bond pricing.1 
First, there was the run-up to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), that is especially the 
period  of  about  five  years  before  1999,  when  the  euro  was  introduced.  During  this  time, 
sovereign  bond  yields  quickly  converged  towards  those  of  German  Bunds.  Much  of  this 
convergence is explained by the elimination of exchange rate and inflation risks. In addition, 
European governments made great efforts to reduce their deficit and debt levels in order to 
fulfil the Maastricht criteria and join the common currency. 
In  the  second  period,  ranging  from  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999  to  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers in September 2008, government bond yields remained at moderate levels 
and did not differ much from country to country. The yield spreads of ten-year government 
bond  yields  vis-à-vis  German  Bunds  reached  a  maximum  of  about  70  basis  points,  and 
recorded about 15 basis points on average.2 
These observations raise some questions: why did this period see such an undifferentiated 
pricing  of  government  debt  securities?  And  were  the  “macroeconomic  fundamentals” 
characterising the different sovereign issuers similar? In fact, no: the state of public finances 
was distinctly and persistently different across countries. So why was the different degree of 
fiscal solidity (or rather the lack thereof) not “priced in” in government bond prices? 
There are several reasons. Market participants may have been insufficiently forward-looking 
and too complacent. They may have extrapolated from their experience of a long period of 
                                                
1  See,  e.g.,  European  Central  Bank,  “Financial  integration  in  Europe”,  May  2011,  Chapter  I.2  for  a 
characterization  of  different  phases  of  bond  market  developments  since  the  run-up  to  EMU  and  a  more 
detailed overview of the bond market situation during the first stages of the sovereign debt crisis. 
2  This is based on ten-year government bond spreads of the initial twelve euro area Member States vis-à-vis 
Germany  between  January  1999  and  August  2008,  where  Greek  spreads  are  included  as  of  2001,  when 
Greece joined EMU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
low  macroeconomic  volatility  –  the  so-called  “great  moderation”  –  and  may  have  felt 
insulated  from  any  extreme  macroeconomic  event.  In  particular,  it  may  have  appeared 
inconceivable that any euro area sovereign issuer could actually reach its “fiscal limit” – that 
is,  a  situation  where  it  could  not  re-finance  its  debt.  Moreover,  the  “great  moderation” 
experience  led  to  low  levels  of  investors’  risk  aversion  and  low  price  of  risk  across  asset 
classes.  The  depth  of  euro-denominated  government  bond  markets,  together  with  the 
expansion  and  diversification  of  global  foreign  exchange  reserves,  may  also  have  created 
the false perception that the demand for sovereign bonds was infinitely elastic. Finally, the 
no-bail-out  clause  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  may  simply  not  have  been  fully  credible  for 
investors. 
In the third phase, since autumn 2008, a sudden and disruptive re-pricing of sovereign credit 
risk has taken place. Government bond yields started to diverge, sometimes reaching levels 
that matched and exceeded those of the early 1990s. There were fundamental reasons for 
such a re-pricing of risk. Fiscal expansion due to the need to fight the crisis came on top of 
already  high  levels  of  public  debt.  Governments’  commitment  to  support  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  added  to  their  contingent  liabilities.  Lower  potential  growth 
rates raised concerns for public finance sustainability. 
In addition to these fundamental causes, sovereign bond markets in some jurisdictions have 
been  characterised  by  poor  liquidity  and  high  volatility.  In  this  context,  investors’  worries 
regarding a loss of market access for some Member States may have become entrenched, 
and their expectations self-fulfilling. Moreover, for some countries, government debt market 
liquidity has been threatened to completely dry up in some periods. Overall, there has been a 
combination of fundamental causes and market distortions.  
It  soon  became  clear  that  the  dramatic  movements  in  government  bond  yields  were  not 
merely  a  barometer  of  investors’  valuation  of  liquidity  and  credit  risk.  Rather,  the  extreme 
levels  of  bond  yields  themselves  were  exerting  an  adverse  influence  on  other  financial 
market segments, the banking sector and also the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
What is the relevance of sovereign debt market tensions for monetary policy? 
There  is  a  strong  link  between  the  stability  of  sovereign  debt  markets  and  the  smooth 
functioning of monetary policy. This becomes very clear once we consider the prominent role 
of government bonds in the monetary policy transmission mechanism. I would like to identify 
four channels through which the functioning of government bond markets can interfere with 
the transmission of monetary policy. Let me call them the interest rate channel, the wealth 
channel, the collateral channel, and the bank balance sheet channel. 
First, government bonds play a key role in transmitting the monetary policy stance to the real 
economy  via  the  so-called  interest  rate  channel.  In  times  when  government  bonds  are 
considered as essentially risk-free and liquid instruments, a change in current and expected 
policy rates is a central factor in shifting the government bond yield curve. Changes in long-
term bond yields, in turn, translate to some extent into movements in corporate bond yields 
and  bank  lending  rates  –  either  via  arbitrage  relations  or  via  pricing  heuristics  based  on 
government  bonds  –,  thus  ensuring  a  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout 
financial markets. However, since end-2008 bond yield changes of several sovereign issuers 
in the euro area have become heavily dominated by high and volatile premiums, often driven 
by contagion and market overreaction. Such effects have come to override changes in the 
monetary  policy  stance,  blurring  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  to  the  real 
economy.  
Second,  faced  with  threatening  direct  and  indirect  losses  from  strong  price  declines  of 
sovereign bonds, consumers may opt for precautionary savings, which  would counteract a 
desired stimulus to consumption from monetary policy easing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third, government debt securities have been a key source of collateral for banks to use in 
secured  lending  with  other  banks  and  the  ECB. With  the  sharp  decline  in  sovereign  bond 
prices  –  often  associated  with  a  rating  downgrade  of  the  respective  sovereign  issuer  – 
government  bonds  were  made  subject  to  significant  haircuts  and  their  refinancing  power 
declined. This has eroded the volume of collateral available in the form of government bonds 
and stressed the re-financing possibilities of banks.  
Fourth, the re-pricing of government debt also had a direct negative impact on the asset side 
of banks and therefore on their own perceived riskiness. In fact, since 2009, we can see a 
close relationship between measures of bank and sovereign credit risk. This sovereign-bank 
nexus constitutes a fundamental impediment to resolving the crisis in the euro area. On the 
one  hand,  rising  sovereign  credit  risk  affects  banks’  credit  risk  via  their  exposure  to 
government debt. This creates deleveraging pressure that may turn into disorderly dynamics 
characterised by fire sales. On the other hand, ailing banking sectors increase the burdens 
faced  by  governments. These two  effects  are  mutually  reinforcing  and  constitute  a  vicious 
circle. For the banks, the increase in their own credit risk makes their re-financing harder. In 
short, unsecured financing is hampered by the perception of increased bank riskiness while 
secured financing is undermined by the erosion of collateral. This can in turn become a major 
obstacle to granting loans to the real economy. As banks are the main source of financing in 
the  euro  area,  this  could  seriously  jeopardise  the  flow  of  credit  to  enterprises  and 
households.  
What lessons have we learnt? 
These  developments  in  the  euro  area  sovereign  bonds  markets  offer  one  clear  lesson: 
financial  markets  are  prone  to  exaggerations,  which  amplify  further  the  pro-cyclicality 
inherent in asset valuations. Usually, during “good times”, when risk appetite is strong and 
economic conditions are favourable, asset prices tend to be high and risk spreads tend to be 
low.  However,  financial  markets  tend  to  be  over-complacent  from  time  to  time,  especially 
after protracted periods that did not see any extreme events materialising. This tendency has 
probably led to an excessive tightening of euro-denominated yields in the run-up to the euro. 
In “bad times”, when the degree of risk aversion increases and GDP growth contracts, asset 
prices tend to decline and risk spreads rise. Also in bad times, this standard pattern of pro-
cyclicality  may  be  amplified  by  market  exaggerations:  investors  tend  to  over-price  certain 
types of risk and thus under-price the respective financial assets. Exaggerated pro-cyclicality 
of  this  type  has  hit  the  sovereign  bond  market  during  the  crisis.  Furthermore,  in  particular 
through  the  use  of  sovereign  bonds  as  collateral,  it  has  exerted  adverse  effects  on  other 
segments of financial markets, such as the funding markets for financial institutions. 
To  remedy  exaggerated  pro-cyclicality  does  not  mean  that  we  should  dispense  with  the 
disciplining  role  of  financial  markets.  The  history  of  the  monetary  union  teaches  us  an 
interesting  lesson:  when  the  disciplining  role  of  intra-euro  area  exchange  rates  was  lost, 
volatility  and  tensions  have  in  fact  migrated  to  sovereign  debt  markets,  where  they  were 
building  up  under  the  surface.  Even  though  markets  sometimes  misprice  assets,  they 
nevertheless provide a useful service in terms of signalling, price discovery and incentives. 
For example, if markets had not pushed up the yields of countries in weak fiscal positions, 
imbalances would have remained unnoticed and grown much larger, and the cost of fixing 
them  would  have  been  even  higher.  While  attenuating  exaggerated  pro-cyclicality  is 
important to avoid self-fulfilling expectations leading to bad equilibriums, at the same time we 
should recognise that markets have issued valuable signals.  
There  are  a  number  of  ways  to  mitigate  exaggerated  pro-cyclicality  of  government  bond 
markets.  One  way  is  to  reduce  the  reliance  of  the  financial,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  on  credit  ratings.  The  European  Commission  has  put  forward  a  number  of 
proposals to this end. Similarly, it is worth considering ways to delink the risk assessment of 
credit  institutions  from  the  credit  rating  of  the  sovereign.  In  addition,  risk  management  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
central clearing counterparties or CCPs is of particular importance, as an increasing number 
of  financial  transactions  is  expected  to  migrate  to  them.  The  CPSS-IOSCO  principles  for 
financial  market  infrastructures  expect  CCPs  to  adopt  forward-looking  and  conservative 
margin  and  haircut  policies  to  limit  the  risk  of  destabilizing  responses to  changes  in  credit 
ratings. 
But to address the root causes of the current instability, fundamental policies will have to be 
adopted. 
The adverse feedback loop between banks and sovereigns, that I mentioned before, can be 
broken  by  establishing  a  true  financial  union:  in  my  view  this  includes  the  creation  of  a 
pan-euro  area  deposit  insurance  fund  and  a  pan-euro  area  bank  resolution  framework, 
supported by a single supervisory system with centralised decision-making. If the European 
Stability  Mechanism  –  an  institution  that  can  provide  financial  assistance  to  euro  area 
Member States in order to safeguard the stability of the euro area as a whole – could inject 
capital directly into banks, this would also help to break the bank-sovereign loop. Of course, 
such support must come with strong conditionality and control. Let me note that depending 
on its design, the financial union could introduce additional elements of risk-sharing among 
euro  area  countries,  and  as  such,  it  should  be  subject  to  strong  democratic  accountability 
and control at national and European level. 
Most importantly, all euro area countries need to return to sound macroeconomic and fiscal 
positions. This may sound obvious, but unfortunately it has threatened to slip out of focus in 
some of the recent discussions. 
There has been substantial progress towards consolidating the foundations of EMU. Fiscal 
rules are being strengthened, and almost all European governments have signed a Treaty 
that  contains  the  so-called  fiscal  compact,  which  mandates  all  contracting  parties  to 
introduce  legally  enforceable  debt  brakes  in  their  countries.3  The  reformed  governance 
framework also provides new tools to improve budgetary surveillance as well as to prevent 
and  address  macroeconomic  imbalances  –  the  “six-pack”  reforms  and  the  “two-pack” 
legislation are examples and should be forcefully implemented.  
Looking ahead, a path towards a fiscal union, based on a principle of responsibility and with 
proper  control  and  accountability,  would  provide  a  sound  “fiscal  pillar”  on  which  the  single 
currency could safely rest. 
Some  have  suggested  that  it  could  provide  a  basis  for  the  introduction  of  euro  area-wide 
funding instruments with joint and several liabilities. Such instruments could contribute to a 
smooth  functioning  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  protecting  Member  States  from 
temporary tensions arising in some parts of the Union and offsetting the emergence of self-
fulfilling expectations leading to bad equilibriums. There is an important caveat, however. In 
his  1790  Report  on  Public  Credit,  Alexander  Hamilton  wished  “to  see  incorporated,  as  a 
fundamental maxim in the system of public credit of the United States, that the creation of 
debt should always be accompanied with the means of its extinguishment”. Common funding 
instruments  would  require  shared  decision  making  on  national  debts  and  deficits  and 
probably joint control on fiscal expenditures and taxation. They can only result from further 
political integration; they cannot precede it.  
Likewise,  and  importantly,  a  fiscal  union  can  only  come  about  once  the  participating 
countries  have  successfully  restored  domestic  fiscal  sustainability  and  solidified  the 
conditions  for  long-term  growth.  Joint  debt  issuance  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  putting 
national fiscal houses in order and restoring competitiveness. 
                                                
3 
“A fiscal compact for a stronger Economic and Monetary Union”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, May 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Euro  area  sovereign  debt  markets  are  going  through  unprecedented 
challenges.  The  inherent  pro-cyclicality  and  the  exaggerations  that  at  times  characterize 
financial markets should be recognized and addressed. However, structural problems call for 
structural answers. The current overhaul of fiscal, financial and economic governance in the 
euro area will help put the single currency on a sound and sustainable footing.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
