Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 28 August 2012. 
 Today,  on  28  August  2012,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged at 4.00%. 
The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  monetary  conditions  are  appropriate  to  meet  the 
inflation target in the medium run and provide the needed monetary incentive to support the 
domestic demand.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic and monetary developments and key 
topics discussed at today’s meeting.  
 Annual inflation marked 2.7% in July, up 0.5 percentage points from a month earlier. The 
inflation  rate  went  up  mainly  due  to  higher  unprocessed  food  prices  during  this  month. 
Similarly, non-food consumer prices added their contribution to annual inflation as a result of 
higher  oil  prices.  Regardless  of  minor  fluctuations,  the  contribution  of  other  goods  of  the 
basket to inflation remained steady.  
Despite  rising,  consumer  price  inflation  remains  in  the  lower  interval  of  Bank  of  Albania’s 
inflation target band. From the macroeconomic viewpoint, it rose due to impact of transient 
factors,  while  the  poor  performance  of  aggregate  demand  continues  to  generate  low 
pressures  on  consumer  prices.  Furthermore,  increase  in  production  costs  remains  weak, 
imported  inflation  remains  low,  and  inflation  expectations  of  economic  agents  remain 
anchored.  
Second-quarter  data  on  the  economy  point  to  slow  growth  of  economic  activity  during this 
period.  While  some  of  the  indirect  indicators  signal  improvement  from  the  first  quarter, 
consumers’ propensity to save continues. This behaviour is reflected in the postponement of 
substantial expenditures, increase in deposits and investments in securities, and decline in 
consumers’  demand  for  bank  loans.  Private  investments  remain  weak,  reflecting  the  poor 
performance  of  the  final  demand  in  the  economy.  Capacity  utilisation  rate  remains  low, 
whereas  exports  of  machineries  and  equipment fell  9.5%  in  the  second  quarter,  in  annual 
terms,  after  expanding  about  1.5%  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  The  banking  system 
continued  to  grant  credits  for  private  investments  at  rates  comparable  to  those  of  the  first 
quarter of the current year.  
The fiscal policy pursued its consolidation during the first six months of 2012, materialising 
in  budget  deficit  narrowing  during  this  period.  In  the  presence  of  slow  growth  of  budget 
revenues, this behaviour was reflected in the contraction of budget expenditures by 1.2%. On 
the other hand, budget revenues increased 4.0% in annual terms, driven by low increase in 
tax revenues. The performance of revenues, expenditures and public borrowing materialised 
in a budget deficit about 31.6% lower than the corresponding period of a year earlier. The 
Bank of Albania notes that maintaining the fiscal discipline has contributed positively to the 
financial  soundness  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  to  the  control  of  risk  premia  in  the 
economy during the first half of 2012. Ongoing efforts to maintain long-term stability of the 
public  debt  will  contribute  to  boost  fiscal  policy  credibility  and  reduce  funding  costs  to  the 
Albanian economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  Albanian  economy 
Foreign demand improved in the second quarter. After shrinking in the first quarter, exports 
of goods recorded nominal annual growth by 19.2%. Imports of goods, in value, curbed by 
4.4%  in  annual  terms,  reflected  in  budget  deficit  narrowing  by  16.5%  during  this  period. 
Stronger  orientation  of 
towards  exports  and  enhanced 
competitiveness  of  our  products  should  be  a  priority  for  the  public  and  private  sectors.  In 
spite of the unfavourable situation in international markets due to the prolonged crisis in our 
trade partner countries, boosting our exports should be seen as a national long-term strategy 
for supporting sustainable economic growth and converging with EU standards.  
Monetary developments were in line with the real-economy performance. Annual monetary 
supply  growth  slowed  down  to  8.3%  in  June,  reflecting  the  reduction  of  public  sector’s 
funding by the banking system and the weak demand for monetary assets from the private 
sector. Influenced by added uncertainties about macroeconomic developments at home and 
abroad,  the  private  sector’s  demand  for  bank  loans  was  low.  For  the  same  reasons,  the 
banks continue their added prudence as regards lending. Consequently, the annual growth 
rates  of  lending  to  the  private  sector  decelerated  to  6.8%  in  June.  Promoting  healthy 
crediting  has  been  and  remains  a  constant  priority  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  policies.  In  this 
regard, we have cut the key interest rate to historically low levels, reviewed and revised the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  and  supplied  the  banking  system  with  the  required 
liquidity. Therefore, the Albanian banking system is among the few ones in the region that 
has maintained positive credit expansion rates over the recent years.  
Financial  markets  were  characterised  by  adequate  liquidity  and  low  interest  rate 
fluctuations.  Interest  rates  on  the  national  currency  continued  their  downtrend  in  July, 
following the easing cycle of the monetary policy and the improved demand and supply ratios 
in the domestic public debt market. Particularly, in the primary market, yields on government 
securities slowed down their pace of increase and there are signals for their further reduction 
in the period ahead. Overall, financial market developments point to low liquidity and inflation 
risk premia.  
Projections for the expected performance of the economy sustain earlier assessments for 
slow growth of the Albanian economy for the period ahead. Having performed poorly in the 
first  half  of  the  year,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  continue  to  be  conditioned  by 
economic agents’ reluctance to undertake private consumption and investments.  
In parallel, meeting of public debt sustainability thresholds determines a consolidating stance 
and  lower  contribution  of  the  fiscal  policy  to  economic  growth.  On  the  other  hand,  foreign 
demand is expected to provide a positive but weak contribution to aggregate demand growth. 
Under these circumstances, economic growth is estimated to remain below its potential and 
generate  low  inflationary  pressures  during  the  upcoming  period.  Taking  into  consideration 
the other variables contributing to inflation, the Bank of Albania deems that in the medium 
run  inflationary  pressures  remain  controlled,  determining  therefore  the  maintaining  of  the 
stimulating monetary policy during this period.  
 At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to 
keep the key interest rate unchanged at 4.00%. For the period ahead, the Bank of Albania 
remains  heedful  to  economic  and financial  developments  at  home  and  abroad  and  stands 
ready to intervene timely and duly, in compliance with its mandate.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
