Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Effective lending to SMEs in the Philippines 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  launch  of  the  2012  RCBC  SME  Initiatives,  Makati  City, 
16 May 2012. 
 The  officers  and  staff  of  RCBC  under  the  leadership  of  President  Lorenzo  Tan; 
entrepreneurs from the SME sector; fellow advocates in promoting access to credit; special 
guests, good evening.  
It is my pleasure to join this launch of innovative and customer-friendly initiatives of RCBC 
...in support of small and medium enterprises: the Phone-a-Loan service and the Women’s 
Enterprise Loan Program. These two programs join the internet-based loan self-assessment 
service introduced in 2009.  
Indeed, RCBC deserves commendation for these services that enable SMEs to find out early 
on – by telephone or internet – if their business fits in …with RCBC’s SME initiatives. This 
is…  therefore…  a  win-win  program  that  saves  time...  for  both  the  entrepreneurs  seeking 
credit and the bank offering credit.  
The Women’s Enterprise Loan program is also noteworthy for addressing the need of Filipina 
entrepreneurs…  not  only  for  credit,  …  but  also  for  incorporating  other  financial  services, 
training  and  business  networking.  In  other  words,  this  program  is  designed  to  support  the 
growth of SMEs managed by Filipinas. This is a good decision.  
In the microfinance world, it has been proven... repeatedly... that women make exceptional 
entrepreneurs  and  have  good  credit  discipline.  That  you  are  launching  the  Women’s 
Enterprise  Loan  program  on  the  week  of  the  celebration  of  Mother’s  Day…  makes  your 
program even more meaningful.  
Ladies and gentlemen. We need our financial system to reach out to underserved and the 
presently unserved. Together, we should work on having an inclusive financial system that 
brings about inclusive growth… in our country. This is the value of your SME program.  
As it is, the 2010 Financial Access Survey indicated that only around 20% of our small firms 
access loans from financial institutions. The figure is higher in our neighboring countries; in 
Malaysia, for instance, the comparable figure is 60%.  
The impact of micro, small and medium enterprises on our economy and our people cannot 
be overemphasized. Together, our MSMEs are estimated to employ roughly 61% of Filipino 
workers and contribute 32% of our Gross Domestic Product.  
In  fact,  MSMEs  are  considered  as  a  seedbed  for  nurturing  entrepreneurial  skills  and  new 
ideas. MSMEs therefore are critical engines of economic growth and development. The entry 
of large banks to the SME sector therefore ...is a most welcome development.  
Globally, providing SMEs access to finance is gaining renewed momentum. For instance, the 
association  of  the  world’s  biggest  economies...  under  the  so-called  G20...  has  created  a 
Global  Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion...  which  is  working  on  principles  for  innovative 
financial inclusion... as well as SME finance. While the Philippines is not a member of the 
G20,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  has  been  invited  to  join  this  important  global 
undertaking.  
At first glance, the MSME sector may not seem to be a natural market for large banks, given 
the high transaction costs relative to small loans and their lack of familiarity with the MSME 
landscape. Nevertheless, we have seen many jurisdictions address these concerns ... in a 
timely and cost-effective manner.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Philippine microfinance sector is one such success story. Developing innovative product 
design and delivery channels have proven to be a viable and sustainable model to serve a 
sector....  previously  seen  as  difficult  to  serve.  RCBC  itself  has  made  inroads  into 
microfinance.  
Moving  forward,  we  at  the  BSP  will  continue  to  create  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory 
environment  that  will  allow  both  the  financial  institutions  and  the  MSMEs  to  grow...  on  a 
sustained  basis.  To  achieve  this,  the  BSP  will  develop  and  adopt  more  market-oriented 
solutions to promote SME lending.  
So far, the BSP has instituted certain regulatory incentives, among which, are the reduction 
in the risk weight for SME loans from 100% to 75% and the extension to December 31, 2014 
of  the  exemption  of  micro-  and  small-  enterprises  from  the  submission  of  additional 
documentary  requirements,  such  as  income  tax  return  and/or  audited  financial  statements 
...when they apply for bank loans.  
Within  the  BSP,  we  are  implementing  a  capacity  building  program  for  BSP  examiners  to 
familiarize them with the many methodologies and technologies banks can use to effectively 
lend to SMEs.  
The  BSP  also  actively  supports  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  credit  information 
bureau and the creation of a collateral registry to spur the growth of MSME lending.  
Finally,  the  BSP  is  deeply  committed  to  further  broaden  the  reach  of  our  economic  and 
financial learning program to strengthen MSMEs. I am pleased to know therefore that RCBC 
is doing its part in promoting financial education.  
Indeed, as a bank named after our national hero, We can expect no less. After all, Dr. Jose 
Rizal was an ardent advocate of education as the way to improve the lives of Filipinos.  
Empowering our people through financial education and supporting the MSME sector gain 
access  to  credit  are,  therefore,  truly  worthy  pursuits  for  RCBC...  both  as  a  business 
enterprise and as a responsible corporate citizen.  
In his novel El Filibusterismo, Dr. Jose Rizal wrote.. and I quote: “The greatness of a man 
is...  in  understanding  his  time’s  desires,  in  responding to  its  needs,  and  in  guiding  its  way 
forward.” 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  programs  RCBC  launched  today  respond  to  the  needs  of  our 
time: to help Philippine MSMEs move forward; to help MSMEs prosper into viable ventures 
that  will  employ  more  Filipinos;  and  to  help  MSMEs  become  viable  partners  in  promoting 
inclusive and sustainable growth across the Philippines.  
We therefore wish total success for RCBC’s SME programs. Marami pong salamat sa inyong 
lahat.  
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
