Mario Draghi: Building the bridge to a stable European economy 
Speech by  Mr  Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the annual event 
“Day of the German Industries”, organised by the Federation of German Industries, Berlin, 
25 September 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  privilege  to  be  invited  to  address  the  Bundesverband  der  Deutschen  Industrie  this 
afternoon.  
The  BDI  in  many  ways  mirrors  the  strengths  of  the  German  economy.  It  simultaneously 
represents global multinationals and family-owned small businesses. It is this combination of 
small, medium and large firms that gives German industry its uniqueness and resilience. And 
this has been rewarded in recent years through strong growth and high employment. 
The  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  been  facing  challenging  times.  Financial  markets  are 
fragmented.  Economic  growth  has  been  broadly  flat  for  the  first  half  of  2012.  Growth  also 
remains highly uneven, with some parts of the euro area economy expanding at a solid pace, 
while others are still in a phase of adjustment.  
But my central message to you today is that, provided that all policy-makers persevere with 
the necessary reforms, we have a number of reasons to be positive about where the euro 
area  is  heading.  We  are  seeing  signs  of  improved  sentiment  in  financial  markets  and  we 
expect the economy to return to growth next year. At the same time, considerable progress is 
being made on all fronts to strengthen the foundations of the euro area.  
Above  all,  the  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  are  undertaking  determined  measures  to 
address 
Individually,  governments  are 
implementing  the  fiscal  and  structural  reforms  essential  for  growth.  Collectively,  they  are 
reforming the governance of the euro area so as to guarantee sound policies for the future. 
We at the European Central Bank (ECB) are continuing to maintain price stability, which is 
the  foundation  of  growth  and  job  creation.  We  have  introduced  new  measures  to  ensure 
price  stability  by  removing  unfounded  fears  about  the  euro  area.  These  measures  are 
supporting financial market sentiment while deeper reforms are implemented across the euro 
area. 
However,  our  measures  can  only  build  a  bridge  towards  a  more  stable  future.  It  must  be 
completed with decisive measures by governments to address fundamental challenges and 
complete the euro area’s institutional architecture. They are currently making progress in this 
direction.  The  key  challenge  going  forward  is  to  ensure  that  the  immediate  upturn 
strengthens rather than weakens this commitment.  
the  root  causes  of  our  current  challenges. 
Actions by the Member States to strengthen the euro area’s foundations  
Let  me  begin  with  the  actions  being  taken  by  the  Member  States  to  strengthen  the  euro 
area’s foundations. 
Across  the  euro  area,  strong  budgetary  consolidation  is  taking  place.  The  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) forecasts that the euro area’s primary budgetary position will be almost 
in  balance  this  year.  This  means  that,  apart  from  debt  service,  all  other  expenditures  are 
covered by current revenues.  
This  is  quite  an  achievement  in  an  international  context:  Japan,  for  example,  will  have  a 
9% of GDP primary deficit this year, the U.S. 6% and U.K. more than 5%. And the euro area 
is not only performing well on average: each individual country  will have a primary budget 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
deficit lower than these three countries. It is those countries most in need that are making the 
largest adjustments. 
Important improvements are also taking place in competitiveness. For example, the countries 
under full EU-IMF programmes have seen unit labour costs improve by around 10% since 
2008, relative to the euro area average. This has translated into current account deficits that 
are on average more than five percentage points of GDP lower than they were then. And this 
is not only due to lower imports, but also rising exports induced by higher competitiveness. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Member  States  are  taking  significant  steps  to  improve  euro  area 
governance. Governance of fiscal policies has been decisively strengthened with  the fiscal 
compact.  This  agreement  is  a  powerful  tool  for  keeping  fiscal  policies  in  balance  and 
reducing debt to sustainable levels.  
Governance  of  financial  policies  is  also  now  being  given  proper  attention.  The  European 
Commission  has  recently  proposed  a  single  supervisor  for  euro  area  banks.  Single 
supervision  is  particularly  important  in  a  single  currency  area  where  countries  are  more 
immediately  affected  by  instability  originating  from  other  member  countries.  Such  single 
supervision should ultimately lead to a more stable financial system.  
Taken together, these actions show that clear progress is being made towards addressing 
the fundamental causes of our current challenges. Deficits are being reduced. Rebalancing is 
happening. And governance is being reformed.  
Actions by the ECB to ensure price stability  
Let  me  turn  to  the  ECB’s  recent  actions.  We  have  played  a  role  in  improving  overall 
confidence by removing unfounded fears about the euro area that were affecting our ability to 
ensure  price  stability  –  notably  through  our  recent  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions, or OMTs. Let me briefly explain the rationale for this decision. 
The euro area has experienced a very severe fragmentation in its financial markets. In recent 
months,  we  have  seen  highly  divergent  borrowing  costs  for  the  real  economy  in  different 
parts  of  the  euro  area.  In  our  analysis,  these  differences  were  larger  than  justified  by 
individual  credit  risk.  They  reflected,  to  a  considerable  extent,  unfounded  fears  about  the 
future of the euro area. 
For  example,  a  loan  to  a  family  in  Germany  for  a  house  purchase  with  a  five-  to-ten-year 
maturity had an interest rate of 3%; the rate for a comparable borrower in Spain was 7.5%. 
At  the  same  time,  the  average  firm  in  Germany  paid  around  3%  for  a  new  loan  over  five 
years, while the average firm in Italy paid above 5.5%.  
In  these  circumstances,  monetary  policy  cannot  work  properly.  This  is  because  a  key 
channel  through  which  the  ECB  ensures  price  stability  is  through  the  cost  of  credit,  in 
particular bank credit. Bank credit accounts for about 70% of external financing of euro area 
firms, and that ratio is even higher for smaller enterprises.  
But if we are unable to influence borrowing costs in some parts of the euro area, this channel 
is  disrupted.  Firms  and  households  have  less  access  to  financing,  economic  growth  stalls 
and these regions are faced with a risk of deflation. In other words, our ability to ensure price 
stability for the whole euro area is compromised. 
The ECB’s Governing Council therefore faced a choice: to accept this situation and allow the 
singleness of its monetary policy to be undermined; or to take actions within its mandate to 
restore  the  normal  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  all  parts  of  the  euro  area.  We 
decided in favour of the latter.  
Our actions aim to repair monetary policy transmission through providing a credible backstop 
in government bond markets that removes unfounded fears and tail risks from the euro area. 
Insofar as this supports investor confidence, it will help stabilise conditions in other markets, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
such as those for corporate and bank bonds. This ultimately feeds into more even borrowing 
costs for the real economy across the euro area. 
Early  signs  suggest  a  positive  effect.  Since  the  beginning  of  this  month,  euro  area  banks 
issued about 27 billion euros of new debt – the most since March of this year. Some of these 
banks  had  not  been  able  to  access  the  market  for  almost  six  months  previously. 
Non-financial  corporations  have  also  issued  around  43  billion  euros  of  new  bonds,  the 
highest figure for five of the last six months. 
It  is too  early  to  tell  the full  impact  of  our measures  on  borrowing  conditions for firms  and 
households. It will take time for the effects of our actions to feed through systematically.  
But the fact that we have seen positive signs so quickly is revealing. It shows that investors 
are  fundamentally  confident  in  the  overall  trajectory  of  the  euro  area.  They  are  ready  to 
re-invest at the first signs of stabilisation. This underscores my central message today: the 
euro area is making progress – and investors are recognising that progress. 
The benefits of stability for the euro area as a whole 
I  have  described  how  the  measures  taken  by  both  the  Member  States  and  the  ECB  are 
beginning  to  improve  confidence.  This  will  ultimately  lead  to  greater  overall  stability.  The 
benefits of this do not accrue only to countries in difficulty. They accrue to the euro area as a 
whole.  
This  is  particularly  true  for  an  open  and  outward-looking  country  like  Germany.  German 
industry is a sector deeply embedded in the wider European economy. The stability of the 
euro area is key to its sustained prosperity. For this reason, ECB actions to maintain price 
stability for the whole euro area are directly in its interests.  
As has long been recognised in this country, low inflation and stable exchange rates ensure 
a level playing field on which German firms can prosper. They can compete based on their 
sophistication and innovativeness, without unfair distortions. At the same time, being part of 
a  large  and  stable  currency  area  provides  a  buffer  against  external  shocks.  This  will  only 
become more essential in an ever globalising world. 
These  factors  have  led  to  real  economic  benefits  for  Germany.  Its  intra-euro  area  trade 
increased  from  around  25%  of  GDP  in  1999  to  almost  40%  of  GDP  in  2010,  while  its 
extra-euro  area  trade  increase  by  more  than  20  percentage  points  in  the  same  period. 
Almost 65% of foreign direct investment in Germany now comes from the euro area – and 
more than one and a half million jobs depend on that investment.  
In other words, a stable euro area supports a strong German economy. And a stable euro 
area is the objective of the all the measures that I have just described. 
Moreover, measures that support investor confidence also support the proper functioning of 
the financial system. For instance, TARGET2 data suggests that balances have now fallen 
slightly from their peak in August. This highlights the fact that if investors are confident that 
adverse  scenarios  will  not  materialise,  they  will  be  more  prepared  to  make  cross-border 
loans. This supports demand across the euro area and the smooth functioning of the Single 
Market. 
I  understand  that  some  observers  in  this  country  have  concerns  about  the  medium-term 
implications of this policy. So let me be clear: we always have a medium-term orientation. 
We are steadfastly committed to our mandate to maintain price stability. And the measures 
we have announced fully support this commitment. 
First  of  all,  our  actions  are  for  the  sole  purpose  of  ensuring  the  proper  transmission  of 
monetary policy. They do not aim to finance governments, and nor would they if they were 
activated. Our operations would only take place in the secondary market, which ensures that 
money would pass to investors holding sovereign bonds, not to governments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Moreover,  we  have  been  explicit  that  our  measures  can  be  only  successful  if  they  are 
accompanied by reforms from governments that address deep-rooted issues. The Governing 
Council has made a strong commitment to such reforms a pre-requisite to be considered for 
our operations. This ensures that governments will continue to take essential measures.  
Euro area citizens can be certain that we remain alert to any risk to price stability. We have 
always delivered price stability in the past – indeed, the average rate of inflation in Germany 
since the launch of the euro has been the lowest since the 1950s. And we will continue to 
deliver price stability in the future.  
The  credibility  of  our  commitment  is  clear.  Indicators  of  inflation  expectations  show  that 
citizens  and  financial  markets  expect  inflation  to  remain  low  in  line  with  our  mandate. We 
take very seriously the trust that citizens put in us to meet their expectations. We will not let 
them down. 
Building a bridge to the long term 
I have discussed the actions that the ECB has taken to ensure price stability and the positive 
early impact they are having. Of course the current improvement in sentiment does not mean 
that everything is solved. The ECB’s actions can only build a bridge to the future. The project 
must  be  completed  through  decisive  actions  by  governments  –  both  individually  and 
collectively – to address the underlying causes of our current challenges. 
This requires further  efforts  by governments to restore fiscal  sustainability  across the  euro 
area. It requires deep structural reforms to achieve long-term competitiveness and growth. 
Governments must remain firmly committed to their current reform efforts, and not seek to 
relax them as economic conditions start to improve.  
To  secure  long-term  stability  also  requires  a  second  level  of  actions.  For  citizens  and 
investors  to  fully  regain  confidence  in  the  euro  area,  they  need  to  be  convinced  that  its 
design flaws have been permanently fixed. A concerted effort from governments to complete 
our economic and monetary union is therefore essential.  
This does not require a choice between extreme options. Some observers have argued that 
long-term  stability  requires  a  return  to  the  original  Maastricht  framework.  Others  have 
suggested  that  we  need  a  full  federation,  a  United  States  of  Europe.  In  my  view,  neither 
approach is necessary. 
We can ensure future stability by elevating to the European level only those policies that are 
essential for our union to function effectively. I have been asked to work on identifying these 
policies  under  the  lead  of  the  President  of  the  European  Council  and  together  with  the 
Presidents  of  the  Commission  and  the  Eurogroup.  In  our  view,  a  stable  and  prosperous 
union must be built on four pillars. 
The first pillar is a financial union that can maintain a stable and integrated financial market. 
This implies a single supervisor to control risk-taking by banks and reduce regulatory capture 
– and a single resolution system to ensure that banks can fail without dragging down their 
sovereigns.  
As regards the Commission proposal for a single supervisor that I mentioned earlier, I am 
confident that governments will find agreement on the appropriate perimeter of supervisory 
responsibilities, as well as issues related to democratic accountability. For our part, we will 
guarantee the firm separation of monetary policy from supervisory tasks. We will also ensure 
close  cooperation  with  national  supervisors  who  have  the  competence  and  resources  to 
implement supervision.  
The  second  pillar  is  a  fiscal  union  that  can  effectively  prevent  and  correct  unsustainable 
budgets. The consequences of misguided fiscal policies in a monetary union are too severe 
to remain self-policed. So a stable EMU  would  ultimately require the establishment of true 
budgetary oversight at the European level.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  third  pillar  is  an  economic  union  that  can  guarantee  the  highest  standards  for 
competitiveness. Countries must be able to generate growth and high employment without 
excessive imbalances. This implies that there must be minimum standards for key economic 
policies and incentives for continued structural reform.  
The fourth pillar is a political union that can engage euro area citizens more deeply and make 
the  other  pillars  legitimate.  This  is  essential  to  ensure  that  where  sovereignty  in  selected 
policy fields is pooled, democratic participation is deepened in parallel. 
A firm commitment from governments to complete economic and monetary union is the best 
complement to the ECB’s actions.  
It ensures that, by supporting immediate confidence, we will build the bridge to a more stable 
and prosperous euro area. And it sends a clear signal to investors that the euro area has a 
vision for a sustainable future. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close. 
In  exceptional  times,  regaining  stability  sometimes  requires  exceptional  measures.  We 
cannot  always  look  to  the  past  for  answers.  We  may  need  to  take  new  steps  to  achieve 
longstanding goals.  
That is the situation we have been facing. 
For  the  Member  States,  new  steps  have  been  needed  to  restore  competitiveness.  A 
sustained  commitment  to  reform  efforts  is  required  and  a  rethinking  of  the  institutional 
architecture of the euro area. 
For  the  ECB,  new  steps  have  been  needed  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  face  of 
fragmented  financial  markets.  These  new  steps  are  not  a  departure  from  our  mandate. 
Indeed, they are the only way to ensure that we continue to fulfil our mandate. 
All the measures I have described today are fundamentally about ensuring stability. In the 
current circumstances, the greatest risk to stability is not action, but inaction. This is why the 
ECB has acted. 
The  euro  supports  the  strong  industrial  sector  on  which  Germany  depends.  It  supports 
openness, growth and prosperity. And ultimately, it supports peace and stability.  
This is why the euro is irreversible.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
