Tiff Macklem: Promoting growth, mitigating cycles and inequality – the 
role of price and financial stability 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
the Brazil-Canada Chamber of Commerce, São Paulo, Brazil, 12 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon and thank you for the kind invitation to speak to the Brazil-Canada Chamber 
of Commerce. 
The  climates  and  geographies  of  Brazil  and  Canada  couldn’t  be  more  different.  Yet  our 
countries have much in common. 
We are both resource- and land-rich – Canada is the world’s second-largest country, Brazil 
the fifth largest. We are both among the world’s top 10 oil producers. We share a democratic 
system  of  government  and  market-based  economies.  And  our  monetary  policies  are  both 
anchored by an inflation target with a flexible exchange rate. 
In  recent  years  we  both  faced  a  global  financial  crisis  that  emanated  from  beyond  our 
borders. We weren’t immune but came through it better than most. 
Among  G-7  countries,  Canada  had  the  shortest  recession  and  one  of  the  strongest 
recoveries. The recession in Canada lasted three quarters and our GDP is now 3.3 per cent 
above its pre-recession peak. Even more impressive is the recovery in Brazil, which returned 
to growth after just two quarters. Your GDP is now 8.2 per cent above its pre-recession peak. 
Globally, the cost of the crisis has been enormous. The ensuing recession was the worst the 
world  has  seen  since  the  1930s  and  the  most  globally  synchronous  in  history.  Almost 
28 million  jobs  disappeared.  Output  losses  to  the  global  economy  amounted  to  at  least 
US$4 trillion. The recoveries in the United States and the euro area are the weakest since 
the Great Depression and risks are elevated. These global headwinds continue to challenge 
the Brazilian and Canadian economies. 
The  devastation  wrought  by  the  crisis  has  focused  attention  on  rising  levels  of  income 
inequality in most advanced countries. The ensuing recession inflicted the greatest hardship 
on the most vulnerable. And this comes against the background of a disquieting trend. Not 
only have lower- and middle-income households borne a disproportionate share of the cost 
of the Great Recession, they reaped less than their proportional share of the income gains 
during the Great Moderation. Those gains were skewed to higher-income households. 
The  growing  disparity  between  rich  and  poor  has  prompted  young  people  and  business 
leaders, workers and the unemployed, and academics and policy-makers alike to ask some 
fundamental questions – first, about the role and structure of the financial system and, more 
recently, about capitalism itself. From the supporters of the Occupy Wall Street movement to 
the editors at the Financial Times, the market economy is under acute scrutiny. 
In my remarks today I want to address these concerns. I have three main messages. 
First,  markets  work  better  than  anything  else  at  delivering  opportunity  and  prosperity. 
Second,  an  efficient  and  resilient  financial  system  is  an  essential  enabler  to  growth  and 
inclusion. But, third and critically, markets only work well within sound policy frameworks. All 
markets  –  and  financial  markets  in  particular  –  need  clear  rules,  diligent  oversight,  and 
consistent  enforcement  of  the  rules.  Systemic  crises  are  not  the  inescapable  product  of 
capitalism, and inequality is not the necessary by-product of growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Central  banks  play  an  important  role  in  supporting  well-functioning  markets  by  promoting 
both price and financial stability. These are essential public goods that sustain growth and 
mitigate cycles and inequality. 
Growth, cycles and inequality 
Over  the  past  quarter  century,  steady  advances  in  transportation,  communication,  and 
information  technologies,  underpinned  by  the  widespread  adoption  of  market-based 
economic policies, have globalized and expanded economies everywhere, especially those 
of  Brazil,  India  and  China.  Never  in  history  has  economic  integration  involved  so  many 
people, such a variety of goods, and so much capital. 
This has dramatically narrowed the gap between rich and poor countries, lifted hundreds of 
millions of people out of poverty and created the potential for hundreds of millions more to 
share  in  the  benefits.  The  shrinking  disparity  between  the  United  States  and  China  is 
particularly striking. In 1990, GDP per capita in the United States was almost 30 times higher 
than in China; by 2010, this ratio had fallen to just 6 times. 
However,  at  the  same  time  as  inequality  between  countries  has  been  declining,  the  gap 
between rich and poor within many countries has increased (Chart 1). Countries as diverse 
as China, Denmark, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the 
United States have all seen inequality rise, as measured by their Gini coefficients.1 Again, to 
use the example of the United States and China, from the mid-1980s to the late 2000s, the 
Gini  coefficient  in  the  United  States  increased  from  0.33  to  0.37,  while  inequality  in  China 
increased from 0.29 to 0.44. 
                                                 
1  The most common measure of inequality, the Gini coefficient, ranges between 0, when everyone has exactly 
the same income, to 1, when only one person holds all the income. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Among advanced countries, income inequality in the United States is at the high end of the 
range  and  has  trended  upward  since  the  early  1980s.  In  1981,  the  income  share  of  the 
wealthiest  5  per  cent  of  U.S.  households  was  16.5  per  cent.  By  2010,  this  share  had 
increased to 21.3 per cent. Over the same period, the income share of the bottom 20 per 
cent shrank from 4.1 per cent to 3.3 per cent. With the onset of the crisis in 2007, the decline 
accelerated  as  rising  unemployment  affected  workers  at  the  lower  end  of  the  income 
distribution, particularly younger and less-educated workers. The last time inequality in the 
United States was so severe was during the 1920s. 
In short, market forces have been a powerful mechanism for creating wealth and narrowing 
the income gaps between countries. At the same time, however, globalization, combined with 
technological change, is concentrating wealth in fewer hands within many countries. 
Brazil and Canada 
Let me turn now to Brazil and Canada. The economic record of our countries in recent years 
provides  an  important  counter-example  to  those  questioning  capitalism.  In  the  face  of  the 
global  crisis,  neither  country  was  obliged  to  bail  out  its  banks.  Our  policy  frameworks 
performed well under stress. And our economies proved resilient in the face of a global crisis. 
To  an  important  degree,  this  outcome  reflects  the  guidance  we  took  from  our  own  past 
mistakes in the 1980s and 1990s. Learning from bitter experience, Canada and Brazil put in 
place  robust  economic  frameworks  to  support  markets,  including  flexible  inflation-targeting 
regimes, prudent fiscal policies, sound financial sector regulation and proactive oversight. 
In Canada we tend to compare our economic performance with that of the United States, for 
obvious reasons. Our financial systems and economies are highly integrated. So when the 
United States plunged into recession in the autumn of 2007, Canada was affected through 
trade,  financial,  and  confidence  channels.  But  with  our  well-regulated  financial  system,  a 
credible  monetary  policy  framework  and  a  record  of  fiscal  prudence,  monetary  and  fiscal 
stimulus proved highly effective in dampening the cycle and spurring the recovery. 
This resilience had a profound impact on the relative performance of our labour market. The 
United States lost 8.6 million jobs in the recession and, despite the recent improvement in job 
creation,  only  about  half  of  those  jobs  have  been  regained.  In  Canada,  on  a  proportional 
basis we lost about 40 per cent of the jobs that were lost in the United States. Moreover, by 
early 2011 all of these had been recouped and employment is now 1.5 per cent above its 
level at the start of the recession in Canada (and 2.4 per cent above its level at the start of 
the recession in the United States) (Chart 2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
In Canada, as elsewhere, low-income workers were hit hardest by the recession. But with a 
less-severe contraction in employment and a faster recovery, they fared far better than those 
in the United States. The unemployment rate for U.S. workers with less than a high school 
education almost doubled, rising from 10 to 19 per cent. And for younger workers aged 16 to 
19,  the  rise  in  unemployment  was  even  bigger,  increasing  from  15  to  26  per  cent.  By 
comparison, in Canada the unemployment rate among youth and the least educated rose by 
4 to 5 percentage points (Chart 3 a, b). 
Similarly,  while  Canada  has  not  escaped  the  trend  toward  higher  levels  of  inequality, 
inequality in Canada is substantially lower than it is in the United States (Chart 4). Over the 
past quarter century, economic growth in Canada and the United States has been virtually 
the same, averaging close to 2.6 per cent. But Canada has achieved this comparable rate of 
growth with less inequality. 
I won’t presume to lecture you on the history of the reforms instituted here in Brazil, but I will 
suggest that the world needs to hear more about Brazil’s success story. The impact of the 
changes  put  in  place  more  than  ten  years  ago  is  both  impressive  and  instructive.  As  the 
Brazilian  economy  became  more  open  to  the  rest  of  the  world  and  more  market  oriented, 
annual economic growth rose from about 2.4 per cent in the early 2000s to 7.5 per cent by 
the end of the decade. Brazil’s exports of goods and services, as a share of GDP, increased 
from 6.6 per cent in 1996 to 11.2 per cent in 2010.2  
The most remarkable measure of success is that this step-up in growth was achieved with a 
declining rate of inequality – proof positive that economic growth isn’t inevitably shadowed by 
a  widening  gap  between  rich  and  poor.  Inequality  peaked  in  Brazil  in  the  1980s  as  the 
economy endured a series of crises, culminating in hyperinflation. But by the 1990s, growth 
and equality began to improve. With market-based reforms starting in the 1990s, combined 
with Brazil’s move to inflation targeting and a flexible exchange rate in 1999, fiscal reforms 
that put public finances on a sustainable track early in the 2000s, and social programs tied to 
education and health, this virtuous cycle accelerated (Chart 5). The decline in inequality has 
been significant, with the Gini coefficient falling from 0.60 to below 0.55. This combination of 
faster  growth  and  declining  inequality  helped  lift  some  20  million  Brazilians  out  of  poverty 
between  2004  and  2009.  Moreover,  the  potential  to  raise  millions  more  out  of  poverty 
remains. 
Indeed, broader cross-country evidence suggests that lower inequality may in turn be good 
for sustaining growth. Based on the historical experiences of a broad sample of countries, 
recent  research  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  suggests  that  for  a  country  with 
median inequality (i.e., with a Gini coefficient of 0.40), a 10-percentile decrease of the Gini 
(to 0.37) increases the expected length of a growth spell by 50 per cent.3 Extrapolating from 
this study for the case of Brazil, these point estimates suggest that the decline in the Gini 
coefficient from 0.60 to 0.55 would be associated with a better than 75 per cent increase in 
the expected length of a growth spell, all other factors being equal. This bodes well for the 
future in Brazil. 
 
 
                                                 
2  These figures are taken from the World Bank World Development Indicators database. 
3  A. Berg and J. Ostry, “Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two Sides of the Same Coin?” Staff Discussion 
Note  No.  SDN/11/08,  International  Monetary  Fund,  2011;  and  A.  Berg,  J.  Ostry  and  J.  Zettelmeyer,  “What 
Makes Growth Sustained?” Working Paper No. WP/08/59, International Monetary Fund, 2008. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
What can central banks do? 
How economies enter the virtuous circle of growth that both reduces inequality and is more 
sustainable is a complex subject involving a broad range of factors and the full array of policy 
frameworks,  including  education,  health,  openness  to  trade,  foreign  investment,  financial 
development, and fiscal, labour market and environmental policies. Needless to say, these 
step well beyond the mandates and expertise of central banks. But within this matrix, central 
banks have two limited but important roles to play: promoting price and financial stability. 
Price stability 
Low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  promotes  growth,  mitigates  economic  cycles  and 
protects the purchasing power of money. 
In  1991  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Canada  adopted  an  inflation-targeting  regime, 
which  was  renewed  again  in  2011  for  another  five  years.  Canadians  have  benefited  in  a 
number of important ways from this regime. An improved inflation environment has allowed 
consumers and businesses to manage their finances with greater certainty about the future 
purchasing power of their savings and income. Interest rates have also been lower in both 
nominal  and  real  terms  across  a  range  of  maturities.  More  broadly,  low,  stable  and 
predictable inflation has helped to encourage more stable economic growth in Canada and 
lower and less-variable unemployment (Table 1). 
The reduced cyclical variability in unemployment has particularly benefited more vulnerable 
households.  Unemployment  rates  for  younger  workers  and  those  with  less  education  are 
considerably more variable than those for well-educated, prime-age workers (Table 2). More 
stable  economic  growth  in  Canada  in  the  20  years  since  we  began  inflation  targeting  has 
reduced the cyclical fluctuations in unemployment for workers across all age and educational 
categories, but the largest declines in variability have been experienced by younger and less-
educated workers. Mitigating cycles is good for equality. 
Inflation control also offers a more direct benefit to lower-income households. Inflation is a 
tax  on  cash,  and  the  proportion  of  household  assets  held  in  cash  decreases  as  income 
rises.4  As  a  result,  the  burden  of  inflation  borne  by  low-income  households  is  significantly 
higher than for the wealthy. 
High  and  unstable  inflation  also  imposes  particular  hardships  on  those  individuals  whose 
incomes  do  not  keep  pace  with  rising  prices,  especially  people  on  fixed  incomes, such  as 
pensioners. 
Recent  research  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  elsewhere  suggests  that  when  inflation 
increases from 2 per cent to 5 per cent, average consumption by the poor declines by about 
1.4 per cent, about four times the decline that occurs among the wealthy. And the drop in 
consumption  among  the  elderly  is  about  1.8  times  larger  than  that  experienced  by  the 
young.5  
                                                 
4  D.  Kessler  and  E.  Wolff,  “A  Comparative  Analysis  of  Household  Wealth  Patterns  in  France  and  the  United 
States,”  Review  of  Income  and  Wealth  37  no.  3  (1991):  249–66;  A.  Kennickell  and  M.  Starr-McCluer, 
“Household Saving and Portfolio Change: Evidence from the 1983–1989 SCF Panel,” Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series 18, Division of Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington D.C., 1996; A. Erosa 
and G. Ventura, “On Inflation as a Regressive Consumption Tax,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, no. 4 
(2002): 761–95; S. Cao, C. Meh, J.V. Rios-Rull and Y. Terajima, “Inflation, Demand for Liquidity and Welfare,” 
forthcoming paper, Bank of Canada (2012); C. Meh, J.V. Rios-Rull and Y. Terajima, “Aggregate and Welfare 
Effects  of  Redistribution  of  Wealth  under  Inflation  and  Price-Level  Targeting,”  2010.  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 57 (6), 637–52. 
5  S.  Cao,  C.  Meh,  J.V.  Rios-Rull  and  Y.  Terajima,  “Inflation,  Demand  for  Liquidity  and  Welfare,”  forthcoming 
paper,  Bank  of  Canada,  2012;  A.  Erosa  and  G.  Ventura,  “On  Inflation  as  a  Regressive  Consumption  Tax,” 
Journal of Monetary Economics 49, no. 4 (2002): 761–795. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial stability 
Low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  promotes  growth  and  can  help  mitigate  cycles  and 
inequality.  However,  the  financial  crisis  has  been  a  stark  reminder  that  low  inflation  is  no 
guarantee of financial stability. 
The  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  are  many  and  complex.  Its  epicentre  was  the  U.S. 
subprime-mortgage  market,  the  growth  of  which  was  fuelled,  in  part,  by  rising  levels  of 
inequality  as  lower-  and  middle-income  Americans  took  on  more  debt  to  compensate  for 
stagnating incomes and wealthy investors searched for yield.6  
The consequences have been severe and will be with us for years to come. History suggests 
that recessions following financial crises tend to be deeper, and the recoveries shallower. On 
average, the loss of output in a recession after a financial crisis is two to three times the loss 
in  a  normal  recession.  And  typically,  it  takes  output  twice  as  long  to  return  to  its  pre-
recession level after a financial crisis than after a normal recovery. 
Sadly, the recoveries in the United States and Europe show no signs of escaping this lesson 
from history. Both are experiencing the weakest recoveries since the Great Depression. The 
resulting unemployment, particularly long-term unemployment, is exacerbating inequality. In 
the United States and the euro area combined, more than 11 million workers have been out 
of work for more than a year. 
The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  that  an  efficient  and  resilient  financial  system  is  essential  to 
growth, and financial development has proven an important ingredient to reducing inequality. 
A  well-functioning  financial  system  is  a  key  enabler  to  growth,  channelling  savings  to 
productive investments, and helping households and businesses manage risks. Increasingly, 
cross-country  evidence  also  suggests  that  financial  development  eases  inequality  by 
reducing transactions costs. This provides the opportunity to accumulate assets and smooth 
consumption, make financing accessible to local entrepreneurs, and promote inclusion in the 
formal economy. Recent research finds that financial development, measured as the ratio of 
private  credit  to  GDP,  both  raises  growth  and  reduces  inequality.  For  the  poorest  quintile, 
60 per cent of the benefit of financial development comes from overall economic growth and 
40 per  cent  from  greater  income  equality.7  In  short,  there  is  a  virtuous  circle  of  financial 
development, growth and reduced inequality. 
This points to the imperative of a dynamic and robust financial system. 
The excesses and abuses in the financial system that led to the crisis have been a lightning 
rod for public discontent. 
Understandably so. 
But the answer is not to dismantle the financial system. It must be rebuilt. That process is 
well under way.8  
The  G-20  financial  reform  agenda,  launched  in  the  depth  of  the  recession,  is  suitably 
sweeping. Its key elements include: 
                                                 
6  R.  Rajan,  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton 
University Press, 2010). 
7  S. Jahan and B. McDonald, “A Bigger Slice of a Growing Pie,” Finance & Development (September 2011): 
16–19; R. Levine, “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by 
P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, vol. 1 (Elsevier, 2005): 865–934; and T. Beck, A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine, 
“Finance, Inequality, and Poverty: Cross-Country Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper No. 10979, Cambridge, 2004. 
8  T.  Macklem,  “Raising  the  House  of  Reform,”  speech  to  the  Rotman  Institute  for  International  Business, 
Toronto, Ontario, 7 February 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   capital and liquidity buffers to make banks safer; 
broadening  the  span  of  regulation  and  oversight  so  that  all  systemically  important 
financial institutions, markets and products are included; 
stronger infrastructure so that core financial markets continue to function in periods 
of stress; and 
credible  and  effective  resolution  regimes  for  all  financial  institutions  so  that  no 
institution is too big to fail.  
Many of these reforms are now being implemented. Others are still in the policy development 
stage. 
These reforms are not without costs. Higher capital and liquidity standards will raise the cost 
of funds. But the benefits of reducing the frequency and severity of crises are much larger. 
Under  conservative  assumptions,  a  cost-benefit  analysis  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  suggests 
that strengthened international liquidity standards and a 2-percentage-point increase in bank 
capital ratios globally would generate net gains to Canada in present-value terms of about 
13 per cent of GDP, equivalent to about $200 billion.9 The gains for the world economy are 
even greater, reflecting the higher historical frequency of crises globally. The cumulative net 
present value gain of these higher global standards is equivalent to more than 35 per cent of 
global GDP.10  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Markets work better than anything else. They have proven over time to be the best generator 
of prosperity. But markets need to be guided by sound policy frameworks with clear rules that 
must  be  enforced  with  consistency  and  transparency.  Effective  inflation  control,  combined 
with well-regulated financial systems, are critical ingredients to sustained economic growth 
and shared prosperity. 
The forces of globalization and technological change that have propelled global growth and 
driven  rising  inequality  within  many  countries  are  not  likely  to  abate.  We  need  to  harness 
these sources of growth while increasing opportunity for all our citizens. Brazil is showing the 
world how. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
9  Bank  of  Canada  (2010),  Report  on  “Strengthening  International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A 
Macroeconomic  Impact  Assessment  for  Canada”.  See  also  M.  Carney,  “Bundesbank  Lecture  2010:  The 
Economic Consequences of the Reforms,” speech delivered in Berlin, Germany, 14 September 2010. 
10  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 2010 – An assessment of the long-term economic impact of 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements (LEI report) http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.htm. 
  Also Basel Committee on Banking Supervision/Financial Stability Board 2010 – Assessing the Macroeconomic 
report) 
to  Stronger  Capital  and  Liquidity  Requirements  – 
(MAG 
Impact  of 
http://www.bis.org/publ/othp10.htm.  
the  Transition 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
