Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 July 2012. 
 Today,  on  25  July  2012,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to decrease the key interest 
rate  by  0.25  percentage  point,  taking  the  one-week  repurchase  agreement  rate  to  a  new 
historical minimum of 4.0%. This decision reflects the Supervisory Council’s opinion that the 
further eased monetary conditions in economy are adequate to meet the inflation target in 
the medium run.  
Simultaneously,  the  eased  monetary  conditions  will  provide  a  further  incentive  to  the 
economic  activity  at  home,  by  increasing  the  monetary  stimulus  to  support  the  domestic 
demand.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic and monetary developments and key 
topics discussed at today’s meeting.  
 During the first half of 2012, the Albanian economy continued to maintain the parameters of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  against  an  increasingly  challenging  global  context. 
Consumer price inflation, budget deficit and public debt indicators, balance of payments and 
financial situation of the banking system were stable or improving.  
In particular, the Albanian financial sector remains well-capitalised, liquid and able to conduct 
its intermediation role. During this period, the Albanian economy experienced some shocks 
on  the  supply  side,  with  structural  movements  in  the  domestic  financial  markets,  and  a 
slowed domestic and foreign demand. These developments drove the fall in GDP in the first 
quarter of 2012 and made difficult the implementation of stabilising policies on the aggregate 
demand. 
The  Albanian  economy  is  expected  to  record  positive  growth  rates  as  tensions  may  be 
reduced in the second half of 2012.  
Average  annual  inflation  marked  1.9%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2012,  increasing  by 
0.8 percentage point compared to the first quarter of 2012.  
The gradual rise in consumer prices has mainly reflected the increase in unprocessed food 
prices, whereas prices of processed foods and those of non-food consumer goods lowered 
their  contribution  to  inflation  during  the  second  quarter  of  2012.  The  other  categories  in 
consumer  prices  basket  showed  a  serene  performance,  and  were  characterised  by  low 
inflation rates.  
Within  the  macroeconomic  context,  consumer  prices  continue  to  reflect  weak  inflationary 
pressures, both on the supply and demand sides. On the demand side, the presence of free 
capacities in using the production factors is reflected in the costs control in economy and in 
declining pressures on inflation.  
On  the  supply  side,  the  slowdown  of  imported  inflationary  pressures,  decrease  in  oil  and 
basic materials prices, steady administered prices, low inflationary expectations and minimal 
second-round  effects  did  not  generate  inflationary  pressures.  Consumer  price  inflation 
remains at low rates and is expected to maintain the same rate in the period ahead. These 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
estimations conditioned the retaining of the stimulating nature of monetary policy during 
the second quarter of 2012. The key rate stood at the lowest historical level, providing eased 
monetary conditions in order to meet our inflation target and support the Albania’s economic 
activity. Also, the Bank of Albania has continued to inject sufficient liquidity demanded by the 
banking system, against an expanded collateral base and at adequate maturity terms.  
According to recent data from INSTAT, the Albanian economy recorded an annual fall of 
0.2%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012.  Industry  contracted  19.3%  y-o-y,  mainly  due  to  the 
significant decrease in electrical energy output. Also, Construction decreased its activity in 
real terms, by 17.6%, thus providing a negative contribution to the performance of the gross 
domestic  product.  By  contrast,  Services  contributed  positively  to  the  economic  activity, 
pointing to an annual growth of 6.0%. Agricultural sector grew 4.5%, y-o-y during this period, 
providing a positive contribution to the growth of the gross domestic product.  
Estimations on the aggregate demand in the first quarter of 2012 suggest a continuing weak 
domestic demand. The consolidated fiscal policy determined the lack of fiscal stimulus in this 
period  and  a  downturn  in  public  sector’s  demand  for  goods  and  services.  Private 
consumption  remains  slow,  thus  reflecting  the  prudent  consumer’s  behaviour  and  the 
increasing  tendency  for  saving.  Private  investments  also  remained  low.  Given  the  free 
production capacity, Albanian businesses found less room to increase their investments in 
machineries & equipment, and production, while the demand for resident buildings remains 
weak.  
At the same time, foreign demand was sluggish in the second quarter of 2012, owing to the 
problems  in  euro  zone  and  in  our  main  foreign  trade  partners. The  weak foreign  demand, 
and the problems in electrical energy production, imposed the slow increase of the Albanian 
exports.  
Data on economy for the second quarter of 2012 are incomplete. Indirect data signal a weak 
recovery  of  the  economy  in  this  period.  Their  analysis  supports  the  estimation  for  a 
continuing  sluggish  aggregate  demand,  especially  of  the  domestic  demand.  On  the 
production side, economic sectors are expected to maintain in the second quarter of 2012 
the dynamic showed in the first quarter of 2012.  
Fiscal developments in the second quarter of 2012 were in line with those observed in the 
first  quarter  of  2012,  characterised  by  the  consolidated  fiscal  policy  and  its  inclination  to 
maintain budget deficit and public debt targets. This behaviour is reflected in the contraction 
of budget expenses by 2.5% in the first half of 2012  
Furthermore, fiscal revenues increased by 3.7% during this period, continuing to show a slow 
dynamic of their taxing component. The performance of public expenditure and income in the 
first half of 2012 is materialised at the significant contraction of budget deficit in annual terms, 
at  37.7%. This  deficit  was  ALL  16.8  billion  in  monetary  value,  and  is  assessed  at  2.6%  of 
GDP.  
Data on developments in foreign trade of economy reveal a contracted trade exchange in 
the first five months of 2012. Value of exports marked a low annual growth of 1.3% in this 
period,  reflecting  the  moderation  of  foreign  demand  and  price  developments  in  global 
markets.  In  this  period,  imports  shrank  by  2.0%  in  annual  terms.  These  developments 
resulted to a decreased trade deficit in the first five months of the year by the annualised rate 
of  4.2%.  Developments in  foreign  trade  were  determined  mostly  by  electrical  energy  trade 
exchanges in this period. Excluding this effect, the growth in exports would be higher and the 
contraction in imports deeper, resulting in a contracted trade deficit, at 18.1%.  
The  performance  of  monetary  indicators  was  in  line  with  the  developments  in  the  real 
economy  and  our  analysis  show  contained  monetary  pressures  on  inflation.  The  annual 
growth of M3 was 8.7% in May, maintaining the average rates of the previous month of the 
current year. The growth paces of money supply slowed down compared to a year earlier, 
reflecting the lower demand of economic agents for money. The consolidated fiscal position 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
was coupled with a decrease of public sector borrowing, whereas private agents of economy 
reflected  a  low  demand  for  financing.  Lending  to  the  private  sector  rose  by  7.5%  in  May, 
pursuing the slowing trend, which has started since the end of previous year. Along with the 
low  demand  of  businesses  and  households,  its  performance  reflects  the  selective  and 
prudent behaviour of banks in lending.  
Regarding lending problems, the Bank of Albania deems that banking system’s balances are 
sound,  sufficiently  liquid,  and  well  capitalised  to  comply  with  the  economy’s  demand  for 
monetary assets.  
The positive position of its balances triggered the lending growth during the past years, while 
many  countries  in  our  region  experienced  contraction  of  lending.  The  banking  system  has 
reviewed and tightened lending standards during the last years; this behaviour to enhance 
the financial discipline of the economy is welcomed and shall positively support the long-term 
growth of Albania. On the other side, credit performance is increasingly experiencing the lack 
of  demand,  which  is  triggered  by  the  consumers  and  businesses  reluctance  to  carry  out 
expenses and investments.  
Bank of Albania deems that, notwithstanding the cyclical situation of Albania’s economy, the 
perspectives on medium and long-term development remain positive. This is reflected by the 
interest  of  foreign  investors  to  increase  their  exposure  toward  the  Albanian  economy.  In 
particular, economy sectors related to exports, tourism and agriculture, which serves to the 
domestic and regional markets, provide unused development potentials.  
Bank  of  Albania  deems  that,  within  the  sound  business’  logic  parameters,  the  Albanian 
entrepreneurs and consumers have room for a more active approach toward the growth of 
investments and their consumption.  
Financial markets showed low interest rate fluctuation and operated under sufficient liquidity 
terms in the second quarter of 2012. The transmission of reduced rates is also observable in 
lek deposits market, followed by normal growth pace of deposits. By contrast, government 
security  yields  increased  in  the  primary  market,  particularly  the  long-term  yields.  This 
performance has reflected the re-positioning of some agents in this market and the demand 
for financing in this period, without implying a shift of inflationary pressures. At the beginning 
of  July,  ratios  improved  and  borrowing  costs  were  reduced  in  the  primary  market.  The 
second quarter also transmitted signals on eased interest rates on ALL credits from banks. 
Nevertheless,  credit-lending  paces  remain  low  and  mainly  designated  for  short-term  use, 
leading to fluctuating interest rates.  
The introduction of new financial intermediaries, specialised in channelling the public savings 
to government  securities,  was  a  positive  development,  worth mentioning in  the  analysis  of 
financial markets for the first half of year. His development along with the increased public 
interest on government securities, enhances the deepness of our financial system, improves 
liquidity,  enhances  its  risk  management  capability,  limits  the  interest  rates  fluctuation, 
increases the Albanian public debt stability and provides pressures to reduce the financing 
cost of the public sector.  
Verified performance of economic activity at home and the information filtered from indirect 
indicators have shifted downward our basic projections for the economic performance for 
the  rest  of  year.  This  shift  reflects  the  materialisation  of  some  risks  around  the  previous 
basic projections, being expected and factorised in our scenarios. The domestic economy is 
expected to slow down  during the rest of year, being conditioned by the weakening of the 
domestic and foreign demand.  
Given the consolidated fiscal behaviour and the slowed foreign demand, the performance of 
the private domestic demand will determine the economic activity growth. However, its two 
components, consumption and investments, have not shown any recovery signal so far.  
Expected  developments  at  home  and  abroad  result  in  a  contained  balance  of  inflationary 
pressures, determining a slow increase in consumer price in the future. The demand growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
below  the  potential  of  the  economy  in  the  upcoming  period  will  continue  to  exercise  low 
inflationary  pressures.  At  the  same  time,  the  pressures  generated  by  supply-side  factors 
appear contained. Based on the insofar developments of the determinant factors of inflation 
and  the  projections  for  their  development  in  the  future,  with  90%  probability,  inflation  will 
range within 1.0% – 3.3% band after 12 months.  
*** 
Based  on  the  analyses  of  the  information  set  out  above,  the  Supervisory  Council 
holds  that  pressures  on  consumer  prices  at  home  remain  low  over  the  monetary 
policy  relevant  horizon;  they  have  been,  however,  on  the  downside  over  the  recent 
months. 
On  the  demand  side,  below-potential  economic  growth  will  continue  to  generate  low 
inflationary pressures, while shocks from the supply side are expected to be moderate. 
The expected developments in economy and inflation imply that the simulating nature of the 
monetary  policy  will  be  retained  during  the  period  ahead.  The  Bank  of  Albania  remains 
heedful  to  future  developments  and  new  information,  ready  to  respond  in  the  appropriate 
time and extent in order to comply with its legal mission.  
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  decrease  the 
key interest rate by 0.25 percentage point, at 4.0%. This decision aims to establish the 
appropriate monetary conditions to comply with the inflation target in the medium run. The 
monetary policy, also, provides the necessary support to simulate the aggregate demand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
