Daniel K Tarullo: Regulatory reform 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 22 March 2012. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank 
you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  implementation  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) and its international implications.  
Although  banking  regulation  has  long  included  an  important  international  dimension,  the 
recent financial crisis has brought renewed attention, both in the United States and abroad, 
to  the  interconnectedness  among  national  financial  markets  and,  consequently,  the 
importance of international cooperation in safeguarding those markets. In recognition of the 
fact  that  financial  distress  can  quickly  and  dramatically  cross  national  borders,  we  seek  to 
protect  our  own  financial  system  by  promoting  the  global  adoption  of  strong,  common 
regulatory  standards  and  effective  supervisory  practices.  Such  common  standards  and 
practices should also help prevent major competitive disadvantages for U.S. firms.  
Today I will touch on several aspects of the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act that have 
significant international implications: regulation of systemically important financial institutions 
(SIFIs), reform of the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market, and a number of discrete 
issues that are arising as we work to implement the Dodd-Frank Act.  
Regulation of SIFIs 
The Dodd-Frank Act and post-crisis international regulatory reform efforts both place great 
emphasis  on  containing  the  systemic  risk  potentially  posed  by  major  financial  institutions. 
The most important points of intersection include efforts to strengthen capital requirements, 
to develop international quantitative liquidity standards, and to put in place mechanisms for 
the orderly resolution of these firms.  
Capital regulation  
Strong capital requirements remain the cornerstone of prudential regulation because capital 
can provide a buffer against losses at financial firms from any source or activity. The best 
way  to  safeguard  against  taxpayer-funded  bailouts  in  the  future  is  for  our  large  financial 
institutions to have adequate capital buffers, sized to reflect their own risk profiles and the 
damage  that  would  be  done  to  the  financial  system  were  such  institutions  to  fail. 
Achievement of this aim requires both improvement of the traditional, firm-based approach to 
capital regulation and creation of a more systemic, or macroprudential, component of capital 
regulation.  
With respect to improving the traditional approach to capital regulation, international work on 
common, global standards was already quite advanced by the time the Dodd-Frank Act was 
enacted  in  July  2010.  The  so-called  Basel  2.5  agreement,  which  strengthened  the  market 
risk capital requirements of Basel II, had already been finished. Just a few months after the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  was  enacted,  agreement  was  reached  on  the  Basel  III  reforms,  which 
require  improvement  of  the  quality  of  regulatory  capital,  an  increase  in  the  quantity  of 
minimum  required  capital,  maintenance  of  a  capital  conservation  buffer,  and  –  for  the  first 
time internationally – compliance with a minimum leverage ratio. In the coming months, the 
banking agencies will be finalizing regulations to implement Basel 2.5 in the United States 
and will be proposing regulations to implement Basel III in the United States.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With  respect  to  macroprudential  capital  regulation,  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act 
mandated  that  the  Board  establish  enhanced  risk-based  capital  standards  for  large  bank 
holding  companies  that  would  be  graduated  based  on  the  relative  systemic  importance  of 
those  companies.  Consistent  with  this  requirement,  we  espoused  proposals  in  the  Basel 
Committee  for  capital  surcharges  on  the  world’s  largest,  most  interconnected  banking 
organizations based on their global systemic importance. Last year, agreement was reached 
on a framework for such surcharges, to be implemented during the same transition period 
applicable  to  Basel  III.  The  Board’s  aim  has  been  to  fashion  the  enhanced  capital 
requirements  of  section  165  and  the  associated  international  framework  in  a simultaneous 
and congruent manner. Both the Dodd-Frank Act provision and the Basel systemic surcharge 
framework  are motivated by the fact that the failure of a systemically important  firm would 
have dramatically greater negative consequences on the financial system and the economy 
than the failure of other firms. Stricter capital requirements on systemically important firms 
should also have the benefit of helping offset any funding advantage these firms derive from 
their perceived status as too-big-to-fail and providing an incentive for such firms to reduce 
their systemic footprint.  
If the benefits of all these improvements to existing capital requirements are to be realized, it 
is  crucial  that  capital  standards  be  not  only  agreed  upon  globally,  but  also  implemented 
consistently across jurisdictional boundaries. We have strongly supported efforts within the 
Basel Committee to monitor implementation – not only in the laws and regulations of member 
countries,  but  also  at  the  level  of  individual  large  banking  organizations,  including  an 
assessment of the consistency of risk-weighting practices by banks. We look forward to the 
evolution of the Basel Committee’s new plans for conducting this monitoring exercise, which 
are considerably more ambitious than any pursued in the past.  
Liquidity standards  
In recognition of the fact that liquidity squeezes at some financial institutions played a key 
role  in  the  financial  crisis,  the  Basel  III  agreements  also  introduced,  for  the  first  time, 
quantitative  liquidity  requirements  for  application  to  internationally  active  banks.  One 
standard,  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  is  designed  to  ensure  a  firm’s  ability  to 
withstand short-term liquidity shocks through adequate holdings of highly liquid assets. The 
other  standard,  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR),  is  intended  to  avoid  significant 
maturity mismatches over longer-term horizons. Again, there is a parallel to this international 
initiative in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which calls for enhanced, graduated liquidity 
standards for large bank holding companies.  
Precisely  because  this  was  the  first  effort  on  quantitative  liquidity  regulation  by  the  Basel 
Committee, there were some questions about potential unintended consequences, as well as 
a  desire  to  ensure  that  the  new  standards  reflected  actual  experience  with  the  stability  of 
various funding sources and the relative liquidity of different financial instruments during the 
financial crisis. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve, with support from a number of other 
central  banks  and  supervisors,  suggested  at  the  time  of  adoption  of  Basel  III  in  2010  a 
multiyear  study  period  before  the  rules  take  effect.  Since  then,  the  U.S.  banking  agencies 
and  a  Basel  Committee  working  group  have  been  collecting  data,  analyzing  the  potential 
effects  of  the  LCR  on  financial  markets  and  the  broader  economy,  and  considering  what 
amendments might be warranted. The Basel Committee will likely suggest a set of changes 
to the LCR later this year, with a goal of introducing the LCR in 2015. Work on the NSFR is 
on a considerably slower track; the current plan is for implementation in 2018.  
Resolution of SIFIs  
A  third  core  regulatory  reform  goal  of  both  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and  international 
policymakers  is  to  enhance  the  ability  of  regulators  to  resolve  failing  SIFIs.  The  Basel 
Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  have  set  forth  standards  for  national 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resolution regimes that will allow resolution of SIFIs in an orderly fashion, without taxpayer 
exposure to losses through solvency support. Here in the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act 
provides  for  an  orderly  resolution  process  to  be  administered  by  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and resolution planning by SIFIs to be overseen by the FDIC 
and  the  Federal  Reserve.  Together  these  provisions  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  are  fully 
consistent with the Basel Committee and FSB standards.  
In developing the orderly liquidation authority established by Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act, 
the  FDIC  has  recently  expressed  a  preference  for  resolving  a  failed  SIFI  under  a  single 
receivership and internal recapitalization model. Under this model, the parent company of the 
failed  SIFI  is  placed  into  receivership;  all,  or  substantially  all,  of  the  assets  of  the  parent 
company are transferred to a bridge entity; the parent company and its residual assets are 
liquidated; and the bridge entity is capitalized, in part, by converting the holders of long-term 
unsecured  debt  of  the  parent  company  into  equity  holders  in  the  bridge.  Under  the  single 
receivership model, the major subsidiaries of the SIFI continue to operate as going concerns. 
This approach holds great promise, but ensuring its viability as a resolution option requires, 
among other things, that each SIFI maintain an amount of long-term unsecured debt that is 
sufficient to absorb very significant losses at the firm.  
Some other jurisdictions have, or are planning to, put in place special resolution mechanisms 
that conform to the emerging international standards. But even continued progress along this 
path  may  not  solve  all  the  possible  problems  associated  with  failure  of  a  SIFI.  The 
coexistence  of  internationally  active  firms  with  nationally  based  insolvency  regimes  means 
that  there  could  be  important  cross-border  legal  complications  when  a  home  jurisdiction 
places  into  receivership  a  firm  with  significant  assets,  subsidiaries,  and  contractual 
arrangements in other countries. A comprehensive, treaty-like instrument for a global bank 
resolution  regime  to  address  these  issues  is  surely  an  unrealistic  prospect  for  the 
foreseeable  future.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  FDIC  are  working  together  with 
counterparts  from  other  countries  to  identify  opportunities  for  more  limited  cooperation 
agreements, coordinated supervisory work on resolution plans, and other devices to make 
the orderly resolution of a large, internationally active firm more feasible.  
OTC derivatives regulatory reforms 
Another key part of the Dodd-Frank Act that involves significant international considerations 
is  OTC  derivatives  reform.  In  the  United  States,  administrative  agencies  are  implementing 
the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act to strengthen the infrastructure and regulation of the 
OTC  derivatives  market.  This  task  includes  enhancing  the  role  of  central  counterparties, 
which  can  be  an  important  tool  for  managing  counterparty  credit  risk  in  the  derivatives 
market;  improving  regulation  and  supervision  of  dealers  and  key  market  participants; 
introducing  minimum  margin  requirements  for  certain  derivatives  transactions  that  are  not 
cleared with a central counterparty; and increasing transparency.  
A roughly parallel international initiative got under way in 2009, when the Group of Twenty 
(G-20) leaders set out commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets. Since 
work  on  the  G-20  commitments  is  being  pursued  in  a  number  of  international  groups  and 
foreign  jurisdictions,  continued  attention  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  the  global 
convergence  process  continues  in  a  timely  fashion.  Such  attention  will  be  particularly 
important  in  areas  where  international  convergence  is  desirable  to  avoid  a  significant 
fracturing or regionalization of the existing global structure of the swaps market, or to prevent 
undue constraints on the ability of U.S. firms to compete in foreign markets. A good example 
of this is the introduction of margin requirements for uncleared derivatives. U.S. and foreign 
regulators have formed a joint working group of the Basel Committee and the International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  to  develop  internationally  consistent 
margin standards that appropriately address the risks of uncleared derivatives while ensuring 
that U.S. and foreign firms compete on a level playing field.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Other key areas of OTC derivatives reform present similar international challenges and will 
demand  similar  levels  of  international  collaboration.  These  areas  include  the  creation  and 
regulation  of  central  counterparties,  swap  execution  facilities,  and  swap  data  repositories, 
including mutual recognition by U.S. and foreign regulators where appropriate. Issues also 
arise  around  the  treatment  of  governmental  entities  in  derivatives  reforms  in  the  United 
States  and  abroad.  For  example,  title  VII  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  generally  exempts  from 
swaps  regulation  any  transaction  to  which  the  Federal  Reserve  is  a  party,  but  does  not 
contain a similar exemption for transactions to which a foreign central bank is party. Foreign 
central banks have expressed concerns that the application of certain parts of title VII may 
interfere with the manner in which they conduct their national monetary policies.  
In addition to its involvement in specific derivatives reforms related to the Dodd-Frank Act, 
the  Federal  Reserve  also  participates  in  a  variety  of  international  groups  that  serve  as 
broader forums for coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of 
derivatives  markets.  These  forums  include  the  Basel  Committee,  which  has  recently 
enhanced  international  capital,  leverage,  and  liquidity  standards  for  derivatives,  as  well  as 
the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with IOSCO to update 
international  standards  for  systemically  important  clearing  systems,  including  central 
counterparties that clear derivatives instruments, and trade repositories. These collaborative 
exercises are intended to support the development of a consistent international approach to 
the regulation and supervision of derivatives  products, dealers, and market infrastructures. 
Here, as in other international contexts, our aims are to promote the financial stability of the 
United States and fair competitive conditions for U.S. financial institutions.  
Other implementation issues 
As noted in the preceding discussion, even where there is broad international consensus to 
adopt  a  particular  regulatory  approach,  there  can  be  discrete  issues  raised  as  countries 
implement  that  approach  in  the  context  of  their  own  legal,  financial,  and  political  systems. 
This circumstance is hardly unique to the area of financial regulation; it is familiar to anyone 
who  has  worked  on  virtually  any  regulatory  issues  that  affect  international  trade  and 
investment.  There  are  also  some  elements  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  that  are  unlikely  to  be 
pursued internationally in any comparable form. These areas of U.S.-only regulatory reform 
can present particular challenges in implementation, both in terms of the potential impact that 
they may have on the ability of U.S. financial institutions to compete abroad and the extent to 
which they may affect the activities of foreign financial institutions in U.S. markets and with 
U.S.  counterparties.  In  these  instances  of  regulatory  reforms  being  pursued  only  in  the 
United  States,  there  are  not  likely  to  be  obvious  answers  to  the  resulting  international 
complexities.  
For example, there has been considerable recent attention paid to the international aspects 
of  section  619  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  more  commonly  known  as  the  “Volcker  Rule.” 
Concerns have been expressed about the Volcker Rule’s potential international implications 
in three principal areas. First, because the Volcker Rule applies to the worldwide operations 
of  U.S.  banking  entities,  but  only  to  the  U.S.-connected  operations  of  foreign  banks, 
concerns  have  been  raised  regarding  the  relative  competitiveness  of  U.S.  firms  that  have 
significant  operations  in  overseas  markets.  Second,  and  conversely,  because  the  Volcker 
Rule also applies to the activities of foreign banks unless such activities are “solely outside 
the  United  States,”  several  foreign  banks  and  their  supervisors  have  expressed  concern 
regarding the potential extraterritorial impact that those restrictions may have on trading or 
fund activity of foreign banks that has both U.S. and non-U.S. characteristics. Third, because 
the Volcker Rule includes a statutory exemption for proprietary trading in U.S. government 
debt  securities,  but  not  in  foreign  sovereign  debt  securities,  several  constituencies  have 
raised concerns regarding this asymmetry. In each of these areas, U.S. regulators will need 
to  carefully  consider  the  concerns  that  have  been  raised  and  the  broader  international 
implications of the Volcker Rule as we work to finalize our implementing rules.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similarly,  the  swaps  “push-out”  requirement  in  section  716  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  also 
appears  unlikely  to  be  pursued  internationally.  Under  section  716,  U.S.  insured  depository 
institutions and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks will be required to “push out” 
certain  types  of  derivatives  dealing  activities  to  affiliated  entities.  The  global  effects  of  the 
swaps push-out provision are multifaceted. On the one hand, the provision will require U.S. 
banking firms to restructure their global derivatives dealing activities in ways that will not be 
required of foreign banks abroad. At the same time, the provision may require U.S. branches 
and agencies of foreign banks to restructure their derivatives dealing activities in ways that 
will not be required of U.S. banks.  
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  attention.  I  would  be  pleased  to  answer  any  questions  you 
might have.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
