Eddie Yue: Renminbi – a new era and the role of Hong Kong 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the Global Offshore RMB Funding Forum 2012, Hong Kong, 23 May 2012. 
 Tony (Shale), Mark (Johnson), Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for being here this morning, and thanks to Euromoney for inviting me to speak at 
this “Global Offshore RMB Funding Forum”. It’s indeed an honour to have this opportunity to 
discuss this important topic in such distinguished company. 
 I  understand  that  we  will  have  a  very  comprehensive  programme  today,  with  editors, 
economists,  bankers  and  financiers  talking  about  the  exciting  developments  of  dim-sum 
bonds and other innovative products in the offshore RMB markets. By way of opening the 
dialogue, I’d like to focus my remarks on the bigger picture, and on three things in particular: 
First,  the  scale  of  change  in  the  global  economy,  which  is  the  backdrop  for  our 
 
discussion; 
Second, the expanding role of the RMB, past and future; and 
Third, the impact this all has on our role and opportunities here in Hong Kong. 
 China’s increasing integration with and contribution to the world economy 
So, first, the scale of change. The foundation for any discussion on the role of the RMB, of 
course,  is  China’s  growing  economy.  Now,  we’ve  all  become  very  familiar  with  breathless 
reports  on  China’s  “economic  miracle,”  so  I  won’t  go  over  this  at  length.  Still,  the  startling 
pace of growth does warrant underlining. In a little over a decade since the year 2000, the 
Mainland’s nominal GDP increased sixfold from 1.2 to 7.2 trillion US dollars; and its external 
trade expanded more than sevenfold, from less than 500 billion to over 3.6 trillion US dollars. 
At the same time, its cross-border direct investments rose fourfold, from just over 40 billion to 
approaching 180 billion US dollars. These are all impressive indicators of the vast amount of 
business  opportunities  present.  It  is  perhaps  even  more  astonishing  that,  by  2016,  the 
Mainland is expected to contribute over a third of total world economic growth, according to 
the projections of the International Monetary Fund. 
Change in the international financial system 
Such shifts in the global economy have inevitably foreshadowed a change in the international 
financial system. As the Mainland economy has grown, its currency and financial sector have 
moved  increasingly  centre-stage.  Over  the  last  decade  or  so,  policymakers,  investors  and 
others have shown more interest in using a greater mix of currencies for international trade 
and financial transactions. This trend has been accelerated by the recent Global  Financial 
Crisis, as the need to reduce reliance on just one or two global currencies has grown. 
Taken together, these trends imply a greater role for the RMB in the Mainland’s trade and 
investment  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Likewise,  they  suggest  a  much  wider  use  and 
circulation of RMB in the international financial system. 
Renminbi internationalisation: From where to where? 
So let us now turn to this issue, and my second point – the expanding role of the RMB. The 
big  question  I’m  often  asked  is  how  the  wider  use  and  eventual  internationalisation  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
RMB is to unfold. This question is, of course, easier to ask than to answer. But I believe we 
can  gain  useful  insights  by  taking  some  perspective  on  where  we  are  now  and  how  we 
arrived here. 
How it started? 
Given the pace of change, it is sobering to recall that it wasn’t until 2009 – not all that long 
ago – that the Mainland authorities started to allow Mainland corporations to use the RMB 
when trading with the rest of the world.  
 
The first step was the launch of a pilot scheme in July 2009 allowing corporations in 
five  Mainland  cities  to  settle  their  trade  with  Hong  Kong,  Macau  and  ASEAN 
economies, in RMB. This pilot was subsequently expanded progressively. Today, all 
trade transactions between Mainland China and the rest of the world have the option 
to be settled in RMB. 
Another major milestone was reached in 2011, when the Mainland authorities began 
to liberalise the use of RMB for inward and outward direct investments. In addition, 
pilot arrangements were introduced allowing offshore entities to use RMB to invest 
in the interbank bond market and the Mainland stock market. 
A longer-term factor is China’s 12th Five-Year Plan, which was released in March 
last  year.  The  Plan  made  clear  that  the  wider  use  of  RMB  in  cross-border 
transactions will be promoted as a matter of national policy. 
  Where we are now? 
Taken together, those steps mean that the use of RMB for trade is today largely liberalised. 
Let me just illustrate that with a few figures:  
 
In  2011,  some  RMB  2  trillion  yuan,  or  8%  of  the  Mainland’s  external  trade  and 
current account transactions, were settled in RMB.  
The  use  of  RMB  for  direct  investments  has  also  seen  an  encouraging  start, 
amounting  to  some  RMB  90  billion  yuan  for  inward  direct  investments  and 
RMB 20 billion yuan for outward direct investments in 2011. 
As  for  portfolio  investments,  some  40  offshore  institutions  have  been  allowed  to 
invest  in  the  interbank  bond  market,  within  varying  quotas.  Meanwhile,  some 
RMB 20  billion  yuan  have  been  invested  in  the  stock  market  through  the 
RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) scheme. 
  As  of  course  you  know,  over  this  period  of  liberalisation,  a  rapidly  growing  offshore  RMB 
market has also emerged, centred in Hong Kong. The rising level of RMB trade flows to and 
from  the  Mainland  has  produced  an  expanding  pool  of  RMB  liquidity.  And  the  growing 
liquidity in the offshore RMB market has led to the development of RMB financing and forex 
markets,  with  an  estimated  daily  turnover  of  around  2  to  4  billion  US  dollars  for  spot  and 
forward transactions. I will come back to the development of Hong Kong as the offshore RMB 
business centre later. 
So, we are seeing a trend that RMB is increasingly used in Mainland China’s external trade, 
followed  by  direct  investments  and  portfolio  investments.  The  offshore  RMB  market  is 
growing with increasing breath and depth, serving the useful function of the intermediation of 
RMB funds. And these developments are bringing tremendous business opportunities, which 
corporations and financial institutions cannot ignore. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What next? 
Now, it’s worth emphasising that this has all taken place only since 2009. So, they are very 
much  just  first  steps  and  we  should  expect  further  developments  in  the  future.  If  we  look 
ahead a little, what might we see? 
Well, given what we’ve seen in terms of economic growth and liberalisation of policy, it would 
not be at all surprising to see the proportion of trade being conducted in RMB continue to rise 
in years ahead. 
Longer term, many ask about the possibility of the RMB playing a more equal role alongside 
the dollar and the euro. On this, I would point out that the more widespread use of RMB has 
been a progressive and market-driven process, and I expect this to continue. I believe that, 
whilst  liberalisation  is  important,  the  RMB  becoming  an  international  currency  to  a  large 
extent is not a matter of policy alone – it is also subject to market forces. In other words, it 
would come from non-resident corporations and financial institutions deciding that the RMB 
served  them  well  as  a  unit  of  account,  means  of  payment  and  store  of  value  for  their 
international transactions. 
I’m not sure any of us are in a position to predict if and when this will happen. However, I feel 
that we can say with some confidence that the landscape of the offshore RMB market will 
change in two respects. 
First, we are likely to see the increasing maturity of the offshore RMB market, both in terms 
of the depth and breadth of the market and the efficiency of price-setting and allocation of 
RMB  funds.  In  more  granular  terms,  this  means  we  will  see  an  expansion  and  greater 
diversity of RMB financial activities:  
 
Up till now, the intermediation of RMB funds has been primarily about placement of 
bank  deposits  by  personal  and  corporate  customers.  In  future,  it  will  move  more 
towards  issuance  and  investment  of  bonds  and  a  wider  range  of  other  financial 
instrument and products. 
At the same time, I would expect that in future there will be more active borrowing 
and lending of RMB funds among banks. If so, this would lead to the emergence of 
a RMB interbank funding market. 
In addition, I would expect to see increased RMB trading in the forex market, which 
in turn should lead to the development of more sophisticated instruments. 
  The  second  change  to  offshore  RMB  markets  we  can  confidently  expect  is  the  further 
development and strengthening of links with the onshore RMB market. As a critical piece of 
infrastructure that supports the internationalisation of RMB, the offshore RMB market cannot 
operate in isolation. Given continued liberalisation of cross-border RMB transactions by the 
Mainland authorities, we will see more and wider channels for the flow of RMB between the 
onshore and offshore RMB markets. This will be critical for the sustainable development of 
the offshore RMB market and, thus, the future role of Hong Kong. 
Role of Hong Kong 
And  this  brings  me  now  to  my  third  point,  the  development  of  Hong  Kong  as  the  offshore 
RMB business centre. 
Let me start by saying that Hong Kong’s role is not an accident or a result of chance. It stems 
from  our  city’s  historical  and  indispensable  role  facilitating  the  opening  up  of  the Mainland 
economy. Since China’s liberalisation and reform began three decades ago, Hong Kong has 
served as the global gateway for trade and investment with the Mainland. Even to this day, 
Hong Kong still intermediates some 30% of the Mainland’s external trade and accounts for 
some 60% of cross-border direct investments in both directions. Against this backdrop, Hong 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Kong  is  well-placed  to  serve  as  a  key  commercial  and  financial  gateway,  continuing  to 
facilitate trade as it expands and is increasingly conducted in RMB. 
Through  its  long  history  as  an  international  financial  centre,  Hong  Kong  has  built  up  the 
necessary  infrastructure  to  support  a  growing  RMB  market.  Indeed,  Hong  Kong  has  been 
steadily gearing up its capability to handle RMB servicing since it started back in 2004. This 
is what has enabled Hong Kong to become a global hub for offshore RMB businesses. Hong 
Kong today provides the largest and most effective platform for the complete range of RMB 
transactions,  from  banking  and  financing  to  asset  management,  at  both  customer  and 
wholesale levels. 
Just to give an illustration of Hong Kong’s status as a global RMB hub, consider its recent 
record: 
 
RMB deposits in Hong Kong, including Certificates of Deposits, grew by a factor of 
ten  between  end-2009  and  March  2012,  from  around  RMB  60  billion  to  over 
RMB 660 billion yuan. 
 RMB  trade  settlement  transactions  handled  by  banks  in  Hong  Kong  has  also 
increased  phenomenally,  from  less  than  RMB  2  billion  yuan  in  2009  to  nearly 
RMB 2 trillion yuan in 2011. 
 Over  the  same  two-year  period,  the  Hong  Kong  RMB  dim-sum  bond  market  has 
seen issuances growing from RMB 16 billion to RMB 108 billion yuan. I know many 
of  you  have  come  here  today  to  hear  more  about  how  to  tap  into  this  rapidly 
developing market to finance your business in the future. 
  Now of course, as a global hub, it does not mean that all offshore RMB businesses are to be 
conducted only in Hong Kong. Quite the contrary. As RMB becomes more widely used and 
accepted  by  trading  companies  and  investors  worldwide,  it  is  natural  to  see  financial 
institutions providing RMB services to meet the demand of their customers.  
That said, even as its role evolves over time in line with market changes, we do see Hong 
Kong  continuing  to  be  an  ideal  place  for  companies  to  conduct  their  RMB  banking  and 
financing activities. In addition, Hong Kong will develop its ability as a RMB hub to serve a 
growing network of financial institutions around the world.  
And  in  this  last  respect  we  are  seeing  real  signs  of  development.  More  foreign  banks  are 
either  choosing  to  have  a  base  in  Hong  Kong  or  are  using  RMB  correspondent  banking 
services provided by banks in Hong Kong. As of the end of March 2012, there were close to 
200  banks  participating  in  Hong  Kong’s  RMB  clearing  platform.  Of  these,  170  are 
foreign-owned  or  located  overseas.  At  the  same  time,  over  1,100  RMB  correspondent 
accounts were maintained by overseas banks with banks in Hong Kong. The amount due to 
and due from such overseas banks amounted to RMB 128 billion yuan and RMB 146 billion 
yuan respectively, a clear indication that banks from around the world are using the robust 
platform and large liquidity pool to offer RMB services to their customers at home. 
Looking ahead, we in Hong Kong will seek to broaden and deepen our offshore RMB market 
further, by enhancing our RMB infrastructure and encouraging participation. In doing so, we 
will continue to cooperate with other places along the way. From the end of next month, the 
operating  hours  of  our  RMB  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  system  will  be  lengthened  to 
11:30 pm  Hong  Kong  time,  giving  financial  institutions  in  different  parts  of  the  world  an 
extended  window  to  settle  offshore  RMB  payments  through  the  Hong  Kong  infrastructure. 
Moreover, the Hong Kong – London Forum for promoting cooperation on the development of 
offshore RMB business just convened its first meeting yesterday. I am very pleased to note 
that the group had a very productive discussion, with concrete joint action plans set forth for 
enhancing offshore RMB market activities in both places. Meanwhile, we at the HKMA will 
also be continuing our efforts to raise awareness about the developments of offshore RMB 
businesses and the comprehensive services provided by Hong Kong in this regard. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding remarks 
So, as I prepare to hand back to Mark (Johnson) for the panel discussion, I would just like to 
underline my points by summing them up very succinctly: 
 
First, I would say that, given the scale and the pace of change I mentioned earlier, 
we are now at the start of a new era. An era in which we will see a much greater use 
of RMB, driven by both policy and market forces. 
Second, we are only in the early days. The RMB started circulating outside Mainland 
China only in recent years, but is already starting to play a significant role in global 
trade and finance. It has the potential to go much further. 
Third,  as  the  RMB  develops  a  more  central  role  and  acquires  more  features 
associated  with  an  international  currency,  Hong  Kong  is  very  well  equipped  to 
service the RMB needs of businesses around the world. 
  Let me just finally say that today’s forum is a most welcome opportunity to help prepare for 
the future. As at any time of historic transition, if none of us have all the answers, then at 
least each of us has a piece of the answers; and if we don’t have that, then perhaps we can 
contribute a better question.  
 I look forward to hearing your ideas and to working closely with you in our common effort to 
develop the offshore RMB market in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
