Thomas Jordan: The Swiss economy and global economic outlook 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
14 June 2012. 
 The Swiss National Bank (SNB) will maintain the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per 
euro  and  will  enforce  it  with  the  utmost  determination.  It  remains  prepared  to  buy  foreign 
currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. Even at the current rate, the Swiss franc is 
still high. Another appreciation would have a serious impact on both prices and the economy 
in  Switzerland.  The  SNB  will  not  tolerate  this.  If  necessary,  it  stands  ready  to  take  further 
measures at any time. 
The  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  remains  at  0.00–0.25%.  Essentially, the  SNB’s 
conditional  inflation  forecast  is  unchanged  from  its  March  forecast.  It  is  based  on  a  three-
month  Libor  of  0.0%  and  continues  to  assume  that  the  Swiss  franc  will  weaken  over  the 
forecast horizon. For 2012, the forecast shows an inflation rate of –0.5%. For 2013, the SNB 
is expecting inflation of 0.3% and for 2014, of 0.6%. Consequently, in the foreseeable future, 
there is no risk of inflation in Switzerland.  
The  SNB  expects  that  the  global  economy  will  only  recover  slowly.  While  the  emerging 
economies  make  a  major  contribution  to  global  growth,  momentum  in  the  advanced 
economies will remain subdued. In Europe, in particular, economic activity will be extremely 
weak  on  account  of  the  financial  and  debt  crisis.  Switzerland  will  experience  a  significant 
economic  slowdown  over  the  rest  of  the  year.  Only  because  of  the  unexpectedly  strong 
winter half-year does the SNB now expect growth of around 1.5% for 2012.  
The risks for the Swiss economic situation remain exceptionally high. The uncertainty about 
future developments in the euro area has again risen. If global activity proves disappointing 
or the turmoil on the financial markets increases, downside risks will again emerge for the 
economy and price stability in Switzerland. The imbalances in the Swiss residential mortgage 
and real estate markets increased further last quarter. Consequently, the SNB welcomes the 
Federal Council decision to make available a countercyclical capital buffer which can counter 
adverse developments on the domestic credit market.  
Global economic outlook 
Let us examine the economic outlook and the inflation prospects in a little more detail. In the 
first quarter of 2012, the global economy continued to grow at a moderate pace although this 
varied considerably from one region to another. The emerging economies were still making a 
major  contribution  to  global  growth.  By  contrast,  overall  momentum  in  the  advanced 
economies was subdued, although here, too, differences from one country to another were 
considerable. Japan experienced strong growth in the first quarter due to a catch-up effect. In 
the  US,  momentum  was  moderate.  In  the  euro  area,  a  number  of  countries  are  in  deep 
recession, while in Germany, GDP continued to expand strongly. Overall, the economy in the 
euro area stagnated. 
As in the last monetary policy assessment, we assume that the global economy will continue 
to  recover  slowly.  This  will  be  driven  by  globally  expansionary  monetary  policy  and  strong 
domestic demand in the emerging economies. In the euro area and the US, developments 
are likely to be more subdued. Here we assume that the European financial and sovereign 
debt crisis will gradually ease. However, risks in this respect remain high. In particular, the 
difficult  situation  in  Greece  and  Spain  has  already  led  to  a  significant  deterioration  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
confidence  of  households  and  companies  in  the  euro  area.  As  a  result,  the  economic 
situation remains vulnerable.  
These high risks are also affecting the financial markets. Following a temporary recovery at 
the beginning of the year, the situation on the financial markets at present is again tense. A 
substantial  correction  has  taken  place  on  the  share  markets.  By  contrast,  investments 
perceived to be safe, such as US, German or UK government bonds, recorded all-time low 
yields and correspondingly high price gains. Real yields on these investments are in negative 
territory for most maturities, measured in terms of inflation expectations. In addition, interest 
rates on money markets are at record-low levels worldwide. 
Swiss economic outlook 
In Switzerland, real GDP rose faster than expected in the first quarter. The stabilising effect 
of the minimum exchange rate against the euro played a major role in this development, with 
goods exports declining only slightly in the first quarter, in an international environment that 
remained  weak,  while  exports  of  services  rose.  An  improvement  in  consumer  confidence 
encouraged a substantial increase in private consumer spending. However, GDP growth was 
also supported by temporary effects. Value added in the banking industry benefited from the 
optimistic mood on the financial markets during the first months of the year. In manufacturing 
and the hospitality industry, however, activity declined, underscoring the particularly negative 
impact of the strong Swiss franc on these industries. 
For the second quarter, we expect a significant slowdown in GDP growth. Since the global 
economy  is  expected  to  recover  slowly,  and  the  value  of  the  Swiss  franc  is  still  high,  the 
demand  for  exports  is  likely  to  remain  subdued,  even  in  the  subsequent  period.  The  high 
level of uncertainty and the pressure on profit margins are impacting negatively on corporate 
investment.  Only  because  of  the  unexpectedly  strong  winter  half-year  does  the  SNB  now 
expect growth of around 1.5% for 2012.  
Swiss inflation outlook  
The  inflation  outlook  for  Switzerland  has  remained  largely  unchanged  from  the  monetary 
policy assessment in March. Since the fourth quarter of 2011, the annual inflation rate has 
been in negative territory. This is mainly attributable to a base effect, because last quarter 
the  price  level  remained  almost  unchanged  from  the  previous  quarter.  Thus  the  minimum 
exchange rate has put a halt to the deflationary situation that had arisen as a result of the 
strong appreciation of the Swiss franc last summer. Surveys on inflation expectations confirm 
that deflation is not expected at present. As the surveys also show, there continues to be no 
danger of inflation. This corresponds to our conditional inflation forecast which reaches 0.8% 
at  the  end  of  the  three-year  forecast  horizon.  Overall,  the  path  of  inflation  is  again  more 
subdued than in the March forecast, due to the fact that the Swiss franc is weakening less 
rapidly than was forecast at that time.  
Monetary and financial conditions  
Let us now turn to monetary and financial conditions. These are virtually unchanged from the 
first quarter of 2012. After the March monetary policy assessment, the euro remained more 
or less stable against the major currencies. Since the beginning of May, it has weakened by 
around  5%  against  the  US  dollar.  As  a  result,  the  Swiss  franc  has  depreciated  slightly  in 
export-weighted  terms,  even  if  the  exchange  rate  has  remained  unchanged  with  regard  to 
the euro. 
Interest rates in the Swiss franc money market continue to fluctuate around zero. In the past 
quarter, the Libor persisted at a very low level, at around 10 basis points. For the foreseeable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
future,  interest  rate  expectations  remain  exceptionally  low,  and  levels  of  interest  rates  on 
futures  –  derived  from  Libor  futures  contracts  –  are  in  fact,  in  some  cases,  substantially 
below zero.  
Yields on bonds with high credit ratings are also very low in Switzerland. At the beginning of 
June, ten-year Confederation bonds attained a new all-time low, at around 0.5%. Thirty-year 
bonds were trading in the market at yields of under 1%. For short to medium-term maturities, 
yields were in negative territory, in some cases very negative.  
The  low  interest  rates  continue  to  be  reflected  in  robust  growth  in  lending  and  rising  real 
estate prices. As a result, the imbalances on the Swiss residential mortgage and real estate 
markets  have  increased  further.  Following  my  presentation,  my  colleague  Jean-Pierre 
Danthine  will  take  a  closer  look  at  the  risks  for  financial  stability  in  connection  with  the 
mortgage and real estate markets. 
SNB monetary policy 
Let  us  now  return  to  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy.  The  debt  problems  in  some  euro  area 
countries have deteriorated seriously over the recent period. Accordingly, the euro has lost 
value against most countries since May. This has led to increased upward pressure on the 
EUR/CHF exchange rate. Even in this difficult environment, we have consistently enforced 
the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro.  
To  defend  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  we  purchased  foreign  currency.  This  has  led  to  a 
further  expansion  in  Swiss  franc  liquidity  and  the  SNB  balance  sheet.  Even  when  the 
minimum  exchange  rate  was  first  introduced,  we  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  its 
enforcement  could  have  significant  consequences 
for  our  balance  sheet.  Another 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  would  constitute  a  very  substantial  threat  to  the  Swiss 
economy and the risk of deflationary developments coming about. This is why it is necessary 
to accept an expansion of the balance sheet arising out of the enforcement of the minimum 
exchange rate. The SNB is in a position to bear the ensuing risks. 
Even at a level of CHF 1.20 per euro, the Swiss franc is still high, presenting large parts of 
our economy with a difficult situation. Consequently, we will continue to enforce the minimum 
exchange  rate  with  the  utmost  determination  and  will  buy  foreign  currency  in  unlimited 
quantities  for  this  purpose.  If  necessary,  we  stand  ready  to  take  further  measures  at  any 
time. 
Management of foreign currency investments  
I will conclude today with a few comments about the management of our foreign currency 
investments. In the recent period, this topic has returned to the spotlight of public discussion. 
In  particular,  the  possibility  of  establishing  a  sovereign  wealth  fund  with  the  SNB’s  foreign 
currency holdings has given rise to discussion. In this respect, it is important, first of all, to 
point out that the SNB does not hold its foreign currency in the form of banknotes or bank 
deposits.  The  funds  are  invested  in  different  investment  categories  and  currencies.  For  a 
considerable  period,  the  SNB  has  held  not  just  the  traditional  instruments  –  government 
bonds  of  countries  with  high  credit  ratings  –  but  also  bonds  issued  by  private  sector 
borrowers and shares. Holdings of shares currently make up some 10% of foreign currency 
investments. 
In order to diversify its investments further, in 2010, the SNB included additional currencies 
such as the Australian and Singapore dollars as well as the Swedish krona and Danish krone 
in its investment universe. Since the first quarter of 2012, the SNB has also been investing in 
the  Korean  won.  Additional  investment  opportunities  in  the  advanced  and  emerging 
economies are continually being evaluated, both for bonds and for shares, although this is 
subject to an adequate level of liquidity in the markets in question.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The idea of a sovereign wealth fund may appear attractive at first glance. However, in the 
current situation, it does little to assist Switzerland or Swiss monetary policy. The sovereign 
wealth funds in Norway and the oil states cannot serve as models for the management of the 
SNB’s  currency  reserves.  All  of  them  invest  state  income  surplus  derived  from  commodity 
exports.  A  Swiss  sovereign  wealth  fund  funded  from  SNB  foreign  exchange,  by  contrast, 
would be financed through money creation.  
From our point of view, the three following points, in particular, speak against a sovereign 
wealth  fund.  First,  the  creation  of  such  a  fund  would  not  help  to  enforce  the  minimum 
exchange rate. The only decisive factor is the SNB’s willingness to buy foreign currency in 
unlimited quantities against Swiss francs. Second, all investments abroad are subject to an 
exchange rate risk, whether they be government bonds, shares, real estate, commodities or 
investments in infrastructure, and irrespective of whether they appear on the SNB balance 
sheet or on that of a separate sovereign wealth fund. Consequently, outsourcing the foreign 
currency investments would not reduce Switzerland’s exchange rate risk. Third, outsourcing 
the foreign exchange to a sovereign wealth fund would call into question the independence 
of monetary policy and the SNB, as well as the freedom of action for monetary policy. The 
size  and  composition  of  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  are  a  reflection  of  monetary  policy.  The 
SNB must also be in a position to dispose of the assets it has purchased and determine the 
composition of its balance sheet as required. Only in this way can it conduct an independent 
and target-oriented monetary policy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
