Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
1 March 2012. 
 Today, on 29 February 2012, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analyses  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged  at  4.50%.  The  Supervisory  Council  deemed  that  this  decision  provides  the 
appropriate monetary conditions to meet the inflation target over the medium term. Moreover, 
it provides the necessary monetary stimulus to the economy in Albania.  
(Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues that were 
discussed at today’s meeting). 
 Annual  inflation  rate  was  1.6%  in  January,  slightly  down  by  0.1  percentage  points 
compared  with  the  previous  month.  The  annual  inflation  rates  have  been  pursuing  a 
downward  trend  since  the  second  half  of  2011,  reflecting  the  mitigation  of  inflationary 
pressures  from  the  supply  side:  cancelling  out  of  effects  from  administered  price  rise; 
increase  of  domestic  agricultural  production;  and  slowdown  of  imported  inflation.  The 
downward annual inflation in January reflected the further decrease of imported inflation from 
the  external  sector  of  the  economy,  materialised  in  the  lower  contribution  of  the  prices  of 
processed  goods  and  foods.  Prices  of  unprocessed  foods  continued  to  contribute  to 
downward annual inflation, while the contribution of other categories was relatively stable.  
Inflationary  pressures  from  the  demand  side  remain  low  and  are  conditioned  by  the 
continued negative output gap and lack of cost-related pressures on the economy. Moreover, 
low increase of consumer prices has reflected economic agents’ expectations on inflation. 
According  to  INSTAT  data,  Albania’s  economy  growth  rates  improved  over  the 
third quarter of 2011, posting an annual growth of 2.6% over this quarter. On the production 
side, growth was supported by branches of the industry sector and services. On the demand 
side,  economic  growth  continues  to  be  driven  by  foreign  demand,  while  domestic  demand 
remains  sluggish.  A  similar  growth  model  is  assessed  to  have  taken  place  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2011. 
Based on the analysis of aggregate demand components, the Bank of Albania judges that 
foreign demand was the main driver of demand increase during 2011. Although not at the 
levels  of  previous  year,  exports  continue  to  grow.  Latest  foreign  trade  data  point  to  our 
exports annual growth by 20.7% in December. On the other hand, imports accelerated their 
growth rates in this month, posting an annual growth of 14.5%. This performance is reflected 
in  the  widening  of  the  trade  deficit  by  12.0%,  year  on  year.  To  a  large  degree,  the  trade 
deficit reflects price developments in international markets. In real terms, the trade deficit is 
assessed to have narrowed during 2011.  
Indirect data show that consumption was poor over the second half of 2011. In the fourth 
quarter,  however,  it  showed  improvement.  Indirect  data  obtained  from  the  import  of 
consumer  goods,  fiscal  indicators  and  consumer  confidence  indices  signal  the  recovery  of 
consumption  during  this  period.  On  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of  uncertainties  for  the 
future  amongst  Albanian  consumers  continues  to  discourage  consumption  and  dictate  the 
consumer’s behaviour towards saving.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Private investment is assessed as improved in the fourth quarter for certain branches of the 
economy,  while  across  the  sectors  of  the  economy  the  improvement  remains  low. 
Furthermore,  below  potential  growth  and  low  capacity  utilisation  rates  have  reduced 
incentives to undertake new investments.  
The contribution of fiscal expenditures to aggregate demand growth has been positive over 
2011, reflecting a moderate fiscal stimulus, especially during the first and fourth quarters of 
the year. The fiscal policy has been prudent with a view to keeping fiscal indicators within 
sound  parameters.  Budget  deficit  for  2011  was  ALL  45.7  billion,  remaining  within  the 
envisaged level. Its performance has reflected low rates, both in terms of fiscal income and 
expenditures, recording an annual growth of 1.8% and 3.7%, respectively, in 2011. 
Monetary indicators performance suggests the existence of contained monetary inflationary 
pressures.  
The annual growth rate of M3 monetary aggregate was 9.2% in December, in line with the 
deceleration over the second half of 2011.  
According to our analysis, the expansion of money is in conformity with the demand for real 
money  in  the  economy.  The  expansion  of  money  has  been  sustained  by  the  increased 
demand of the public sector for funds at end-2011, as well as the stable contribution of the 
demand by the private sector.  
The latter continues to reflect developments in the real economy, being conditioned mainly 
by weak demand for loans by businesses and households. In December, the loan portfolio of 
the banking system to the private sector was 10.4% higher than a year earlier. Similar to the 
most  part  of  2011,  it  has  reflected  the  demand  of  the  private  sector  to  fund  its  liquidity, 
consumption and investment needs, materialising also the hesitation of the private sector to 
commit to long-term projects. In addition to demand factors, the supply of loans is assessed 
to have been more tightened in the second half of 2011, reflecting the added prudence of the 
banking system in lending. 
Latest  developments  in  financial  markets  are  influenced  by  the  normal  and  quiet 
performance of demand and supply, which is in line with the monetary policy signals. The 
key  interest  rate  cut  to  4.50%  is  reflected  in  eased  borrowing  costs  for  banks,  while  it  is 
expected  to  be  completely  transmitted  to  other  higher-maturity  market  segments.  Overall, 
risk, liquidity and inflation premiums in financial markets remain contained.  
Projections  for  the  expected  performance  of  the  economy  support  the  assessment  for 
positive, though below potential, growth of the Albanian economy for the year ahead. Foreign 
demand  is  expected  to  continue  to  provide  positive,  but  more  moderate,  contribution  to 
aggregate demand increase.  
Likewise, the impulse by the fiscal sector is expected to be lower than in the past year. Under 
these circumstances, the growth speed and rate of the economy at home will be determined 
largely  by  the  performance  of  private  domestic  demand  components:  consumption  and 
investments.  
Our analyses reveal the existence of room for higher growth in the future. This growth will be 
supported also by stimulating monetary and financial conditions, in response to the monetary 
policy of the Bank of Albania.  
 Taking  into  account  the  above  overview,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
deemed  that  the  inflationary  pressures  remain  subdued  over  the  monetary  policy  horizon. 
The  output  gap  will  continue  to  be  negative  in  the  period  ahead,  materialising  in  low 
inflationary  pressures  originating  from  domestic  demand.  Moreover,  inflationary  pressures 
from developments in the global economy are expected to be downward, whereas inflation 
expectations remain anchored. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The expected performance of real and monetary indicators is reflected in projections for the 
inflation, which is expected to range within the target of the Bank of Albania for the period 
ahead. 
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key 
interest rate unchanged at 4.50%. This decision serves to comply with our medium-term 
inflation  target  and  provides  the  appropriate  monetary  conditions  to  stimulate  Albania’s 
economic  activity.  The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  heedful  to  future  economic  and  financial 
developments at home and abroad as well as diligent to accomplish its mandate.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
