Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s recent economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 June 2012. 
 Today,  on  27  June  2012,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged at 4.25%.  
The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  monetary  conditions  are  adequate  to  meet  the 
inflation  target  in  the  period  ahead,  while  they  provide  the  needed  monetary  incentive  to 
support the domestic demand.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic and monetary developments and key 
topics discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Annual  inflation  marked  1.9%  in  May,  continuing  to  pursue  a  gradual  upward  trajectory. 
Inflation  rate  in  May  was  largely  driven  by  the  rise  in  food  prices,  whose  performance 
triggered  inflation’s  behaviour  over  the  last  two  years.  The  impact  of  other  commodities’ 
basket on inflation remains stable and slightly volatile.  
Within  the  macroeconomic  context,  the  analysis  of  economic  and  financial  developments 
reveals  the  lack  of  strong  and  sustainable  inflationary  pressures,  which  is  reflected  on the 
current  low  annual  inflation  rate.  As  aggregate  demand  increased  below  its  potential,  free 
production  capacities  were  created  in  the  economy,  generating  weak  pressures  on  the 
increase  in  wages.  Imported  inflation  remains  moderated,  owing  to  the  contained 
performance  of  core  commodity  prices,  the  moderated  inflation  in  Albania’s  trade  partner 
countries and the stable exchange rate. Also, economic agents’ inflation expectations remain 
low, administered prices provide a minimum effect, and monetary developments and liquidity 
in the economy are in line with the mid-term price stability.  
Data  available  on  the  economic  performance  for  the  first  five  months  of  2012  show  that 
economic expansion slowed down. Estimations based on indirect, qualitative and quantitative 
data  reveal  a  sluggish  production  sector  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012,  whereas  services 
improved  compared  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011.  On  the  demand-side,  economic 
developments  in  this  period  show  a  moderated  foreign  demand  and  a  sluggish  domestic 
demand. The latter is determined by the weak performance of private sector’s expenditures 
and investments, and the low fiscal stimulus. 
January – May 2012 is characterised by a consolidating behaviour of fiscal policy.  
Budget deficit decreased by 6.5% y-o-y during this period, reflecting the increase in budged 
revenues  and  expenses,  by  2%  and  0.8%,  respectively.  Notwithstanding  the  short-term 
reduction of fiscal stimulus, Bank of Albania deems as indispensable for the public sector to 
focus on consolidating and reducing public debt indicators. The implementation of this policy 
will provide short- and long-term benefits to the Albanian economy in the form of lower risk 
premiums in financial markets and more credit opportunities for the economy.  
Foreign demand, the main source on the increased aggregate demand in the last two years, 
appeared moderated during the first four months of 2012. The relevant partial information, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
obtained from the external trade data, shows a contraction of 4% in Albanian exports during 
the first months of year.  
This  contraction  is  largely  driven  by  the  reduced  exports  of  electric  energy.  Excluding  the 
latter,  Albanian  exports  grew  by  about  7%  y-o-y,  albeit  insufficient  to  maintain  the  growth 
paces during 2012. At the same time, imports shrank during the first four months of 2012, by 
1.8% in nominal terms. These developments are materialised in a narrowed trade deficit in 
goods and services, by about 2.3% for this period. The narrowed trade and current account 
deficit are welcomed, particularly given the high fluctuation of global financial markets.  
Monetary developments were in line with the performance of the real economy. Monetary 
supply rose by 8.3% y-o-y in April, about 0.5 p.p lower compared to March. This deceleration 
reflected the lower financing by banks to the government and the decelerated demand of the 
private sector for monetary assets. 
Annual increase of credit to the private sector marked 8.1% in April. Given that uncertainties 
concerning  the  external  and  domestic  macroeconomic  developments  augmented,  private 
sector’s  demand  for  banking  credit  continues  to  fall.  Households  demand  for  consumer  or 
mortgage  loan  shows  weak,  due  to  their  increased  propensity  toward  savings.  Business 
demand for credit has been downward, due to the failure to utilise producing capacities in full 
and the uncertainties on the demand performance in future.  
The  banking  system  continues  to  be  increasingly  prudent  regarding  crediting,  albeit  its 
balance sheets remain completely sound and able to encourage credit growth at home. 
The  decelerated  crediting  is  a  known  phenomenon  within  the  context  of  global  financial 
markets, and characterises the developments in all regional economies. Banking credit and 
foreign direct investments are the two main financing sources of private sector’s long-term 
investments slowdown in Albania. In this light, the Bank of Albania deems that businesses 
and banking system have room for closer collaboration and better mutual understanding to 
support crediting.  
Financial markets operated under liquidity terms and showed low interest rate fluctuation. 
Indicators related to soundness of the banking system are positive and stable, and adequate 
to  enhance  financial  intermediation.  Interest  rates  in  the  domestic  currency  trended 
downward in April and May, notably in inter-bank and deposits markets. This tendency was 
followed by  increased inter-bank trading and lek deposits. On the other side, the relatively 
high  yields  rates  of  government  Treasury  bills,  since  the  beginning  of  year,  seem  to 
considerably  factorise  structural  changes  in  primary  market  and  do  not  transmit  added 
inflationary pressures.  
In  the  light  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  analysis  on  the  expected  fiscal  and  monetary 
developments,  this  trend  may  return  in  the  second  half  of  year,  along  with  the  improved 
demand and supply ratios for public sector securities. 
Basic projections on the expected economic performance in the future continue to align with 
our  previous  estimations  for  an  economic  growth,  but  below  its  potential.  Economic 
slowdown  in  Albania’s  trade  partner  countries  is  expected  to  impose  a  sluggish  foreign 
demand during the rest of year. Given the lack of room for a substantial fiscal stimulus, the 
main  drivers  of  domestic  demand  will  be  the  consumption  and  private  investment,  which 
have shown few recovering signal so far. Overall, the expected economic developments at 
home and abroad are expected to condition a slow rise in consumption prices at home.  
Real and monetary sectors convey low pressures on prices; also, inflation in global markets 
is expected to be low, whereas inflationary expectations are anchored.  
The  gradual  subsiding  supply  shocks  and  the  termination  of  base  effects  impact  are 
expected to be followed by a slight rising inflation trend in the second half of year. At a high 
probability, consumer prices inflation is expected to remain below the target over the medium 
run.  These  circumstances,  in  the  absence  of  unexpected  shocks,  encourage  the  further 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
maintaining and strengthening of the monetary policy’s stimulating nature. The reconfirmed 
commitment of the government to continue the fiscal consolidation process even in the next 
review  of  budget,  as  well  as  the  calmer  situation  in  global  markets,  will  pave  the  way  to 
review the monetary policy position.  
 Based on the analysis of the information set out above, the Supervisory Council holds that 
inflationary pressures on consumption prices at home remain low over the monetary policy 
horizon.  On  the  demand  side,  below-potential  economic  growth  shall  continue  to  generate 
low inflationary pressures. Also, supply-side pressures, both of external origin and generated 
by the macroeconomic environment at home, are expected to remain moderated. At the end 
of  the  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged at 4.25%. 
The Supervisory Council remains committed to meet the main target of the Bank of Albania, 
to maintain price stability in the medium run.  
Without  jeopardising  this  target,  the  Supervisory  Council  remains  vigilant  and  monitors 
carefully the macroeconomic and financial developments at home and abroad, to assess the 
monetary  leverage  for  supporting  the  economic  growth  and  maintaining  the  domestic  and 
external equilibriums at home.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
