Mario Draghi: Interview with Bild Zeitung 
Interview with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President of  the  European Central  Bank,  in  BILD Zeitung, 
conducted by Messrs Kai Diekmann, Editor in Chief, Nikolaus Blome, Deputy Editor in 
Chief, on 19 March 2012 and published on 23 March 2012. 
 Part I 
BILD: President Draghi, when it was clear that you were to become head of the European 
Central  Bank,  BILD  made  a  photomontage  of  you  wearing  a  Prussian  spiked  helmet  and 
called you a “true German”. What did you think of that? 
Mario Draghi: I really liked it. The Prussian element is a good symbol of the ECB’s key task: 
to maintain price stability and to protect European savers. 
BILD:  For  Germans,  a  central  bank  chief  must  take  a  strict  line  on  inflation,  be  politically 
independent and favour a strong euro. In that light, how German are you? 
Draghi: These are indeed German virtues. But every central banker in the euro area should 
have them. 
BILD: The French President said that Europe should learn from the German model… 
Draghi:  …he’s  right.  Long  before  him  I  said  that  Germany  is  a  model.  The  old  European 
welfare state model is in fact dead, because it had to make debts far too often. The Germans 
have re-invented it – with no excessive debts. 
BILD: Do you have a message for the people of Germany? 
Draghi: Keep it up! 
BILD:  The  ever-present  fear  of  devaluation,  of  inflation,  is  typically  German.  Can  you 
understand that? 
Draghi:  In  the  twentieth  century  the  people  of  this  country  suffered  terribly  because  of 
inflation.  It  destroys  wealth  and  makes  planning  impossible.  What’s  more,  it  can  really 
destroy the fabric of a society. 
BILD: Why then, as ECB President, are you allowing euro area inflation to currently stand at 
2.7%, significantly more than the ECB’s objective? 
Draghi:  Hold  on.  If  you  exclude  the  price  of  oil  and  recent  tax  increases  by  many 
governments,  the  inflation  rate  has  been  stable  for  months  at  1.5%.  Should  the  inflation 
outlook  get  worse,  we  will  immediately  take  preventive  steps.  And  look  at  the  facts,  they 
speak for themselves. Since the founding of the ECB the yearly average inflation rate has 
been better than in any comparable period prior to the euro.  
BILD: In two moves, the ECB has put almost €1 trillion into circulation. That’s inflationary, 
surely?  
Draghi: The banks to which the ECB has lent the money have, by and large, not fed this into 
the economic cycle but have used it to meet old liabilities. So the money in terms of inflation 
has,  so  to  speak,  been  neutralised.  This  action  is  not  inflationary.  And  we  will  watch  very 
carefully if and how the money is fed into the economic cycle.  
BILD: But the head of Germany’s Bundesbank, Jens Weidmann, has issued a sharp warning 
about this flood of money. 
Draghi:  I  get  on  very  well  with  Jens  Weidmann  both  professionally  and  personally.  Our 
difference of opinion has been blown up.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
BILD: Was he exaggerating?  
Draghi:  He  is  a  typical  central  banker,  like  all  of  us.  We  like  to  worry  about  things  that 
nobody else worries about. And of course there are risks and side effects if you use such a 
strong  drug,  such  as  the  almost  €1  trillion  of  central  bank  money.  It  was  right  of  Jens 
Weidmann to point that out and I agree with him. 
BILD: Is there a rift between north and south in the Governing Council? 
Draghi:  No,  there  is  no  divide  between  north  and  south.  All  members  of  the  Governing 
Council have taken to heart Germany’s stability culture. The time of conflicts is over. But let 
me  also  say  that  the  situation  in  the  autumn  was  really  critical.  It  could  have  led  to  a 
dangerous  credit  crunch  at  the  banks  and  thus  to  bankruptcies;  companies  would  have 
suddenly been left sitting high and dry financially. We had to prevent that. 
BILD: And the banks are doing nicely out of it, right? 
Draghi:  The  ECB’s  money  has  got  to  the  right  places.  In  Germany  alone,  460  banks 
participated  in  the  action,  many  more  than  usual.  So  it  wasn’t  just  the  acutely  suffering 
banks,  but  also  many  others,  many  of  them  small.  That  particularly  helps  the  small  and 
medium-sized companies that account for 70% of all jobs in Europe. 
BILD: This all sounds very optimistic. Is the euro then a safe currency? 
Draghi: Yes, it is. 
BILD: Is the crisis over? 
Draghi: The worst is over, but there are also still risks. The situation is stabilising. The key 
data for the euro area, such as inflation, the balances of payments and in particular budget 
deficits, are better than in the United States, for example. Investors are regaining their trust 
and the ECB has not had to provide support by buying government bonds for several weeks 
now.  It  is  now  up  to  the  governments.  They  must  make  the  euro  area  crisis-proof  in  a 
sustainable manner 
BILD: If it were your birthday today, what would you want from the German government and 
the Chancellor? 
Draghi: Trust the ECB. Trust Europe.  
Part II 
BILD: There is no end to the crisis in Greece. Yet again, more than €100 billion of credit is to 
be given to them. But isn’t the country a bottomless pit? 
Draghi:  The  Greeks  have  passed  very  many  important  reforms  in  parliament.  If  they  also 
implement these, the country has a chance to get itself out of the current downward spiral. 
BILD:  But  the  parties  that  reject  the  reforms  will  be  the  ones  that  win  in  the  upcoming 
elections. 
Draghi: To overcome the crisis, Greece needs a stable political situation.  
BILD: Why should taxpayers in Germany and other euro area countries be liable if it goes 
wrong? 
Draghi: The fact is that European taxpayers have taken on a lot for Greece. Their money 
must be protected. This is also why the ECB did not take part in the debt relief – because the 
cost would have been borne by taxpayers. 
BILD: How much time does Greece have left? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Draghi: Some reforms can take effect very quickly. For example, a tax reform and better 
tax  collection  would  spread  the  tax  burden  more  fairly.  That  is  a  strong  incentive  to  work 
more – and this will get the economy quickly back on its feet. 
BILD: Many experts now think that the only way for Greece to become competitive again is if 
it leaves the euro area. 
Draghi: As a matter of principle, the ECB does not give any thought to a country leaving the 
euro area. 
BILD: Nevertheless… 
Draghi: Leaving the euro area and having the possibility to devalue their own currency would 
not improve anything. It would not remove the need for reform. In fact, the consequences of 
leaving the euro area would be high inflation and instability – and, for the foreseeable future, 
nobody would lend Greece the money it needed. 
BILD: Will the Greeks in any case have to give up their prosperity? 
Draghi: Yes, they are renouncing exactly that as a result of wage cuts across all sectors. But 
this is still easier to do inside the euro area rather than outside it. 
BILD: Is there a limit to the support? Or will it just continue like this? 
Draghi: I can’t answer that. We will have to see how things develop in the country. Generally 
speaking, the fact remains that if we want to protect taxpayers’ money, the euro area cannot 
be  turned  into  a  transfer  union,  where  one  or  two  countries  provide  the  money,  the  rest 
spend, and the whole thing is financed by joint Eurobonds. That cannot happen. 
BILD: Many parties, also in Germany, are calling for that. 
Draghi: A community must be founded on trust – trust that shared rules will be adhered to, 
for example, with regard to budgetary discipline. That is why the new fiscal pact among euro 
area states is the right thing and why Eurobonds would be premature. 
BILD: Is the German Chancellor’s stance winning through? 
Draghi: Let me put it this way: without pressure from the markets and from the Germans, 
much of the progress we have made in the various euro area countries would not have been 
possible. 
BILD: How often do you speak on the telephone with the Chancellor? 
Draghi:  Not  very  often.  The  ECB  is  very  mindful  of  its  independence.  And  the  Chancellor 
fully respects this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
