Klaas Knot: The future of EMU and the Netherlands’ place in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  before  the  OMFIF  (Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum), London, 17 February 2012. 
 Thank you for this opportunity to exchange views with you on this topical issue. Thank you 
also for arranging for me to do so amid the splendour of this magnificent hall. I feel quite safe 
standing  here,  for  I  understand  the  Armourers’  Hall  was  among  the  few  buildings  that 
escaped destruction in the Great Fire of 1666, and, in 1940, also survived a major blitz on 
London,  while  the  surrounding  area  was  devastated.  So  one  might  say  that  this  venue 
symbolically suits my subject of today, for I am confident that in the distant future we will be 
able to say that EMU still survives. 
Speaking of which, I couldn’t help but notice that the title of my talk as announced in the flyer 
is  “The  Future  of  European  Monetary  Union”,  instead  of  “Economic  and  Monetary  Union” 
which the term “EMU” stands for.  
Don’t  worry,  you  find  yourselves  in  good  company;  many  European  governments  are  only 
now starting to realize that they haven’t paid enough attention to the “E” in EMU. 
My  talk  today  consists  of  two  parts.  In  the  first  part,  I’ll  focus  on  why  it  is  that,  for  the 
Netherlands in particular, it is so important that the European project will be successful. In 
the  second  part,  I’ll  discuss  the  implications  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  for  the 
future design of EMU.  
I will argue that at the root of the crisis we find some individual euro area countries pursuing 
wrong  policies  and  a  failing  system  of  mutual  surveillance  in  the  euro  area.  These 
deficiencies pose a number of challenges for the future of EMU. While the introduction of the 
euro has increased macroeconomic stability and furthered trade and financial integration, the 
sovereign debt crisis clearly demonstrates that the job is not done yet.  
The alliance of the Netherlands with Europe has always been strong and will remain so in the 
future, if only because of its small size and geographical location. The same holds true for 
the other “low country”, Belgium.  
By nature, Dutch people have always had a strong focus on Europe.  
Just  to  illustrate  this  point,  every  pupil  in  high  school  has  to  learn  at  least  two  foreign 
European languages. Foreign residents in the Netherlands even complain that it is hard to 
learn Dutch in Holland, because everybody they speak to in Dutch replies in English, French 
or German.  
Another  way  to  illustrate  the  Netherlands’  focus  on  the  outside  world  is  to  look  at  the 
openness of its economy. If you take a look at Chart 2, you find openness defined as exports 
plus imports as a percentage of GDP.  
As you can see, in the US, exports plus imports are less than 30% of GDP.  
In France, Italy, Spain and the UK, this indicator is between 53 and 63%. In the Netherlands, 
exports plus imports are nearly 150% of GDP, and in Belgium and Ireland even more.  
As a consequence of this openness, the realization of the single market and the introduction 
of the euro later on did have a substantial positive impact on the Dutch economy. After all, 
one of the most significant yields was the boost that EMU provided to trade. Driven by lower 
transaction cost, lower exchange rate risks and more market transparency, trade within the 
euro area developed more strongly than outside the euro area. Being a country of trade and 
distribution by  tradition,  the  Netherlands  has  taken  advantage  of  these  circumstances.  For 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sure, it is one of the reasons why the Dutch economy outperformed the euro area in terms of 
GDP growth in 14 out of the last 20 years.  
The  strong  alliance  of  the  Dutch  economy  with  Europe  in  general  and  the  euro  area  in 
particular also shows up if we look at its exports orientation. In Chart 3 you see this defined 
as exports to the euro area expressed as a percentage of total exports. It follows that the 
orientation on the euro area is the largest in the Netherlands. More than 60% of our exports 
goes to euro area countries.  
Given its close ties with the euro area, it is obvious that for the Dutch economy a solution of 
the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  of  vital  importance.  If  EMU  were  to  fall  apart,  the 
consequences  for  the  open  Dutch  trading  nation  would  be  severe.  Therefore,  Dutch 
policymakers and central bankers should do their utmost to solve this crisis. In what follows, I 
will first focus on the causes of the sovereign debt crisis. Finally, I will present my views on 
the implications for a stable design of EMU. 
Over  the  last  couple  of  months,  European  policy  makers  have  done  a  lot  to  restore 
confidence.  
As a consequence, most stressed sovereign debt markets have calmed down substantially 
(left-hand side of the graph). The most important development was the announcement and 
finalisation of  the  Fiscal  Compact,  in  which  the  political leaders  of  the euro  area  countries 
(and most other EU countries) further strengthened the rules governing budgetary discipline 
in Europe. 
Furthermore, in March the capacity of the EFSF/ESM will be evaluated. We have to conclude 
that the EFSF in its current form (based on guarantees) and size unfortunately has failed to 
convince markets that all countries will get through this crisis unharmed. This is why we as 
central bankers call upon the European governments to increase the emergency facility as 
soon as possible. 
The  ECB  also  took  further  measures  to  avoid  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  from  severely 
dragging  down  the  real  economy.  It  did  so  by  introducing  a  refinancing  operation  with  a 
maturity of three years.  
As  Chart  4  shows,  this  operation  attracted  a  lot  of  interest,  with  a  total  volume  of 
EUR 490 billion (right-hand side of the graph). This is not all “new” liquidity by the way, since 
banks also rolled over operations with shorter maturities into this new facility. This provides 
them  with  the  liquidity  security  they  need  in  light  of  the  market  tensions  and,  thus,  helps 
prevent a sharp reduction in credit supply to the economy.  
At the end of this month, a second three-year operation will be carried out.  
In  analysing  and  solving  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  focus  was  on  fiscal  and  monetary 
factors rather than on the macroeconomic causes of the crisis.  
However, as I’ll briefly demonstrate by means of Charts 5, 6 and 7, these causes are at least 
as important as the fiscal slippages some countries allowed themselves. 
At the start of EMU, per capita income levels between countries differed significantly. It was 
assumed that catching-up countries would experience faster economic growth. This is what 
did happen, but not quite to the extent expected.  
Prior  to  the  crisis,  mainly  Ireland,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  also  Greece  and  Spain,  showed 
signs  of  real  convergence.  Their  cumulative  growth  differentials  compared  to  Germany 
reached 20 to 45% in 2007.  
Note that Italy and Portugal hardly experienced any real convergence towards the German 
welfare level, even before to the crisis. Even the Netherlands “converged” more than these 
countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Unfortunately,  the  catching-up  process  largely  took  place  through  debt,  either  public  or 
private. As Chart 6 shows, in some countries credit to the private sector grew by more than 
10%  a  year  for  over  a  decade.  As  a  result,  their  debt  with  the  rest  of  the  world  ran  up 
tremendously.  This  was  most  dramatically  the  case  in  Ireland,  which  moved  from  a  net 
creditor position of 52% of GDP in 1999 to a net debtor position of 71% of GDP in 2008.  
Note  that  the  Netherlands  is  not  doing  particularly  well  with  regard  to  this  measure  either. 
This is mainly the result of the growth in mortgage loans.  
In my view the high stock of mortgage debt is among today’s biggest vulnerabilities of the 
Dutch economy.  
Besides being largely based on credit, real convergence was accompanied by high inflation, 
as you find visualised on Chart 7.  
Whereas  Germany  experienced  lower  inflation  compared  to  the  euro  area  average,  the 
inflation  rates  in  Greece,  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  were  much  higher  than  the  EMU 
average.  
This  substantial  deterioration  of  competitiveness  mainly  reflects  the  development  of  unit 
labour costs. 
The  economic  developments  in  Germany  in  the  last  decade  have  been  phenomenal.  The 
time that Germany was called the sick man of Europe is not so far way. Partly due to the 
supply  of  many  low-paid  workers  from  East  Germany,  the  labour  market  institutions  in 
Germany  were  no  longer  sustainable.  This  has  led  to  the  so-called  Harz  reforms,  which 
made the German labour market more flexible and tempered unit labour costs and inflation. 
Before EMU, the current euro area countries followed different economic strategies. Between 
1970 and 1999, unit labour costs in Germany, the Netherlands en Austria grew by a factor of 
2.5 to 3. During these 28 years prior to EMU, unit labour costs grew by a factor of 12 in Italy, 
14 in Spain, 35 in Portugal and 55 in Greece. By regularly devaluing their currencies, these 
countries  were  able  to  restore  competitiveness.  But  after  the  launch  of  EMU,  this  policy 
option was no longer available, of course.  
The  hope  was  that  these  countries  would  adapt  to  this  new  reality  and  unit  labour  costs 
growth would slow down. But has this happened?  
Chart 8 shows the cumulative growth of unit labour costs relative to the euro area average 
from  the  start  of  EMU.  While  countries  like  Germany,  Austria  and  Finland  continued  their 
modest wage policies, unit labour costs in Southern European countries went up at a much 
higher  pace,  undermining  their  competitiveness.  This  proved  unsustainable.  The  countries 
that  found  themselves  in  the  top  of  the  chart  when  the  sovereign  debt  tensions  started  in 
2009 – that is Greece, Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Italy – all ran into trouble one after the 
other.  
This  is  no  coincidence.  Currently,  adjustments  are  hard-handedly  being  enforced  by  the 
markets.  
In the said countries, Ireland excepted, product and labour markets didn’t function properly 
and they still don’t. Markets are overregulated and labour markets are highly inflexible. By 
addressing  these  problems,  labour  productivity  can  increase,  thereby  lowering  unit  labour 
costs.  I  am  not  saying  this  will  be  easy,  but  I’m  convinced  that  such  steps  are  absolutely 
necessary for EMU to function properly. 
As the chart also shows, in the Netherlands unit labour cost growth was also relatively high 
during the first years of EMU. This, however, wasn’t caused by the high inflation rates and 
low  flexibility  of  the  labour  market,  but  reflected  the  low  unemployment  rate  in  the 
Netherlands in that period.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
For many years, the unemployment rate in the Netherlands was the lowest in the euro area. 
The divergences in unit labour cost developments and price competitiveness within the euro 
area are reflected in the current account balances of the individual countries. As you can tell 
from Chart  9, before the crisis, most southern European countries and, to a lesser extent, 
Ireland experienced high and steadily increasing current account deficits, while the current 
account surpluses of Germany and the Netherlands improved further. 
For  many  years  it  was  thought  that  in  a  monetary  union,  the  current  account  balances  of 
individual countries were no longer relevant.  
It was only the balance of payment of the euro area as a whole that mattered.  
We know better now.  
Of course, besides competitiveness problems, the crisis also had fiscal causes.  
As can be told from Chart 10, the stability and growth pact didn’t prevent some governments 
from taking up old habits once they had fulfilled the convergence criteria that enabled them to 
join EMU.  
We shouldn’t forget, however, that this was facilitated by some of the core countries of EMU. 
When it became clear that fiscal policies in these countries wouldn’t be able to meet the rules 
of the Stability and Growth Pact, it was not the policies that were changed but the Pact.  
This was clearly a mistake. 
Besides, the gradual worsening of the budget balance in countries like Italy and Portugal was 
partly due to their competitiveness problems. 
Since  devaluing  out  of 
competitiveness slowed down economic and employment growth.  
This dampened tax revenues while stimulating social security expenditures.  
Looking at it this way, the lack of fiscal discipline partly reflected the lack of macroeconomic 
discipline. 
More in general, budgetary policy was supposed to absorb temporary cyclical differences, by 
allowing the automatic stabilisers to do their work.  
For  example,  during  a  downturn,  public  spending  automatically  goes  up  as  more  people 
receive unemployment benefits, while tax revenues decrease.  
Such “automatic” response to cyclical developments stabilises the economy.  
But in most member states, the automatic stabilisers have failed to operate properly since 
1999. 
Instead, a number of governments followed pro-cyclical budgetary policies, by loosening the 
budgetary reins during the economic booms, and tightening them during the busts.  
In other words, budgetary policies have hampered the functioning of EMU. 
Budgetary discipline in EMU was supposed to be exacted not only by the stability and growth 
pact, but also by market discipline.  
Markets were expected to restrain profligate governments by charging them higher interest 
rates and, thus, forcing them to change their ways.  
As is evident from Chart 11, market discipline was largely absent during the first ten years of 
EMU,  allowing  governments  to  pursue  unsustainable  policies.  And  when  markets  finally 
started to differentiate between governments, they did so with a vengeance. Although market 
discipline is now imposing necessary corrections, a stable monetary union cannot be based 
on this mechanism. So what would a stable monetary union look like in my view?  
these  problems  was  no 
longer  an  option, 
the  declined 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As I argued earlier, some euro area countries have not fully adapted to the fact that they lost 
the option of devaluation in order to restore competitiveness.  
If they had, they would have increased their flexibility and growth potential by reforming their 
labour and product markets.  
Given the spillover effects of postponed structural reforms on the functioning of EMU, these 
reforms  cannot  be  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  governments  concerned,  but  should  also 
have a “European” dimension. This can take different forms.  
One way could be to strengthen the macroeconomic imbalances procedure, by increasing its 
focus and enforceability.  
This could be done, for instance, by introducing more reversed Qualitative Majority Voting in 
these areas.  
Another  way  would  be  to  introduce  minimum  standards  or  best  practices  in  policy  areas 
where  spillovers  have  turned  out  to  be  especially  high,  such  as  labour  market  policies. 
Importantly, what should be avoided is harmonisation towards some kind of EMU average, 
as this would force strong countries to reduce their competitiveness.  
Secondly, debt ratios should gradually be brought well below the ceiling of 60%. This lower 
debt  ratio  can  only  be  realised  and  maintained  through  independent  enforcement  of  the 
European  fiscal  rules  and  by  anchoring  these  rules  in  national  legislation.  A  politically 
independent  European  authority  that  can  increasingly  intervene  in  the  fiscal  policy  of 
countries breaking the agreements is essential here. 
If  –  and  only  if  –  these  conditions  have  been  met,  eurobonds  could  be  a  serious  option. 
Eurobonds  could  enhance  the  stability  of  EMU  in  several  ways.  They  would  prevent  a 
liquidity  problem  in  one  euro  area  country  from  needlessly  transforming  into  a  solvency 
problem. Moreover, they could provide a fire wall against the danger of contagion. Although 
eurobonds are not suitable as a crisis instrument, they could be the light at the end of the 
tunnel for the people of vulnerable euro area countries.  
For  the  people  in  those  countries  need  to  feel  that  their  sacrifices  will  contribute  to  a 
permanent  solution;  one  that  will  safeguard  them  from  the  short-sightedness  of  both 
politicians and markets. 
As  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  presentation,  it  is  obvious  that  for  the  Dutch  economy  a 
solution of the sovereign debt crisis is very important, given its strong connections to the euro 
area. And therefore, Dutch politicians and central bankers should do their utmost to solve this 
crisis.  
But what is it we can offer?  
In my opinion a lot. Pragmatism, common sense and a focus on problem-solving are crucial 
now and the Dutch happen to be famous – not to say notorious – for these characteristics.  
Although we can be very principled on some issues and in many cases see eye to eye with 
the Germans, these typically Dutch characteristics could help divided euro area countries to 
stick together and solve this crisis. Pointing at the long-term perspective of eurobonds once 
the  necessary  conditions  have  been  met,  is  an  example  of  this  pragmatism  and  focus  on 
problem solving.  
Let me finish this presentation by saying that finding a structural way out of the crisis will not 
only be beneficial for the Netherlands, but also for the euro area, the rest of Europe, and, 
yes, even for the world economy.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
