Benoît Cœuré: Global liquidity and risk – a re-interpretation of the recent 
crises 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the BIS-ECB Workshop on global liquidity and its international repercussions, Frankfurt am 
Main, 6 February 2012. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Roland  Straub  for  his  contributions  to  the  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Introduction 
1. 
I am delighted to deliver the dinner speech today at this BIS and ECB workshop on global 
liquidity.  Our  two  institutions  have  worked  closely  and  extensively  on  the  topic  of  global 
liquidity  in  recent  years,  notably  in  the  context  of  Basel-based  organisations,  such  as  the 
Committee on the Global Financial System, so it made sense for us to organise a workshop 
on  this  subject.  On  a  more  personal  note,  as  a  former  co-chair  of  the  G20  Sub-Working 
Group  on  Global  Liquidity  Management,  I  am  particularly  pleased  to  see  that  work  is 
progressing on this important issue. 
The global economic and financial crisis in 2007–08 forcefully demonstrated that fluctuations 
in global liquidity conditions can lead to distortions in asset prices and cross-border capital 
flows. These distortions contribute to the emergence of bubbles and to financial crises when 
the bubbles burst. This is not a new story, but a recurrent theme in modern economic history. 
In this regard the recent financial crisis has not really been exceptional. 
Liquidity,  no  matter  how  defined,  is  widely  understood  to  follow  cyclical  patterns.  These 
patterns feature one important element which is not yet sufficiently appreciated and which I 
would like to stress today, namely the self-reinforcing interaction between risk appetite and 
liquidity. This particular interaction ultimately determines the relationship between the official 
and the overall level of global liquidity. In this connection, I should perhaps add that Claudio 
Borio  and  his  colleagues  at  the  BIS  were  among  the  first  to  note  this  self-reinforcing 
interaction and introduce the concept of the risk-taking channel.1 
This evening there are several things I’d like to consider: I’ll outline some of the key concepts 
in global liquidity and also cover liquidity cycles. I’ll talk about the interaction between liquidity 
and risk appetite in the Asian crisis, and between liquidity and the recent financial crisis. I’ll 
discuss the relationship between global liquidity and the availability of safe assets, and the 
impact of the post-Lehman global liquidity cycle on emerging economies. Finally, I’ll explore 
some of the policy implications. 
Key concepts in global liquidity 
2. 
The Landau Report of the CGFS has pointed out that global liquidity has two separate, but 
interdependent, components. The first component can be labelled as “official liquidity”, and 
can  be  defined  as  “the  funding  that  is  unconditionally  available  to  settle  claims  through 
monetary  authorities”2.  Official  liquidity  can  be  generated  through  various  instruments. 
Central banks can create it in their domestic currency through regular monetary operations or 
                                                 
1   See  Borio  and  Zhu,  2008,  “Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the 
transmission mechanism?”, BIS WP No. 268. 
2   CGFS Paper No 45: “Global liquidity – concept, measurement and policy implications”, Basel, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
through emergency liquidity assistance. In addition, authorities can provide official liquidity in 
foreign  currency  by  selling  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  through  swap  lines  between 
central banks.  
The  other  component  is  private  (or private  sector)  liquidity.  Private  liquidity  is created  to  a 
large degree through cross-border operations of banks and other financial institutions, and 
increasingly within the shadow banking system. 
In normal times, private liquidity dominates official liquidity. But private liquidity is highly pro-
cyclical and highly endogenous to the conditions that prevail in the global financial system. 
The inherent endogeneity of private liquidity means that it can easily evaporate in times of 
financial stress. The pro-cyclicality is documented via the strong interaction of private liquidity 
and the global risk appetite of financial institutions. Indeed, the global risk appetite is one of 
the main determinants of the multiplier that links levels of overall liquidity to levels of official 
liquidity. 
Consequently, while only central banks can create official liquidity (the IMF can only mobilise 
it and reallocate it across countries), for global liquidity cycles to emerge there is no need for 
new injections of official liquidity. What is needed is that private or official investors reallocate 
existing liquidity to other market segments. And when viewed in this light, the true driver of 
liquidity is the underlying set of factors that allows this portfolio reallocation to take place. Let 
me explain. 
Relationship between liquidity and recent crises 
3. 
A glance at the history of global capital flows over the last 20 years suggests that the liquidity 
cycles  that  posed  a  threat  to  global  financial  stability  originated  in  both  advanced  and 
emerging  economies.  Until  1997,  Asia  drew  in  almost  half  of  the  total  capital  inflow  into 
developing  countries.  The  economies  of  South-East  Asia,  in  particular,  maintained  high 
interest  rates  that  attracted  foreign  investors  looking  for  high  rates  of  return.  The  region 
received  large  inflows  of  money  and  saw  dramatic  increases  in  asset  prices.  At  the  same 
time, the region experienced high growth. This achievement was widely acclaimed as being 
part of the “Asian economic miracle”. 
But  the  self-reinforcing  interaction  between  risk  appetite  and  liquidity  came  to  the  surface 
here. The surge in capital flows weakened incentives to improve transparency and corporate 
governance; it also fuelled leverage, pushing up asset prices further, to unsustainable levels. 
Those  prices  eventually  underwent  a  correction,  causing  individuals  and  companies  to 
default on their obligations. 
The shortage of liquidity created by the crisis changed risk sentiment, thereby increasing the 
global demand for safe assets. With the US dollar still reigning supreme, the United States 
became a hub for the recycling of the liquidity that was available globally3. All of a sudden, 
capital was flowing uphill, from emerging to advanced economies, a puzzle famously known 
as the “Lucas paradox”. 
Clearly, however, the surge in capital flows to the US was mainly driven by the desire of the 
official sector in emerging-market and oil-exporting economies to increase their war chests of 
reserves  and  insure  against  global  shocks,  and  not  by  utility-maximising  decisions  of  their 
private  sector.  Nevertheless,  those  inflows  contributed  to  the  decline  in  long-term  interest 
rates and increased risk appetite in many of the advanced economies. The self-reinforcing 
interaction between risk appetite and liquidity came back with a vengeance. Of course, one 
should  not  neglect  the  domestic  inefficiencies  in  advanced  economies  that  allowed  the 
                                                 
3   Ricardo  J.  Caballero,  Emmanuel  Farhi,  and  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas:  “An  Equilibrium  Model  of  “Global 
Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review 2008, 98:1, pgs 358–393. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial crisis to occur in the first place. That said, the global dimension of the underlying 
forces is striking. 
The  eventual  implications  of  this  interaction  for  the  advanced  economies  were  not  so 
different from those for Asia a decade earlier. Again, one saw distorted incentives within the 
lender-borrower  relationship,  a  highly  leveraged  economic  climate,  and  upswings  in  asset 
prices to unsustainable levels. This resulted in the “Great Recession” and the corresponding 
fall in global economic activity. 
The ensuing sovereign debt crisis in the euro area can be seen – at least to some extent – 
through the lens of global liquidity and its cycles. In an environment of abundant liquidity and 
high  risk  appetite,  sovereign  yields  in  the  euro  area  converged  at  very  low  levels. 
Government bond spreads did not reflect differences in macroeconomic fundamentals. This 
distorted  incentives,  both  in  the  public  and  the  private  sectors.  Sovereigns  over-borrowed 
and put off necessary reforms. In some Member States it was the private sector that took on 
excessive debt, fuelling unsustainable real estate bubbles which, when they burst, pulled the 
banking system down and then affected public finances. In other words, abundant liquidity 
undermined  market  discipline,  which  could  otherwise  have  become  an  important  pillar  of 
macroeconomic and fiscal discipline in the euro area. 
Shortage of safe assets and global liquidity 
4. 
There is also a striking link between the global liquidity cycle and the shortage of safe assets 
in the global economy. Let me elaborate. 
Financial  crises,  but  also  economic  downturns  in  general,  trigger  a  rise  in  global  risk 
aversion.  This  in  turn  induces  a  flight  to  safety  by  global  investors,  resulting  in  an  excess 
global demand for safe assets. As an illustration, think of the current nominal yield on some 
short-term  sovereign  debt,  which  is  close  to  zero  and  has  even  turned  negative  in  some 
constituencies.  The  consequent  shortage  of  safe  assets  globally,  however,  is  a  significant 
impediment to the functioning of the global financial system. How can we, as policy-makers, 
address this recurrent problem? 
First,  emerging  market  economies  should  develop  an  efficient  financial  system  and  sound 
legal,  regulatory  and  macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  in  order  to  create  safe,  globally 
accepted financial assets. 
Second,  the  euro  area  needs  to  regain  its  role  as  a  global  supplier  of  safe  assets.  Some 
investors have doubted whether the sovereign debt issued by some euro area countries can 
be considered as risk-free. However, by restoring fiscal discipline, euro area sovereign debt 
will be viewed once again as risk-free. We have made significant progress in the last couple 
of years, with the establishment of the EFSF, the launching of the ESM, the approval of the 
six-pack legislation and of the fiscal compact. 
Third,  the  unused  resources  of  the  international  monetary  system  need  to  be  mobilised. 
According  to  estimates,  US  government  bonds  of  around  USD  2.1  trillion  and  overall 
reserves  of  USD  6.5  trillion4  are  held  by  emerging  market  economies.  However,  standard 
methods to quantify the optimal level of reserves suggest that the current level of reserves 
would not be justified purely for precautionary motives. It would be advisable, therefore, to 
utilise some of these excess reserves to stabilise the international monetary system, while 
Europe is enhancing its firewall. One obvious way to do this would be via the IMF. The IMF 
could borrow global excess reserves and use them to support programme countries that are 
                                                 
4   Data  on  US  government  bonds 
from  TICS:  http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-
center/tic/Documents/mfh.txt. Data on reserves in emerging economies is from Haver Analytics and national 
resources. 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
suffering  from  liquidity  shortages,  under  strict  conditionality.  Restoring  confidence  in  these 
economies would in turn stabilise regional debt markets and contribute to the global supply of 
safe assets. 
there  has  been 
in  policy  circles 
increasing  demand 
Impact of post-Lehman global liquidity cycle on emerging economies 
5. 
The  outbreak  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  crisis  led  to  a  speedy  and  coordinated 
response by major central banks. They supplied significant amounts of liquidity via different 
channels,  including  currency  swaps  and  non-standard  measures.  In  parallel,  the  IMF  and 
multilateral development banks have been required to expand their balance sheets.  
This  global  response  has,  however,  also  initiated  a  lively  discussion  among  policy-makers 
about  how  to  address  liquidity  shortages  with  instruments  providing  official  liquidity.  In 
particular, 
for  harmonisation, 
standardisation and some sort of pre-commitment to provide official liquidity through foreign-
currency swap arrangements between central banks. 
Let me just remind you, however, that foreign currency swap lines are, to some extent, the 
international  extension  of  the  lender-of-last-resort  function  of  reserve  currency-  issuing 
central banks. As the lender-of-last-resort role in the domestic context is subject to the well-
known  principle  of  “constructive  ambiguity”,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  a  different 
approach would be warranted in an international context. That said, central banks should aim 
to  improve  the  current  infrastructure  for  conducting  foreign  exchange  swap  arrangements, 
ensuring that future policy responses face no technical obstacles. 
The  surge  in  official  liquidity  is,  however,  also  associated  with  the  launch  of  non-standard 
monetary operations in advanced economies. These policies seek to stabilise the domestic 
economy and have been criticised by emerging markets’ central banks. Those of you who 
attended the G20 discussions in 2011 will remember the animated exchanges on this issue. 
If  anything,  this  confirmed  that,  for  any  meaningful  discussion  of  international  monetary 
reform to take place, one needs to better understand the driving factors of global liquidity and 
its  impact  on  domestic  policies.  The  emerging  market  participants  argue  though  that 
unconventional  measures  taken  in  developed  economies  have  created  excessive  global 
liquidity and that this, in turn, was a key factor behind the massive increase of capital flows 
into their economies between 2009 and mid-2011. This surge was then widely blamed for the 
appreciation  pressures  exerted  on  their  currencies,  contributing  to  a  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances  and  asset  price  bubbles,  high  credit  growth  and  risks  of  overheating  in  those 
markets. 
However,  an  important  question  is  whether  idiosyncratic  “pull  factors”  have  influenced  the 
transmission process of official liquidity expansion. Indeed, recent studies argue that there is 
a significant degree of heterogeneity in the way different emerging economies were affected 
by US monetary policy5. Pull factors, such as country-specific fundamentals and institutional 
characteristics, are just as important as  “push factors” coming from developed economies. 
For instance, countries with fundamentally undervalued exchange rates are of course prone 
to surges in capital inflows. 
Conclusions 
Reinterpreting  recent  crises  through  the  lens  of  global  liquidity  cycles  cannot  hide  the  fact 
that the crises themselves have their origins in more fundamental “fault lines”, to paraphrase 
                                                 
5   Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub: “Quantitative Easing, Portfolio Choice and International Capital Flows”, ECB 
mimeo. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Rajan.6 Liquidity fluctuation and cycles simply exacerbate these underlying weaknesses. For 
instance, in the Asian crisis, regulation and supervision of the banking system was weak in 
many instances, as was corporate governance in general. Similarly, the recent financial crisis 
revealed  gaps  in  regulation  and  supervision,  especially  in  segments  such  as  the  shadow 
banking system, as well as the lack of a macro-prudential approach to financial supervision. 
Finally, the debt crisis in the euro area has its roots in insufficient fiscal discipline and, even 
more  importantly,  in  divergent  productivity  trends  among  the  Member  States.  Such 
divergence  sows  the  seeds  of  balance-of-payment  imbalances  and  ultimately  leads  to  a 
sudden  stop  of  capital  inflows  into  peripheral  countries.  Obviously,  adequate  policy 
responses will have to focus primarily on these structural issues. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  essential  to  adopt  measures  that  can  break  the  self-reinforcing 
interaction between risk appetite and liquidity in order to avoid further financial crises. Here, I 
see three avenues that merit further reflection: 
 
Micro-  and  macro-prudential  measures  –  these  aim  to  prevent  the  build-up  of 
financial  fragilities  and  the  emergence  of  credit  and  asset  price  bubbles.  This 
includes of course the liquidity and capital adequacy-related measures which are at 
the  heart  of  the  Basel  III  accord.  This  may  also  include  capital  management 
techniques insofar as they are internationally consistent, and insofar as they are not 
a substitute for fundamental reforms; 
Further  improvements  in  the  financial  regulatory  framework  –  these  would  enable 
national  supervisors  and  central  banks  to  better  monitor  and,  if  necessary,  rein  in 
endogenous liquidity creation within the financial sector. This includes the oversight 
and  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  system  and  the  implementation  of  OTC 
derivatives market reform; 
Further  reflection  is  also  warranted  on  precautionary  foreign-exchange  reserve 
holdings  and  on  international  coordination  in  the  face  of  global  liquidity  shocks. 
These deliberations should build on the seminal work done by the CGFS on liquidity 
arrangements between central banks, and on the progress achieved by the IMF with 
the  creation  of  the  Precautionary  and  Liquidity  Line,  in  addition  to  the  already 
existing FCL and PCL. 
  Progress along these three avenues would help to provide a consistent policy framework for 
addressing global liquidity.  
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
6   Rajan, Fault Lines, 2010, Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
