Carlos Gustavo Cano: On the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Carlos  Gustavo  Cano,  Co-Director  of  the  Bank  of  the  Republic,  at  the 
Universidad del Rosario School of Economics graduation ceremony, Bogotá, 25 April 2012. 
 An  important  body  of  literature  has  come  to  light  on  occasion  of  the  latest  international 
financial  crisis,  known  as  the  Great  Recession,  which  began  to  form  in  2007  and  had  the 
mortgage  market  in  the  United  States  at  its  core.  Produced  by  the  most  prestigious 
economists  in  academia,  this  literature  focuses  on  the  etiology  of  that  crisis  and  the 
suggested  courses  of  action  to  prevent  its  reoccurrence.  Several  documentary  films  have 
been produced as well, which help to illustrate and stir the debate.  
One  of  the  most  valuable  exercises  is  that  developed  by  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth 
Rogoff (2009). Its title carries the ironic essence of one of its central messages: This Time Is 
Different,  thereby  reflecting  the  typically  arrogant  attitude  often  assumed  by  those 
responsible for economic policy, and particularly for financial regulation in the affluent world, 
when  confronted  with  phenomena  of  this  type,  which  have  been  recurrent,  at  least 
throughout the last two centuries.  
Excessive exposure to financial risk, above all during the so-called “good times,” has been 
the main cause of these crises. During the last 25 years, this exposure was exacerbated by 
the much celebrated and lauded “financial revolutions,” which provoked the largest bubbles 
and “manias” in the real estate and securities markets.  
The term “manias” suggests a loss of contact with reality and is akin to the idea of “mass 
hysteria”.  Indeed,  during  a  boom,  people  over-borrow  in  order  to  invest.  The  longer  the 
euphoria provoked by the boom lasts, the more risks lenders take. And, so it goes until the 
income generated by the assets acquired by borrowers is no longer enough to repay their 
debts.  Creditors  then  tend  to  demand  loans  be  paid  immediately,  forcing  over-indebted 
investors  to  sell  their  speculative  assets  precipitously  to  pay  back  their  loans,  causing  the 
prices of those assets to drop sharply.  
The hard lessons derived from these experiences – forewarned by eminent scholars who are 
no  longer  with  us,  such  as  Charles  Kindleberger  (2005)  and  Hyman  Minsky  (1992,  2008)  
–  and  regrettably  often  ignored  but  fortunately  reiterated  and  recalled  by  a  group  of  other 
learned contemporary writers and central bankers, such as Paul Krugman (2009a, 2009b), 
Nouriel Roubini (2010), Charles Goodhart (2005) and Paul Volcker, show investors do not 
respond to the “efficient market” theory, based on the false assumption of absolute rationality 
on the part of economic agents.  
On  the  contrary,  in  the  real  world,  false  illusions  and  collective  insanity  tend  to  outweigh 
rationality.  As  a  result,  investors  very  often  are  exposed  to  “herd  behavior,”  attacks  of 
“irrational exuberance” or unwarranted panic. If we were truly rational and the markets were 
indeed efficient and perfect, unemployment would be voluntary and recessions, natural and 
therefore desirable, as noted by Krugman (2009b), the 2008 Nobel Laureate in economics. 
Moreover, to fulfill the objective of their mission, financial intermediaries raise funds from the 
public, which generally lacks the knowledge and sufficient means to assess the solvency and 
liquidity of those intermediaries, and to understand the nature and scope of the risks involved 
in how those funds ultimately will be used. 
Therefore, the State must assume a fundamental responsibility to fill this delicate vacuum. It 
can  do  so  primarily  by  educating,  guiding  and  protecting  the  consumer,  by  reinforcing  
–  through  regulation  and  oversight  –  the  confidence  savers  and  depositors  have  in  the 
broader  financial  system,  by  ensuring  its  social  effectiveness,  by  promoting  competition 
among its agents and avoiding dominant positions in the market, by minimizing the risks and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the costs of crises, by ensuring the smooth operation of payment systems, and by giving rise 
to  and  preserving  the  faith  citizens  have  in  the  constituted  authority  that  is  responsible  for 
monetary policy, regulation and oversight.  
Ultimately, what is at stake are the criteria for deciding who may or may not use the public’s 
savings and for what purposes; who may or may not undertake new businesses; and who 
may or may not preserve or increase their positions of economic power.  
As  to  the  constitutional  duty  of  the  country’s  monetary  authority,  which  is  essentially  to 
secure and maintain low and stable levels of inflation through controls on demand and on 
growth  of  the  amount  of  money  in  circulation,  the  efforts  of  today’s  central  bankers  could 
easily end up being offset by new and very near substitutes for the latter.  
I am talking about some of the latest credit and financial “innovations.” Their development 
has  paralleled  that  of  the  so-called  “shadow  banking  system,”  with  a  capacity  to  issue 
currency  by  virtue  of  those  innovations  that  goes  beyond  the  reach  of  the  central  bank’s 
monopoly or control over that function.  
Clearly, the regulation of classic and new financial intermediation, rather than supplementary, 
must  be  an  essential  and  urgent  part  of  the  management  of  the  monetary  base  in  all  its 
accepted forms and varieties.  
Rather than distorting the use of a traditional instrument such as the interest rate to achieve 
that second objective, what we need is a second instrument with counter-cyclical features of 
the kind that make it possible to exercise effective control over growth in the loan portfolio 
during asset price booms, such as those involving real estate and securities. Obviously, the 
issue at hand is one of regulation and oversight. 
The  appearance  of  new  non-bank  intermediaries  with  a  strong  appetite  for  risk  –  hedge 
funds, private equity funds and venture capital funds, among others – is the most formidable 
contemporary  challenge  the  authorities  now  face.  Within  the  “broader  financial  system,”  in 
most  of  the  planet  and  especially  in  the  United  States,  duly  supervised  banks  occupy  an 
increasingly  reduced  space,  as  indicated  by  another  of  today’s  most  noted  experts, 
Raghuram Rajan (2005, 2010). At the time, he was labeled as backward by the heads of the 
financial  conglomerates  and  their  counterparts  in  the  public  sector.  Yet,  ultimately  and 
because of deregulation, it was they who sparked the crisis.  
Therefore,  if  regulation  and  oversight  are  to  be  effective,  they  must  apply  to  the 
conglomerates, instead of being applicable only to individual firms in a separate manner. The 
entire system must be covered comprehensively and seamlessly. 
As  illustrated  by  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009),  there  is  a  striking  correlation  between  the 
degree  of  freedom  in  capital  markets  and  the  occurrence  of  crises.  Clearly,  the  booms  in 
capital  flows  have  been  particularly  important  factors  in  causing  financial  crises,  as  least 
since the 1970s when the markets began to be deregulated in a major way. 
Thirty years ago, in the face of that the deregulatory wave, Minsky (1992, 2008) warned that 
a  sophisticated,  complex  and  dynamic  financial  system  like  ours  endogenously  generates 
destabilizing forces than end in equally serious economic depressions as a natural result of 
noninterventionist  capitalism.  ”Do  not  allow  the  markets  to  operate  freely,”  he  said.  As 
happened  to  Keynes,  many  accused  him  of  being  a  socialist,  and  even  a  Marxist,  when 
actually  what  he  was  trying  to  do  was  save  the  capitalist  system.  Since  then,  the  “Minsky 
moment” has been popularized in economic literature to characterize the symptoms of this 
type of crisis.  
In addition, the possibility that the effects of sharp increases in capital inflows, combined with 
high  terms  of  trade,  might  be  multiplied  by  the  financial  system  through  more  lending, 
thereby generating asset price bubbles, constitutes a risk that warrants careful monitoring. 
Similar  scenarios  could  trigger  the  formation  of  bubbles,  and  equally  unusual  increases  in 
current account deficits and excessive vulnerability of the financial system.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  behavior  of  asset  prices,  although  not  included  in  conventional  indicators  of  inflation, 
also  should  be  an  issue  of  concern  to  the  monetary  authority,  namely  the  central  bank, 
because of its impact on the solvency and stability of the financial system.  
The idea is to steer regulation towards dealing with the systemic risks in the financial sector 
as  a  whole,  as  opposed  to  addressing  isolated  parts.  This  means  supplementing  the 
conventional objective of monetary policy by adding the mandate to anticipate potential asset 
price bubbles. For that reason, regulating the supply of credit is crucial. 
What is needed to do so, apart from interest rates, reserve requirements and capital controls, 
which must continue to be available and applied, when warranted under the circumstances, 
are  other  tools  now  referred  to  as  macro-prudential  regulation.  These  include  minimum 
liquidity and capital requirements for intermediaries; ordinary and counter-cyclical provisions; 
leveraging limits; criteria on risk management and investment portfolio diversification; limits 
on loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios for housing and other consumer durables , as well 
as  limits  to  financing  securities  through  “margin  accounts”;  prevention  of  currency  and 
maturity  mismatches  between  leveraging  by  intermediaries  and  their  loan  portfolios; 
counter-cyclical capital requirements for intermediaries, according to credit performance; and 
separation of commercial banking activity from proprietary trading.  
In short, the task at hand is essentially to prevent excesses caused by financial and credit 
innovations, to offset the formation of asset price bubbles and to prevent them from bursting, 
and, above all, to protect the consumers of financial services. 
Colombia can proudly show off its sold and transparent institutional system in the realm of 
monetary  policy  and  regulation  and  oversight,  which  is  recognized  and  respected  both  at 
home and abroad.  
The severe crisis the country suffered at the end of the 1990s taught us some harsh lessons. 
Fortunately, they were learned well and assimilated by our central bank, which is known for 
its outstanding and proven technical capacity.  
Since  then, coordination  with  the  Finance  Ministry  and  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of 
Financial Institutions in the area of regulation and oversight has been particularly close and 
fruitful.  Nevertheless,  in  my  opinion  and  regardless  of  how  suitable  and  responsible 
management fortunately has been, this last agency should have a degree of independence 
and autonomy similar to what the central bank (Banco de la República) enjoys, with a Board 
of Directors and fixed terms for its members and for the Superintendent. Its public credibility 
would be further strengthened through such reforms, as would its harmony and coherence 
with the Board of Directors of Banco de la República, which is essential.  
James Madison, the foremost architect of the United States constitution and the foundations 
of its public institutions, wrote the following in the fifty-first edition of the Federalist Papers: 
“If  men  were  angels,  no  government  would  be  necessary.  If  angels  were  to 
govern men, neither external nor internal controls would be necessary. In framing 
a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty 
lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in 
the next place oblige it to control itself.” 
Inspired  by  Madison’s  judgment,  in  an  excellent  book  just  published  by  MIT  entitled  The 
Guardians  of  Finance,  the  authors,  who  almost  certainly  are  the  leading  experts  on  these 
topics at present – James Barth, Gerard Caprio and Ross Levine (2012), added: 
“If men had only angelical intentions and the markets were perfect, there would 
be no need for government or financial regulation. But people are not angels, nor 
are the markets perfect.”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
On this particular point, United States Senator Carl Levin, who is quoted in the book, said: 
“The recent financial crisis was not a natural disaster. It was an economic assault 
perpetrated by  men.  People  did  it…and  it  will  happen  again  unless  we  change 
the rules.”  
The moral of these considerations leads us to recognize that history is the master inspiration 
of  economics;  psychology,  the  language  by  which  it  can  be  understood;  and  ethics,  its 
cradle.  
Those who disregard history, like Sisyphus, will never cease to wrongly believe “this time is 
different”.  
Those who ignore psychology will never be able to understand that economic is essentially a 
science of human behavior. Were it not so, then how can one explain the fact that the 2002 
Nobel  Prize  for  Economics  went  to  the  most  celebrated  psychologist  of  our  time,  Daniel 
Kahneman (2011)? 
Finally, let us not forget the first great work written by Adam Smith, the pioneer of modern 
economics, was The Theory of Moral Sentiments, followed by The Wealth of Nations, which 
is  better  known  to  us  for  having  concentrated  on  the  specific  object  of  our  profession  as 
economists.  But  the  order  in  which  these  works  appeared  is  not  coincidental.  Clearly,  the 
former provided the underpinnings for the latter; hence, their contents are bound essentially 
by cause and effect. 
References 
Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., Levine, R. (2012). Guardians of Finance. The MIT Press. 
Goodhart,  Ch.  (2005).Financial  Regulation,  Credit  Risk  and  Financial  Stability.  National 
Institute Economic Review. 
Kahneman,D. (2011). Thinking Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Struss and Giroux.  
Kindleberger, Ch. (2005). Manias, Panics and Crashes. New Jersey: Wiley. 
Krugman, P. (2009a). The Return of Depression on Economics. New York: Norton. 
Krugman, P. (2009b). “How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?” NYT: Sept. 6, 2009. 
Minsky,  H.P.  (1992).”The  Capital  Development  of  the  Economy  and  the  Structure  of 
Financial Institutions.”Working Paper No. 72.The Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard 
College. 
Minsky, H.P. (2008).Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Mc GrawHill. 
Rajan, R.G. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” IMF. 
Rajan, R.G. (2010).Fault Lines. Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart, C.M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2009).This Time is Different. Princeton University Press. 
Roubini, N. and Mihm, S. (2010). Crisis Economics. New York: The Penguin Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
