Mario Draghi: Remarks at the Annual Reception of the Association of 
German Banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Annual 
Reception of the Association of German Banks, Berlin, 26 March 2012. 
 Sehr geehrter Herr Schmitz, 
vielen Dank für Ihre freundliche Einführung und vielen Dank für Ihre Einladung nach Berlin. 
Ich freue mich, heute hier zu sein.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  provide  you  with  my  assessment  of  the  current 
situation  in  the  euro  area  and  shed  light  on  recent  signs  of  improvements  in  the  overall 
outlook.  I  would  particularly  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy 
measures implemented by the Eurosystem, the EU institutions and national authorities. And 
to remind you of the measures that we all must continue to pursue over the coming months 
and years with great diligence in order to continue on this path of stabilisation.  
The current economic situation 
As  this  audience  knows  very  well,  in  November  last  year,  the  prospects  for  the  euro  area 
financial sector were very bleak.  
Banks were experiencing a period of heightened stress. The inter-bank market was closed 
except  to  the  strongest  institutions  in  the  safest  countries,  and  funding  markets  were 
impaired. Unable to raise funds beyond short maturities, many banks were reducing medium-
term lending to the real economy. 
At the same time came the requirement to increase capital ratios to 9%. This increased the 
risks of substantial deleveraging, including the risk of banks cutting back on loans, notably 
those to small and medium-sized enterprises.  
We could see the intensity of the deleveraging pressures in bank lending surveys and other 
data. In the fourth quarter of 2011, there was a significant tightening of credit standards on 
loans to both companies and households. There was no doubt that the euro area was on the 
brink of a major credit crunch, with potentially adverse consequences for the economy and 
employment.  
At that time, many observers had little confidence in the capacity of the euro area to reverse 
the situation.  
Yet today, only four months on, the picture looks different. There are signs of stabilisation in 
both financial markets and overall economic activity – albeit still at low levels.  
Conditions  in  bank  funding  markets  have  improved.  For  example,  euro  area  banks  have 
already issued about 70 billion euro in senior unsecured debt so far this year, which is well 
above the amount they issued in the whole second half of 2011.  
Banks  are  meeting  their  new  capital  requirements.  The  capital  plans  submitted  to  the 
European Banking Authority (EBA) indicate an intention to exceed the benchmarks by more 
than 20%. EBA has also confirmed that there will be no stress test this year. 
Bank  lending  is  also  stabilising.  Banks  are  starting  to  assess  their  financial  situation  more 
positively and in many cases their willingness to make loans is increasing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
How  has  the  picture  changed  so  clearly  in  only  four  months?  There  are  two  parts  to  the 
answer. 
First,  the  doomsday  predictions  were  always  exaggerated.  Not  because  the  situation  last 
November was not very serious. But because the willingness of euro area authorities to take 
the measures necessary to restore stability was greater than many commentators realised.  
Second,  euro  area  authorities  have  proved  their  commitment  to  safeguarding  financial 
stability through a number of important policy measures. The Eurosystem, the EU institutions 
and national authorities have all played a role in constructing a comprehensive and coherent 
response to the economic, financial and fiscal challenges that we face. 
Let me now explain the key elements of this response in more detail. 
The policy response of the Eurosystem  
The primary explanation for the improvement in sentiment over the last few months has been 
the measures taken by the Eurosystem – that is, we at the European Central Bank (ECB) 
and our colleagues at the national central banks of the 17 countries that share the euro.  
As  you  know,  since  December  last  year  the  Eurosystem  has  launched  two  long-term 
refinancing  operations  –  LTROs  –  with  a  maturity  of  three  years.  While  the  total  liquidity 
requested by banks in these operations amounted to around 1 trillion euro, the net liquidity 
injection by the Eurosystem has been around half a trillion euro because the other half has 
been shifted over from other operations.  
Let  me  be  clear  about  why  we  implemented  the  three-year  LTROs.  It  was  not  to  support 
sovereign debt markets. It was also not to bolster bank profits. 
The LTROs were specifically designed to prevent a credit crunch that could compromise the 
maintenance of price stability in the euro area. With funding markets closed, banks needed 
liquidity assurance over the medium term to avoid pre-emptive deleveraging and to continue 
lending. 
To understand why these operations were necessary requires a euro area wide perspective. 
It would be misleading to judge the urgency for action – or the necessary responses – based 
on  the  situation  in  any  one  country  or  groups  of  countries.  The  Eurosystem  acts  in  the 
interests of the euro area as a whole with 330 million citizens. This is the perspective that 
always informs our decisions. 
Some  observers  have  raised  questions  about  these  operations.  The  questions  tend  to  fall 
into three categories and since they touch on fundamental issues, I would like to spend a 
moment responding to them. 
First,  some  wonder  whether  there  is  really  any  transmission  from  the  LTROs  to  the  real 
economy.  The  argument  goes  that  banks  are  simply  taking  cheap  liquidity  and  setting  up 
carry trades or putting the liquidity back into our deposit facility. 
The facts show that this is an incomplete view. Over 800 banks participated in the February 
LTRO,  compared  with  around  500  in  December.  This  number  included  460  banks  from 
Germany, most of them – literally hundreds – being smaller banks.  
I cannot tell you names of the towns and villages in which these banks are located because 
often they are the only bank in town and could be easily identified. But I can tell you this: that 
the money is now closer to small and medium-sized enterprises than it was before.  
We  cannot  say  that  this  money  will  necessarily  go  to  these  smaller  enterprises  but  it  is 
certainly very close to them. We have this in mind because nearly three quarters of corporate 
employment in the euro area is in the small and medium-sized business sector. The banks I 
am  talking  about  are  ones  whose  main  business  is  lending  to  the  Mittelstand  and  thereby 
supporting the real economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  also  not  accurate  to  claim  that  banks  are  returning  the  liquidity  straight  back  to  the 
Eurosystem.  We  know  that  banks  using  the  deposit  facility  are  not  identical  to  those 
borrowing  from  the  Eurosystem.  This  implies  that  even  though  the  bulk  of  the  liquidity  is 
returned eventually, it is being directed within the banking system as intended. 
The  second  category  of  question  involves  concerns  that  some  have  expressed  that  the 
Eurosystem is exposing itself to excessive risks. Critics point in particular to the differentiated 
collateral framework adopted by some national central banks to allow banks to participate in 
the three-year LTROs. 
Let  me  underscore  that  high  haircuts  are  applied  to  the  additional  credit  claims  so  as  to 
ensure  risk  equivalence  between  this  collateral  and  the  regular  framework.  Moreover,  the 
main elements of the risk management framework applied are common: the eligibility criteria 
and  risk  control  measures  were  approved  by  the  Governing  Council,  and  the  Council  will 
monitor the effectiveness of the risk control framework on an ongoing basis. Hence, there is 
only  limited  national  discretion.  I  should  also  emphasise  that  the  Eurosystem  has  a  long 
experience in the acceptance of credit claims in its collateral framework.  
Moreover, the Eurosystem is being very careful to manage any risks that may ensue from 
our  current  operations.  We  employ  a  conservative  risk  management  framework.  On  the 
additional  collateral  presented  so  far,  the  average  haircut  is  53%.  This  means  that  on  a 
nominal  value  of  100  euro  we  provide  47  euro  of  liquidity.  This  shows  you  how  prudently 
such collateral is accepted.  
If over time the market value or quality of the collateral posted were to decline, counterparties 
would have to provide additional collateral or return part of the liquidity. This too serves to 
protect the financial soundness of the Eurosystem as a whole. 
The third kind of question comes from some observers who worry that the liquidity created by 
the LTRO will lead to inflation or asset price distortions.  
Here it is important to distinguish between different concepts of liquidity. We would expect an 
impact on inflation and asset prices only following a sustained and strong increase in money 
and credit – not following an increase in central bank liquidity per se. The tentative signs we 
are seeing of a stabilisation in money and credit growth do not signal increasing inflationary 
pressures over the medium term. 
For example, growth in monetary aggregates remains at low levels, with M3 increasing by 
2.5% in January 2012, well below the average growth rate of M3 in monetary union so far, 
which was 5.9%. The same is true of the counterparts of M3 – loans to the euro area private 
sector increased by only 1.5% in January, compared with an average of 6.8% since the start 
of the euro. 
Market  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  overall  show  no  signs  of  inflation  above  our 
medium-term objective. Investors overall assume a break-even inflation rate in five years of 
around  1.7%.  Looking  further  out  at  the  inflation  expectations  between  five  years  and  ten 
years also shows that, adjusted for the usual risk premia, market expectations of long-term 
inflation are fully consistent with our definition of medium-term price stability.  
Moreover, the Eurosystem has a range of tools at its disposal to absorb excess liquidity if 
that  is  deemed  necessary  in  the  future.  Available  tools  include  increases  in  reserve 
requirements and the conduct of liquidity absorbing operations including not only short-term 
but  also  longer-term  deposits.  Hence,  there  are  tools  and  the  Governing  Council  can  use 
them  as  needed.  Moreover,  our  balance  sheet  has  grown  and  shrunk  in  the  past  without 
creating inflation – for example, this was evident over the course of both 2009 and 2010. 
In  other  words,  we  are  constantly  alert  to  threats  to  medium-term  price  stability.  Euro 
area  citizens  can  be  certain  that  our  objective  is  delivering  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  –  and  that  we  have  all  the  necessary  tools  to  achieve  it.  The  consistent 
strong anchoring of inflation expectations confirms that our commitment is credible.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let me address one final issue, and this concerns the debate in this country about Target2 
balances. It is important that this debate is framed correctly – in particular, by distinguishing 
between symptoms and causes. 
Target2 is a payment system that reflects the flow of funds within the euro area. Imbalances 
within Target2 are a symptom of real and financial imbalances between euro area countries. 
Restoring normality within Target2 requires not that we address the symptom – the payment 
system – but that we address the cause: the underlying imbalances. 
This  is  not  the  task  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  the  task  of  the  national  authorities  and  EU 
institutions that are responsible for fiscal, economic and financial policies. 
Important  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  months  to  strengthen  the  credibility  of  these 
policies – and this has been recognised by financial markets. 
This  is  the  second  explanation  for  the  overall  stabilisation  we  have  witnessed  since 
November – and it is something to which I will now turn briefly. 
Policy responses at the national and EU level 
The  signature  at  the  last  European  Council  of  the  International  Treaty,  including  the  fiscal 
compact, is an important signal of commitment to reducing deficit and debt levels. Enshrining 
balanced  budget  rules  in  national  legislation  creates  a  new  “first  line  of  defence”  against 
fiscal  imbalances.  Like  the  Schuldenbremse  in  this  country,  this  legislation  shifts  the 
onus  for  enforcement  away  from  Brussels  and  onto  national  institutions.  Prevention  is 
better than cure – and that is the spirit of the compact.  
Member States have also taken important steps to strengthen euro area and global firewalls. 
The  entry  into  force  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  has  been  advanced  and  the 
paying-in of capital will be accelerated to reach full lending capacity sooner than originally 
planned.  On  top  of  this,  euro  area  countries  have  committed  to  providing  an  additional 
150 billion euro to the IMF.  
Seen  together,  these  measures  represent  a  coherent  strategy  to  strengthen  euro  area 
economic  governance.  The  focus  is  not,  as  some  commentators  claim,  skewed  towards 
fiscal  consolidation.  Stronger  fiscal  rules  are  one  –  albeit  essential  –  element  in  a  larger 
package that addresses real and financial imbalances and provides a safety net for countries 
in financial difficulties.  
But stronger governance cannot be effective without individual Member States also fulfilling 
their  responsibilities.  Here  too  we  have  witnessed  a  number  of  positive  developments  in 
recent months.  
The  new  governments  in  Spain  and  Italy  have  shown  determination  to  address  their  twin 
challenges  of  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The  government  of  Spain  remains 
committed  to  bringing  its  deficit  below  3%  by  2013  and  taking  the  necessary  measures  to 
ensure a rapid and secure transition to this target from the high deficit in 2011. 
The  latest  review  missions  confirm  that  the  Irish  and  Portuguese  programmes  are  on 
track – with authorities in both countries strongly committed to meeting their targets and with 
a solid track record.  
It is important that observers recognise that these reforms at the national level will take time. 
They are addressing deep-rooted obstacles to competitiveness and growth, and the positive 
effects  may  not  be  visible  immediately.  But  once  realised,  they  will  put  employment  and 
growth on a new and more sustainable track. 
The example of Germany shows the need for patience. The structural reforms passed many 
years  ago  did  not  immediately  feed  through  into  higher  growth  and  employment.  But  now 
they have, and Germany is reaping the benefits and leading the way in Europe. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
With  a  new  governance  framework  in  place  and  strong  commitments  from  national 
governments, there are solid grounds for trusting that reforms will be implemented across the 
euro area as a whole. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The turnaround we have witnessed since November is the result of every 
institution  of  the  euro  area  fulfilling  its  responsibilities.  No  single  institution  can  carry  the 
burden  of  addressing  a  set  of  challenges  that  are  simultaneously  economic,  financial  and 
fiscal. Everyone has played their part. 
But  let  me  emphasise  that  the  current  stabilisation  should  not  make  us  pause  in  our 
responses to these challenges. Indeed, this is a time for continued action.  
The present situation provides a window of opportunity for governments to accelerate efforts 
to consolidate budgets, to boost employment and to enhance competitiveness – and to do so 
with confidence. 
It also creates a benign environment for banks to strengthen their resilience further – including 
by retaining earnings and cutting dividends and bonuses. 
Decisive policy measures brought about the stabilisation since last November. Now, further 
decisive policy measures are required to strengthen fiscal positions and competitiveness. 
These measures will lay the foundations for future sustainable and balanced growth in the 
euro area. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
