Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in Odisha 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
seminar  on  “Role  of  banks  in  Odisha’s  development”,  organized  by  The  Political  and 
Business Daily, Bhubaneswar, 20 August 2012. 
 The assistance of P.K. Nayak, Rekha Misra, Y.K. Gupta, Deepa Raj and S. Suraj in preparation of this paper is 
acknowledged. 
I thank Shri Bijoy Ketan Mishra for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering. I am 
happy  that  The  Political  and  Business  Daily  has  chosen to  highlight the  role  of  banking  in 
Odisha’s development. In the development of the financial sector, banks have a pivotal role. 
Finance leads growth and economic progress follows. As you know, the Reserve Bank has 
been actively engaged in the development of the financial sector. However, we have stepped 
up our efforts in the recent years to enhance the penetration of the formal financial sector 
and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being of our society. 
In my talk today, I propose to briefly outline the economic and financial structure of the State 
as well as highlight various financial inclusion initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank with a 
particular  reference  to  Odisha.  In  conclusion,  I  shall  present  some  thoughts  on  policy 
challenges that lie ahead. 
Odisha  accounting  for  4.7  per  cent  of  the  total  geographical  area  of  the  country  and 
3.5 per cent of the national population has a unique place in the national history and culture. 
Rather than going back on history, I will trace the economic development starting from the 
early  2000s  mainly  because  this  is  a  period  in  which  the  Indian  economy  experienced  a 
quantum  jump  in  growth  rate.  And  obviously,  growth  was  happening  in  various  states 
including Odisha. 
Economic structure 
During  the  5-year  period  2003–08,  All-India  GDP  growth  rate  averaged  8.7  per  cent 
per annum.  In  the  subsequent  4-year  period  2009–12  though  All-India  GDP  growth  rate 
moderated  to  7.6  per  cent  per  annum  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  can  still  be 
considered  high.  It  is  noteworthy  that  coinciding  with  this  high  growth  phase,  the  Odisha 
economy witnessed acceleration in its gross state domestic product (GSDP). In fact, in the 
earlier  period  during  2003–08,  the  average  GSDP  growth  in  Odisha  at  11.6  per  cent 
per annum  far  exceeded  the  national  average.  Subsequently,  growth  has  moderated  in 
Odisha to an annual average rate of 7.6 per cent, in line with the national level (Chart 1).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
In  this  growth  dynamics,  three  important  aspects  stand  out.  First,  in  the  earlier  phase  of 
2003–08 growth was mainly led by industry. Second, in the latter phase of 2009–12 growth 
was driven by the services sector. Third, in both the phases agricultural growth remained low 
and volatile (Chart 2).  
At a more disaggregated level, the growth acceleration during the decade of 2002–12 was 
led  by  registered  manufacturing,  construction,  mining  &  quarrying  and  trade  &  hotels 
(Chart 3).  
 The  varying  growth  trends  are  reflected  in  the  compositional  shift  among  sectors  in  the 
GSDP:  the  share  of  agriculture  declined  steadily;  the  share  of  industry  first  rose  and  then 
moderated  and  the  share  of  services  first  declined  and  then  rose.  In  this  structural 
transformation  of  the  Odisha  economy,  which  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  trend  in  the 
national economy, the rise in the share of industry is noteworthy (Chart 4).  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Significantly, the initial growth spurt in Odisha raised its GSDP share in national GDP from 
2.3  per  cent  in  2002–03  to  2.7  per  cent  in  2008–09.  As  growth  in  GSDP  slowed  and 
converged to the  national  level,  the  share  has since  declined  but remained  steady  around 
2.6 per cent after 2008–09. However, the most discerning impact can be seen in the rise of 
real (at 2004–05 prices) per capita NSDP from ₹13,923 in 2002–03 to ₹25,708 in 2010–11. 
This has helped improve Odisha’s rank in terms of per capita income among the states from 
the  bottom  3rd  position  in  2002–03  to  7th  in  2010–11.  Notwithstanding  this  progress, 
Odisha’s per capital income is still lower than the national average (Chart 5).  
While the  economy  is  transferring  towards  industry  and  services, the  labour force remains 
concentrated in agriculture. As against the national average of around 52 per cent of labour 
share  in  agriculture  &  forestry  in  2010–11,  the  State  has  a  much  higher  labour  share  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 59 per  cent.  Furthermore,  the  share  of  manufacturing  sector  in  the  labour  force  remains 
lower compared to the national average despite the recent pick up in manufacturing activity 
(Table  1).  Moreover,  labour force  participation rate  at  around  50  per  cent  in  2010–11  was 
lower than the labour participation rate of 53 per cent at the national level.  
Table 1 
Share of employment by broad industry group 
(Usual Principal Status) 
(Per cent) 
Source: Labour Bureau, Government of India.  
 Apart from the greater concentration of labour force in agriculture, the demographic structure 
of Odisha with a higher share of working age population is also favourably disposed towards 
growth  (Chart  6).  Hence,  the  major  challenge  for  the  state  is  to  generate  employment  in 
industry and services so that labour force can be released from low productivity agriculture 
activity. This will require improvement in the quality of labour force with higher expenditure in 
education  and  health.  In  this  regard,  the  private  sector  can  play  a  major  role  in 
supplementing the government’s efforts in provision of higher education and health services. 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Social indicators 
Notwithstanding  the  rapid  economic  growth  in  the  recent  years,  Odisha  remains  low  in 
human  development.  With  low  urbanisation,  lower  per  capita  income,  high  incidence  of 
poverty, high infant mortality and  lower life expectancy rate as compared with the national 
average, Odisha was ranked 22 among the 23 states1 in terms of Human Development Index 
2007–08 (Chart 7).  
 Table 2 
Standards of life indicators 
(As percentage of households) 
Source: Census 2011, Government of India. 
                                                 
1  North Eastern States excluding Assam was taken together as one entity and therefore only 23 States were 
compared HDI ranking in the India Human Development Report 2011, Government of India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The share of households having access to basic civic amenities such as safe drinking water 
and  electricity  remains  relatively  low  compared  to  the  national  average,  though  there  has 
been  substantial  gains  in  the  decade  between  2001  and  2011.  Similarly  ownership  of 
household assets such as television, telephone and mechanised personal transport remains 
lower  than  the  national  average.  The  population  of  households  having  banking  facility, 
though improving, still remains lower than the national average (Table 2). 
State finances 
There was substantial improvement in state finances as Odisha achieved the targets set out 
in  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Legislation  (FRL)  well  ahead  of  the  stipulated  time-frame.  The 
revenue account turned surplus in 2005–06 followed by fiscal surplus in 2006–07. Although 
the  fiscal  position  of  Odisha  had  shown  some  deterioration  in  2008–09  reflecting  the 
combined impact of macroeconomic slowdown and sixth pay commission award, it has since 
reverted to the path of consolidation. With revenue surplus and moderate fiscal deficit, the 
need  for  market  borrowings  was  low.  In  fact  since  2006–07  the  State  has  refrained  from 
market borrowings. This has had a favourable impact on state finances as the outstanding 
liability of the State dropped from 33.8 per cent of GSDP in March 2008 to 21.1 per cent in 
March 2012 which is expected to further go down to 19.6 per cent by March 2013. 
The  reduction  in  liabilities  significantly  reduced  the  debt  serving  cost, thus  opening  up  the 
space for higher capital outlays and social expenditure. Given the developmental challenge 
to  enhance  social  and  economic  infrastructure,  it  will  be  desirable for the  State  to  step  up 
mobilisation  of  its  own  tax  revenues  to  scale  up  capital  outlays  without  resorting  to 
borrowings (Table 3).  
Table 3 
Fiscal position of Odisha 
(as a per cent to GSDP) 
Note: Minus (-) sign indicates surplus. 
Source: Budget documents of the State Government. 
 Banking developments 
Let me now turn to development of banking in the State. The formal financial system in India 
is dominated by banks and same is the case with Odisha. The average population per bank 
branch  in  Odisha  declined  from  16,800  in  March  2003  to  13,800  in  March  2011  which  is 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
somewhat comparable to the national average figure of 13,400 (Chart 8). During this period 
the number of branches of commercial bank has increased from 2,240 to 3,234.  
 Apart  from  the  branch  network  and  its  population  coverage,  another  major  indicator  of 
banking development is the credit-deposit (CD) ratio. In the turn of the last decade in 2001, 
the CD ratio of Odisha at 42 per cent was way below the national average of 54 per cent. As 
the  State  experienced  rapid  economic  growth,  the  CD  ratio  not  only  accelerated  but  also 
exceeded the national average and peaked at 79 per cent in 2005–06. Subsequently the CD 
ratio  moderated,  particularly  after  2007–08  when  growth  slowed.  As  at  end-March  2011, 
Odisha’s  CD  ratio  at  56  per  cent  remained  significantly  below  the  national  average  of 
76 per cent (Chart 9). 
Another indicator of credit penetration is credit to GSDP ratio. This ratio for Odisha was also 
relatively  low  highlighting  the  scope  for  further  development  of  Banking  in  the  State 
(Chart 10). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Not only that the C-D ratio has declined, the inter-regional inequality among districts in credit 
deployment has also increased in recent years underscoring the need for focused attention 
to deployment of comparatively less developed districts (Chart 11).  
 Chattopadhyay (2011) calculated a composite index of financial inclusion which showed that 
against the national average of 0.33 in 2009–10, Odisha had a lower ratio of 0.20 and had a 
rank of 16 among 23 states2. The sectoral analysis reveals that though the rural population of 
Odisha is about 83 per cent of the total population, the credit flow to the agriculture remained 
low compared to other sectors. 
                                                 
2  Chattopadhyay,  Sadhan  Kumar  (2011),  Financial  Inclusion  in  India:  A  case-study  of  West  Bengal,  RBI 
Working Paper No. 8/2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial inclusion 
Against this background, let me now turn to the financial inclusion strategy of the Reserve 
Bank and what are the specific steps taken for Odisha? It is important to bring the poor and 
under-privileged  sections  of  the  society  within  the  banking fold for  inclusive  growth.  In this 
context, our recent financial inclusion drive has four key elements. 
First,  provision  of  a  set  of  basic  financial  products  and  services  for  the  vulnerable  and 
financially excluded sections. This includes a savings cum overdraft product in the form of 
no-frills account, and entrepreneurial credit in the form of Kisan Credit Card (KCC)/General 
Credit Card (GCC). 
Second, spread of financial literacy across all sections of the society by creating awareness 
about financial products and services among the population.  
Third,  greater  regulatory  incentives  through  liberalisation  of  interest  rates  and  branch 
licensing. Banks have been given complete freedom to price their advances so that lending 
in the rural areas could be a commercial proposition. Given the lower penetration of formal 
credit and recourse to money lenders what matters is the availability of credit rather than the 
cost. Banks have also been given the freedom to open branches in centres with population of 
less than 1,00,000. 
Fourth, use of technology and innovative delivery models so that the cost for providing large 
quantum of small-ticket transactions could be brought down. This initiative included putting in 
place  a  system  of  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  Model  to  provide  door-step  delivery  of 
financial  products  and  services  by  authorized  agents  of  banks;  and  Electronic  Benefit 
Transfer (EBT) for routing of payments of the central and state government welfare schemes 
like  social  security  pensions,  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee 
Scheme  (MNREGS),  National  Old  Age  Pension  Scheme  (NOAPS)  directly  to  the  bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries.  
Table 4 
Progress made under financial inclusion plans 
Source: Reserve Bank of India 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
In  this  direction,  the  effort  so  far  has  been  to  make  basic  banking  facility  available  to  all 
villages  with  a  population  of  over  2,000  by  end-March  2012.  The  progress  in  banking 
coverage over the last two years has indeed been substantial (Table 4). The next step is to 
provide  banking  facilities  with  population  below  2000.  State  Level  Bankers  Committees 
(SLBCs)  are  preparing  roadmaps  for  banking  facilities  in  these  villages  in  a  time  bound 
manner. For meaningful financial inclusion, it is envisaged that banks would set up brick and 
mortar branches in a cluster of 8–10 BC units in a reasonable distance of 3–4 kilometers.  
Financial inclusion in Odisha 
Let me now highlight the progress in the Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) for Odisha. 
First,  the  banks  in  Odisha  have  made  provision  for  banking  facilities  in  1,877  unbanked 
villages  having  population  of  more  than  2000  by  March  2012.  Of  these,  54  villages  are 
covered through bricks and mortar branches, 7 villages through ultra small branches (USB), 
1,740  villages  through  appointment  of  BCs  and  83  through  mobile  vans.  The  banks  have 
proposed  to  open  additional  200  brick  and  mortar  branches  by  March  2013.  In  addition 
1,502 villages  with  population  between  1,600  and  2,000  have  been  identified  for  banking 
facilities by March 2013. 
Second, by March 2012, over 6 lakh no-frill accounts were opened and 24 Financial Literacy 
Counselling Centres (FLCCs) were established. Third, during 2011–12, over 10 lakh Kissan 
Credit  Cards  (KCCs)  were  issued.  Moreover,  over  8,000  Swarozgar  Credit  Cards  (SCCs) 
and  over  1,000  Artisan  Credit  Cards  (ACCs)  were  issued.  Fourth,  during  2011–12  over 
58,000 self-help groups (SHGs) were credit-linked. 
Policy challenges 
Let me now turn to broader macroeconomic policy challenges. 
First,  though  perceptible  structural  change  in  Odisha’s  economy  is  visible,  the  growth  has 
slackened in the recent years. The Odisha economy needs to regain the growth momentum 
so that its per capita income not only converges but also exceeds the national average. 
Second,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  population  is  dependent  on  agriculture  for 
livelihood.  Yet  agricultural  production  has  stagnated.  Moreover,  the  agrarian  economy 
remains  vulnerable  to  frequent  natural  calamities.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  make 
consorted  effort  to  raise  productivity  in  agriculture  which  is  currently  low  by  national 
standards  by  stepping  up  public  investment  in  agriculture  and  encouraging  better  water-
management practices. 
Third,  over  the  medium-term,  there  is  a  need  to  raise  the  skill  levels  of  rural  population 
through greater public investment in health and education so that they may find remunerative 
employment and livelihood opportunities outside the agricultural sector. This will encourage 
greater mechanisation and modern farming practices and thus boost agricultural productivity 
and production. 
Fourth,  managing  the  movement  of  labour  force  from  agricultural  sector  to  industry  and 
services  is  no  less  challenging.  Given  the  endowment  of  mineral  reserves,  the  natural 
tendency will be for extractive industry to develop. However, exploitation of natural resources 
should be conducted in a transparent and environmentally sustainable manner with greater 
emphasis on value addition. 
Fifth,  the  rich  heritage  and  strategic  location  of  the  State  provides  ample  opportunities  for 
developing both domestic and international tourism. In this regard, upgrading Bhubaneswar 
airport  into  an  international  airport  and  developing  the  hospitality  sector  with  the  active 
participation  of the  private  sector  could  boost the  services  sector. The connectivity  can  be 
further improved by developing a few more airports in the state. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Sixth, a few urban centres like Bhubaneswar could be developed into knowledge hubs which 
will  not  only  cater  to  the  skill  requirement  of  the  growing  state  economy  but  also  will 
contribute  to  the  national  technical  manpower  pool.  This  will  also  promote  growth  of  skill 
intensive industries like information technology and biotechnology. 
Seventh,  the  financial  sector  in  the  State  is  dominated  by  commercial  banks.  Hence,  the 
spread  of  banking  services  is  important  for  greater  economic  activity.  In  this  context,  the 
quantitative achievement of banking coverage reflected in increase in no-frills accounts need 
to be converted into meaningful financial inclusion by active loan and deposit transactions in 
these  accounts.  Given  the  preponderance  of  agriculture  and  allied  activities  and  high 
frequency of natural calamities, group lending should be encouraged. In this process, all the 
stake-holders – banks, the State Government and the Reserve Bank – need to work in close 
co-ordination:  banks  by  ensuring  that  the  BCs  are  active  and  by  gradually  increasing  the 
number of brick and mortar branches; the State Government by ensuring that social benefit 
transfers progressively take place through bank accounts; and the Reserve Bank by effective 
monitoring and active co-ordination of the financial inclusion action plan in the State.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Over the last decade Odisha has made rapid economic progress starting 
from a low base. In this process, while many of the socio-economic indicators have improved 
they  still  lag  behind  the  national  average.  Given  the  resource  endowment  and  strategic 
location of the State, there is continuing scope for stepping up the economic activity which 
has  slackened  in  the  recent  years.  This  will  require  reorientation  of  public  expenditure 
towards  strengthening  social  and  economic  infrastructure  and  active  encouragement  of 
private investment in industry and services. In this process, banks can play a major role by 
effectively meeting the credit need of the economy and being more inclusive.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
