Yaseen Anwar: Main challenges for the State Bank of Pakistan 
Address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  on  the 
65th Independence Day, Karachi, 14 August 2012. 
 Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalam-o-Alakum! 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  celebrate  the  65th  Independence  Day  of  our 
beloved country. 
Today reminds us of our great leaders and forefathers who fought for independence of our 
nation with a vision to form a country for the welfare of its people. Allow me to quote from 
Quaid-e-Azam  Muhammad  Ali  Jinnah’s  famous  address  at  the  inauguration  of  Pakistan 
Constituent Assembly on 14th August 1947 at Karachi; 
“It will be our constant endeavor to work for the welfare and wellbeing of all the 
communities in Pakistan, and I hope that everyone would be inspired by the idea 
of public service, and they will be imbued with the spirit of co-operation and will 
excel in their political and civic virtues which go to make a great nation and help to 
advance its greatness.” 
These words reflect the statesmanship, wisdom and vision of our great Quaid, under whose 
inspiring leadership, the first ideological state of the world came into being. The leaders and 
workers of the Pakistan Movement also deserve our rich tributes. 
It is now our duty to transform this country into a truly developed state, as envisioned by our 
Quaid.  I  am  sure  that  by  following  the  guidance  of  our  founding  fathers,  we  can  easily 
overcome our main challenges. 
The  Quaid,  while  inaugurating  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  on  1st  July  1948,  from  this  very 
podium, said in his address that “State Bank of Pakistan symbolises the sovereignty of our 
State in the financial sphere” and had set some high goals for our institution and I quote; 
“I need hardly dilate on the important role that the State Bank will have to play in 
regulating the economic life of our country. The monetary policy of the bank will 
have a direct bearing on our trade and commerce, both inside Pakistan as well as 
with  the  outside  world  and  it  is  only  to  be  desired  that  your  policy  should 
encourage maximum production and a free flow of trade.” 
Today, the State Bank has been striving to fulfill the twin objectives of monetary policy i.e., 
maximizing  production/employment  while  ensuring  price  stability.  Pakistan  has  a  well 
developed  banking  sector  and  financial  infrastructure  which  helps  in  meeting  the  credit 
demand of our productive sectors and transmitting the monetary policy. The banking system 
is  largely  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  growing  economy.  In  addition,  our  banks  are 
considered  safe,  relative  to  some  of  the  advanced  nations,  where  confidence  in  financial 
institutions  has  dwindled  as  a  result  of  the  recent  financial  crises.  People  still  feel  safe  to 
keep their hard earned savings in banks here. Likewise, banks have been performing well in 
attracting new equity with their high ROE which is unmatched in the region. 
State Bank has also been working to increase the welfare of all communities in line with the 
Quaid’s vision for Pakistan. Financial inclusion is a core component of SBP’s financial sector 
development  strategy.  It  envisages  transforming  the  financial  market  into  an  equitable 
system  with  efficient  market  based  financial  services  to  the  otherwise  excluded  poor  and 
marginalized  population  including  women  and  young  people.  In  addition,  inclusive  finance 
recognizes  that  a  continuum  of  financial  services  providers  work  within  their  comparative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
the  market  –  new  players, 
advantages  to  serve  the  poor  and  low-income  people,  as  well  as  micro  and  small 
enterprises. 
Therefore, in order to further build the linkages of the banking sector to promote access to 
finance for the poor and marginalized segments of the population, the State Bank has been 
promoting  financial  inclusion  through  innovative  approaches.  SBP  has  been  actively 
supporting microfinance in Pakistan to make major breakthroughs in reaching out to millions 
of underserved people who require a wide variety of financial services. Presently, nine MFBs 
are operating in Pakistan. The success of microfinance in Pakistan is widely acknowledged 
by  the  international  community.  Our  microfinance  regulatory  framework  has  been  ranked 
globally at the top in 2010 and 2011 by the independent “the Economic Intelligence Unit” of 
UK’s “The Economist” Magazine. 
Moreover,  a  unique  opportunity  for  the  financial  sector  in  Pakistan  are  the  branchless 
banking regulations that have catalyzed a number of branchless banking deployments with 
dual  advantages:  First,  there  is  enormous  scope  for  expanding  outreach,  especially  to 
hard-to-reach  rural  areas.  Second,  alternative  delivery  channels  promise  significant  cost 
reduction  to  institutions.  Due  to  these  benefits,  the  expansion  in  the  retail  network  of 
microfinance has arisen overwhelmingly from agents and mobile phone channels. 
In  a  little  over  2  years,  the  branchless  banking  deployments  with  26,954  active  agents 
offering low-cost services all over the country, including in the hitherto neglected areas, have 
surpassed  the  10,000+  branch  network  of  banks.  As  a  result  of  these  low-cost,  efficient 
financial services being offered at convenient locations the quarterly volume of transactions 
has reached to 28 million totaling Rs.115 billion. The average size of these transactions is 
Rs.4,000  which  shows  that  technology  is  reaching  out  to  the  previously  unbanked, 
marginalized  segments  of  the  society.  The  years  ahead  are  expected  to  see  continued 
expansion 
innovative  distribution  channels,  market 
segmentation,  price  reductions  etc.  Moreover,  a  number  of  initiatives  have  been  taken  to 
promote access to finance in the SMEs, agriculture, and housing sectors that largely focus 
on creating an enabling environment by addressing regulatory barriers, market failures and 
industry bottlenecks, as well as to ensuring consumer protection. 
Despite having in place  internationally acclaimed regulations, innovative  delivery channels, 
industry-wide market development initiatives, the growth in financial access leaves much to 
be  desired.  This  partly  explains  why  Pakistan  has  one  of  the  lowest  financial  penetration 
levels  in  the  world  with  56%  of  the  adult  population  totally  excluded,  and  another 
32% informally served. 
Here, I would like to recognize that part of the challenge may be lying on the demand side of 
the equation. Therefore, initiatives such as the National Financial Literacy Program (NFLP) 
have  been  rolled  out  by  the  State  Bank  along  with  stakeholders  to  address  the  lack  of 
financial literacy. The program focuses on different themes such as savings, budgeting, debt 
management, investment, consumer protection and branchless banking to impart awareness 
and understanding of basic financial concepts to the low-income and unbanked population. 
In conclusion, it’s true that our economy is going through testing times; but let me just assure 
you that Pakistan holds enormous potential for economic growth. The State Bank will keep 
on working with all stakeholders to ensure that the financial system is well positioned to meet 
the growing needs of the economy and for achieving our shared goals of economic growth 
and prosperity. 
This  momentous  occasion  compels  me  to  urge  upon  all  employees  of  the  State  Bank  to 
continue to stride for transforming this prestigious institution into the best central bank of the 
region. 
Let  me  conclude  with  these  words  of  our  Quaid,  and  I  quote  “Let  us  on  this  day,  humbly 
thank God for his bounty and pray that we might be able to prove that we are worthy of it.” 
Happy Independence Day! Thank you 
Pakistan Paindabad 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
