José Manuel González-Páramo: Completing the euro project – the day 
after tomorrow 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF) 
Golden Series on World Money, London, 18 May 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  speak  today  to  the  distinguished  audience  at 
OMFIF’s  headquarters  in  London.  Few  other  places  in  the  world  concentrate  comparable 
expertise in finance and similar experience with financial crisis. 
I  would  like  to  reflect  today  on  the  current  challenges  in  the  euro  area  and,  in  particular, 
those relating to the institutional set up of the euro. 
To be meaningful, any reflection on the future of the euro should start with a reference to the 
past. In the early months of 2009, Europe’s economy was already in crisis. While we were 
passing  through  a  recession,  coupled  with  the  aftershocks  from  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  the  situation  was  qualitatively  very  different  from  today.  In  2009  the  credit  risk 
perception of financial institutions and the confidence of investors and consumers had clearly 
deteriorated.  To  address  this  situation,  the  European  Union  (EU)  deployed  three  lines  of 
defence:  an  aggressive  easing  of  monetary  conditions,  strongly  expansionary  coordinated 
fiscal  policies  and  also  coordinated  measures  to  support  the  financial  system.  The  role  of 
sovereign credit was not in question, nor the role of the euro. No one spoke of a “sovereign 
debt crisis”, much less of a “euro crisis”. 
Today things are different. Since the beginning of the Greek crisis and the debate on private 
sector involvement in the debt restructuring, the perception of sovereign credit risk in Europe 
has grown to an unforeseen extent. The lines of defence of fiscal policy and financial system 
support  have  been  overwhelmed  by  the  markets  in  many  cases.  And  the  tensions  in  the 
markets  have  been  contained  in  the  first  instance  by  unconventional  monetary  policy 
measures, whose aim has been to restore the transmission channels and strengthen credit 
support.  The  room  for  manoeuvre  of  conventional  economic  policies  has  diminished 
significantly. That’s the bad news. And the good? There are several important pieces of good 
news. First, the economic and political fundamentals of the euro do not allow us to conclude 
that  our  single  currency  is  in  crisis.  Second,  the  origin  of  the  institutional  weakness  of  the 
euro  has  been  clearly  identified.  And  third,  since  2009,  and  particularly  since  last  autumn, 
European governments have acted individually and collectively to establish or strengthen the 
pillars of a stable and durable euro. Today, as has so often been the case for more than half 
a century, we see that Europe’s problems have only one solution: more Europe. 
A crisis of the euro? 
2. 
The issue of the so-called euro crisis is one of the most controversial, and at the same time 
sterile, to occupy economists, politicians and citizens in the last two years. “The euro will not 
work”, some press and intelligentsia told us in the early 1990s. “We already warned you: the 
euro  is  in  crisis”,  they  now  tell  us,  not  without  some  Schadenfreude.  So  much  so  that 
prominent eurosceptics race to set up prizes to be awarded to the best proposals responding 
to questions of the type: How can countries ensure their future prosperity once they decide to 
leave  the  euro?  The  underlying  assumptions  are  obviously,  that  abandoning  the  euro  is 
something natural and preferable to staying in the bloc, and that there is a better alternative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to keeping the euro. As so often happens, ideologically loaded arguments have actually had 
the opposite effect to that intended. So we see now the emergence of a common ground, 
acceptable to media that was never particularly warm to the euro. As the WSJ puts it: “The 
euro’s  problems  are  undeniable.  But  trying  to  remedy  them  seems  preferable  to  risking 
chaos in the world’s second largest economy (...). The best interests of the euro area lie (...) 
in greater economic and political integration”. I would subscribe to this assertion. 
On a more substantive note, a project which has yielded good economic results and which 
maintains the political support that brought it to life cannot be in an existential crisis. Let’s 
take a quick look at the numbers. Since 1999, average inflation has been close to 2% in the 
entire euro area. This has been, and remains, the ECB’s commitment to its mandate. The 
ECB  has  also  made  a  major  contribution  to  financial  stability  and,  in  this  way,  to  creating 
trust, especially during the crisis. Today few would argue that without the measures taken by 
the  ECB  during  these  five  years,  we  would  be  talking  about  a  1930s-style  economic 
depression. 
So much for monetary stability, but what can be said about growth, employment and other 
real variables? The conclusions to be drawn are straightforward, but perhaps surprising for 
eurosceptics.  From  1999  until  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  the  euro  area  created  15  million 
jobs, twice the figure in the US, and cut its unemployment level by two points, to 7.6%. Per 
capita income increased almost 14% in just one decade, and productivity by 7%. Our savings 
rate  is  consistently  more  than  double  that  of  the  US  or  Britain,  our  contribution  to  global 
imbalances nil, with our external accounts being almost in balance, and our public finances, 
despite the difficulties, show a deficit standing at around 4% of GDP in 2011, less than half 
that of the US. 
Not surprisingly, seven out of ten residents of the euro area with an opinion, according to the 
latest Eurobarometer, think that the euro has been a good thing. And the euro is also viewed 
worldwide  as  the  most  successful  symbol  of  Europe’s  integration,  which  started  half  a 
century ago. 
So, we do not have to resort to Mark Twain to conclude that the rumours about the death of 
the  euro  may  be  somewhat  exaggerated.  However,  it  is  undeniable,  and  this  is  the  great 
paradox,  that  Europe  now  finds  itself  in  the  focus  of  global  financial  stress  due  to  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  But  this  is  not  a  euro  crisis.  It  cannot  be  when  the  reaction  of 
governments to the crisis has been to consistently renew their commitment to integration. It 
is a crisis of market confidence in the willingness and ability of some countries to comply with 
the demands of the euro – and a crisis of the design of the institutional foundations of the 
single currency. Let me briefly explain the reasons for this institutional fragility. 
The institutional weakness of the euro 
3. 
From its very conception, like all the big steps in the history of European integration, the euro 
has been an ambitious and unique project. It combined a centralised monetary policy with 
decentralised but coordinated economic policies. Paraphrasing Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, 
we decided to give ourselves a currency that doesn’t belong to any single nation-state. The 
advent  of  the  euro  was  only  an  episode  –  surely  the  most  significant  in  history  –  of  the 
construction of a post-Westphalian order of shared sovereignties. 
One of the key lessons that we have learned from the crisis is that the design of the euro was 
incomplete.  Indeed,  the  euro  area  lacks  certain  institutional  elements  which  we  associate 
with federations and which act as shock-absorbers, countering the negative effects of shocks 
and  imbalances.  The  logical  corollary  is  that  we  need  to  compensate  for  these  “missing 
institutions” by establishing a much stronger financial and economic union. 
One area in which the absence of stabilising institutions has been keenly felt is that of current 
account  imbalances  within  the  euro  area.  These  imbalances  existed  before  the  crisis  for 
many years, although many said they were irrelevant in a monetary union. But now it is clear 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that current account imbalances, although not one of the essential causes of the crisis, are 
not benign and are an indicator of vulnerability that can be transmitted to the euro area as a 
whole. 
On the financial side of the current account the persistent imbalances between the member 
countries of the euro area indicate that some public sectors or private sectors, or both, are 
living beyond their means year after year. And if, as has been the case in some countries, 
these  imbalances  are  also  linked  to  a  strong  build-up  of  foreign  liabilities  by  a  domestic 
banking system that has taken excessive risk positions, we find ourselves in a situation in 
which  twin  crises  can  develop  –  a  crisis  affecting  both  the  sovereign  and  the  banks,  with 
negative feedback loops between them – as we have recently witnessed. Because, in effect, 
private  debts  can  be  rapidly  converted  into  public  liabilities  as  soon  as  governments  are 
forced to recapitalise banks or guarantee their funding, which can in turn lead to a sovereign 
debt  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  high  public  debt  levels  can  impinge  upon  the  health  of  the 
domestic banking sectors, given the exposure of euro area banks to paper issued by their 
governments and the link that the markets may make between the cost of funding banks and 
the cost of funding their respective sovereign. 
In  principle,  these  vicious  circles  involving  both  banks  and  governments  can  be  better 
mitigated in a framework of federal political institutions. For example, if a particular state of 
the US were to experience a significant build-up of private debt that would threaten their local 
banks, the responsibility for its recapitalisation and deposit insurance would be borne by the 
federal  government,  through  institutions  like  the  Treasury  Department  and  the  Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation.  This  means  that  a  US  state  cannot  get  into  financial 
difficulties because of a mismatch between the size of its banking sector and the size of its 
local economy, while in the euro area this can occur. The absence of these kind of federal 
institutions in Europe is a source of vulnerability. 
In  the  real  component  of  the  current  account,  persistent  trade  imbalances  within  the  euro 
area  also  reflect  sustained  losses  of  competitiveness  in  the  deficit  countries.  The  problem 
can be temporarily masked in a context in which economic growth is driven by strong credit 
and consumption dynamics, as was the case in some Member States before 2008. But when 
financial  flows  that  feed  this  process  suddenly  stop  and  are  reversed,  i.e.  when  foreign 
lenders  are  no  longer  willing  to  fund  an  additional  build-up  of  foreign  debt,  cumulative 
competitiveness losses come to the fore. And this can lead to particular regions of the euro 
area suffering from extended periods of low growth and high unemployment. 
And again, these negative effects could be eased by the stabilising institutions of a political 
federation.  Federations  tend  to  have  a  certain  cultural  and  linguistic  homogeneity  which 
facilitate labour mobility, offering an adjustment channel. At the same time, federations have 
a  relatively  large  common  budget  which  offers  a  natural  shock-absorbing  capacity,  since 
programmes  like  unemployment  insurance,  social  security  contributions  as  well  as  taxes 
redistribute income between the richest or most stable regions and those most affected by 
economic disruptions. 
The institutional architecture of a durable and stable euro 
4. 
None  of  this  was  unknown  before  the  decision  to  create  the  euro.  However,  the  founding 
fathers believed that the commitment of governments to maintain sound public finances and 
to  complement 
in  combination  with 
market-discipline could make up for the absence of federal institutions in the financial and 
budgetary spheres. Based on these elements and on a common monetary policy aimed at 
price  stability,  the  euro  should  provide  its  members  with  non-inflationary  growth  and  high 
employment. And indeed, things seem to have developed along these lines during the first 
decade of the new currency. 
internal  market  with  structural 
reforms 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
internalise 
insufficient.  Some  governments  did  not 
The  current  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  clearly  showing  us  that,  even  though  the  monetary 
component of the euro, which falls under the responsibility of the ECB and the Eurosystem, 
has worked better than those legacy currencies of the euro which were considered to be the 
most solid, the adaptation of fiscal policies and structural reforms to the new demands of the 
single  currency  has  been 
the 
requirements of the euro when designing their economic policy, and acted as if the loss of 
competitiveness and the fiscal vulnerabilities could still be wiped away through the traditional 
resort  to  inflation  and  devaluation.  But  inflation  and  devaluation  are  the  vessels  that  we 
consciously decided to burn upon the creation of the euro. 
And neither has the framework for coordinating fiscal policies worked well, not to mention the 
complete lack of coordination of macroeconomic policies, influencing competitiveness. The 
Greek crisis and its contagion to other vulnerable countries have been the irrefutable proof: 
no matter how small the country, its competitiveness problems and imbalances can have a 
systemic impact. In this context, the absence of federal-type shock absorbers has resulted in 
a  loss  of  market  confidence  in  sovereign  paper  as  a  risk-free  asset,  and  even  in  the 
fungibility  of  bank  money,  which  has  experienced  episodes  of  flight  to  banking  systems 
located in countries perceived to be stable. Gross political mistakes, such as the “Deauville 
doctrine”  on  private  sector  involvement  in  debt  restructuring  or  the  public  debate  about  a 
country  possibly  abandoning  the  euro,  have  worsened  the  situation.  All  too  frequently,  the 
common monetary policy has been left to play its role in resounding solitude. 
It  is  clear  today  that  the  road  we  must  travel  to  support  the  stability  and  to  reaffirm  the 
irreversibility  of  the  euro  cannot  get  round  building  the  institutions  of  a  political  federation 
overnight. The euro area needs to follow a different path to ensure a stable functioning of 
monetary union to compensate for the absence of these institutions, without excluding the 
possibility  that  the  process  of  European  integration  may  also  lead  to  federalisation  in  the 
medium to long term. This approach to the completion of the euro project should focus on 
four  key  pillars  of  stability:  economic  governance,  crisis  management,  financial  regulation 
and supervision, and monetary policy. 
Economic governance 
4.1 
The first pillar should be to fundamentally strengthen governance procedures to prevent and 
avoid the emergence of imbalances. With fewer institutions capable of providing stability and 
mitigating crises when they arise, we must be more effective in preventing the emergence of 
serious imbalances. This process has led us to strengthen fiscal policy rules and to create 
mechanisms for monitoring and correcting macroeconomic imbalances and competitiveness 
(“six pack” legislation, the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance and “the fiscal 
compact”.) 
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  and  the  new  “fiscal 
compact”  are  specifically  designed  to  detect  and  correct  the  fiscal  imbalances  at  an  early 
stage. One key aspect of the reform of the Pact has been the strengthening of its “preventive 
arm”. For example, sanctions will now be possible not only in cases of non-compliance with 
the 3% limit, but also deviations relating to the medium-term budgetary targets, disciplinary 
procedures will follow reverse qualified majority rule, and the debt criterion will play a more 
active role. The “fiscal compact” strengthens this focus on prevention through a new “first line 
of defence”: the introduction of balanced budget rules in the constitutions of member states. 
These  rules  have  the  merit  of  shifting  to  the  national  level  the  main  responsibility  for 
compliance, rather than calling it to account in Brussels. In fact, if the rule is applied strictly, 
the  “fiscal  compact”  will  correct  imbalances  before  the  European  Union  procedures  even 
need to be activated. 
Another  lesson  from  the  experience  of  the  last  decade  is  that  the  soundness  of  public 
finances  is  not  the  only  relevant  factor  to  be  monitored.  Macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
competitiveness losses may also lead to severe disturbances with systemic consequences. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The new “macroeconomic imbalances procedure” (MIP) allows early monitoring of variables 
such  as  competitiveness  trends,  private  credit  flows,  house  prices,  the  real  effective 
exchange rate or unit labour costs. If the procedure identifies the existence of imbalances, a 
system of alerts, recommendations and, if necessary, penalties can be triggered. Under the 
MIP,  which  is  designed  in  parallel  and  complements  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the 
“exuberance” of credit and the cumulative losses of competitiveness that we observed during 
the first decade of the euro would have flashed “red lights” much earlier. This procedure has 
been criticised by some as being asymmetric in relation to the so-called “super-competitive 
countries”.  Admittedly,  the  vulnerabilities  created  by  excessively  large  current  account 
deficits are greater than those associated with surpluses, and therefore require more urgent 
remedies.  Nonetheless,  structural  factors  underlying  high  and  sustained  current  account 
surpluses are also partly addressed in the procedure, although not to the same extent as in 
the case of the countries in deficit. For example, parallel to the MIP, the Commission intends 
to  conduct  further  analyses  on  the  determinants  and  possible  implications  for  economic 
policy arising from the existence of high and sustained current account surpluses including in 
this  examination  commercial  and  financial  links  between  surplus  countries  and  deficit 
countries. The Commission should also examine alternative ways to rebalance the current 
account  imbalances,  in  particular  within  the  euro  area,  also  taking  into  account  the  global 
context.  In  this  regard,  we  must  remember  that  a  recurrent  theme  in  the  response  to  the 
crisis has been the renewed emphasis on structural reforms, and this is reflected in the Euro 
Plus  Pact  and  Europe  2020  Strategy,  which  apply  to  all  participating  countries,  including 
those in which an excessive level of domestic savings derives from structural rigidities. 
Since 2011 the strengthening of the coordination of fiscal and macroeconomic policies relies 
also on the so-called European Semester, a procedure under which the Union will discuss 
the  guidelines  and  reform  priorities  during  the  first  half  of  the  year,  so  that  the  debate  in 
national parliaments and the elaboration of national stability or convergence programmes for 
each country can rely on these orientations. 
for 
tax 
liabilities 
taxpayers 
in  other  countries,  European  Union 
Management and resolution of crises 
4.2 
Despite all this progress, which undoubtedly represents a qualitative leap in the governance 
of the euro, it would be naive to believe that crises will be relegated to history only because 
we will always manage to avert them at an early stage. The second pillar on which a more 
stable monetary union should be based, in the absence of conventional federal institutions, is 
the strengthening of the crisis management and resolution mechanisms. Having witnessed 
how  imbalances  in  a  euro  area  country,  no  matter  how  small,  can  become  systemic  and 
create 
institutions, 
governments  and  national  parliaments  are  now  playing  a  much  more  prominent  role  in 
demanding and monitoring economic reforms. 
This change is visible in the much more active role of the heads of state or government of the 
euro area countries – now institutionalised in the so-called “euro summits”. It is also evident 
in the more intense scrutiny to which national parliaments subject the economic policies of 
other Member States. For example, before approving assistance programmes, a number of 
national parliaments now require compliance reports prepared by the European Union and 
the  International  Monetary  Fund,  and  an  analysis  of  debt  sustainability.  This  new  role  for 
national  parliaments  serves  to  highlight  the  recent  remark  by  Herman  Van  Rompuy  that 
national parliaments are increasingly European institutions. 
Until May 2010, the euro area lacked a financial stabilisation mechanism. At that point in time 
governments  decided  to  close  this  institutional  gap  by  creating  the  European  Financial 
Stability Fund (EFSF). This temporary fund can provide, under strict conditionality and based 
on guarantees by Member States, loans to countries in distress, and it can intervene in the 
primary and secondary debt markets, offer programmes on a precautionary basis and fund 
bank recapitalisation through loans to governments. From July 2012 the European Stability 
Mechanism  (ESM)  will  start  operations;  this  is  a  permanent  instrument  with  capital  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
€700 billion. In March this year the Eurogroup agreed that as from July both funds will coexist 
for about a year, with a joint lending capacity of €700 billion. In mid-2013 the ESM will be the 
main instrument for financing new programmes. These funds may be supplemented by those 
contributed by the International Monetary Fund, to which euro area countries have pledged 
an  additional  €150  billion.  These  funds  form  part  of  the  over  $430  billion  in  additional 
resources that countries committed to the IMF at the April 2012 G20 meetings.  
The Commission is also gaining a much more prominent role in crisis management through 
the  new  “two  pack”  legislation  which  is  set  to  be  approved  this  summer.  The  current 
proposals  would  allow  the  Commission  to  place  a  Member  State  under  “enhanced 
surveillance”  when  it  is  experiencing  financial  difficulties  or  is  simply  threatened  by  them, 
whether  financial  assistance  has  been  requested  or  not.  This  new  situation  would  entail 
implicit stress tests for the banking system via the European Banking Authority (EBA), close 
monitoring  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  regular  missions  by  the  Commission,  in 
cooperation with the ECB. Likewise, the Commission is empowered to reject and return to 
government budgetary drafts that do not fulfil the Stability and Growth Pact before they have 
been adopted by the national authorities. 
From  the  description  of  these  two  pillars  –  prevention  and  correction  of  imbalances,  and 
crisis management – it must be concluded that the euro area is responding to the crisis by 
creating a much more consistent model of economic governance. In many of its facets, this 
sui generis response is different from the standard template of political federations, in some 
cases going further in terms of the powers exercised at the “central level”. For example, the 
“two-pack”  legislation  gives  the  Commission  the  power  to  demand  reforms  that  the 
US federal  government  could  not  impose  upon  a  US  state.  For  instance,  the  US  federal 
government could not fine a state if, say, its tax code was regarded as favouring a housing 
bubble in the state. This possibility of sanctions is not ruled out under the MIP. 
Financial regulation and supervision 
4.3 
The  new  governance  model  still  needs  further  refinement,  particularly  in  the  financial 
dimension. No economic and monetary union can function properly without a large degree of 
“financial  union”.  This  should  be  the  third  pillar  of  the  euro  that  is  coming.  During  the  first 
years  of  the  single  currency,  financial  integration  made  impressive  progress  in  some 
markets, such as the bond markets, stock markets and money markets, but advanced very 
modestly  in  other  areas,  particularly  in  the  case  of  the  banking  system.  In  retrospect,  this 
may seem surprising, since four-fifths of private sector financing comes from the banks. The 
diversity  of  supervisory  regulations  and  practices  have  made  regulatory  arbitrage  possible 
and,  in  some  cases,  it  has  even  led  to  the  emergence  of  protectionist  barriers  across 
different domestic financial markets.  
A  positive  initial  response  to  the  financial  crisis  has  been  the  active  role  played  by  the 
Commission in seeking to ensure that public support to financial institutions becomes subject 
to  conditions  that  limit  the  distortions  to  fair  competition  within  the  single  market.  Another 
important  milestone  leading  to  a  pan-European  approach  to  supervision  has  been  the 
creation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  to  strengthen  macroprudential 
supervision within the EU as a whole, which has filled one of the most acutely felt institutional 
gaps during the crisis. 
Until  recently,  however,  under  the  umbrella  of  the  same  legislation,  we  have  witnessed 
regulatory competition to attract business, the oversight of cross-border groups has suffered 
from a lack of coordination and the compliance process has been fragmented along national 
borders.  For  this  reason,  it  is  difficult  to  overstate  the  importance  of  the  commitment  of 
EU institutions to a “single rulebook”. According to the logic of this approach, which pursues 
a  growing  harmonisation  of  supervisory  standards,  once  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA)  or  the  other  European  supervisory  authorities  (ESMA  and  EIOPA)  have  developed 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technical  standards,  once  adopted  by  the  Commission,  these  standards  will  become 
legislation directly applicable to entities, with no need for national transposition. 
The  potential  of  the  “single  rulebook”  is  enormous,  although  resistance  to  the  concept  of 
maximum  harmonisation  remains  significant.  In  the  area  of  crisis  prevention,  the  difficult 
discussions  surrounding  the  definition  of  capital,  or  the  application  of  new  liquidity 
requirements, among other Basel III proposals, will have to be followed closely. 
But perhaps the most demanding challenges are in the field of crisis management and the 
resolution  of  financial  institutions  that  are  both  systemically  important  and  which  have 
significant cross-border operations. A legislative proposal from the Commission is expected 
in  the  coming  months,  detailing  common  tools  for  monitoring  and  resolution  as  well  as 
principles of cooperation and mediation applying to cross-border institutions, and the role of 
the  EBA  in  these  processes.  If  we  add  to  these  important  developments  the  possibility  of 
recapitalising banks through the ESM in the case of countries not subject to a programme, 
we could speak of the first significant steps towards a euro area regime. In the medium term, 
in my opinion, this should be followed by the creation of a pan-European resolution fund and 
a pan-European resolution authority. This design would maximise the benefits of the financial 
union, since only a pan-European orientation would minimise the involvement of taxpayers, 
help  diversify  risks,  and  effectively  break  the  pernicious  link  between  risks  to  the  national 
banking sector and to the respective sovereign. Awareness about these advantages should 
help ease technical and political resistance to these initiatives. 
Monetary policy 
4.4 
I must mention, finally, the fourth pillar: monetary policy. It has been said repeatedly, perhaps 
with exaggeration, that when the history of the crisis which started five years ago is written, 
the ECB and the Eurosystem will emerge as the saviours of the euro. However, it will be no 
exaggeration to point to the ECB as the first line of defence, as early as August 2007, and 
possible  the  most  prominent  one  once  the  margins  for  fiscal  policy  and  financial  sector 
guarantees had been squeezed in the face of market pressures. 
As  the  only  European  institution  with  executive  powers  and  a  federal  mandate  and 
functioning, the temptation is to conclude that there is nothing new to invent in this domain. 
“If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it”. I think this is a feeling that many share. Be it as it may, what is 
important  is  to  realise  that,  after  just  over  a  decade,  the  ECB  has  become  a  model  of 
credibility at the international level. First, because it has fulfilled its mandate of price stability 
in a period marked by crisis and episodes of sharp rises in the prices of raw materials and 
energy. Second, because through the use of its unconventional measures – deployed more 
quickly and with more flexibility than any other central bank – the ECB has, to a considerable 
extent, been able to repair the transmission mechanism of monetary policy and to provide 
enhanced credit support without which a credit crunch would have taken place in the euro 
area. 
And  third,  because  its  contribution  to  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  has  increasingly 
become clear, without prejudice to the ECB’s primary mandate of price stability. The ECB’s 
contribution  to  financial  stability  has  been  both  an  indirect  consequence  of  its  monetary 
policy, as both price stability and non-standard measures have promoted financial stability, 
as well as a direct result of the role the Eurosystem has come to play in the context of the 
newly  created  ESRB.  It  should  be  emphasized,  however,  that  even  when  price  stability  is 
ensured,  the  ECB  should  only  contribute  to  the  stable  functioning  of  the  financial  system, 
because  the  primary  responsibility  for  guaranteeing  financial  stability  lies  with  regulators, 
supervisors and governments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The day after tomorrow: politics and markets 
5. 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  thoughts  about  the  future.  What  does  the  day  after  tomorrow 
hold  in  store  for  us?  This  is  an  issue  that  cannot  be  answered  by  abstracting  from  the 
political substrate of the euro, or the complex interactions between politics and markets. And 
ignorance of these facts are a fundamental error shared by both fans and critics of the euro. 
From the fans we often hear this kind of advice: “End the sovereign debt crisis immediately? 
Easy! Let’s create a federal budget, eurobonds, a treasury or ministry of finance of the euro 
and common financial supervision”. Naturally, these proposals are immediately rejected by 
many sectors of public opinion, and are not welcomed by the markets. From the critics we 
receive disinterested advice on how to undo the euro which not only overlooks the political 
vision  that  inspired  it,  but  also  the  impossibility  of  avoiding  a  debacle  of  incalculable 
dimensions if the fungibility of bank money is threatened in a part of the euro area, no matter 
how small.  
Two specific arguments based on an acknowledgement of the existing interaction between 
politics  and  markets  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  deeper  integration  and  governance  of  the 
euro  area  is  needed.  First,  much  of  the  institutional  design  flaws  of  the  euro  stem  from  a 
naive  faith  of  politicians  two  decades  ago  in  the  disciplining  ability  of  the  market.  It  was 
thought that since there was no mechanism to allow transfers to rescue troubled countries, 
markets  would  discriminate  against  those  with  less  prudent  fiscal  policies,  with  larger 
financial  imbalances  and  with  worse  indicators  of  competitiveness.  But  the  markets  never 
played  this  role,  not  even  when  the  only  framework  worth  mentioning  in  the  field  of 
governance, the SGP, was diluted in the face of the rebellion of major member countries. 
The mistake was to believe that the second-most important currency area in the world could 
delegate  its  governance  to  rating  agencies  and  markets  which  are  always  prone  to 
overreaction  and  which  are  generally  pro-cyclical.  The  absence  of  self-governance  has 
resulted in governments being forced to hastily approve reforms in dramatic meetings, which 
has made it difficult to explain the reforms to the people and to achieve a consensus – all of 
which has not served to contain the contagion. That is why, with the hopes that were once 
placed on market discipline now frustrated, politicians have realised that they have to create 
a largely non-existent system of governance. This discussion raises a question. If so much 
has been achieved since 2009, why haven’t the European authorities been more effective in 
ending  the  debt  crisis,  the  attacks  by  the  markets  and  the  contagion?  In  my  opinion,  the 
answer lies in the functioning of the political institutions at the present stage of integration. All 
major decisions are made by 17 sovereign democracies. Unlike a unitary state, the euro area 
has  17  heads  of  state  or  government,  17  ministers  of  economy  and  countless  national 
parliamentarians.  Not  surprisingly,  in  complex  matters  such  as  European  ones,  their 
messages to the media often diverge. As we have seen many times, these differences can 
lead to echoes and adverse interactions between politics and markets that ultimately end up 
undermining the effectiveness of the decisions taken, however important they may be. 
To some extent, this is a procedural problem: our institutions are not sufficiently effective to 
ensure that political leaders speak with one voice. But at a deeper level, it is a problem that 
stems  from  fundamental  differences  in  the  expectations  and  perceptions  of  citizens  and 
markets. Markets expect messages of confidence, immediacy, and an unlimited capacity of 
governments to act. The residents of each country, meanwhile, want to know the limits to tax 
obligations for which they may be liable, they want to be sure that the decisions are fair and 
equitable, and they want to feel confident that mistakes will not be repeated.  
A classic example of this divergence has been the debate over private sector involvement in 
debt restructuring. For a domestic audience, banks must accept the consequences of past 
mistakes  in  lending  to  countries.  But  from  the  perspective  of  financial  markets,  such 
communication  is  disastrous,  because  it  indicates  to  investors  that  some  sovereign  assets 
previously considered risk- free have become risky, i.e. the euro area is a market in which 
sovereign investments are not guaranteed. And as markets are moved by expectations, they 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resolve to unwind their investments today, or take short positions in order to do it tomorrow. 
This  process  immediately  weakens  the  achievements  made  on  the  institutional  front.  A 
second  example  comes  from  the  practical  implementation  of  policy  decisions  taken  in 
response  to  the  crisis.  Markets  expect  decisions  that  have  an  immediate  effect,  decisions 
that  are  bold,  front-loaded  and  far-reaching.  They  become  exasperated  by  the  fact  that 
political  agreements  can  take  months  to  become  operational,  as  was  the  case  with  the 
European  stability  funds  or  mechanisms.  However,  the  decisions  must  be  explained,  the 
approval procedures followed and sometimes political compromises have to be negotiated, 
and all within a system of 17 sovereign democracies. Thus, once the decisions have already 
been  implemented,  we  find  that  expectations  have  changed  and  that  these  decisions  are 
now taken for granted. 
This  complex  relationship  between  governments  and  markets  is  another  reason  why  it  is 
essential  that  we  achieve  a  closer  and  deeper  economic  and  financial  union  in  order  to 
ensure  a  stable  future  for  the  euro.  The  logic  of  the  original  design  of  EMU,  a  single  or 
federal monetary policy, coexisting with decentralised economic policies, was linked to the 
principles  of  subsidiarity  and  democratic  accountability.  This  was  consistent  with  the 
prevailing  setting  for  two  decades.  But  these  same  principles  today  involve  more  Europe. 
Because the principle of subsidiarity assigns to the European authority tasks that cannot be 
effectively carried out at the national level. Can anyone argue, after the intense experience of 
the  crisis,  that  a  European  level  of  government  is  not  the  most  effective  way  to  conduct 
directly, or at least coordinate, certain economic and financial policies? 
Democratic  accountability  is  a  principle  under  which  citizens  must  be  able  to  demand 
accountability from politicians about the decisions taken. But if we need a stronger European 
authority, the principle requires a profound improvement of democracy at the European level. 
And  any  thoughts  on  what  this  entails  should  start  by  recognising  that  membership  of  the 
euro leads to a significant degree of political union. We have found that in order avoid crises 
all  member  countries  should  take  responsibility  for  monitoring  and  for  exercising  peer 
pressure in relation to the economic policies of the rest. And we have also seen that in order 
to correct the effects of the crisis in the euro area we need decisions to be taken collectively 
and to consider the euro area as a whole rather than to be dominated by specific national 
interests. 
The  need  for  institutionalized  collective  decision-making  procedures  is  what  defines  a 
political union. This need has been felt de facto by the members of the euro area since the 
beginning of the crisis. Its de jure recognition has been somewhat slower but decisive. Thus, 
the Treaty of Stability, Coordination and Governance will enter into force on 1 January 2013 
if  12  Member  States  ratify  it.  This  Treaty  will  in  effect  put  a  end  to  the  right  of  any  single 
country  or  small  group  of  countries  to  exercise  a  veto,  The  Eurogroup  represents  stable 
enhanced  cooperation.  Unlike  the  EFSF,  the  ESM  is  an  institution  under  the  Treaty.  The 
Community method is once again gaining ground after the blossoming of intergovernmental 
agreements.  The  rules  for  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  governance  have  been  created  or 
reinforced with strict criteria. Despite some initial delays in the financial front, things are also 
starting  to  move  forward  in  this  front,  with  the  creation  of  the  European  Supervisory 
Authorities,  the  “single  rulebook”  and  the  future  directive  on  management  and  crisis 
resolution. These are clear illustrations of a course that, while far from implying the level of 
federalisation  that  we  have  in  monetary  policy,  represents  significant  progress  towards  a 
political union.  
And when these institutions and procedures become a reality and show that they can work, 
debates such as those we should have about the federalisation of banking supervision and 
deposit  insurance,  or  the  federalisation  of  fiscal  policy  will  make  sense.  But  this  will  only 
happen the day after tomorrow. For the immediate challenges are to put our houses in order, 
regain  competitiveness  and  clean  up  our  balance  sheets  and,  perhaps  more  importantly, 
reaching  an  understanding  that  sharing  sovereignty  in  the  euro  area  is  not  tantamount  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
losing sovereignty. Rather, sharing sovereignty is the only way to secure a future of stability 
and progress. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
