Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Capacity-building and the Bangko Sentral ng 
Pilipinas’ reform agenda 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  induction  ceremonies  of  BAIPHIL’s  2012–2013  officers, 
Makati City, 11 July 2012. 
 To the incoming and outgoing officers of BAIPHIL, led by Mr. Buddy Serrano and Ms. Agnes 
Brillantes-Santos, members of the organization, MB members Ignacio Bunye and Armando 
Suratos, SEC Chair Tess Herbosa, PDIC President Val Araneta, fellow bankers led by BAP 
President  Abet  Villarosa,  distinguished  guests,  my  colleagues  at  the  BSP,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good afternoon.  
It is a pleasure to join you today to induct your  incoming officers. Of all the organizational 
activities, the passing of the baton is truly meaningful. Similar to the relay races in athletic 
competition, moving the baton typifies continuity as the next leg takes over from the last one.  
On this basis, I would like to laud the outgoing officers for completing yet another successful, 
activity-laden chapter in the story of BAIPHIL. I also congratulate your incoming officials for 
accepting the challenge of leadership and for taking their turn in carrying the baton.  
Reaping the fruits of investing in ourselves 
Managing change is certainly not alien to any of us here. From the persistent difficulties we 
endured  in  the  past  through  one  financial  crisis  after  another,  we  now  find  ourselves  in  a 
position of strength. For some time, we referred to this as a mark of our resilience. Perhaps, 
it may be more appropriate to simply describe it as “investing in ourselves” but with a clear 
view of the changes that we would like to effect. 
The net result is open for everyone to see. With total assets of Php 2.95 trillion in 1999, the 
Philippine banking system has grown to Php 7.33 trillion as of the end of 2011.  
This  expansion  has  of  course  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  increase  in  both 
deposits and loan levels. However, what is striking is not just the increase. Rather, it is that 
we  have  been  actually  growing  faster  in  this  time  of global  difficulties  than  in  the  years  of 
relative global calm. 
Deposit balances have grown by 13.40% per year between 2007 and 2011 even though it is 
only  growing  by  roughly  8%  annually  between  1999  and  2007.  The  loan  book  is  more 
impressive, expanding at 10.62% per year in the last 4 years which is much higher than the 
3.67% p.a. growth in the 8 years from 1999. 
With a strong banking core firmly in place, the economy grew by 6.4 percent year-on-year in 
the first quarter. Prices have remained stable with inflation averaging 3.0 percent during the 
first semester. 
The country’s balance of payments position also remains healthy. During the first five months 
of  this  year,  the  country  posted  a  BoP  surplus  of  USD  1.3  billion.  This  has  contributed  to 
record 
international  reserves  which  as  of  end-June  now  stood  at 
USD 76.3 billion. 
level  of  gross 
Capacity-building: a key to reforms  
These positive macro-financial indicators should not be taken as simply the “aggregate view”. 
They are the result of and not independent of the inputs of stakeholders on the ground. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
To be sure, BAIPHIL is one of those stakeholders. Through the years, you have been a vital 
institutional  partner  in  ensuring  a  healthy  banking  industry.  Not  only  have  your  initiatives 
been essential in extending the competencies of your member institutions, you have likewise 
reached  out  to  other  constituents  to  broaden  awareness  towards  saving  and  financial 
literacy. 
Your corporate governance course is now part of our market landscape, together with other 
trainings such as Forgery Detection and various aspects of risk management. 
Of  equal  importance  are  the  activities  that  you  have  pursued  with  other  constituencies  in 
mind. Our partnership on the “Banking on your Future” kiddie account program as well as the 
financial literacy program for teachers and students are high marks that deserve the public’s 
gratitude and commendation.  
It may not have been front-page news, but your recent undertakings in Bayambang, one for 
the  Tugatog  Elementary  school,  and  another  in  Barangay  Highway  Hills  in  Mandaluyong 
certainly take front-and-center stage in making a difference. And with your donation for the 
victims  of  typhoon  Sendong  and  the  earthquake  in  Negros,  BAIPHIL  has  truly  made  a 
difference in the lives of people. 
These are all efforts towards expanding the core competencies of different target audiences. 
I  cite  them  because  they  are  critical  to  the  future  of  our  financial  market  and  our  reform 
agenda.  We  do  understand  that  without  the  adequate  retooling  of  existing  skills  and  the 
buildup  of  new  ones,  policy  initiatives  would  not  have  much  of  an  anchor  from  the 
constituents who either must execute or those that can benefit from these reforms.  
It is for this reason that I truly appreciate your theme for the coming fiscal year of “Levelling-
up:  Linking  Action  with  Vision”.  In  a  short  phrase,  you  emphasize  the  need  for  direction 
through vision but likewise realize that success requires affirmative action. 
Towards  this  end,  the  BSP  values  the  efforts  of  BAIPHIL  to  step  up  its  capability-building 
initiatives. We also welcome BAIPHIL’s move to thoroughly align its varied activities with its 
vision  of  providing  excellent  banking  support  at  par  with  the  best  in  the  Asia  Pacific. 
Achieving this singular goal alone will demand unity of purpose throughout the organization.  
Down the road, we see that this will result not only in a rise in the number of seminars for 
bank  personnel.  More  importantly,  we  expect  this  to  translate  to  responsive  training 
programs that enable bankers to keep up with the fast-changing global environment.  
It  is  clear  to  us  that  today’s  financial  market  norms  are  markedly  different  compared  to 
practices just a decade or two ago. We now live in an era of stricter capital requirements, 
steeper yardsticks of governance and higher standards of consumer protection. We certainly 
expect banking practices to evolve as global markets grapple further with the lingering global 
financial crisis.  
Indeed, the only thing that remains constant is change itself. But financial markets rarely give 
us the opportunity to pause and dictate the changes that are evolving before us.  
Banks – with all the formalities of an organization and its brick and mortar structures – must 
always be ready to adjust if they are to meet the changing needs of their own publics.  
This is a hurdle…but not an impossibility. To be able to put themselves in a position to be 
this flexible, banks must ensure that both skills and knowledge are already in place before 
change takes root. 
The reform agenda as a training guide  
This  seems  to  be  an  oxymoron:  to  ask  banks  to  have  skills  and  knowledge  in  place  well 
before these competencies will be demanded by the changes in front of us.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However,  this  investment  in  capacity  is  precisely  what  is  dictated  by  today’s  market 
landscape.  We  need  to  anticipate  change  and  by  doing  so,  we  allow  ourselves  the 
opportunity to parlay the uncertainties of change into opportunities that come with vigilance.  
There is then a convenient nexus between the agenda of reform and the dictates of capacity-
building.  
From  our  perspective,  nothing  is more  urgent than  the  policy  agenda  of  pursuing financial 
stability and mitigating systemic risks. Regulators talk of this continuously and we have set 
this as a threshold of prudential policy moving forward.  
Many may argue however that financial stability is best left to regulators. After all, each bank 
is well aware of its own actions, its balance sheet and performance metrics but certainly not 
of each and every other bank out in the market. Should you not then focus on the bottom line 
and leave the “big picture” to the prudential authority? 
This is an easy argument to make. But I believe it to be only half true. While regulators need 
to  understand  and  take  action  on  what  can  impair  the  system  as  a  whole,  this  cannot  be 
simply a task of one stakeholder.  
How can the greatest good be achieved if not all stakeholders assume collective 
responsibility? 
We believe that it is useful for all other stakeholders to have a working appreciation of that 
same big picture that regulators routinely worry about. From a capacity-building standpoint, 
this is ground zero. All other training initiatives will emanate from this. 
Capital  market  issues  such  as  products  and  markets,  pricing  and  valuation,  and  market 
infrastructure  easily  emanate  from  the  same  framework.  All  these  training  topics  are  quite 
technical  in  their  own  regard  but  there  is  a  direct  way  to  make  them  part  of  one  common 
objective.  
Training  opportunities  in  the  Basel  Accord,  ICAAP,  stress  testing,  risk  management,  good 
governance,  compliance  framework,  among  others,  can  then  be  brought  to  bear  on  this 
singular prudential goal of achieving stability.  
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, while  we have made strides, we should not rest on our laurels. To 
say that much more needs to be done is an understatement. The truth is that a lot more than 
“much more” must be done if we are to continuously move forward.  
But  the tasks  ahead  are  not  independent strands  but  should  instead  be  seen  as  part  of  a 
single process. Just like the relays in athletics, each stakeholder plays a unique role so that 
the baton is faithfully passed on from one leg to the next.  
Those of you who know the 4-by-100 relays understand that the winning team is not always 
made up of the four fastest runners. Relays are not only about sheer speed. Rather, most 
races are won – and lost – in the baton hand-off.  
Capacity-building is just like these competitive relays. The skill set that one develops is the 
speed that allows us to be in this race. But it is knowledge – that keen perspective of when 
and how things fall into place – that generates results and ensures eventual success.  
Relays  are  about  continuity  in  motion  so  that  momentum  is  not  impaired  but  actually  built 
upon in a coordinated and smooth passing of the baton. This continuity in motion is how we 
evolve from simply building capacities to becoming enablers of change.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Make no mistake about it; we are in the midst of a relay in instituting change. We led off with 
a strong start and despite the staggered positions, we can see some early gains. Our second 
runner has taken the baton and built momentum in the straight-away leg.  
Now comes the harder part of this relay. We have the speed and momentum but we must 
now run the next leg while navigating a curve. Only after we get through that can we hand-off 
to the anchor who must then take this race home to the finish line.  
I ask you now: with the investments of your previous and outgoing boards plus the unbridled 
potential  of  the  incoming  board,  has  BAIPHIL  built  enough  future  capacity  so  that  our 
industry can take this race home? 
Thank you very much and good afternoon to all of you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
