H R Khan: Turmoil in global economy – the Indian perspectives 
Address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the All India 
Conference 2012 on “Waves of change: ocean of opportunities”, organized by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India, Bhubaneswar, 18 August 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Jagan Mohan, Shri Anand Shankar and Shri Surajit Bose of 
the Reserve Bank of India. 
Shri  Rajendra  Kumar  Das,  Host  Branch  Chairman,  Shri.  Prashant  Panda,  Organizing 
Committee Chairman and the office bearers of the National & Branch Managing Committees 
of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  (ICAI),  Shri.  Jugal  Kishore  Mahapatra, 
Principal  Secretary,  Finance,  Government  of  Odisha,  distinguished  delegates  from  across 
the country, ladies and gentlemen. I am very happy to be invited to this important conference 
being organized by the ICAI in this picturesque temple city of Bhubaneswar which can also 
be  called  as  God’s  Own  City.  I  am  thankful  to  the  organizers  for  choosing  such  a  topical 
subject for this session of the conference. 
The  last few  years  have  been  very  challenging  times for  the  policymakers,  regulators  and 
participants of the financial system. The crisis of 2007–08, now popularly referred to as the 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC), emanated from developed countries and considerably slowed 
down  their  growth  and  raised  the  unemployment  to  all-time  highs.  Due  to  various  inter-
linkages  with 
the  affected  Advanced  Economies  (AEs),  Emerging  and  Developing 
Economies  (EDEs),  including  India,  experienced  the  consequential  impact  by  way  of 
slowdown  in  trade,  increase  in  risk  perception  and  reversal  of  capital  flows.  The  recent 
European sovereign debt crisis, fears of Chinese slowdown and the “Fiscal Cliff” of the US 
are having an adverse impact on the already fragile global economy. In short, the world and 
Indian economies are faced with new challenges to growth and stability which have emerged 
while some of the old impediments to sustainable growth persist. In my presentation today, I 
would  attempt  to  delve  into  some  of  the  issues  related  to  the  current  global  turmoil  and 
provide  the  Indian  perspectives  on  those  issues using  a  “7  C” framework.  For  the  sake of 
completeness,  I  would  also  like  to  touch  upon  the  macroeconomic  environment  as  the 
occasion  demands  and  very  briefly  refer  to  the  accounting  and  auditing  issues  since  the 
gathering is predominantly of the accountants. 
Challenges facing global economy 
The recent slowdown of the AEs is both a cause and an effect of the sovereign debt crises in 
the Eurozone and the associated fiscal problems. The sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone 
has not only aggravated the macroeconomic conditions of the countries of the Eurozone but 
also,  in  turn,  has  deeply  affected  the  balance  sheets  of global  banks  having  exposures  to 
these countries. The political measures and announcements, co-ordinated initiatives of the 
Governments,  and  prolonged  easing  policies  backed  by  unconventional  measures  of  the 
central banks to provide a solution to the problems arising out of this crisis have not been 
able to evoke sustainable confidence in the financial markets. The fiscal austerity measures 
taken  in  response  are  further  weakening  the  prospects  of  growth  and  employment  in  the 
affected European countries and, in turn, fiscal adjustment and repair of the national balance 
sheet are becoming an onerous task. The US continues to face high levels of unemployment, 
the  consumer  and  business  confidence  remains  shaken  and  the  financial  sector  is  still 
recuperating  from  the  earlier  crisis.  The  European  Union  and  the  US  form  the  two  largest 
economies in the world and are deeply inter-twined with each other even in such adversities. 
There is, thus, a felt need for concerted actions by the policy-makers across the AEs to save 
the  global  economy  from  falling  into  a  downward  spiral,  rejuvenate  the  employment  led 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recovery  and  pave  the  way  for  structural  reforms  required  for  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth not only in these economies but also in other economies including India. 
Growth prospects 
Economic growth around the world weakened significantly in Q2 2012 after being better than 
expected  in  Q1  2012.  AEs  and  EDEs  alike  are  experiencing  moderation  in  growth.  The 
numerous  problems  confronting  the  highly  inter-connected  global  economy  are  reinforcing 
each other in retarding the pace and prospects of growth. Growth in the US has fallen during 
Q2 2012 while UK has been experiencing negative growth rates for three quarters now. GDP 
growth  in  the  Euro  area  and  Japan  has  been  negative  during  Q2  2012.  Economic  growth 
even in the BRICS nations, which serve as an engine of growth in the developing world, has 
slowed  down  considerably.  One  of  the  other  pressure  points  in  the  world  economy, 
particularly the AEs, is the prevailing high unemployment. Unemployment in the US above 
8 per cent has been persistently high. UK is also experiencing high unemployment of about 
8 per cent and so is the Eurozone at around 11 per cent. Unemployment in the peripheral 
countries  of  Eurozone  range  between  15  per  cent  (Portugal)  to  25  per  cent  (Spain).  This 
obviously  has  implications  for  economic  growth  and  the  social  fabric.  China,  a  large 
contributor to the global GDP in the recent times, is slowing down too, much more than what 
was anticipated with growth rate for 2012 expected to below 8 per cent vis-à-vis trend rate of 
near double digit growth rate. This would have significant influence on the growth prospects 
of both AEs and EDEs. 
Inflation prospects 
The risk of rising inflation globally is currently not high as demand softens and commodity 
prices decline. Bond yields across the maturities in the US, the UK and Germany, which are 
relatively stable AEs, remain low and do not portend higher inflation down the line. A key risk 
factor  to  benign  inflation  expectations  is,  however,  brewing.  The  US  is  facing  the  worst 
drought  in  over  half  a  century.  There  are  fears  that  corn  and  soyabean  crops  could  fail 
leading to an increase in the price of these crops. Since these crops also serve as animal 
feed and bio-fuels, there could be an eventual increase in price of animal products like meat, 
milk and milk products and bio-fuels due to fall in supply. The drought could have a bearing 
on  the  production  of  other  crops  which  could  potentially  increase  global  food  inflation. 
Massive  liquidity  injections  by  the  central  banks  of  advanced  countries  also  have  the 
potential, particularly through the financialization of the commodity price channel, leading to 
build  up  of  inflationary  pressures.  In  the  face  of  falling  growth,  rising  inflation  could  pose 
tremendous challenge for policy-makers who are fighting against heavy odds to maintain the 
growth-inflation equilibrium.  
European sovereign debt crisis – new challenges 
The  European  debt  crisis,  which  originated  in  Greece,  spread  initially  to  other  “peripheral” 
sovereigns and has now moved to the bigger “core” European countries, such as, Spain and 
Italy.  As  is  expected,  when  a  sovereign  is  stressed,  its  banking  system  is  likely  to  get 
embroiled and this is exactly what happened in this case also. The European banking sector 
was tested during the onslaught of the global financial crisis and was found to be seized with 
less than optimal assets amidst a stagnating economy and high unemployment level. With 
aggravation  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  it  was  observed  that  these  banks  with  fragile 
balance sheets could not lend to the sovereigns. On the other hand, the affected sovereigns 
have  been  finding  it  increasingly  difficult  to  borrow  to  re-capitalise  the  banking  sector  as 
borrowing costs have increased due to perception of high risk associated with sovereigns. In 
fact, the borrowing costs in Spain and Italy are inching towards unsustainable levels of 7 per 
cent and 6 per cent respectively (Chart 1). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 It is important to note that a large number of banks in the Eurozone stand to suffer significant 
losses in the event of further escalation of sovereign debt crisis which may put many banks 
on the verge of bankruptcy and trigger a worldwide credit crunch. Another equally important 
aspect to reckon is the fund availability of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) is 
likely to be over-stretched if bigger economies like Italy and Spain require bail-out funds. The 
latest twist to the story is news of regional governments in Spain facing insolvency. Recently, 
Catalonia  and  Valencia  regions  in  Spain  sought  bail  outs  from  the  Spanish  central 
government.  This  has  made  the  job  of  policymakers  even  more  challenging.  Business 
confidence  continues  to  remain  weak  and  the  Keynesian  “animal  spirits”  have  long  been 
absent.  Any  further  escalation  of  the  European  problem  would  possibly  lead  to  a  deeper 
crisis with a potential recessionary impact not only in those economies under sovereign debt 
distress but also on other economies across the globe. 
The US “Fiscal Cliff” and the Chinese slowdown 
Another  potential  crisis  on  the  horizon  is  the  “fiscal  cliff”  in  the  US.  There  is  a  risk  that 
government spending could fall abruptly in the US by as much as 4 per cent of GDP in 2013. 
The political deadlock over the budget could potentially harm the economic growth if it leads 
to severe fiscal austerity. With the huge unemployment rate unlikely to fall soon, the already 
shaken  confidence  of  the  households  and  businesses  could  be  further  depressed  and 
possibly intensify the stressed housing sector, leading to foreclosures which, in turn, would 
put the United States banking sector at risk again. Obviously, this has implications for global 
growth and financial stability. It has therefore been suggested that the policy-makers in the 
US must take steps to avoid the fiscal cliff and also raise the debt limit while devising plans to 
return to long term fiscal prudence – a medicine long prescribed by them to the others. 
China, according to the IMF, is the most “central” trading power in the world, based on its 
extensive trade links with other economies that are themselves tightly interwoven. It is the 
largest trading partner for 78 countries. This makes the IMF to classify China as a member of 
the  so-called  S5,  or  Systemic  Five,  a  group  of  economies  subject  to  extra  IMF  attention. 
Given  its  systemic  importance,  the  recent  slowdown  in  growth  of  China  led  by  fall  in 
investment and export demand has dampened the hopes that China could make up for weak 
demand  from  the  debt-crippled  Europe  and  the  United  States.  Accordingly,  the  IMF  has 
projected very low growth rate of 3.5 per cent in 2012. The World Bank has projected global 
GDP to increase modestly by 2.5 per cent, 3.0 per cent and 3.3 per cent in 2012, 2013 and 
2014 respectively. This year is, thus, shaping up to become the worst year in terms of global 
growth since the GFC of 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Accounting and auditing issues emerging from GFC 
Allow  me  to  now  turn  to  some  issues  related  to  accounting  and  auditing  as  most  of  the 
participants are Chartered Accountants and would be in a better position to appreciate the 
issues.  The  GFC  has  forced  various  market  participants  to  re-examine  their  accounting 
standards  and  auditing  practices.  Though  several  detailed  analysis  has  been  done  to 
determine the root causes of the crisis, the role of extant accounting standards and auditing 
practices  in  exacerbating  the  GFC  have  also  been  highlighted,  particularly  the  approach 
dealing with illiquid markets and distress sales. As a result, a number of G-20 led initiatives 
on  global  regulatory  reform  process  along  with  various  regulatory/standard  setting  bodies, 
such  as,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB), the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS), and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) have been taken. 
Some of the key issues related to accounting which were considered to have contributed to 
the  crisis  were  (i)  Procylicality:  Certain  aspects  of  accounting  frameworks  and  capital 
regulation tend to enhance the natural tendency of the financial system to amplify business 
cycles, affecting both the degree of credit expansion in normal conditions and the degree of 
credit contraction in the downturn phase, (ii) Disclosure: Weaknesses in public disclosures by 
financial  institutions  damaged  market  confidence  during  the  turmoil.  Public  disclosures  by 
financial institutions did not always make clear the type and magnitude of risks associated 
with their on- and off-balance sheet exposures, & (iii) Recognition of impairment: Loan loss 
provisions  were based on an incurred loss approach rather than approaches that consider 
expected losses. This resulted in the level of provisions being “Too little Too late” in case of 
many banking institutions. 
Auditing  related  issues  like  role  of  external  auditors  in  conduct  of  audit  with  professional 
integrity as per the applicable statutes to impart credibility to the opinion expressed on the 
reliability, transparency and usefulness of the financial statements have also been raised in 
the  context  of  the  GFC  and  many  other  accounting  controversies  relating  to  financial  and 
non-financial firms. It is expected that international and national initiatives being taken up to 
bring  about  desired  revisions  of  the  accounting  standards,  their  convergence  across  the 
jurisdictions  under  the  IFRS  framework  and  improve  the  transparency  of  financial  reports 
without jeopardising financial stability would yield the desired results sooner than later. 
Challenges facing Indian economy 
India  has  benefited  from  greater  integration  with  the  world  economy  and  global  financial 
markets. There was a belief in some quarters that India in particular and the EDEs in Asia 
have  “decoupled” from  the  AEs  and  could grow  indefinitely.  The  experience gained  during 
the  GFC,  however,  proved  that  the  decoupling  theory  was  only  a  myth.  It  is  also  been 
realized that no doubt there are numerous benefits of globalisation it also entails huge costs. 
As  has  been  seen  over  the  years  India’s  globalization  indicators  have  been  going  up;  for 
example,  the  current  and  capital  account  receipts  and  payments  as  a  percentage  of  GDP 
has  been  around  110  per  cent  in  the  last two  years. The  European  debt  crisis  and  global 
slowdown  are  creating  serious  headwinds  for  the  Indian  recovery  and  posing  major 
challenges  for  the  economy.  On  the  domestic  front,  the  large  twin  deficits,  viz.  current 
account deficit (CAD) and fiscal deficit, pose significant risks to macroeconomic stability and 
growth sustainability. Financing the huge fiscal deficit from internal domestic savings would 
potentially crowd out private investment, thus lowering growth prospects. This, in turn, deter 
capital inflows, making it more difficult to finance the increasing CAD which in a sense is a 
result of global slowdown. 
Decelerating growth and persistence of high inflation 
Growth  deceleration  in  India  has  not  been  accompanied  by  lower  inflation  (Chart  2).  This 
obviously complicates policy making. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 2: Percentage change in GDP and inflation 
Source: Bloomberg 
The latest GDP growth number of 6.5 per cent for the year 2011–12 is the lowest in the last 
nine  years.  Further,  the  growth  outlook  for  2012–13  has  been  lowered  by  almost  all 
stakeholders including the Reserve Bank with its current projection of growth rate of 6.5 per 
cent  for  2012–13.  Lower  private  consumption  demand  in  face  of  a  slowing  economy  is 
compounding the slowdown. Reserve Bank’s estimates suggest non-inflationary trend growth 
rate has fallen to 7.5 per cent from 8 per cent. Further, a weak monsoon is feeding into food 
inflation  worries.  This  coupled  with  sharp  currency  depreciation  could  lead  to  imported 
inflation. When compared to our peers, India is an outlier in many respects, particularly with 
respect  to  high  fiscal  deficit  accompanied  by  persistent  high  inflation  (Chart  3).  India,  for 
instance, now ranks at 151 out of 180 countries in respect of the inflation level as against a 
rank below 100 few years back. Such high fiscal deficit and inflation in India limits the policy 
maneuverability  for  providing  support  and  stimulus  by  the  Government  and  the  Reserve 
Bank. 
Currency depreciation and current account deficit 
The  high  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  at  4.2  per  cent  in  2011–12  is  much  above  the 
country’s  comfort  level.  India’s  CAD  is  also  relative  higher  than  its  peers  and  the  Indian 
currency  has  depreciated  by  about  20  per  cent,  year  on  year.  In  fact,  currencies  of  other 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
countries with CAD have also depreciated in the last one year since the US sovereign rating 
downgrade. The depreciation of Indian Rupee has been broadly at the same rate vis-à-vis 
the BRICS nations but higher than Asian economies (Chart 4).  
Note:  Currency  depreciation  is  for  the  period  1  August  2011  until  13  August  2012,  CAD  is  IMF 
estimate for 2012. Source: IMF, Bloomberg 
 Impact of global developments on India 
With recent global developments contributing to a significant rebalancing of portfolios as a 
result  of  rapidly  changing  risk  perceptions  and  appetites,  the  Indian  macroeconomic 
environment has looked turbulent during the past year or so. It has been noted that Indian 
growth  slowdown  during  2008  crisis  was  more  due  to  global  developments  while  in  the 
current phase of crisis it is due to a combination of both domestic and global factors. Taking 
up the latter, it is almost axiomatic that in a world that is highly globalised, developments in 
developed  economies  are  bound  to  have  considerable  direct  and  indirect  influence  on  our 
domestic economy and the financial system. Against this background, I intend to highlight the 
impact of global developments on the Indian economy by using a 7 C framework under which 
I  will  analyse  their  influence  through  the  seven  channels  –  Commerce,  Commodity  price, 
Capital flows, Currency rates, Contamination, Confidence and Credit rating channels. I will 
also highlight the measures that have been taken as also further measures that need to be 
taken  to  contain  the  impact  of  these  global  headwinds  along  with  the  challenges  that  lie 
ahead. 
integration 
Commerce channel 
India,  notwithstanding  its  strong  domestic  consumption  and  investment  drivers  for  growth, 
has  witnessed  concomitant 
last 
decade. Whenever  one  thinks  of  globalisation,  the  first  things  that  comes  to  mind  is 
integration  of  trade  around  the  world.  Over  the  years  there  has  been  substantial 
improvement in India’s trade openness. Further, services have come to account for a major 
contributor to our export earnings. A number of factors have aided this process. Services that 
were  considered  to  be  non-tradable  increasingly  became  tradable  due  to  innovations  in 
Information Technology and  led  to  the  export  of  Information Technology  Enabled  Services 
(ITES) and the business processes. Currently, total trade in goods and services, for example, 
accounts for over 55 per cent of the GDP (Table 1).  
the  world  economy  over 
into 
the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The GFC and the European sovereign debt crisis has slowed down the global growth and 
trade  and  this  would  impact  our  exports  both  in  merchandise  and  services.  The  recent 
decline of Indian exports (during April – June 2012, merchandise exports have contracted by 
1.7 per cent) is a clear indication of this. Given the projections of the IMF that during 2012 
world trade would grow only at 3.8 per cent as against 5.9 per cent in 2011, Indian exports 
are certainly in for turbulent times.  
It  may,  however,  be  noted  that  strong  and  sustained  growth  in  merchandise  exports 
witnessed in the recent years has been accompanied by structural shifts in the commodity 
composition  and  product  and  market  diversification.  Over  the  years,  technology  intensive 
engineering goods, such as, machinery, transport equipment, manufacture of metals and iron 
and steel, and petroleum products have emerged as the drivers of India’s exports in place of 
traditionally predominant items, such as, gems and jewellery, textiles and textile products. In 
addition,  India’s  exports  have  witnessed  geographical  diversification  as  well.  India’s  major 
export markets have shifted from developed regions in the European Union and the US to 
diversified  markets,  such  as,  Asia,  OPEC  and  African  countries.  All  these  developments 
have provided space for maneuverability for India’s exports. Besides rationalization of many 
procedures, various policy measures have also been undertaken to boost exports. Some of 
the  recent  significant  policy  measures  taken  by  the  Government  include  more  coverage 
under  the  Focus  Market  and  the  Focus  Product  Schemes  and  the  interest  subvention 
scheme.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  also  taken  quite  a  few  steps  like  allowing  elongated 
period for realization of export proceeds, increasing export credit refinance limits from 15 to 
50 per cent of the banks’ outstanding Rupee export credit, increasing spread in respect of 
FCNR(B)  deposits  which  would  provide  source  for  foreign  currency  denominated  export 
credit to Indian exporters and deregulating interest rate on export credit in foreign currency 
so as to incentivize the banks to extend more foreign currency export credit. 
There  are  many  opportunities  for  India  to  sustain  its  export  momentum.  India  could 
encourage  and  build  capacity  in  the  export  of  the  3Es  –  Engineering,  Electrical  and 
Electronic  goods  as  India’s  presence  in  these  goods  is  rather  insignificant  and  there  is  a 
huge scope for improvement. India could tap into the African market and encourage exports 
to  other  EDEs.  Invoicing  of  trade  in  local  currencies,  which  has  received  fillip  with  the 
Reserve Bank of India permitting hedging facility to the non-resident importers in respect of 
Rupee invoiced exports, could also help reduce reliance on the US Dollar and the vagaries of 
the movement in the US dollar. Bi-lateral and regional trade blocks could be promoted and 
used to invoice trade in local currencies. The steps already taken and further steps that could 
be  taken  to  explore  and  establish  new  markets  and  augmenting  manufacturing  base  to 
increase the export capacities could be leveraged when tides turn and would provide us the 
opportunity to balance our trade account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
With  trade  across  the  globe  closely  interlinked  with  the  products  and  markets  of  different 
countries, developments in the  world economy  will also influence the Indian economy  with 
greater intensity. While on the one hand our exports may fall, our imports may not moderate 
commensurately,  thereby  posing  problems  for  India  on  the  trade  account  front.  Besides 
slowing  global  demand,  excessive  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  along  with  uni-directional 
movement bias witnessed during the last one year, persistence of high inflation accompanied 
by wage pressure which erodes export competitiveness, and infrastructural bottlenecks have 
emerged as major challenges for Indian exporters. 
Commodity price channel 
Commodity  price  channel  also  serve  as  a  major  transmission  mechanism  of  global 
developments  to  the  domestic  economy.  India  is  highly  reliant  on  imports,  particularly  oil 
imports. About 70 per cent of demand for oil is met by imports and almost 100 per cent for 
the demand of gold is met via imports. Therefore, any change in price of these commodities 
has implications for price of these goods in the Indian markets. Inherently, the demand for 
these  goods  is  relatively  price  inelastic.  Increase  in  price  of  oil  and  gold  have  thus  little 
impact  on  the  demand  of  these  goods  in  India.  Since  they  are  largely  imported,  India’s 
current account balance is adversely affected and could also influence inflation expectations, 
putting further pressure on the fisc by way of higher subsidies and on the monetary authority 
by  way  of  suppressed  inflation.  Although  slowdown  and  recession  in  the  AEs  and  EDEs 
should  moderate  oil  price  substantially,  monetary  easing  by  major  central  banks  and  geo-
political factors have ensured that the prices do not fall much. The other major commodity 
price  channel  which  adversely  affects  the  global  and  domestic  prices  is  that  of  food.  The 
current drought in the US is already showing the adverse impact in terms of higher prices for 
corns.  Further,  the  impact  of  financialisation  of  commodities  on  their  prices  needs  to  be 
studied further as current level of demand-supply mismatch does not warrant persistence of 
such high prices. 
Discouraging gold imports, containing the impact of exchange rate dynamics, moderating the 
impact  of  volatility  of  global  commodity  prices  on  domestic  economy  and  moderating  the 
increasing trend for financialisation of commodities pose serious challenges for India in the 
future. Increasing the domestic exploration of gas and oil, augmenting alternative source of 
energy  in  a  planned  manner  and  enhancing  domestic  agricultural  productivity  by  optimally 
exploring  32  agro-climatic  zones  of  the  country,  however,  can  mitigate  risks  arising  out  of 
adverse commodity price movements to some extent. 
Capital flow channel 
The major source of the transmission of external shocks to the domestic economy is through 
the  movement  of  capital  flows  across  borders.  India  has  also  benefitted  from  the  flow  of 
capital into the country and integration of financial markets across the world. The savings-
investment  gap  in  India  has  been  met  by  capital  inflows.  India  is  structurally  a  current 
account deficit country; therefore, capital inflows play a very important role in financing the 
CAD. In the recent period, however, dwindling capital inflows have been a cause of concern 
and financing the CAD has become a major challenge. The general risk-off sentiment and 
deleveraging by the European banks against the back drop of the European sovereign debt 
crisis  is  affecting  trade  credit,  infrastructure  financing  and  external  commercial  borrowings 
(ECBs) of the Indian corporates. Capital flows are determined by, inter-alia, global investor 
sentiment i.e. risk-on – risk-off sentiment, investment climate in the destination country and 
its  credit  rating.  Expectedly  capital  flows  into  India  have  slowed  in  the  recent  times;  the 
figures of Q1 of 2012–13 except for non-resident deposit flows have particularly been very 
disappointing. (Table 2) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 A number of policy measures have been undertaken to augment the capital flows into India 
given  the  general  risk-off  sentiment  prevailing  the  global  markets.  With  deregulation  of 
interest rate  on  NRE  deposit  schemes  and  increase  in  the  spread for FCNR  (B)  deposits, 
greater  non-resident  Indian  (NRI)  deposit  flows  have  been  facilitated.  In  2011–12,  NRI 
deposit flows witnessed a sharp rise of more than 200 per cent and stood at US$ 11.9 billion 
as compared with an inflow of US$ 3.2 billion in 2010–11. In addition, remittances facilities 
for  Indian  expatriates  have  been  streamlined  given  the  fact  that  India  remains  the  largest 
remittance  receiving  country  and  such  flows  have  huge  beneficial  impact  for  bridging  the 
CAD.  There  has  been  calibrated  enhancement  in  the  investment  limits  for  the  FIIs  in 
sovereign  and  corporate  bonds. The  limit  on  investment  in  G-Secs  has been  enhanced  to 
US$ 20 billion from US$ 15 billion. Long term investors like Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs), 
multi-lateral agencies, endowment funds, insurance funds, pension funds and foreign Central 
Banks have now been permitted to invest in Government securities. The limit on investment 
in corporate bonds has been enhanced to US$ 45 billion from US$ 40 billion and the holding 
period and residual maturity requirements for bonds in the infrastructure sector have been 
reduced.  A  new  scheme  allowing  the  Qualified  Foreign  Investors  (QFIs)  to  invest  upto 
US$ 1 billion in corporate bonds has been introduced. A number of measures like increasing 
the limit for availing of ECB under the automatic route, increasing the limit for refinancing the 
Rupee loans out of ECBs, new US$ 10 billion scheme of ECBs for export earners, etc. have 
been  taken  to  rationalize  the  regulatory  framework  for  ECBs.  All  these  measures  are 
expected to augment capital flows into India. 
Given  the  increasing  vulnerability  of  the  external  sector  reflected  in  increasing  short  term 
debt to total debt ratio, debt service ratio, fall in the import cover of our reserves and reserves 
to  external  debt  ratio,  the  need  is  to  encourage  non-debt  creating  flows  and  discourage 
excessive  debt  creating  flows.  Finding  funding  sources  other  than  the  US  and  European 
banks is also a major challenge. Perhaps one of the most daunting challenges for India is to 
attract capital given the risk-off sentiment prevailing in the global markets and low investment 
and growth outlook in the country. Improving the investment climate in India has to be the 
priority area of focus both to retain the interest of Indian corporates in the country and attract 
foreign direct investment flows. This could perhaps be addressed by focusing on what can be 
called  as  deficits  of  the  7Ls  –  Land,  Linkages,  Labour,  Legal,  Liquidity,  Leadership  and 
Learning deficits. Let me spend sometime to briefly explain these seven deficits. 
Land:  Due  to  lack  of  clarity  on  land  titles,  incomplete  land  records,  absence  of  their 
digitalization and weaknesses in the laws relating to land acquisition, investors find it difficult 
to acquire the required land. Further, given the population density and the type of land use in 
the  country,  the  problem  in  land  acquisition  gets  further  aggravated  due  to  social,  cultural 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
and political reasons. Linkages: The problem of non-availability of land at the right locations 
is  compounded  by  the  lack  of  required  linkages  with  quality,  infrastructure,  backward 
integration  with  coal  and  power  and  other 
input  sources.  Labour:  Despite  huge 
unemployment, lack of employable people  with  right type of skills, inflexibility of the labour 
laws,  growing  signs  of  industrial  unrest  and  rising  wage  demand  have  resulted  in  labour 
related  deficit. In knowledge  intensive  sectors,  which  need  people  trained  in  hard  subjects 
like  science  and  mathematics  and  quality  engineers,  also  face  problems  in  hiring  required 
people. 
Legal  deficit:  Difficulty  in  enforcing  contracts  in  a  timely  manner,  absence  of  proper 
liquidation  laws,  absence  of  reforms  and  certainty  in  tax  laws  and  uncertainty  about 
interpretation  of  laws,  as  evident  from  some  recent  cases,  are  legal  impediments  for 
investments. Need for obtaining multiple regulatory approvals, which is reflected in very low 
global  position  of  India  in  “Doing  Business  Ranking”,  compounds  the  problems  of  the 
entrepreneurs. Liquidity: At the system level, crowding out of resources from the banks due 
to  huge  government  borrowings  because  of  large  fiscal  deficit  pre-empts  resources  for 
private sector investment. In the current context of declining asset quality and loan-deposit 
mismatches, banks are found to be risk averse in lending for private investment. Absence of 
a vibrant corporate debt market and the dearth of IPOs as seen recently in the capital market 
further  compound  the  problems  of  funding  investments.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  of  course 
been  conducting  the  open  market  operations  to  ease  the  liquidity  deficit  in  the  system 
beyond  its  comfort  level;  recently  to  direct  flow  of  resources  to  the  private  sector  for 
productive  purposes,  it  has  reduced  the  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR).  Leadership: 
Although India has traditionally taken pride in its entrepreneurial class, the recent decades 
have brought to the fore the fact that not many new dynamic entrepreneurs have emerged. 
Some studies in fact indicate that India has a large number of well entrenched billionaires in 
comparison  to  the  peer  group  countries.  Absence  of  effective  political  and  executive  level 
leadership  at  the  local,  state  and  the  central  levels  have  also  been  seen  as  obstacles  to 
investment  in  the  recent  years.  Learning  deficit:  Learnings  in  the  form  of  Research  & 
Development (R&D) inputs form an integral part for laying a strong foundation for industrial 
growth.  Given  the  quantum  of  resources  and  investments  required,  corporates  tend  to 
compromise  on  the  R&D  or  depend  on  reverse  engineering  to  manufacture  cheaper 
alternatives. For achieving a greater share in world trade of quality products, corporates need 
to create or tap resources which will provide original ideas through R&D. Declining number of 
Ph.Ds in the country in a way shows how innovation and creativity deficits could affect quality 
investment efforts. 
Currency rate channel 
Movement  in  exchange  rates  both  in  India  and  abroad  is  primarily  conditioned  by  the 
movement in the US Dollar due to the “Exorbitant Privilege1” that the currency enjoys. Firstly, 
a significant portion of world trade is denominated in the US Dollar. Secondly, during times of 
global risk aversion, capital flows back to the US and the US dollar strengthens (Chart 5) – a 
phenomena  witnessed  immediately  after  the  US  downgrade  by  the  Standards  &  Poor’s 
(S&P). 
                                                
1   The term was coined in the 1960s by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, then the French Minister of Finance. The term got 
popularized with the release of the book titled “Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of 
the International Monetary System” written by Barry Eichengreen. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
DXY Index: The US Dollar Index is a geometrically-averaged calculation of six currencies weighted against 
the  US  dollar  and  contains  six  component  currencies:  the  Euro  (57.60%),  Japanese  yen  (13.60%),  British 
pound  (11.90%),  Canadian  dollar  (9.10%),  Swedish  krona  and  Swiss  franc. ADXY Index: The Bloomberg-
JPMorgan Asia Currency Index is an U.S. dollar tradable index of emerging Asian currencies with Chinese 
Renminbi having a weightage of 36.76%, Korean Won 14.10%, Singapore Dollar 9.84%, Hong Kong Dollar 
9.21%, Indian Rupee 7.90% and Indonesian Rupiah, Malaysian Ringgit, Philippine Peso, Taiwan Dollar and 
Thai Baht with smaller weightages. 
Thirdly, the US Dollar is the “numeraire currency” of official reserves around the world. All 
these factors have led to the strength of the US Dollar vis-a-vis other currencies of the world. 
Economic  health  of  resident  entities  is  often  affected  by  developments  in  the  US,  Europe, 
US, China, etc. markets and is transmitted via changes in the currency rates. Transmission 
of developments in the global economy to the domestic economy takes place via movement 
in the exchange rates. More particularly, although exchange rates are influenced by domestic 
economic and financial conditions, rates are also influenced by the global currency rates due 
to integration of the Indian financial system and markets with the rest of the world. One such 
illustration  is  the  recent  movement  in  the  US$-   rate  which  has  been  found  to  mirror  the 
Euro-US$ movement. (Chart 6) 
The domestic forex market has witnessed a prolonged period of volatility with one-way bias 
over the last one year except brief periods of appreciation. While during 2010–11, the Indian 
Rupee saw an appreciation of 1.1 per cent, 2011–12 witnessed sharp depreciation of more 
than 12 per cent, much more than many Asian economy currencies (Chart 7). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 After  touching  54.30  (all-time  low  till  that  point  of  time)  on  December  15,  2011,  Rupee 
showed signs of recovery in response to the various policy measures aimed at encouraging 
capital flows as well as administrative measures taken to curb the speculative behavior of the 
market participants. Rupee has been trading in a range between 55.07 and 56.16 since early 
July.  The  level  of  Rupee  exchange  rate  and  its  volatility,  as  mentioned,  will,  however, 
continue  to  be  influenced  both  by  the  global  currency  rate  movements  and  domestic 
developments. 
A  number  of  policy  and  administrative  measures  have  been  undertaken  to  mitigate  the 
effects of unfavourable movement in the exchange rates. Steps have been taken to contain 
speculative  pressure  on  Rupee  and  the  Reserve  Bank  has,  as  a  policy,  intervened  in  the 
forex  market  to  contain  excessive  volatility  without  of  course  targeting  any  level.  Caps  on 
banks’  and  corporates’ ability  to  bring  in  or  take  out  capital  have  been  applied  judiciously. 
Measures have been undertaken to attract capital flows to reduce supply-demand mismatch 
for the US Dollar. Trade invoicing in Indian Rupee and hedging of rupee exposures by non-
residents  has  been  permitted.  All  these  strategic  and  tactical  measures  are  expected  to 
reduce  the  effect  of  unfavourable  movements  of  the  global  currency  rates  on  the  Indian 
currency.  Level  of  CAD  affects  currency  rates,  thus,  moderating  the  CAD  by  expanding 
exports and moderating imports is a challenge. Another challenge is the constant monitoring 
of  the  market  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  review  of  the  strategic  and  tactical  tools 
available to it on an ongoing basis for handling excessive exchange rate volatility. Increasing 
the use of local currencies in trade starting with the neighbouring/emerging market countries 
could mitigate the effects of adverse movement in the US Dollar. Increasing the use of local 
currencies in trade, however, remains a challenge, particularly  when such currencies have 
shown sharp volatility with downward bias. 
Exchange rate is an important macro-economic variable which has significant impact on the 
real sector. Sharp unidirectional movements in this variable in a relatively short period of time 
can  have  serious  financial  stability  implications.  All  the  concerned  regulators  who  have 
jurisdictional interest in the exchange rate have to adopt a coordinated approach to address 
market volatility. Credibility of central bank’s approach to intervention and communication of 
its  policy  preferences  remain  a  major  challenge  given  the  multiple  pressure  points  of  our 
external  sector.  Role  of  the  Government  is  very  important  in  building  confidence  in  the 
economy,  encouraging  long-term  non-debt  creating  capital  flows  and  taking  measures  to 
promote exports and moderate avoidable imports for reduction in the CAD. At the same time, 
the  market  participants  and  end-users  have  a  significant  role  and  stake  in  market’s  early 
return to normalcy. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Contamination 
Increasing  integration  of  Indian  economy  with  the  rest  of  world  has  also  made  corporates 
vulnerable to external developments through the effect on their balance sheets. The recent 
sharp  one-way  movement  of  the  Indian  Rupee  caught  most  people  by  surprise.  The  high 
levels  of  unhedged  external  borrowings  of  Indian  corporate  sector  and  other  current  and 
capital account linkages with the rest of the world exposed them to transaction, translation 
and economic risks from exchange rate movements. The Indian Rupee depreciation causes 
translation  losses  that  need  to  be  recognised  on  balance  sheets  in India  to judge the true 
financial  health  of  corporates.  In  addition,  the  use,  and,  on  many  occasions,  the  abuse  of 
complex forex derivatives, added to the contamination of the balance sheets. The European 
sovereign  debt  crisis  and  consequent  deleveraging  by  the  European  banks  has  increased 
funding pressures for our entities as the European banks are an important source of finance 
for  Indian  banks  and  corporates.  In  the  recent  period,  Indian  corporates  have  expanded 
abroad and, given the volatility in financial conditions the world over, their exposures by way 
of equity, loans and contingent liabilities like guarantees to the JV/WOS set up in stressed 
countries  abroad  could  put  pressure  on  the  parent  companies  who  maybe  required  to 
provide support to their overseas JVs/WoS. These developments pose major challenges as 
India Inc has been globalizing in a rapid pace. 
Since the commercial banks are the major players in the domestic foreign exchange market 
in India, one would expect much higher responsibility from them. Keeping in view the need to 
keep “suitability and appropriateness” criteria in view, banks are expected to show restraint 
while offering forex derivative products to the corporates as the latter often enter into such 
the market move adversely. This could lead to enormous problems for the banks as also for 
the corporates. Therefore, Reserve Bank has been emphasizing that banks should insist on 
Board  approved  policy  covering  un-hedged  foreign  exchange  exposure  of  all  their  clients 
including  the  SMEs.  Further,  while  extending  fund  and  non-fund  based  credit  facilities  to 
corporates,  banks  should  rigorously  evaluate  the  risks  arising  out  of  un-hedged  foreign 
currency exposures of the corporates and price them in the credit risk premium. 
Containing  excessive  reliance  on  foreign  borrowings  remains  a  challenge.  As  mentioned, 
managing the risks of leveraged fund based and non-fund based overseas exposures to the 
JV/WoS abroad is also an emerging issue. Adoption of sound risk management practices at 
home has also not been properly appreciated as domestic firms should focus on their core 
business rather than see forex transactions as profit centres. In addition, proper appreciation 
of the spirit of the accounting norms including the requirements of hedge accounting relating 
to forex exposures should also receive the attention of all the stakeholders. 
Confidence channel 
Confidence or contagion channel arises from uncertainty in the minds of investors and other 
economic  agents  due  to  both  global  and  local  factors.  In  general,  one  could  relate  the 
contagion  channel  to  Keynes’  concept  of  “animal  spirits”.  The  impact  of  this  channel 
manifests  itself  very  quickly  in  the  equity  and foreign  exchange market-falling  equities  and 
one-way movement of the exchange rate. Even the stock market sentiment is often driven by 
the FIIs led activities based on their “risk on – risk off” approaches. Often the movement in 
one  market  reinforces  movements  in  the  other.  Overall  negative  sentiments  can  quell 
investment plans of portfolio investors, deter long term direct investors to commit funds and 
can have negative effect on the financial markets. 
Recognizing  these  issues  the  Reserve  Bank  had  mandated  that  the  participation  in  the 
call/money  markets  be  limited  to  only  domestic  entities  like  primary  dealers  and  banks 
without any role for non-resident entities. Even the debt market has been insulated due to 
limited  exposure  to  the  non-residents.  The  overall  Indian  approach  has  been  to  focus  on 
active capital account management so that the domestic currency is not unduly affected by 
global factors unrelated to the local fundamentals. As discussed earlier, the Reserve Bank 
also  intervenes  in  the  currency  markets  to  reduce  excessive  volatility.  The  Liquidity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Adjustment Facility (LAF) available to the banks also acts as a safety valve during times of 
stress and reduction in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) negates the impact of contagion 
as more resources are available for the private sector. 
Contagion  always  poses  challenges  for  the  AEs  and  the  EDEs  alike.  India  is  no  different. 
Maintaining  and  improving  confidence  in  India  story  remains  a  challenge.  This  obviously 
involves reduction in the twin deficits of CAD and the GFD and improvement in investment 
climate  for  both  domestic  and  foreign  investors.  There  is  a  need  to  realize  that  financial 
sector solutions can not address real sector problems. Maintaining foreign exchange reserve 
adequacy ratios in the current context of emerging vulnerabilities in our external sector poses 
challenges for India. In addition, encouraging non-debt flows in a risk-off global environment 
is another big challenge. 
Credit rating channel 
Capital flows are often determined by the sovereign ratings. The outlook for India has been 
downgraded by a few Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs). India’s sovereign rating was put under 
“watch-list”  due  to  weak  fiscal  performance,  uncertain  investment  environment,  declining 
growth  and  governance  related  issues.  According  to  S&P,  India’s  rating  currently  is  BBB-. 
Any downgrade from the current rating will lead to a non-investment grade status and could 
have  implications  for  capital  flows.  Cross-currency  studies  have  revealed  that  downgrades 
cause  depreciation  of  currencies  and  increases  currency  volatility.  One  can  always  argue 
whether  the  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  of  the  CRAs  is  the  correct  way  to  assess  the 
country’s macro-economic situation. Further, the credibility of CRAs has come into question 
in  the  recent  past.  Some  quarters  of  the  academia  and  policy  makers  often  ask  if  the 
standards of the CRAs are poor. We have, however, limited choice in this regard. Changes in 
external ratings could affect the size or availability of capital flows in a significant manner in 
either direction. The cost of capital flows could also be affected by changes in ratings. Major 
rating  agencies  have  recently  sounded  off  warnings  resulting  in  difficulties  faced  by  both 
Indian banks and corporates in accessing overseas credit facilities mainly ECBs. Some FIIs 
like  pension  funds,  endowment  funds,  sovereign  wealth  funds/central  banks,  etc.  have  a 
minimum  investment  rating  criteria  for  their  bond  investments  and  if  India  falls  below  that 
rating, there could be an impact on capital flows. 
There  are  many  positives  for  India.  India  continues  to  be  one  of  the  fastest  growing 
economies  in  the  world  and  the  relatively  high  levels  of  domestic  savings  and  investment 
rates  augur  well  for  the  future  economic  growth  of  the  country.  In  addition,  public  debt  is 
largely held domestically and is denominated in Rupees, insulating the country from adverse 
movements in exchange rates and contagion arising out of risk-off sentiment of the foreign 
investors.  India’s  large  and  diversified  economy  along  with  educated  workers  and  strong 
entrepreneurial  class  can  go  a  long  way  in  augmenting  domestic  growth  and  furthering 
India’s 
the  general 
investment/business  sentiment  in  the  country.  The  Government  has  announced  its 
commitment for fiscal consolidation and working towards a more transparent and stable tax 
regime. Improvements in supply side channels have been focussed to address the problem 
of inflation. 
Meaningful  engagement  with  CRAs,  improving  governance,  removing  bottlenecks  in 
infrastructure  projects  in  power,  roads,  ports  &  airports,  improving  the  investment  climate, 
providing  a  stable  and  clearer  legal  tax  structure,  easing  regulatory  rigidities  in  terms  of 
approval for large projects, reducing high GFD which crowds out resources available to the 
private sector and adds to the inflationary pressure and quality spending by the Governments 
to  crowd  in  investment  could  go  a  long  way  in  bringing  out  positive  reassessment  of  the 
country by the CRAs. 
term  growth  story.  There  have  been  efforts 
improve 
long 
to 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding thoughts 
In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  summarize  the  issues  I  have  highlighted.  Global  growth  has 
slowed  and  uncertainties  have  increased.  Unemployment  remains  high  in  the  advanced 
economies leading to lower demand. The Indian economy and the financial system have a 
unique set of strengths and weaknesses but like any other EDE it cannot fully protect itself 
from the global headwinds. Its resilience to overseas developments would be severely tested 
as  domestic  growth  and  inflation  dynamics  are  affected  by  both  global  factors  and  local 
factors. Global factors affect the domestic economy through the 7C channels – Commerce, 
Commodity price, Capital flows, Currency rates, Contamination, Confidence and Credit rating 
channels.  The  local  factors,  such  as,  the  twin  deficits  of  GFD  and  CAD,  persistently  high 
levels of inflation, deceleration in investments, infrastructural deficiencies, supply bottlenecks 
of industrial inputs like coal and electricity, deficient monsoon, hassles involved in execution 
of large projects, low business confidence and governance issues play an equally dominant 
role  in  toning  down  the  growth  expectations.  From  the  global  perspective,  the  major 
challenges facing India that need to be addressed are the falling demand for Indian exports 
and  inelastic  nature  of  our  imports,  mostly  commodities  with  elevated  prices,  controlling 
inflation and inflation expectations, eliminating infrastructure bottlenecks, attracting non-debt 
creating  foreign  capital  in  the  face  of  general  risk  aversion,  containing  knock-on  effects  of 
overseas  developments  on  the  exchange  rate,  encouraging  firms  to  follow  sound  risk 
management practices to contain the impact of their foreign exchange exposures and taking 
measures to positively influence the assessment of the credit rating agencies.  
In the context of current global environment characterized by slowdown and uncertainty on 
which  we  have  little  control,  there  are  still  leeways  available  for  improving  the  domestic 
economy  and  the  investor  sentiments.  The  need  of  the  hour  is,  therefore,  to  address  the 
structural and cyclical impediments through appropriate domestic macro and micro-economic 
policies, credible action for fiscal consolidation, tax reforms and predictability and controlling 
inflation  and  inflationary  expectations.  There  is  also  need  to  tone  up  our  political  – 
administrative – regulatory framework for improving our “Doing Business Ranking” given the 
fact  that  in  2012,  India  ranked  132  among  183  nations  in  terms  of  overall  ease  of  doing 
business indicators as per a World Bank study. Although we have given a gobye to the so-
called “licence-permit raj”, the study finds that in terms of procedures to start a business and 
get  all  the  permissions  needed  for  a  business  to  start  India  ranked  166th.  This  clearly 
indicates that we need to focus on the 7L deficits – Land, Linkages, Labour, Legal, Liquidity, 
Leadership and Learning deficits – for boosting the investment climate for both domestic and 
foreign investors. 
Finally,  I  believe  each  one  of  us  can  play  a  part  in the globally  turbulent  and  domestically 
challenging  times  by  drawing  inspiration  from  a  prayer  from  the  American  theologian  and 
public affairs commentator Reinhold Neibuhr who very aptly said:  
God give us grace to accept with serenity things that cannot be changed, courage to change 
the things which should be changed and the wisdom to distinguish the one from the other. 
Thank you once again for giving me this opportunity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
