Charles L Evans: Managing monetary policy risks 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
Lake Forest-Lake Bluff Rotary Club Regular Meeting, Lake Forest, Illinois, 11 January 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for that kind introduction. This seems to be the time of year when both businesses 
and  individuals  focus  on  planning  for  the  year  ahead,  and  I’m  delighted  to  be  here  this 
morning  to  share  my  perspective  on  the  current  economy.  In  doing  so,  I  will  discuss  my 
views on the progress of the recovery and on the likely course of monetary policy. 
Those of you who follow monetary policy developments may be aware that I was the lone 
dissenter at the last two Fed policy meetings. So it should come as no surprise when I say 
that  the  views  that  I  am  presenting  today  are  my  own  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  my  other  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. 
Lately, it has become extremely important for Federal Reserve policymakers to get out from 
behind our desks and into the communities we serve. Doing this gives me the opportunity to 
explain  how  I  think  about  the  economy,  but  it’s  also  important  for  me  to  learn  from  your 
questions and comments. I really do value the opportunity to interact with business people 
within our Fed District, which comprises most of the Midwest and stretches from Detroit to 
Des Moines and on down to Indianapolis. So it really is a pleasure for me to be here today, to 
have the chance to “get out” and yet still be close to home. 
Dual mandate 
The Federal Reserve is charged by Congress with fostering economic conditions consistent 
with maximum employment and price stability. These two objectives are commonly referred 
to as our “dual mandate.” 
The Fed is different from most other central banks in that it has an explicit dual mandate. 
Although  many  central  banks  are  instructed  to  mitigate  disturbances  to  the  real  economy, 
most have a mandate to achieve only one goal – maintaining price stability. Usually, this is 
not an important distinction, since monetary policies that promote price stability are generally 
consistent with those that support full employment. 
However, in the rare occasion when tension arises between these two goals, policy must be 
formulated with careful consideration of the relative performance of one objective against the 
other and of the risks to the outlooks for both policy goals. 
Keeping this in mind, I’ll turn now to a discussion of my outlook for the economy and then 
offer my views on how best to chart a course for monetary policy. 
Real output gap 
Four years ago the U.S. economy entered what developed into the deepest downturn since 
the Great Depression; indeed, many are now referring to 2008–09 as the “Great Recession.” 
During recoveries from severe recessions, we usually see solid job and output growth, with 
the improvements in one fostering gains in the other. We are not seeing this today. It is now 
two and a half years since the Great Recession ended and the recovery began. 
Yet,  despite  both  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  stimulus,  the  pace  of 
improvement has been painstakingly slow. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is only just 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
tepid, 
improvement. 
is  showing  signs  of 
back  to  where  it  stood  at  its  pre-recession  peak.  Employment  growth  is  barely  enough  to 
keep  pace  with  the  natural  growth  in  the  labor  force  and  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
extraordinarily high. 
However,  recent  news  about  the  performance  of  the  economy  has  been  more  promising. 
Motor vehicle sales have returned to their upward trend following supply disruptions caused 
by last spring’s horrible Japanese tsunami. U.S. manufacturing is expanding – boosted by 
the recovery in the automotive sector, as well as growing worldwide demand for  materials 
and equipment in the energy, mining and agricultural sectors. 
Consumer  spending  outside  of  autos  appears  to  be  rising  at  a  moderate  rate,  and 
employment  growth,  although  still 
Initial 
unemployment insurance claims are down and layoffs have fallen, contributing to a decline in 
the  unemployment  rate  of 0.5  percent  over  the  past  quarter.  So,  the  economy  is  looking 
somewhat better than it did a few months ago. 
But this does not mean we are seeing a massive surge in economic activity. The data shows 
only  modest  improvement  in  growth  to  rates  that  are  near  or  just  somewhat  above  the 
economy’s longer-run potential. 
Moreover,  the  pace  of  economic  activity  needs  to  accelerate  further  to  boost  confidence. 
After  all,  we  have  seen  our  hopes  for  a  more  rapid  improvement  in  the  economy  dashed 
several times in this recovery. For instance, early last year most forecasters thought that the 
recovery was gaining traction and that economic activity would increase at a solid – though 
not spectacular – pace through 2012. 
Then, as now, the labor market was beginning to show some long-awaited improvement, and 
households and businesses seemed to be making good progress in repairing their balance 
sheets following the huge losses in wealth sustained during the recession. Analysts thought 
that higher prices for energy and other commodities would weigh on output growth, as would 
the supply-chain disruptions from the disaster in Japan. But these factors were expected to 
be  transitory,  and  most  forecasters  thought  growth  would  improve  significantly  once  these 
influences had passed. 
Unfortunately, this forecast proved to be too optimistic. Revised data indicate that annualized 
real GDP growth was only 1 percent in the first half of 2011 and improved only modestly to 
2 percent in the third quarter. Consumer spending was particularly sluggish, weighed down 
by slow growth in employment, income, and household wealth, as well as some continued 
limits in access to credit. 
Furthermore,  the  weakness  in  GDP  growth  began  before  the  bulk  of  the  effects  of  higher 
energy prices hit the economy and before the disaster in Japan happened. This timing, along 
with the continued softness of most economic indicators into the early summer, indicates that 
the slowing in output growth was not all due to temporary factors. 
Periodically,  the  FOMC  publishes  participants’  projections  for  several  key  economic 
variables. Our latest forecasts were made in early November. Our outlook then was for real 
GDP growth to be around 1.75 percent in 2011 and then rise to 2.75 percent in 2012. 
Though  an  improvement,  this  2012  pace  is  not  far  above  most  analysts’  views  of  the 
potential  rate  of  output  growth  for  the  economy.  Thus,  such  growth  rates  are  not  strong 
enough to make much of a dent in the unemployment rate and other measures of resource 
slack. Indeed, the FOMC’s latest forecasts are for the unemployment rate to remain above 
8.5 percent through 2012 and to fall only to about 8 percent in 2013. 
As I just noted, the somewhat firmer tone of recent economic data suggest some welcome 
traction, but the data are not strong enough, or uniform enough, to assert that momentum for 
growth is building. The headwinds that we face are still substantial. 
Moreover, the problems in Europe now loom larger. Careful analysis suggests that the direct 
impact of slower European growth on U.S. net exports likely would be small. However, there 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
is  a  risk  that  substantial  financial  disruptions  in  Europe  could  impinge  on  the  cost  and 
availability of credit in the U.S. or induce a new wave of cautious behavior by households 
and  businesses.  If  that  were  to  occur,  then  we  could  see  a  larger  adverse  impact  on 
economic activity in the U.S. 
After  I  balance  these  factors,  my  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  remains  largely  unchanged 
from  the  November  forecast,  and  my  forecast  for  the  unemployment  rate  is  only  slightly 
lower. However, I am concerned about the downside risks. 
that  were  well  beyond 
the  control  of  monetary  policy  –  such  as 
Inflation outlook under 2 percent 
What  about  inflation?  Large  increases  in  energy  prices  pushed  headline  inflation  –  as 
measured  by  the  12-month  change  in  the  total  Personal  Consumption  Expenditures  Price 
Index  –  up  from  about  1.25  percent  last  fall  to  almost  3  percent  this  summer.  One-time 
events 
the  
Arab Spring – drove prices higher and took a bite out of households’ budgets. But they did 
not result in a permanent ratcheting up of inflation. 
Prices  for  energy  and  many  other  commodities  have  softened  of  late,  and  the  earlier 
increases did not pass much into core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy 
components.  Notably,  recent  numbers  show  core  inflation  is  now  lower  than  last  summer. 
Keep in mind, this is a better predictor of future overall inflation than total inflation itself. 
And  with  the  unemployment  rate  still  high  and  capacity  utilization  low,  resource  slack  will 
continue to exert downward pressure on prices. In addition, measures of longer-run inflation 
expectations are at the low end of the range they have been running since last November. 
Putting these factors together, I would argue that the outlook for inflation is likely to remain 
low for the foreseeable future. The November FOMC forecasts for core inflation in 2012 were 
concentrated near 1.8 percent, and the forecasts for total inflation in 2013 and 2014 were in 
the range of 1.5 percent to 2.0 percent. My own assessment is that inflation will be at the 
lower end of these ranges. 
Fed performance 
Given  the  high  unemployment  rate  and  low  job  growth,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  the  Fed  has 
fallen short in achieving its goal of maximum employment. 
As 
the  majority  of  
FOMC participants – including me – judge that our objective is for overall inflation to average 
2 percent over the medium term. With my own view that inflation is likely to run below this 
rate over the next few years, I believe we will miss on our inflation objective as well. 
the  price  stability  component  of  our  dual  mandate, 
for 
What Is the right course for policy? 
The traditional course of action when inflation is below target and real output is expected to 
be  below  potential  is  to  run  an  accommodative  monetary  policy.  I  support  such 
accommodation today. And I believe the degree of accommodation should be substantial. 
I  believe  that  the  disappointingly  slow  growth  and  continued  high  unemployment  that  we 
confront today reflects the fact that we are in what economists call a “liquidity trap.” Let me 
explain.  In  normal  times,  real  interest  rates  –  that  is,  nominal  interest  rates  adjusted  for 
expected  inflation  –  rise  and  fall  to  bring  desired  savings  into  line  with  investment  and  to 
keep productive resources near full employment. 
This market dynamic is thwarted in the case of a liquidity trap. That is, when desired savings 
increase a great deal, nominal interest rates may fall to zero and then can go no lower. Real 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3
interest  rates  become  “trapped”  and  may  not  be  able  to  become  negative  enough  to 
equilibrate savings and investment. That is where we seem to be now – short-term, risk-free 
nominal interest rates are close to zero and actual real rates are modestly negative, but they 
are still not low enough to return economic activity to its potential. 
A  liquidity  trap  presents  a  clear  and  present  danger  of  a  prolonged  period  of  economic 
weakness – today that means a risk of repeating the experience of the U.S. in the 1930s or 
that of Japan over the past 20 years. 
But we need not resign ourselves to such an outcome. Because of the dire implications of 
liquidity traps, economists have studied them over the years in rigorous analytical models. 
Importantly,  variants  of  these  models  have  successfully  explained  past  business  cycle 
developments in the U.S. These studies conclude that economic performance can be vastly 
improved by employing monetary policies that commit to keeping short-term rates low for a 
prolonged period. 
A balanced policy approach 
As  I  weigh  the  evidence,  I  believe  we  are  in  a  liquidity  trap  and  favor  the  prescription  of 
continued  accommodation.  But  I  recognize  that  I  could  be  wrong.  Central  bankers  have 
incomplete information, and sometimes are confronted with very different views of the forces 
driving the economy. This is especially true in the difficult circumstances we currently face. 
Instead of a liquidity trap, some have posited that we are in an economic malaise that reflects 
“structural  factors”  (such  as  a  job  skills  mismatch)  and  that  the  economy  today  is  actually 
functioning  close  to  a  new,  more  dismal  productive  capacity.  I  have  discussed  this  very 
pessimistic “structural impediments scenario” in other forums.1 If this scenario is true, then 
further monetary accommodation will only lead to rising inflation without much improvement 
in unemployment. 
Those subscribing to this view warn of repeating the mistakes of the 1970s. At that time, the 
Fed did not understand that the changing structure of the economy had caused the natural 
rate of unemployment to rise. Too much accommodation during that time only served to raise 
inflation and inflation expectations. 
Although  I  do  not  find  this  structural  impediments  scenario  compelling,  as  a  prudent 
policymaker, I must at least consider its possibility. Without a clearer picture of whether we 
are in the midst of structural change or a liquidity trap, I favor a monetary policy strategy that 
balances the two risks of dismally slow growth on the one hand and creeping inflation on the 
other. 
Let  me  outline  how  this  balanced  policy  approach  might  work  in  practice.  The  Fed  could 
sharpen  its  forward  guidance  by  pledging  to  keep  policy  rates  near  zero  until  one  of  two 
events occurs. 
First, this policy would account for the liquidity trap risk by communicating that we intend to 
keep the federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels as long as the unemployment rate is 
above a 7 percent threshold. 
Reductions in the unemployment rate below this level would represent meaningful progress 
toward  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  and  might  be  a  reason  to  lessen  policy 
accommodation. Second, this policy would account for the risk of higher inflation – that is, we 
would  be  committed  to  pulling  back  on  accommodation  if  inflation  rises  above  a  particular 
threshold. 
                                                 
1  Evans (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
I would argue that this policy’s inflation-safeguard threshold needs to be above our current 
2 percent  inflation  objective.  My  preferred  threshold  is  a  forecast  of  3  percent  over  the 
medium  term.  Now,  calling  for  tolerance  of  inflation  up  to  3  percent  may  seem  shocking 
coming from a conservative central banker. 
However,  the  most  recent  research  shows  that  improved  economic  performance  during  a 
liquidity trap requires the central bank, if necessary, to allow inflation to run higher than its 
target over the medium term. Such policies can generate the above-trend growth necessary 
to reduce unemployment and return overall economic activity to its productive potential. 
Let me emphasize that under this policy proposal, core inflation reaching 3 percent is only a 
risk – and not a certainty. 
Indeed, simulations of standard models suggest that core inflation is likely to remain below 
3 percent even under a policy of extended monetary accommodation. But the economy may 
behave differently than expected. Still, 3 percent inflation is a risk that we should be willing to 
accept. 
If, contrary to most evidence, the natural rate of unemployment is higher than 7 percent, then 
under this policy inflation will rise more quickly and without any improvements to the real side 
of  the  economy.  In  such  an  adverse  situation, the  inflation  safeguard triggers  an  exit  from 
what would be evidently excessive policy accommodation. And it would do so before inflation 
expectations would be in much danger of becoming unhinged. 
We would not have the desired reductions in unemployment, but then again, there wouldn’t 
be anything that monetary policy could do about it. We would suffer some policy loss in that a 
3  percent  inflation  rate  is  above  our  2  percent  target.  But  we  certainly  have  experienced 
inflation  rates  near  3  percent in  the  recent  past  and  have  weathered  them  well.  And 
3 percent won’t unhinge long-run inflation expectations. 
We are not talking about anything close to the debilitating higher inflation rates we saw in the 
1970s or 1980s. Most importantly, we would also know that we had made our best effort. 
But  let  me  be  clear:  There  is  a  natural  tendency  for  policymakers  to  pull  back  on 
accommodation  too  early  before  the  real  rate  of  interest  has  fallen  to  low  enough  levels. 
Such  errors  happened  in  1937  when  the  Fed  prematurely  withdrew  accommodation.  This 
was documented in Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz’s 1971 book, A Monetary History of 
the United States. More recently, the Bank of Japan made the same mistake. Therefore, it is 
essential that the Fed clearly commit to a policy action that is measurable against our goals. 
Policy projections and a monetary policy framework 
Regardless  of  whether  such  explicit  forward  guidance  is  adopted,  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy can be enhanced by clear communication of the Fed’s ultimate goals and of 
the strategies that it will use to achieve those goals. The minutes from the December FOMC 
meeting,  which  were  released  last  Tuesday,  noted  that  the  Committee  discussed  two 
initiatives to enhance our communications about monetary policy. First, we agreed to begin 
publishing  participants’  projections  for  the  appropriate  path  for  the  federal  funds  rate  and 
qualitative  information  about  their  outlooks  for  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  in  our  quarterly 
Summary of Economic Projections (or SEP). Second, we discussed formulating a consensus 
statement on the Committee’s longer-run goals and monetary policy strategies. 
Until now, participants have provided forecasts for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate 
and inflation, but not the policy assumptions that underlie these projections. The forecasts 
were made under each participant’s unspecified views of appropriate policy, which is defined 
in  true  Fedspeak  as:  “the  future  path  of  policy  that  each  participant  deems  most  likely  to 
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her interpretation of 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  stable 
prices.” 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5
Being more explicit about appropriate policy can clear up a lot of uncertainty. For example, 
suppose inflation were running higher than we would like, and the economic projections in 
the SEP showed it coming down over the next couple of years. In the absence of information 
on  participants’  policy  projections,  the  public  would  not  know  whether  the  FOMC  thought 
inflation would simply come down on its own or whether it thought that a monetary tightening 
would  be  required  to  reduce  inflationary  pressures.  Including  policy  projections  will  help 
clarify such judgments. 
In  my  opinion,  this  is  a  substantial,  first-order  improvement  in  policy  communications,  and 
this  greater  clarity  may  have  significant  additional  value  for  improving  how  the  economy 
operates. Expectations of the future path for policy and the degree of uncertainty surrounding 
those expectations are key determinants of private borrowing rates and other asset prices. 
These  play  an  important  role  in  the  spending  and  saving  decisions  of  households  and 
businesses.  Households  and  businesses  will  be  able  to  make  better-informed  decisions  if 
they have a clearer notion of future policy rates; the potential for reduced uncertainty could 
also lower the risk premium embedded in longer-term interest rates. 
The  second  new  communications  initiative  –  a  more  explicit  consensus  framework  for 
monetary policy – is still a work-in-progress. Thus I can only talk about it in generalities and 
give you my personal views about what it should say and why it would be very helpful. 
In  my  view,  a  framework  statement  should  help  clarify  what  the  dual  mandate  goals  of 
maximum employment and price stability mean in terms of measurable economic outcomes. 
It  should  also  convey  the  extent  to  which  monetary  policy  can  be  expected  to  deliver 
particular  long-run  outcomes.  And  it  should  better  enable  the  public  to  form  expectations 
about  how  policy  will  react  to  economic  disturbances  that  move  employment  and  inflation 
away from levels consistent with the dual mandate. As I noted earlier, our goals of maximum 
employment and price stability usually are not in conflict; but when they are, a more explicit 
framework can provide a better idea of how the Committee will weigh the relevant costs and 
benefits that enter this more difficult decision-making process. 
I have strongly supported the publication of our policy projections, and I strongly support the 
adoption of a more explicit consensus framework statement. In my opinion, my current policy 
views  and  prescriptions  continue  to  be  appropriate  in  light  of  these  new  communications 
vehicles. The threshold policy I discussed earlier advocates keeping the federal funds rate 
near  zero  until  either  the  unemployment  rate  falls  below  7  percent  (at  least)  or  until 
medium-term  inflation  breaches  3  percent.  The  FOMC’s  adoption  of  an  explicit  policy 
framework can underscore the distinction between these policy thresholds vs. our longer-run 
objectives.  In  particular,  we  would  convey  that  the  longer-run  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment  is  substantially  lower  than  the  threshold  of  7  percent,  while  the  inflation 
threshold of 3 percent is higher than the longer-run inflation objective. Consequently, even if 
inflation  runs  somewhat  above  its  goal  for  a  while,  the  public  would  understand  that  we 
intend  to  bring  inflation  down  to  the  goal  over  time,  and  hence  longer-run  inflation 
expectations would remain firmly anchored. 
The communication of policy projections also works well in conjunction with the thresholds. 
By publishing projections for future short-term interest rates along with unemployment and 
inflation,  the  public  can  evaluate  the  Committee’s  thinking  about  which  combinations  of 
unemployment  and  inflation  will  likely  lead  to  a  lift-off  of  policy  rates.  In  comparing  these 
projections  against  my  thresholds,  the  public  can  evaluate  how  much  more  policy 
accommodation could potentially be allowed under my proposal. 
Providing  these  additional  forecasts  enhances  transparency  and  the  public’s  ability  to 
evaluate current monetary policy with alternative approaches. And a framework that explicitly 
clarifies  the  Committee’s  commitment  to  both  price-stability  and  achievable  real-side 
mandate responsibilities will, I believe, often allow monetary policy to respond more strongly 
in  the  medium-term  when  adverse  economic  shocks  impede  growth  and  employment. 
Indeed, I think these additional communications vehicles can provide further clarification and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
increase the effectiveness of the types of additional accommodation that I have advocated in 
recent months, as well as earlier in 2010. Consequently, I am an enthusiastic supporter of 
these enhancements to Fed transparency. 
Let me conclude by saying that I do not see these enhanced communications vehicles as 
being  inherently  “hawkish”  or  “dovish.”  Participants  may  well  have  differing  views  on  the 
appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  the  particular  economic  circumstances  of  the 
moment.  In  being  more  explicit  about  our  framework,  we  would  not  eliminate  these 
differences of opinion. But we would further discipline the parameters of our discussions and 
clarify the judgments that lie behind our policy decisions. 
As  the  central  bank  in  a  democratic  society,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  an  obligation  to 
articulate  what  it  is  trying  to  achieve  with  monetary  policy.  I  believe  that  these  latest 
communications efforts are an important step in further increasing such accountability to the 
public.  The  Committee  equally  respects  both  legs  of  the  dual  mandate,  and  I  feel  these 
communications enhancements will help articulate the ways in which we will seek to achieve 
both objectives. 
Thank you and I look forward to your questions. 
References 
Evans, Charles, 2011, “A risk management approach to monetary policy,” Remarks delivered 
at the Ball State University Center for Business and Economic Research, Muncie, Indiana on 
December 5. 
Friedman,  Milton,  and  Anna  Jacobson  Schwartz,  1971,  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United 
States, 1867–1960, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 7
