Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Managing risks in a financial stability world 
– how different is this prudential world? 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Joint General Assembly of ACI Phils, FMAP, IHAP, MART, 
NASBI and TOAP, Makati City, 19 September 2012. 
 The Officers and Members of ACI Phils led by Coco Martin, FMAP led by Mike Ferrer, IHAP 
led by Manny Tordesillas, MART led by Raul Victor Tan, NASBI led by Roderick Dones, and 
TOAP led by Raffy Ayuste, colleagues from the BSP, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  joining  here  tonight  six  (6)  organizations…  Since  your  last  General 
Membership Meeting, I am told two organizations have been added to the Meeting. In other 
words, the “Clan” has gotten bigger. 
Among  your  six  organizations,  you  cover  a  very  broad  spectrum  of  the  market  activities 
which  we  oversee…  from  the  cash  market,  to  the  foreign  exchange  market,  to  securities 
underwriting and brokering and then to trust.  
This gathering is impressive for its sheer breadth of operating interests, all falling under the 
purview of the banking regulator…This Assembly therefore presents a unique opportunity for 
the  BSP  to  share  its  views  with  several  different  organizations  at  the  same  time.  I  would 
therefore like to thank you for the invitation.  
The operating environment 
As I have done for a few years now during your General Membership Meeting, I shall begin 
my remarks by touching on our targets and expectations over our policy horizon.  
If you attended our Mid-Year Economic Briefing last Monday (17 September) at the PICC, I 
think  you  would  agree  with  me  that,  as  in  the  immediately  preceding  Economic  Briefing 
hosted  by  the  BSP-IRO,  the  public’s  interest  in  our  economy  is  palpable.  The  excitement 
about our economic prospects remains high. The presenters on the government side were 
optimistic, while the reactors on the private sector side were upbeat.  
Our current growth rate is already at the doorstep of the National Government’s announced 
real  GDP  growth  target  for  2013  of  6–7  pct…Inflation  is  expected  to  be  benign  with  the 
targets  for  headline  inflation  still  set  at  3–5  pct  through  2014…  The  country’s  external 
position  is  seen  to  remain  robust.  In  fact,  our  current  BOP  and  GIR  are  already  at  levels 
where they are forecast to be by 2013, if not higher.  
Indeed, it would seem that the economic policies and reforms we have invested in over the 
years are converging towards solid high economic performance…But, in taking all these in, 
we  need  to  be  prudent…  Let  us  not  overvalue  these  better  prospects  lest  we  become 
complacent…  You  in  the  markets,  of  all,  are  most  familiar  with  the  still  fragile  global 
environment we operate in.  
Over  the  past  two  weeks,  both  the  ECB  and  the  Fed  announced  new  asset  purchase 
programs – the OMT (although with some conditionality) and the QE3…Central bankers do 
know  how  to  use  acronyms  also,  don’t  we?  Both  of  these  were  much  awaited  by  the 
market…both seemingly open-ended… both signalling prolonged easy monetary policy in the 
advanced economies…And, your reaction has so far been, as expected… To take on added 
risk, as layers of policy uncertainty are peeled away.  
At the BSP, we are watchful of these developments. If these programs still don’t produce the 
desired effects on growth and unemployment in the US and Europe, the risks are clearly to 
the downside. Of particular concern to us is the adverse feedback loop between the financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
sector and the real sector due to 1) the interlocking sovereign debt and banking crisis in the 
euro  zone…2)  the  overhang  of  the  fiscal  cliff  in  the  US,  and…3)  the  softening  Chinese 
economy.  
The 2007/08 financial crisis graphically illustrated to us that this feedback loop can be very 
strong and could take a non-trivial length of time to unwind…It also taught us that although 
focus  on  price  stability  is  necessary,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  to  protect  economic 
growth…  Furthermore,  we  should  remember  the  lesson  that  looking  only  at  the  health  of 
individual financial entities would not safeguard the system as a whole…Indeed, the recent 
crisis has taught us many things – but most importantly, it taught us that policies to ensure 
monetary stability and financial stability must go hand in hand.  
I know that when market players listen to a speech from the BSP Governor, you have your 
radars  up,  hoping  to  hear  “directionals”…  On  the  peso  you  hope  to  hear  about  where  the 
peso is going. Have we hit the top yet?... On interest rates, you hope to hear where these are 
headed.  Have  we  hit  the  bottom  yet?...  Are  we  at  the  top?  bottom?  Is  the  BSP  holding 
steady?... These are important concerns, of course, because where the peso is and where 
interest rates are, feed directly and quite concretely into the everyday lives of Filipinos.  
But,  I  don’t  have  to  speak  about  directionals  tonight…  Everyday  you  come  across  some 
quote from me on these financial prices… So I am certain you already know the stance of the 
BSP…  One,  that,  the  exchange  rate  will  remain  market-determined…  although,  Folks,  be 
very aware that the BSP is watching how you conduct yourselves in the market… Two, that 
the  policy  interest  rates  will  always  primarily  be  dictated  by  the  inflation  outlook…but 
balanced  off  against  concerns  on  excesses  in  other  segments  in  the  market  such  as  real 
assets and capital flows. 
You know that our current assessment is – that inflation over the policy horizon will remain 
well within our target range of 3–5 percent. You must also know that the implication of this on 
interest rates is that interest rates will remain low over this period.  
Many of you already have a good handle on how the BSP conducts monetary policy and our 
exchange rate policy. I can say that we have had some success in communicating monetary 
policy to the market. But we still need to work on conveying the nuances when it comes to 
financial stability.  
So, instead of one-dimensional directionals, I would like us to spend the next few minutes 
discussing financial stability.  
In the BSP, we believe it is important to pursue financial stability because financial stability 
makes  the  transmission  of  other  policies  (including  monetary  policy)  more  effective… 
Moreover, we pursue it because financial stability helps financial institutions better allocate 
resources.  When  the  risk/return  tradeoffs  are  known  and  steady,  returns  are  more 
“predictable”  even  when  the  risks  are  relatively  higher.  In  other  words,  financial  stability 
benefits both the policy makers and the market.  
So what’s new about financial stability?  
The  original  draft  of  this  speech  contained  the  BSP  financial  stability  framework…Our 
definition  of  financial  stability…The  governance  framework  in  the  BSP…And  how  we  are 
pushing the agenda to go past the BSP borders.  
But  in  the  interest  of  time,  let  me  just  focus  on  a  couple  of  points  (well,  five  points  to  be 
precise) to help you better appreciate what we mean in the BSP when we talk about financial 
stability, and hopefully along the way, this discussion will help you also understand what all 
these mean for you and the institutions you represent.  
Let me begin with capital. The BSP is now more “focused” on capital adequacy – but from 
the  perspective  of  strengthening  the  ability  of  capital  to  absorb  losses.  Lest  I  be 
misunderstood, I want to emphasize that our regulations in the past were never just simply 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about exacting compliance to a specific ratio. What is different today is the focus. Now the 
goal is to make capital more efficient in mitigating potential losses from the type of bailouts 
we saw in other jurisdictions. Today, we are (in a sense) being “stricter” about what goes (or 
does not go) into both the numerator and the denominator of that ratio. By doing this, we are 
broadening the risks that are accounted for by such capital. This is the BSP view on CAR 
from a financial stability perspective.  
The CAR should not keep only your compliance officer awake at night… It should concern 
everyone here, including you who are in the confines of your trading rooms…. Ladies and 
gentlemen, the types of transactions and risks you can undertake will now be defined by the 
amount  and  kind  of  capital  your  institutions  have…  But  you  already  know  that…  from  the 
example of the 15pct risk weight on NDF. 
It is this kind of policy framework that drives the new regulations we have been putting out… 
And  this  is  my  second point…We  now  view  regulation  using the  “systemic”  lens.  After the 
additional  NDF  risk  weight,  you  must  have  noted  that  the  BSP  has  become  more  visibly 
concerned with issues that have systemic implications. These are reflected in, among others, 
the refinements to SDA trading, which have been intended to contain possible carry trades 
funding  SDAs,  and  initiatives  to  improve  reporting  on  real  estate  exposures,  which  are 
expected to ensure that all possible exposures are contained in the net and accounted for in 
the limits set. 
These  reforms  are  some  of  the  most  recent  that  we  put  out…  but  many  more  lie  ahead 
–  from  the  money  market  to  the  capital  market  and  to  the  derivative  market.  Some  in  the 
pipeline  are  1)  defining  the  benchmark  yield  curve  so  that  pricing  is  transparent  and 
independent  of  one  large  market  participant’s  rejections  (I  meant  actions)  in  the  auction 
market, 2) awakening the moribund repo markets so that liquidity is improved and one-sided 
quotes  will  be  a  thing  of  the  past,  3)  standardizing  OTC  derivatives  so  that  structured 
products  would  have  more  legs  to  stand  on,  and  4)  obtaining  the  components  of  shadow 
banking so that the unregulated activities are brought to the surface. 
While I am listing forthcoming reforms, let me also share with you that there are talks in the 
regulatory circle that consumer protection will be elevated to a core banking function and not 
simply an advocacy… You should keep this in  mind because when this happens, it  would 
materially impact your product development, disclosure practices and marketing efforts, on 
one hand, and trading and settlement infrastructure, on the other.  
This  brings  me  to  my  third  point.  Market  infrastructure  …  The  perennial  elephant  in  the 
room…  Friends,  new  international  guidelines  are  being  introduced.  Let  me  rattle  off  a  few 
more  acronyms.  I  am  afraid  it’s  not  only  central  bankers  who  love  acronyms.  Regulators 
have an even bigger penchant for these!… CSDs (for central securities depositories), SSS 
(for  securities  settlement  systems),  CCPs  (for  central  counterparties)  and  TRs  (for  trade 
repositories). I am not saying BSP will take all these in…. But once these guidelines are in 
place,  we  will  have  to  consider  how  we  can  adopt  these  best  practice  guidelines  to  our 
domestic  operating  context.  I  assure  you,  the  BSP  will  be  consultative  in  rolling  out  the 
guidelines... but at the same time, the BSP will not allow parochial motivations to cloud what 
is best for the market and financial stability. 
Moving  on  to  my  fourth  point…  In  considering  financial  stability,  the  BSP  has  pushed 
changes in the financial governance framework so it starts with the financial institution itself. I 
realize this point may seem at odds with what I just said about parochial motivations…. But 
having  solid  governance  structures  in  the  banks  would  precisely  help  the  institution  veer 
away from such insular thinking.  
Governance  was  never  meant  to  be  the  reactive  function  of  the  regulator.  Our  recently 
released  revised  compliance  framework  highlights  the  accountability  of  banks  with  actions 
and processes that they undertake. We have also just issued the new corporate governance 
and risk management guidelines for trusts (I am told the latter had undergone considerable 
discussion and coordination…Is this is indicative of how tough Trust practitioners are?) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Finally, it would be a serious oversight if I do not touch on the monetary policy aspects of 
financial  stability.  Our  calibration  of  monetary  policy  rates  is  towards  price  stability  but  it 
clearly  will  have  real  economy  implications.  In  addition,  the  interest  rate  benchmarks  that 
monetary  policy  sets  will  directly  impact  the  cost  of  leverage  and  the  volume  of  credit 
exposures. Obviously, the use of one policy lever (in this case, policy interest rates) would 
not always be able to address – at the same time – two policy objectives (price stability vs. 
financial  stability)  without  conflict.  Hence,  the  use  of  enhanced  policy  tool  kit  and  policy 
coordination are imperative.  
To operationalize all these at the BSP, we have recently created the BSP Financial Stability 
Committee  (or  FSComm)  in  addition  to  the  BSP  Advisory  Committee  (which  recommends 
monetary policy to the Monetary Board).  
From the five items I enumerated earlier, it is clear that financial stability crosses the three 
pillars of central banking. To close that “divide”, the FSComm is set at the highest level at the 
BSP,  with  the  main  committee  manned  by  the  three  deputy  governors  and  3  of  the  most 
senior officers of the BSP… I have the pleasure of directly overseeing this committee. 
Closing remarks: market conduct ensures reform success 
I have given you some of the guideposts, or mile markers on the road to financial stability 
– as we see it in the BSP.  
The BSP can put out regulations and create the enabling regulatory environment… but, after 
everything is said and done, it is the market that will execute transactions.  
A wise man once warned that when dealing with the market, one should anticipate that it is 
not so much about the destination, as it is about the ride itself. Financial targets tell us where 
we want to go but it is risk-taking and risk management that get us there. No doubt, the ride 
can  be  enjoyable  and  give  you  a  high,  but  if  you  don’t  manage  the  risks  well,  then  you 
– dragging everyone else with you – might end up in one big traffic jam, if not in the gutter.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I am not about to ask everyone here – for lack of a better term – to 
“behave”… As Michael Corleone said to Sonny, “It’s not personal, it’s strictly business.” 
Acceptable behaviour is a given because that is what collective responsibility requires. And 
our collective responsibility are prudential concerns. Turned on its head, prudential concerns 
are our collective responsibility because the gains (as well as the losses) are always shared.  
This  applies  as  much  to  the  cash  market,  to  the  foreign  exchange  market,  to  securities 
underwriting and brokering, to trusts and other fiduciary activities and certainly to banking.  
I therefore ask the organizations and institutions here tonight, let us effectively partner with 
one another because... the stakes are far too great for the bottom line of any single balance 
sheet… the stakes far outweigh the high of the ride….  
Ladies and gentlemen, we are in this together.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
