Deepak Mohanty: Global capital flows and the Indian economy – 
opportunities and challenges 
Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at Techkriti 
2012,  the  Annual  Technical  and  Entrepreneurship  Festival  of  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Technology Kanpur (IITK), Kanpur, 28 January 2012. 
 The assistance provided by Rajiv Ranjan, Rajan Goyal, Somnath Sharma and Kumar Rishabh is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  Kanpur  and  Shri  Suyash  Baderiya  for  this 
opportunity to interact with such a talented gathering of young minds. As you know, capital 
flows  have  played  a  major  role  in  the  process  of  globalization.  While  these  flows  bring 
several benefits, they pose certain risks. How in India we have handled this issue to enhance 
the sustainability of our external sector, is the topic of my deliberation today. 
Capital flows pose a puzzle both in theory and practice. On the one hand, they are credited 
with  a  key  role  in  the  development  of  the  modern  day  economies  by  alleviating  resource 
constraints and facilitating technology transfer. On the other hand, they are also blamed for 
several external debt and financial crises. Understanding the various facets of capital flows 
has  been  intellectually  challenging  as  the  reality  runs  counter  to  theory.  For  example,  the 
neo-classical  economic  theory  suggests  that  capital  should  flow  from  advanced  countries 
that  have  relatively  high  capital-to-labor  ratios  (capital  abundant  countries)  to  developing 
countries  that  have  relatively  low  capital-to-labor  ratios  (labor  abundant  countries). 
Paradoxically, capital often flows uphill from developing to advanced countries as was seen 
in the recent years. 
History of private capital flows 
In  the  pre-First  World  War  period  spanning  the  19th  century  and  the  early  20th  century, 
London was the pre-eminent financial center, and many of today’s developed countries were 
developing  then.  This  period  saw  a  great  expansion  of  private  investment  in  developing 
countries,  notably  in  the  United  States  (US),  Canada  and  Australia.  It  also  stretched  to 
Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and India. The capital flows to developing countries took two main 
forms: bond issues by various levels of public administration and foreign direct investment 
(FDI). 
In  the  interwar  period,  in  the  1920s  the  US  emerged  as  a  major  lender.  Consequently, 
New York emerged as a key center for international lending up until the Great Depression of 
1929.  The  interwar  period  was  also  marked  by  extensive  defaults.  Latin  America  was 
affected  by  the  abrupt  halt  in  foreign  lending.  In  the  immediate  post-Second  World  War 
period there was virtually no borrowing by developing countries in the world capital market. 
Private  portfolio  investment  and  bank  lending  resumed  only  in  the  1960s.  By  the  1980s, 
private capital flows had picked up substantially. This is the period when the Latin American 
debt crisis erupted reflecting macroeconomic imbalances arising out of high budget deficits 
and overvalued exchange rates. Later, the East Asian Economies were faced with a currency 
crisis  in  1997  even  though  they  had  good  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  The  infirmity 
emanated primarily from huge short-term external borrowings by banks and corporates. 
A common thread running through the debt crises is that in almost all the episodes, waves of 
lendings were followed by a sudden stop or reversal of capital flows resulting in distress in 
the borrowing countries. What lessons did the Emerging and Developing Economies (EDEs) 
learn from these crises? Though gross capital flows to EDEs accelerated in the 2000s, but 
for  the  interruption  in  2008  due  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  their  external  balance  sheets 
showed  greater  resilience.  This  is  reflected  in  changes  in  the  components  of  international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
investment positions (IIPs) of major EDEs1. The external liabilities of EDEs once were mainly 
debt. Now FDI and portfolio equity together dominate the stock of their liabilities (Table 1). 
The  advantage  of  FDI  and  portfolio  equity  flows  over  pure  debt  flows  is  that  there  is  risk 
sharing between the lender and borrower in the case of the former. Moreover, FDI flows tend 
to be more stable than other forms of capital flows. 
Another strength has been the increase in foreign exchange reserves in the overall external 
assets of EDEs. This has provided a counterweight to risk taking by the private sector. Of 
course, it is another debate as to how much of reserve is adequate and at what level benefits 
outweigh  costs.  But  there  is  no  disagreement  that  reserves  provide  inherent  strength  and 
stability to an economy, particularly EDEs. 
Table 1:  
Key components of external liabilities and assets 
Table adopted from Prasad, Eswar. 2011. “Role Reversal in Global Finance”. IZA Discussion Paper No.6032 
 Capital flows to EDEs 
Gross  capital  inflows  to  EDEs  rose  over  eight  fold  from  US  $  200  billion  in  1999  to  over 
US $ 1,700  billion  in  2007,  just  before  the  crisis  in  2008.  While  FDI  increasing  steadily 
remained  the  most  stable  component,  the  acceleration  was  dictated  by  portfolio  and  other 
investment.  During  the  crisis  the  gross  portfolio  investment  inflows  to  these  economies 
dropped sharply from about US $ 420 billion in 2007 to a low of about US $ 10 billion in 2008 
(Chart 1). 
                                                 
1  The international investment position (IIP) is a country’s balance sheet in relation to the rest of the world, one 
side of which is its total foreign assets including official reserves and the other is its external liabilities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  long  term  trend  in  capital  flows  indicates  that  the  peaks  in  capital  flows  are  often 
followed by sudden fall. In the 2000s, net capital flows to EDEs peaked to 4 per cent of their 
GDP just before the global financial crisis in 2008 (Chart 2). 
  Determinants of capital flows 
The factors explaining international capital flows are categorized into “push” factors that are 
external to an economy, and “pull” factors that are internal to an economy. The push factors 
include  parameters  such  as  low  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies,  abundant  liquidity, 
slow growth and the lack of domestic investment opportunities as also deregulation that has 
allowed  greater  global  risk  diversification  in  industrial  countries.  The  pull  factors  include 
parameters such as the robust economic performance and the improved investment climate 
in  EDEs,  which  are  the  results  of  a  series  of  trade,  financial  and  legal  reforms.  However, 
which factor would be dominant in a particular phase of the cycle is difficult to fathom. 
Benefits and risks of capital flows 
In  theory,  free  flow  of  capital  across  borders  should  lead  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of 
resources  between  savers  and  investors  across  the  world.  Further,  as  the  capital  flows  to 
capital  scarce  developing  countries  it  brings  along  technical  know-how  and  thus  should 
increase  growth  in  the  recipient  countries  and  help  them  to  reduce  the  volatility  in  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
consumption and investment in response to exogenous shocks. However, this position is not 
widely shared2. 
While  there  is  a  broad  agreement  among  economists  on  the  desirability  of  open  trade  in 
goods, there is much disagreement with respect to the virtues of financial openness. Even 
strong proponents of free trade such as Jagdish Bhagwati have expressed skepticism about 
the gains from unfettered trade in financial assets. Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian (2007)3 
find that among non-industrial countries, lesser reliance on foreign capital is associated with 
higher growth. 
Capital controls 
The sudden reversal that the EDEs had to face during the crisis of 2008 despite their good 
fundamentals and improved external liabilities position brought to the fore various questions 
on capital controls again. Capital flows have interfered with the simultaneous management of 
fixed/managed exchange rate peg and inflation targets – a phenomenon known as Mundell’s 
“Impossible  Trinity”.  For  EDEs  with  flexible  exchange  rates,  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate 
and the loss of trade competitiveness prompts central banks to occasionally intervene in the 
foreign exchange market. This increases domestic liquidity with its inflationary consequences 
if left unsterilized. But sterilization has quasi-fiscal costs. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  issue  of  capital  controls,  especially  the  imposition  of  financial 
transactions tax, some form of Tobin Tax, is being widely debated among policy makers in 
multilateral forums like the G-20, and the IMF as well as in academic circles. 
Significantly,  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  have  relaxed  their  earlier  position  on  capital 
controls. The IMF’s own Independent Evaluation Office found that during the 1990s the Fund 
clearly  encouraged  capital  account  liberalization  in  its  bilateral  policy  advice  to  member 
countries.  The  Fund’s  multilateral  surveillance  also  emphasized  the  benefits  to  developing 
countries of greater access to international capital flows. But following the 2008 crisis, in a 
policy note in February 2010 the IMF noted “circumstances in which capital controls can be a 
legitimate component of the policy response to surges in capital flows”. The World Bank also 
recognized that “capital controls might need to be imposed as a last resort to help mitigate a 
financial  crisis  and  stabilize  macroeconomic  developments”.  The  G-20  recognised  in 
October 2011 that “to maintain financial stability, capital controls may be adopted or reversed 
as destabilizing pressures abate”. 
Against  this  background,  I  now  turn  to  evolution  of  our  policy  and  experience  with  capital 
flows. 
Capital account management in India 
India’s capital account liberalization began in a substantive sense in 1991 following a severe 
balance of payments (BoP) crisis. The analytical foundations for reforms were provided by 
three  reports:  Report  of  the  High  Level  Committee  on  Balance  of  Payments  (Chairman: 
C. Rangarajan,  1991)  and  the  two  reports  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility  (Chairman: 
S. S. Tarapore, 1997 and 2006). These reports, inter alia, suggested: (i) encouragement to 
private capital inflows; (ii) shift from debt creating to non-debt creating flows, (iii) a shift within 
the debt inflows from short-term to long-term debt, (iv) emphasized on monitoring of external 
commercial borrowings, and (v) gradual liberalisation of outflows. 
                                                 
2  Cardoso,  E.A.,  and  R.  Dornbusch,  (1989)  “Foreign  Capital  Flows”  in  H.  Chenery  and  Srinivasan  T.N. 
Handbook of Development Economics, volume 2, 1416–1439, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers. 
3  Prasad,  Eswar  S.,  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  and  Arvind  Subramanian  (2007).  “Foreign  Capital  and  Economic 
Growth”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The capital account liberalization in India was considered as a process rather than an event. 
The  sequencing  of  the  process  was  conditional  on  underlying  domestic  macroeconomic 
fundamentals and sustainability of the BoP. Considerable progress has since been made as 
reflected in the volume  and variety  of capital flows without undermining the stability of our 
external account. 
India’s status with regard to capital account liberalisation could be seen in terms of its policy 
stance towards capital transactions by residents and non-residents on the one hand and by 
the  underlying  instruments  of  cross  border  flows  on  the  other.  Non-residents  have  been 
provided considerable extent of convertibility whereas permission to residents to undertake 
capital account transactions across borders is relatively restrained. Moreover, distinction is 
made not only between residents and non-residents but also between different categories of 
residents. 
Residents 
If residents are classified into corporates, financial institutions and individuals, the regime is 
most  liberal  in  the  case  of  corporates  followed  by  financial  intermediaries  and  individuals. 
Corporates  and  financial  intermediaries  are  permitted  to  raise  equity  resources  through 
American Depository Receipts (ADRs)/ Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) and are allowed 
to  borrow  through  debt  instruments  from  abroad.  External  Commercial  Borrowings  (ECBs) 
could be raised under both automatic and approval routes subject to quantity as well as price 
restrictions.  Under  automatic  route,  eligible  borrowers  in  industry,  infrastructure  sector  and 
NBFCs  (excluding  micro  finance  companies)  can  now  borrow  upto  US  $  750  million  in  a 
year. For borrowing above this stipulation prior approval is required. There is an all-in-cost 
ceiling currently ranging between 350 basis points and 500 basis points over 6 month LIBOR 
for loans with minimum maturity of 3 years to more than 5 years. Banks can borrow up to 
50 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital. Apart from inflows, corporates are allowed to 
invest abroad in overseas joint or wholly owned subsidiaries up to 400 per cent of their net 
worth. Banks can invest overseas up to 25 per cent out of their demand and time liabilities in 
India. Indian mutual funds can invest abroad within overall aggregate limit of US $ 7 billion. 
Individuals can remit an amount equivalent to US dollar 200,000 in a year under liberalized 
remittance scheme. 
Non-residents 
Non-resident corporates and financial intermediaries can invest in domestic companies and 
instruments across sectors subject to some instrument-wise and sector-wise conditions. For 
portfolio  investment,  they  need  to  register  themselves  with  the  SEBI.  Recently,  Qualified 
Foreign  Investors  (QFI)  including  individuals  and  groups  or  associations  have  also  been 
permitted to invest directly in the equity market in India after meeting the stipulated norms 
including Know Your Customer (KYC). 
Instruments 
In terms of instruments, inflows to India are subject to a hierarchy of preferences with direct 
investment  preferred  over  portfolio  flows,  rupee  denominated  debt  preferred  over  foreign 
currency debt and medium and long-term debt preferred over short-term debt. 
As  regards,  non-debt  flows,  the  overall  approach  has  been  to  substantially  liberalise  FDI 
flows  so  as  to  meet  domestic  investment  requirements  and  raise  growth  potential  of  the 
economy. However, keeping in view socio-economic implications, FDI is prohibited in certain 
sectors, viz., lottery business, chit funds, nidhi companies, tobacco products, agriculture and 
plantation, and activities/sectors not open to private sector investment, e.g., atomic energy 
and  railway  transport  other  than  mass  rapid  transport  systems.  Though  FDI  in  multi-brand 
retail is not allowed, the Government is actively debating this issue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Apart  from  direct  investment,  non-residents  can  acquire  equity  stakes  through  portfolio 
investment as well. Portfolio investment could be made by the entities which are registered 
with the SEBI as Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs). FIIs do not need prior approval as long 
as they are within the sectoral and individual limits. There are no restrictions on repatriation 
of equity investments. 
With regard to debt flows, policy levers comprise both quantity and price based prudential 
prescriptions.  There  is  a  ceiling  on  the  extent  of  FII  investment  in  sovereign  debt 
(US $ 15 billion)  and  corporate  debt  (US  $  45  billion)  and  there  is  also  a  withholding  tax. 
ECBs  flows  under  both  the  automatic  and  approval  routes  are  moderated  by  interest  rate 
ceilings  and  those  under  the  automatic  route  through  an  additional  quantity  ceiling.  In 
addition, there are end use and minimum maturity restrictions of 3 years for ECB. However, 
trade credit is available for short-term with quantity and price restrictions. 
Foreign Currency denominated Non-Resident Indian (NRI) deposits are regulated through an 
interest  rate  ceiling  linked  to  LIBOR/SWAP  rate  of  the  corresponding  currency.  However, 
rupee  denominated  NRI  deposits  have  recently  been  deregulated  with  the  condition  that 
interest  rate  on  those  should  not  be  more  than  the  rate  offered  on  domestic  deposits  of 
comparable maturities. There is no restriction on repatriation of NRI deposits. 
In  sum,  a  gradual  and  calibrated  liberalisation  has  progressively  opened  up  India’s  capital 
account with a preference for equity investment over debt. Now I turn to a review of trends in 
capital flows to India since the last BoP crisis of 1991. 
Trends in capital flows to India 
In  the  period  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  the  capital  account  was  dominated  by  debt  creating 
flows. For example, in 1990–91, debt creating flows constituted about 97 per cent of capital 
inflows.  In  the  debt  creating  flows,  there  was  a  large  component  of  external  assistance. 
However,  this  scenario  changed  substantially  following  the  BoP  crisis  that  triggered  wide 
ranging reforms. 
Table 2:  
Key Components of Balance of Payments 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  period  since  1991–92  can  be  seen  in  three  phases  on  the  basis  of  our  economic 
performance  based  on  economic  growth:  Phase  I  (1992–93  to  2002–03)  when  India’s 
economic growth recovered from a low of 1.4 per cent in 1991–92 to an annual average of 
5.8  per  cent;  Phase  II  (2003–04  to  2007–08)  when  India  registered  its  highest  average 
annual  growth  rate  of  8.7  per  cent;  and  Phase  III  (2008–09  to  2010–11),  the  most  recent 
period  following  the  global  financial  crisis  which  dented  both  India’s  economic  growth  and 
volume of capital inflows (Table 2). How did capital flows behave during these phases? This 
is an issue I turn to next. 
During the 11-year period 1992–2003, capital inflows to India resumed to an annual average 
of US $ 8.6 billion. There was a significant shift in favour of equity which accounted for over 
54 per cent of capital inflows. Within equity, the FDI component was dominant. In the debt 
component,  NRI  deposits  were  dominant.  During  the  5-year  period  2003–08,  there  was  a 
sharp increase in capital inflows to an annual average of US $ 45 billion. The composition of 
inflows continued to be towards equity, though its share moderated slightly to 53 per cent. 
However, within equity there was a shift towards portfolio investment. The debt flows were 
dominated by trade credit and external commercial borrowings. 
During  the  recent  3-year  period  of  2008–11,  net  capital  inflows  moderated  to  an  annual 
average of US $ 39 billion. The composition of capital inflows continued to be towards equity 
inflows  with  equal  share  between  FDI  and  portfolio  investment.  The  debt  component  was 
dominated by external commercial borrowings (Tables 3). 
Relative Share of Debt and Equity in Capital Flows 
Table 3:  
Note: Equity Debt composition of Capital Accounts excludes other capital 
Another discernible trend that emerged since the mid-2000s is the sharp increase in India’s 
outward  FDI  suggesting  increasing  external  orientation  of  the  Indian  corporates.  India’s 
outward FDI peaked from US $ 2.2 billion in 2004–05 to US $ 19.4 billion in 2008–09 before 
moderating somewhat to US $ 16.5 billion in 2010–11 (Chart 3). This underscores maturing 
of India’s capital account liberalization process which has encouraged two-way flows. How 
did this rising trend and shift in composition of capital flows impact the BoP? This is an issue, 
I turn to next. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
An  inward  looking  Indian  economy  with  a  restrictive  capital  account  regime,  which  was 
biased against equity inflows, was highly vulnerable to external shock. Hence, a widening of 
current account deficit (CAD) to 3.0 per cent of GDP in 1990–91 in the wake of the Gulf war 
and crude oil price spike was not clearly sustainable (Table 4). Prior to 1990–91 also India 
had  periodically  faced  significant  external  financing  constraints  and  went  knocking  at  the 
doors of the IMF from time to time. Following the wide ranging reforms initiated in the 1990s, 
which  encompassed  both  trade  and  financial  liberalization,  the  resilience  of  the  India’s 
external sector improved vastly. 
 Table 4:  
Key components of BoP as a percentage of GDP 
During  1992–2003,  India’s  current  account  showed  a  modest  annual  average  deficit  of 
0.6 per  cent.  Given  a  capital  account  balance  of  2.2  per  cent  of  GDP,  there  was 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserve of 1.6 per cent of GDP per annum. In the following 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 period, 2003–08, CAD improved to an average of 0.5 per cent. With a strong capital inflow of 
5.1 per cent of GDP per annum, the pace of reserve accumulation rose to 4.6 per cent of 
GDP per annum. On the terminal year of this period, India’s foreign exchange reserves as a 
percentage of GDP peaked at 25 per cent at end-March 2008. (Chart 4) In the recent period 
of 2008–11, CAD expanded significantly averaging 2.6 per cent of GDP per annum (Table 4 
& Chart 5). As capital inflows moderated simultaneously to 2.7 per cent of GDP per annum, 
there was only small accretion to reserves at the rate of 0.1 per cent  of GDP per annum. 
Latest  information  suggests  that  CAD  expanded  to  3.6  per  cent  of GDP  in  the  first  half  of 
2011–12. As capital inflows fell short of CAD under current global financial stress, there was 
a drawdown of reserves. 
  The  foregoing  discussion  suggests  that  India  has  persistently  registered  current  account 
deficit,  since  1990–91  barring  the  three  years,  2001–04.  Though  the  average  CAD  was 
moderate for a long period, this has expanded since 2008–09. What does this imply? The 
persistent current account deficit accumulates into increasing claim of non-residents on India. 
This is captured in India’s international investment position (IIP) which delineates its external 
balance sheet. India’s international liabilities have remained higher than international assets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
and the difference between the two has increased significantly from US $ (-) 51 billion at end-
March 2008 to US $ (-) 238 billion at end-June 2011 but improved slightly to $ (-) 225 billion 
at  end-September  2011  (Chart  6).  Our  liabilities  were  mainly  on  account  of  portfolio 
investment, FDI and external commercial loans. The bulk of our international assets are in 
the form of foreign exchange reserve assets of the RBI, followed by direct investment abroad 
by the corporate sector. 
 While  IIP  gives  the  full  balance  sheet  picture,  how  has  our  external-debt  position  shaped, 
given  our  preference  for  non-debt  creating  flows?  Notably,  India’s  external  debt  stock 
remained  steady  during  the  13-year  period  between  1991  and  2003  in  the  range  of 
US $ 84-105 billion. Since then, the debt stock has risen to US $ 306 billion by March 2011. 
However,  the  ratio  of  India’s  external  debt  to  GDP  has  declined  over  the  years  from 
28.7 per cent in 1990–91 to 17.3 per cent in 2010–11. The debt service ratio declined from 
35.3 per cent to 4.2 per cent during the same period4. As regards the composition of external 
debt, there was a distinct decline in the share of government debt from 42.7 per cent of total 
external debt in March 2001 to 24.2 per cent by March 2011 with corresponding increase in 
private debt (Charts 7 & 8). 
                                                 
4  Debt service ratio, as measured by the proportion of total debt service payments to current receipts of balance 
of payments (BoP), is an indicator of debt sustainability. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although,  India’s  external  debt  service  position  has  improved,  recently  in  the  wake  of 
moderation  in  inflows  amidst  destabilized  euro  area  financial  turmoil  some  of  our  external 
vulnerability indicators have worsened. For example, reserves cover of total debt has fallen 
below 100 per cent (Table 5). 
 Table 5:  
External sector vulnerability indicators (per cent) 
* Annualised 
 Conclusions 
What key conclusions can we draw from a review of capital flows and our BoP developments 
over the past two decades since the crisis of 1991? 
 
First, global capital flows now increasingly show a two-way movement between EDEs 
and advanced economies. However, EDEs remain vulnerable to volatility and sudden stops 
in capital flows. This is because EDEs have limitation in borrowing in their own currencies in 
international capital markets, a phenomenon known as “original sin”. This is evident from the 
recent crisis. The epicenter of 2008 crisis was the US but capital flows to EDEs, including 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
India,  was  severely  affected.  Now  the  epicenter  has  shifted  to  Europe  but  capital  flows  to 
EDEs continues to be impaired. 
 
Second,  considerable  lessons  seem  to  have  been  learnt  by  EDEs  from  their  past 
experience debt and currency crises, particularly from the Latin American debt crisis of the 
1980s and the East Asian currency crisis of 1997. This has reinforced the hierarchy of capital 
flows with a preference by EDEs for equity flows. This is also reflected in a discernible shift in 
the composition of capital flows to EDEs in favour of equity, particularly FDI. 
Third, capital flows to EDEs depend on push factors emanating from low interest rate 
 
and  lack  of  investment  opportunity  in  advanced  economies  as  well  as  by  pull  factors 
emanating from strong economic fundaments and growth prospects in the recipient country. 
Particularly, stable flows like FDI are guided more by pull factors. 
 
Fourth,  availability  of  foreign  capital  is  not  an  unmixed  blessing.  While  it  alleviates 
domestic  resource  constraints,  it  could  also  destabilize  the  economy  in  two  ways:  one, 
excess capital inflows could result in asset price inflation and loss of competitiveness through 
over  valuation  of  exchange  rate;  two,  sudden  outflow  on  risk  aversion  could  trigger  a 
currency crisis. 
 
Fifth,  the  earlier  dominant  view  was  tilted  towards  unfettered  capital  movement.  But, 
following  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  of  2008,  there  is  explicit  recognition  –  even  by 
multilateral bodies such as the IMF, World Bank and the G20 – that capital controls may be 
desirable under certain circumstances. 
 
Sixth, India’s external sector policy had always believed in some form of management 
of our capital account with a preference for equity inflows, though there is now international 
recognition of this policy. This policy of cautious opening of the capital account has served us 
well  as  reflected  in  the  stability  of  our  BoP  since  the  1991  crisis.  The  composition  of  our 
capital account has shifted from almost entirely debt to predominantly equity. 
 
Seventh, notwithstanding relative stability of our BoP, some stress has developed post-
2008  global  financial  crisis  as  capital  inflows  have  moderated  in  the  face  of  expanding 
current account deficit. This is reflected in worsening of some of the vulnerability indicators of 
the external sector. Our dependence on private capital inflows to finance our current account 
deficit  has  increased.  Moreover,  we  have  to  factor  in  uncertainties  in  the  global  financial 
markets.  These  developments  call  for  vigorous  domestic  policy  reforms  with  a  greater 
emphasis on trade competitiveness and energy security so as to enhance the pull factor for 
FDI to reinforce our BoP. 
 
Finally, in conclusion what advice can I give to such bright minds as yours? Like capital 
flows  your  talent  knows  no  boundary.  You  are  truly  global  citizens.  While  this  provides  an 
opportunity, it is also a challenge for you to unleash your creative potential to innovate for the 
global welfare. 
Thank you. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
