Charles I Plosser: The outlook and the hazards of accelerationist policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Economic Forecast, The University of Delaware Center 
for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, Newark, Delaware, 14 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me back again to the University of Delaware. It has been three years 
since I last spoke at this event and a lot has happened. Yet, as I will explain, we have come 
a long way on the road to recovery from the Great Recession. So, this morning I will share 
with you my take on the economic outlook. Then I want to discuss the hazards of trying to 
apply ever more monetary accommodation to speed up the recovery process.1 
Economic outlook 
We are now in the third year of a moderate economic recovery that has had more than a few 
bumps  along  the  way.  We  finished  2011  with  real  GDP  at  1.6  percent,  compared  to 
3.1 percent in the prior year. Some of this weakness is perfectly understandable, given the 
unexpected shocks we experienced during the year. Yet, the economy persevered. Indeed, 
growth accelerated across each of the four quarters, from less than half of a percent in the 
first quarter to around 2-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter. I anticipate that we will continue to 
see moderate growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013, which is slightly above trend. 
Business spending, especially investment in equipment and software, was relatively healthy 
last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. In January, the Philadelphia Fed’s 
Business Outlook Survey showed that regional manufacturing activity continued to expand at 
a  moderate  pace,  the  fourth  consecutive  monthly  increase  since  a  late  summer  lull.  The 
survey’s  measures  of  future  activity  also  indicated  that  our  respondents  expect  activity  to 
continue to pick up over the next six months. I take this as a sign that business sentiment is 
also improving. 
On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization but not much improvement in 2012. We 
entered the Great Recession over-invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to 
see  a  housing  recovery  until  the  surplus  inventory  of  foreclosed  and  distressed  properties 
declines. 
Even as the economy rebalances, we should not seek, nor should we expect, housing and 
related sectors to return to those pre-recession highs. Those highs were unsustainable, and 
the  housing  crash  that  ensued  destroyed  a  great  deal  of  wealth  for  consumers  and  the 
economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals 
and  many  businesses.  Moreover,  monetary  policy  cannot  paper  over  these  losses,  nor 
should it try to do so. Households and businesses, nevertheless, continue to make progress 
on restoring the health of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. 
Most economists, including me, believe that this process will continue into 2012. 
The  labor  market  has  grown  stronger  in  recent  months.  Although  there  are  still  too  many 
people  unemployed  in  our  region  and  the  nation,  I  am  encouraged  by  the  most  recent 
employment  reports.  The  January  employment  report  showed  a  net  gain  of  243,000  jobs, 
and revisions to November and December added another 60,000 jobs to the recovery. Some 
                                                 
1 
I should note the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve 
Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have  downplayed  the  report,  suggesting  that  one  good  data  point  does  not  make  a  trend, 
and  I  wholeheartedly  agree.  But  what  we  have  seen  is  more  than  one  data  point.  Net 
employment gains were 103,000 in October, 157,000 in November, 203,000 in December, 
and 243,000 in January – a clear positive trend. 
The  household  survey  also  reported  a  significant  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate.  Here, 
too, the trend is encouraging – 8.9 percent in October, 8.7 in November, 8.5 in December, 
and 8.3 in January. That is the lowest level in nearly three years. As growth continues and 
strengthens, I expect further gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling 
to 8 percent or less, by the end of 2012. 
In  our  District,  all  three  states  ended  2011  with  lower  unemployment  rates.  New  Jersey’s 
rate,  at  about  9  percent,  is  still  higher  than  the  national  average,  but  Delaware’s  and 
Pennsylvania’s  were  below  the  national  average,  with  rates  of  7.4  and  7.6  percent, 
respectively. 
As we continue down the road to recovery, I expect we will face further hiccups along the 
way.  One  significant  risk  is  the  potential  effects  of  the  continuing  sovereign  debt  crisis  in 
Europe. The economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely restrain U.S. exports. And while 
strains  in  financial  markets  have  been  limited  to  European  institutions  so  far,  we  must 
continue  to monitor  events  to  ensure  that  there  are  no  adverse  spillovers  to  U.S. financial 
institutions.  Of  course,  regardless  of  how  the  European  situation  plays  out,  it  has  already 
imposed  considerable  uncertainty  on  growth  prospects  for  the  global  economy.  Moreover, 
our own nation’s inability to establish a clear plan to put our fiscal house in order contributes 
additional uncertainty to the economic landscape. 
Until  the  economic  environment  becomes  clearer,  firms  and  consumers  are  likely  to 
postpone significant spending and hiring decisions – imposing a drag on the recovery, even 
though economic developments in the U.S. continue to improve. 
Inflation risks in the near term remain modest. However, I remain concerned that monetary 
policy  has  exposed  us  to  substantial  inflation  risk  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Total 
inflation in 2011, as measured by the consumer price index on a year-over-year basis, was 
3 percent, reflecting strong increases in energy and food prices, particularly in the early part 
of  the  year.  The  personal  consumption  expenditures  price  index  rose  2.4  percent.  While 
these  inflation  rates  exceed  our  target,  I  anticipate  that  with  many  commodity  prices  now 
leveling  off  or  falling,  and  inflation  expectations  relatively  stable,  inflation  will  remain 
moderate in the near term. My forecast is that inflation will settle around 2 percent in 2012. 
Yet,  inflation  often  develops  gradually,  and  if monetary  policy  waits too  long  to  respond,  it 
can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often 
thought to prevent inflation from rising. But that did not turn out to be true in the 1970s. Thus, 
we  need  to  proceed  with  caution  and  be  circumspect  as  to  the  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation we supply to the economy. So let me review some of the policy actions the 
Fed has taken. 
Monetary policy 
As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to 
support  the  recovery.  We  have  also  conducted  two  rounds  of  asset  purchases  that  have 
more than tripled the size of the balance sheet and changed its composition from short-term 
Treasuries  to  longer-term  Treasuries  and  housing-related  securities,  mostly  mortgage-
backed securities. Today, we are in a modest recovery from a deep recession and financial 
crisis. The financial crisis has passed, however, and monetary policy should not continue to 
act as if the crisis was still with us. 
In January, the Federal Open Market Committee announced that economic conditions were 
“likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
–  that’s  almost  three  years  from  now.  And  that  is  18  months  longer  than  the  mid-2013 
calendar date first signaled last August. In addition, the Committee announced that the Fed 
intends to continue the maturity extension program, or “operation twist”, first launched last 
September.  In  this  program,  the  Fed  is  buying  $400  billion  of  longer-term  Treasuries  and 
selling an equal amount of shorter-term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce yields from already 
historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its 
holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. 
You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September because 
it was not clear to me that further monetary policy accommodation was appropriate. After all, 
inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year. 
In  addition,  I  do  not  support  the  practice  of  offering  forward  policy  guidance  by  saying 
economic  conditions  are  likely  to  lead  to  low  rates  through  some  calendar  date.  Such 
statements  are,  in  my  mind,  particularly  problematic  from  a  communications  perspective. 
Monetary policy should be contingent on the economic environment and not on the calendar. 
Thus,  I  was  not  supportive  of  the  Committee’s  actions  in  January.  I  think  that  economic 
conditions, as they have evolved since late last year, do not call for further accommodation. 
In fact, the economy has actually improved. Moreover, I continue to oppose using calendar 
dates to communicate forward guidance. 
Yet,  despite  the  extraordinary  steps  taken  to  support  the  economy,  many  argue  that 
monetary  policy  should  do  more.  The  argument  is  that  while  inflation may  be  close  to  our 
target,  unemployment  remains  elevated,  and  thus,  monetary  policy  must  act  more 
aggressively if it is to meet its mandated employment objective. 
I disagree and believe that doing so would lead us down a very treacherous path – one that 
would be ever more difficult to navigate and one that would increase the already substantial 
risk  of  higher  inflation.  But  the  problem  is  not  just  inflation  risk  down  the  road.  Prolonged 
efforts  to  hold  interest  rates  near  zero  can  lead  to  financial  market  distortions  and  the 
misallocation of resources. 
Let me offer an analogy that might help you visualize the risks. 
Imagine you’re driving a car down the Delaware Turnpike on a rainy and foggy day on the 
way to a birthday party for your mother. Unfortunately, you can’t see very far ahead because 
of the weather, and you don’t know exactly how far you are from the exit. You are anxious 
because  you  don’t  want  to  miss  the  party.  Your  children  are  in  the  back  seat,  giddy  with 
excitement  about  seeing  their  grandmother.  So  you  decide  to  go  a  little  faster.  You 
accelerate. 
After some time passes, you still think you are some distance from your exit. The children are 
now fidgeting in the back seat, and you don’t want to be late, so you decide to step on the 
gas  a  little  more.  Now,  you  are  speeding,  hoping  to  get  to  your  destination  sooner. 
Eventually, though, as you are flying down the highway, you finally catch a glimpse of the exit 
through the fog and rain, only now you are going too fast to safely navigate the off ramp. You 
are faced with two very unattractive options. 
One option is to slam on the brakes to make the exit. This strategy risks causing a multicar 
accident, as your abrupt efforts to slow down surprises drivers behind you who had expected 
you to continue at high speed. The result is an accident, perhaps injuries to innocent people, 
and maybe a severe traffic jam, diverting or delaying many others. The second option is to 
continue down the road to the next exit, turn around, and then backtrack to the right exit. This 
strategy means that you are late, you miss the party, you disappoint everyone, you pay extra 
for tolls and gas, and you incur numerous other costs in the process. 
Monetary policy is sometimes criticized for such “go-stop” policies. Policymakers step on the 
accelerator  aggressively,  only  to  slam  on  the  brakes  in  order  to  change  course.  Such  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
approach to policy can be highly destabilizing, creating added volatility for financial markets 
and the economy. 
I  would  add  that  constant  acceleration  only  makes  these  risks  even  more  hazardous. 
Slamming on the brakes or abruptly changing course could disrupt the economy. Failing to 
slow down and exit at the right time risks excessive inflation, which then has to be controlled. 
It also risks the misallocation of resources and capital, and perhaps even credit bubbles or 
other distortions that could pose problems for the economy. 
Thus,  in  my  mind,  such  an  accelerationist  approach  to  monetary  policy  is  risky  and  the 
potential costs may be quite high. It is an approach most often driven by an excessive focus 
on the short run and perhaps some hubris that we will be able to successfully avert the risks 
such a strategy poses for the economy over the longer run. 
Conclusion 
In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual 
growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. 
Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the 
unemployment  rate  falling  gradually  over  time.  I  believe  inflation  expectations  will  be 
relatively  stable  and  inflation  will  moderate  in  the  near  term.  However,  with  the  very 
accommodative stance of monetary policy, we must guard against the medium- and longer-
term risks of inflation and the potential for distortions such accommodation can create. 
Finally, I believe we must also guard against an accelerationist approach to policy – one that 
calls  for  monetary  policy  to  do  more  and  more  in  an  attempt  to  get  to  our  objectives  that 
much faster. The risks to economic stability of such an approach over the medium term could 
be quite high and could jeopardize our ability to achieve our longer-terms goals.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
