José Manuel González-Páramo: What has Europe learnt from the crisis? 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  OMFIF  Conference  “On  the  cusp:  the  world  economy  at  a 
turning point. Strengthening stability at a time of challenge and change.”, Frankfurt am Main, 
15 March 2012. 
 The euro area’s “missing institutions” 
From its conception the euro was and has been a unique and ambitious project. It combined 
a  centralised  monetary  policy  with  decentralised  economic  policies,  and  to  paraphrase 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, created a currency that did not belong to a single nation-state. A 
key  finding  for  the  euro  area,  arising  from  the  crisis,  is  that  this  construction  was  not 
complete.  In  particular,  the  euro  area  did  not  have  certain  institutions  we  associate  with 
political  federations  and  that  act  as  shock-absorbers  against  the  negative  effects  of 
imbalances.  The  key  lesson  from  the  crisis,  therefore,  is  that  the  euro  area  needs  to 
compensate for these “missing institutions” by establishing a much stronger economic and 
financial union. 
A  central  area  where  the  absence  of  shock-absorbing  institutions  has  been  felt  is  via 
intra-euro area current account imbalances. These imbalances existed for many years prior 
to the crisis, but were largely ignored as theory told us that they could always be financed 
through  cross-border  financial  flows.  However,  it  is  now  clear  that  current  account 
imbalances – while not being the only proximate causes of the crisis – are not benign and 
imply vulnerabilities which can be transmitted to the euro area as a whole.  
On the financial side of the current account, persistent intra-area imbalances imply that some 
public or private sectors are living beyond their means, year after year. If, as was the case in 
some euro area countries, these imbalances are also linked to the large build-up of external 
liabilities  by  an  over-leveraged  domestic  banking  system  that  engages  in  excessive  risk 
taking, this may also create the conditions for the kind of twin sovereign-bank crises which 
we have witnessed over the recent period. Private liabilities can quickly become sovereign 
ones  when  governments  are  required  to  recapitalise  banks  or  guarantee  bank  funding, 
leading  to  sovereign  debt  crises.  At  the  same  time,  sovereign  liabilities  can  undermine 
domestic  banking  sectors  given  the  high  exposure  of  euro  area  banks  to  their  own 
governments’ debt and the link made by markets of the cost of funding of banks with that of 
their respective sovereign.  
Such negative effects may potentially be better mitigated in political federations given their 
stronger shock-absorbing institutions. For example, if a particular state in the U.S. were to 
experience  a  build-up  in  private  sector  liabilities  that  threatened  its  local  banks,  the 
responsibility for recapitalisation and deposit insurance would fall on the federal government 
– through institutions like the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
This  means  that  a  U.S.  state  cannot  be  brought  into  financial  difficulties  by  a  mismatch 
between the size of its banking sector and that of its local economy, whereas a euro area 
country can – as we saw in Ireland. 
On the real side of the current account, persistent trade imbalances within the euro area also 
reflect accumulated competitiveness losses in deficit countries. The problem may be masked 
while  growth  is  driven  by  credit  and  consumption,  as  was  the  case  in  some  euro  area 
countries before 2008. But when there is a reversal in financial flows and foreigners are no 
longer willing to finance the further accumulation of external debt, accrued competitiveness 
losses come to the fore. This can result in particular regions suffering sustained low growth 
and unemployment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Again, these negative effects may be more manageable with the shock-absorbing institutions 
of a political federation. A homogenous language and culture may facilitate labour mobility, 
providing one channel for adjustment – although recent evidence suggests this effect is not 
as  significant  in  the  U.S.  as  previously  thought.  At  the  same  time,  having  a  large  federal 
budget  creates  a  natural  stabiliser  as  federal  spending  on  “big  ticket”  items  like  social 
security, healthcare and defence redistributes incomes between rich and struggling regions. 
framework 
to  monitor  broader  macroeconomic 
Constructing a sui generis response 
It  is  clear  that  the  way  ahead  for  the  euro  area  cannot  involve  trying  to  construct  the 
institutions of a political federation overnight. This implies that the euro area needs a different 
approach to ensure the smooth functioning of monetary union that can compensate for some 
of these “missing institutions”. This approach has two main pillars. 
The  first  pillar  is  to  strengthen  fundamentally  the  governance  procedures  which  prevent 
imbalances from arising. With fewer shock-absorbing institutions to mitigate crises when they 
arise,  the  euro  area  has  learned  that  it  must  become  more  effective  at  preventing 
imbalances. This process has involved tightening the rules for fiscal policies and creating a 
much  needed 
imbalances  and 
competitiveness. 
On the fiscal side, the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact and the new Fiscal Compact 
are specifically designed to catch imbalances earlier. A key focus of the SGP reform was to 
strengthen the so-called “preventive arm” – for example, sanctions are now possible for non-
compliance with medium-term budgetary objectives. The Fiscal Compact supports this focus 
on  prevention  by  creating  a  new  “first  line  of  defence”:  balanced  budget  rules  with  a 
constitutional  status.  Importantly,  this  shifts  the  onus  for  enforcement  away  from  Brussels 
and onto national institutions, encouraging greater ownership. Indeed, if applied properly, this 
Fiscal  Compact  would  correct  imbalances  before  the  EU  level  rules  ever  need  to  be 
activated. 
On the broader macroeconomic side, the new Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure allows 
for early monitoring of – amongst other things – competitiveness trends, private sector credit 
flows and house prices. If excessive imbalances show up in these areas, sanctions1 can be 
applied to euro area countries that do not follow recommendations to correct them. Under 
this framework, the kinds of credit booms and competitiveness losses we witnessed in the 
first years of the euro would be “flashing red” much earlier. 
I  am  aware  that  some  criticise  this  process  as  asymmetric.  While  it  is  clear  that  the 
vulnerabilities created by large current account deficits are greater than those of surpluses  
–  and  therefore  require  more  urgent  remedies  –  the  structural  drivers  of  current  account 
imbalances  in  surplus  countries  are  also  partly  being  addressed,  even  if  not  to  the  same 
extent as those in deficit countries. In parallel to the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure, 
for  example,  the  Commission  intends  to  undertake  further  analysis  on  the  drivers  and 
possible policy implications of large sustained current account surpluses, including trade and 
financial linkages between surplus and deficit countries. It will also examine ways for further 
rebalancing current account imbalances, particularly at the level of the euro area, and within 
the global context. A key theme of the crisis response has also been a renewed focus on 
structural  reforms  as  embedded  in  the  Euro  Plus  Pact  and  Europe  2020  Strategy,  which 
apply to all participating Member States equally. 
                                                 
1  Under the MIP, an interest-bearing deposit can be imposed after one failure to comply with the recommended 
corrective action. After a second compliance failure, this interest-bearing deposit can be converted into a fine 
(up to 0.1% of GDP). Sanctions can also be imposed for failing twice to submit a sufficient corrective action 
plan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  would  be naïve,  however,  to  believe  that  with  better  governance  crises  could  always  be 
prevented.  The  second  pillar  to  compensate  for  the  euro  area’s  “missing  institutions”, 
therefore,  is  to  strengthen  the  way  in  which  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  manages  crises. 
Having  witnessed  how  imbalances  in  one  euro  area  country  –  no  matter  how  small  –  can 
become  systemic  and  create  financial  obligations  for  other  taxpayers,  the  EU  institutions, 
national  governments  and  national  parliaments  are  now  playing  a  much  stronger  role  in 
demanding and monitoring economic reforms. 
This shift is visible in much more active role of the euro area Heads of State or Government 
in the economic management of the euro area – now institutionalised in the form of the Euro 
Summit.  It  is  also  visible  in  the  greater  scrutiny  applied  by  national  parliaments  to  the 
economic  policies  of  other  Member  States:  for  example,  to  approve  financial  assistance 
programmes a number of national parliaments now require EU-IMF compliance reports and 
debt  sustainability  analyses.  This  changing  role  of  national  parliaments  underscores  the 
recent  observation  by  Herman  Van  Rompuy  that  national  parliaments  are  increasingly  EU 
institutions. 
The  Commission  is  also  gaining  a  much  stronger  crisis  management  through  the  new 
“two pack” legislation. The current proposals would allow the Commission to put any Member 
State under enhanced surveillance if it is experiencing or threatened with financial difficulties 
– regardless of whether it has requested financial assistance. This would imply stress tests of 
the banking sector by the EBA, monitoring of macro imbalances and regular review missions 
by  the  Commission  in  liaison  with  the  ECB.  Moreover,  the  Commission  would  be  able  to 
send  back  budgets  that  did  not  comply  with  the  SGP  before  they  had  been  adopted  by 
national authorities. 
In  other  words,  the  euro  area  is  responding  to  the  crisis  by  creating  a  new  and  more 
comprehensive model of economic governance. This is aimed at preventing imbalances in all 
policy areas before they can trigger crises – and managing crises more effectively when they 
do  arise.  In  many  ways,  this  response  is  sui  generis  and  departs  from  the  template  we 
associate with political federations. For example, the “two pack” gives the Commission the 
power to demand the kind of reforms that the U.S. federal government could not demand of a 
U.S.  state.  Moreover,  the  federal  government  would  not  be  able  to  sanction  a  state  if,  for 
example, its tax code was leading to a local housing bubble. This is now not excluded in the 
euro area under the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure.  
This new model is under development and still needs to be perfected – in particular in the 
financial sector, more work still needs to be done. That said, problems of regulatory arbitrage 
created  by  national  level  banking  supervision  are  being  addressed  through  an  increasing 
harmonisation  of  supervisory  standards  and  the  establishment  of  a  European  System  of 
Financial Supervisors with new European Supervisory Authorities. Europe is also exceeding 
international  benchmarks  in  transposing  the  new  Basel  III  rules.  We  may  be  seeing  the 
beginning  of  a  euro  area  framework  for  banking  sector  recapitalisation  and  resolution  with 
the decision to allow the ESM to recapitalise banks in non-programme countries. Indeed, a 
modest first step that will be followed by others in the future. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the euro area has learned that the original design of EMU was incomplete, and 
is now working hard to complete it. For various reasons, the euro area is not in a position to 
adopt in the near term the institutions of a political federation. This means that it has to take a 
different  road  to  increase  overall  stability  and  –  in  true  European  tradition  –  a  sui  generis 
approach is being developed that focuses on preventing imbalances and improving collective 
management of crisis. 
It is clear that this approach implies a loss of sovereignty. The crisis has proved that the euro 
area is a political entity which is not self-adjusting; it needs to be actively governed, and this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
cannot happen without Member States sharing more powers with each other. In other words, 
there  has  been  a  belated  recognition  that  monetary  union  entails  political  union.  This  shift 
has profound implications for the involvement of all levels of governments in the European 
project:  EU  institutions,  national  governments,  national  parliaments,  and  even  local 
governments  are  all  required  to  participate  in  the  common  governance  of  the  euro  area. 
Managing this process represents the next great challenge of European integration.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
