Ben S Bernanke: Economic outlook and policy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
7 June 2012. 
 Chairman Casey, Vice Chairman Brady, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
this opportunity to discuss the economic outlook and economic policy.  
Economic  growth  has  continued  at  a  moderate  rate  so  far  this  year.  Real  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the first quarter after increasing at 
a 3 percent pace in the fourth quarter of 2011. Growth last quarter was supported by further 
gains  in  private  domestic  demand,  which  more  than  offset  a  drag  from  a  decline  in 
government spending.  
Labor  market  conditions  improved  in  the  latter  part  of  2011  and  earlier  this  year.  The 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  about  1  percentage  point  since  last  August;  and  payroll 
employment increased 225,000 per month, on average, during the first three months of this 
year, up from about 150,000 jobs added per month in 2011. In April and May, however, the 
reported  pace  of  job  gains  slowed  to  an  average  of  75,000  per  month,  and  the 
unemployment rate ticked up to 8.2 percent. This apparent slowing in the labor market may 
have been exaggerated by  issues related to seasonal adjustment and the unusually  warm 
weather this past winter.1 But it may also be the case that the larger gains seen late last year 
and early this year were associated with some catch-up in hiring on the part of employers 
who had pared their workforces aggressively during and just after the recession.2 If so, the 
deceleration  in  employment  in  recent  months  may  indicate  that  this  catch-up  has  largely 
been  completed,  and,  consequently,  that  more-rapid  gains  in  economic  activity  will  be 
required to achieve significant further improvement in labor market conditions.  
Economic  growth  appears  poised  to  continue  at  a  moderate  pace  over  coming  quarters, 
supported in part by accommodative monetary policy. In particular, increases in household 
spending have been relatively well sustained. Income growth has remained quite modest, but 
the  recent  declines  in  energy  prices  should  provide  some  offsetting  lift  to  real  purchasing 
power. While the most recent readings have been mixed, consumer sentiment is nonetheless 
up noticeably from its levels late last year. And, despite economic difficulties in Europe, the 
demand for  U.S.  exports  has  held  up  well.  The  U.S.  business  sector  is  profitable  and  has 
become more competitive in international markets.  
However, some of the factors that have restrained the recovery persist. Notably, households 
and  businesses  still  appear  quite  cautious  about  the  economy.  For  example,  according  to 
surveys,  households  continue  to  rate  their  income  prospects  as  relatively  poor  and  do  not 
expect economic conditions to improve significantly. Similarly, concerns about developments 
in  Europe,  U.S.  fiscal  policy,  and  the  strength  and  sustainability  of  the  recovery  have  left 
some firms hesitant to expand capacity.  
                                                
1 
In particular, the unusually warm weather this past winter may have brought forward some hiring in sectors 
such as construction where activity normally is subdued during the coldest months; thus, some of the slower 
pace of job gains this spring may have represented a payback for that earlier hiring. In addition, the estimated 
seasonal factors for some economic indicators may have been influenced by the timing of the steepest part of 
the decline in activity during the 2008–09 winter months; if so, the seasonal adjustment process may have 
resulted in an overstatement of economic activity this past winter and the understatement of activity in other 
months. 
2  For  further  discussion,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2012),  “Recent  Developments  in  the  Labor  Market”,  speech 
delivered at the National Association for Business Economics Annual Conference, Washington, March 26. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  depressed  housing market  has  also  been  an  important  drag  on the  recovery.  Despite 
historically low mortgage rates and high levels of affordability, many prospective homebuyers 
cannot obtain mortgages, as lending standards have tightened and the creditworthiness of 
many  potential  borrowers  has  been  impaired.  At  the  same  time,  a  large  stock  of  vacant 
houses  continues  to  limit  incentives  for  the  construction  of  new  homes,  and  a  substantial 
backlog of foreclosures will likely add further to the supply of vacant homes. However, a few 
encouraging signs in housing have appeared recently, including some pickup in sales and 
construction, improvements in homebuilder sentiment, and the apparent stabilization of home 
prices in some areas.  
Banking and financial conditions in the United States have improved significantly since the 
depths  of  the  crisis.  Notably,  recent  stress  tests  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  of  the 
balance sheets of the 19 largest U.S. bank holding companies showed that those firms have 
added about $300 billion to their capital since 2009; the tests also showed that, even in an 
extremely adverse hypothetical economic scenario, most of those firms would remain able to 
provide  credit  to  U.S.  households  and  businesses.  Lending  terms  and  standards  have 
generally become less restrictive in recent quarters, although some borrowers, such as small 
businesses  and  (as  already  noted)  potential  homebuyers  with  less-than-perfect  credit,  still 
report difficulties in obtaining loans.  
Concerns about sovereign debt and the health of banks in a number of euro-area countries 
continue to create strains in global financial markets. The crisis in Europe has affected the 
U.S.  economy  by  acting  as  a  drag  on  our  exports,  weighing  on  business  and  consumer 
confidence,  and  pressuring  U.S. financial  markets  and  institutions.  European  policymakers 
have  taken  a  number  of  actions  to  address  the  crisis,  but  more  will  likely  be  needed  to 
stabilize euro-area banks, calm market fears about sovereign finances, achieve a workable 
fiscal framework for the euro area, and lay the foundations for long-term economic growth. 
U.S. banks have greatly improved their financial strength in recent years, as I noted earlier. 
Nevertheless, the situation in Europe poses significant risks to the U.S. financial system and 
economy and must be monitored closely. As always, the Federal Reserve remains prepared 
to take action as needed to protect the U.S. financial system and economy in the event that 
financial stresses escalate.  
Another factor likely to weigh on the U.S. recovery is the drag being exerted by fiscal policy. 
Reflecting ongoing budgetary pressures, real spending by state and local governments has 
continued to decline. Real federal government spending has also declined, on net, since the 
third  quarter  of  last  year,  and  the  future  course  of  federal  fiscal  policies  remains  quite 
uncertain, as I will discuss shortly.  
With regard to inflation, large increases in energy prices earlier this year caused the price 
index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  to  rise  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  3  percent 
over the first three months of this year. However, oil prices and retail gasoline prices have 
since  retraced  those  earlier  increases.  In  any  case,  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  or  other 
commodities  are  unlikely  to  result  in  persistent  increases  in  overall  inflation  so  long  as 
household  and  business  expectations  of  future  price  changes  remain  stable.  Longer-term 
inflation  expectations  have,  indeed,  been  quite  well  anchored,  according  to  surveys  of 
households and economic forecasters and as derived from financial market information. For 
example,  the  five-year-forward  measure  of  inflation  compensation  derived  from  yields  on 
nominal  and  inflation-protected  Treasury  securities  suggests  that  inflation  expectations 
among investors have changed little, on net, since last fall and are lower than a year ago. 
Meanwhile, the substantial resource slack in U.S. labor and product markets should continue 
to restrain inflationary pressures. Given these conditions, inflation is expected to remain at or 
slightly below the 2 percent rate that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges 
consistent with our statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and stable prices.  
With unemployment still quite high and the outlook for inflation subdued, and in the presence 
of significant downside risks to the outlook posed by strains in global financial markets, the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
FOMC  has  continued  to  maintain  a  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The 
target range for the federal funds rate remains at 0 to 1/4 percent, and the Committee has 
indicated  in  its  recent  statements  that  it  anticipates  that  economic  conditions  are  likely  to 
warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the  federal  funds  rate  at  least  through  late  2014.  In 
addition, the Federal Reserve has been conducting a program, announced last September, 
to  lengthen  the  average  maturity  of  its  securities  holdings  by  purchasing  $400  billion  of 
longer-term  Treasury  securities  and  selling  an  equal  amount  of  shorter-term  Treasury 
securities. The Committee also continues to reinvest principal received from its holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in agency MBS and to roll over 
its  maturing  Treasury  holdings  at  auction.  These  policies  have  supported  the  economic 
recovery  by  putting  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates,  including  mortgage 
rates,  and  by  making  broader  financial  conditions  more  accommodative.  The  Committee 
reviews the size and composition of its securities holdings regularly and is prepared to adjust 
those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price 
stability.  
The economy’s performance over the medium and longer term also will depend importantly 
on the course of fiscal policy. Fiscal policymakers confront daunting challenges. As they do 
so,  they  should  keep  three  objectives  in  mind.  First,  to  promote  economic  growth  and 
stability, the federal budget must be put on a sustainable long-run path. The federal budget 
deficit, which averaged about 9 percent of GDP during the past three fiscal years, is likely to 
narrow in coming years as the economic recovery leads to higher tax revenues and lower 
income  support  payments.  Nevertheless,  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  projects 
that,  if  current  policies  continue,  the  budget  deficit  would  be  close  to  5  percent  of GDP  in 
2017 when the economy is expected to be near full employment.3 Moreover, under current 
policies and reasonable economic assumptions, the CBO projects that the structural budget 
gap and the ratio of federal debt to GDP will trend upward thereafter, in large part reflecting 
rapidly  escalating  health  expenditures  and  the  aging  of  the  population.  This  dynamic  is 
clearly unsustainable. At best, rapidly rising levels of debt will lead to reduced rates of capital 
formation, slower economic growth, and increased foreign indebtedness. At worst, they will 
provoke a fiscal crisis that could have severe consequences for the economy. To avoid such 
outcomes,  fiscal  policy  must  be  placed  on  a  sustainable  path  that  eventually  results  in  a 
stable or declining ratio of federal debt to GDP.  
Even  as  fiscal  policymakers  address  the  urgent  issue  of  fiscal  sustainability,  a  second 
objective should be to avoid unnecessarily impeding the current economic recovery. Indeed, 
a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of next year that is built into current law  
–  the  so-called  fiscal  cliff  –  would,  if  allowed  to  occur,  pose  a  significant  threat  to  the 
recovery.  Moreover,  uncertainty  about  the  resolution  of  these  fiscal  issues  could  itself 
undermine  business  and  household  confidence.  Fortunately,  avoiding  the  fiscal  cliff  and 
achieving  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  are  fully  compatible  and  mutually  reinforcing 
objectives.  Preventing  a  sudden  and  severe  contraction  in  fiscal  policy  will  support  the 
transition  back  to  full  employment,  which  should  aid  long-term  fiscal  sustainability.  At  the 
same time, a credible fiscal plan to put the federal budget on a longer-run sustainable path 
could  help  keep  longer-term  interest  rates  low  and  improve  household  and  business 
confidence, thereby supporting improved economic performance today.  
A third objective for fiscal policy is to promote a stronger economy in the medium and long 
term through the careful design of tax policies and spending programs. To the fullest extent 
possible,  federal  tax  and  spending  policies  should  increase  incentives  to  work  and  save, 
encourage  investments  in  workforce  skills,  stimulate  private  capital  formation,  promote 
research and development, and provide necessary public infrastructure. Although we cannot 
                                                
3  This projection is the alternative fiscal scenario in the Congressional Budget Office (2012), Updated Budget 
Projections: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022 (Washington: CBO, March). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
expect  our  economy  to  grow  its  way  out  of  federal  budget  imbalances  without  significant 
adjustment  in  fiscal  policies,  a  more  productive  economy  will  ease  the  tradeoffs  faced  by 
fiscal policymakers.  
Thank you. I would be glad to take your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
