Gill Marcus: Perspectives on the global and domestic economic 
environment 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the Volkswagen 
South Africa Strategic Conversation Dinner, Sandton, 15 March 2012. 
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  lead  in  the  strategic  conversation  this  evening.  We  have 
come through a difficult few years, and the road ahead is likely to be just as challenging.  
Right now there seems to be a small breathing space that might allow a better assessment of 
where the world is today. We have seen three elements of the global crisis come together, 
namely  sovereign  debt,  a  banking  crisis,  and  the  crisis  of  weak  growth  and  rising 
unemployment, particularly among the young. There is also the increasing recognition that 
what is occurring is not simply a very deep economic crisis, but a fundamental shift in the 
balance of forces in the world. This is likely to take time to unfold, but significant changes are 
taking place, with the growing voice and economic power of emerging markets being heard 
more loudly. 
The global financial crisis is still with us, although it does appear that some of the worst case 
global scenarios may have been avoided or perhaps merely delayed. But even the optimistic 
scenarios for Europe are not good news as fiscal adjustments, bank deleveraging and the 
weight of the cumulative impact of the crisis thus far take hold. For this reason the outlook for 
the South African economy is not as bright as it could be, unless a concerted effort is made 
to do something different. Currently the domestic economy is characterised by rising inflation 
and slowing growth, which is a difficult combination for policy-makers to deal with.  
This  evening  I  will  give  a  perspective  on  aspects  of  the  global  and  domestic  economic 
backdrop. I will spend some time on the European situation, as the context within which we 
operate, formulate policy, adopt strategies is critical to enable all of us to ensure that South 
Africa is able to take advantage of what opportunities exist, and take appropriate measures 
to try to protect us from the ravages of the global crisis. From a South African perspective, 
what  happens  in  Europe  is  important,  given  the  trade  links  that  we  have  with  the  region. 
Although  the  percentage  of  South  African  manufacturing  exports  to  Europe  have  declined 
over  the  past  few  years,  at  around  30  per  cent  it  is  still  an  extremely  important  trading 
partner. 
In recent months there have been progressive downward revisions by analysts of the global 
growth outlook. The IMF, in its latest World Economic Outlook, also downgraded its forecast 
for world growth to average 3,3 per cent in 2012, and 3,9 per cent in 2013. There are still 
significant risks to the global environment, but the intensity and immediacy of these risks may 
have been reduced somewhat with the recent agreement on the Greek bail-out which has 
helped  to  prevent  a  disorderly  default.  This  agreement  is  expected  to  allow  for  Greece  to 
roll-over its debt that is maturing this month. 
It  would  be  premature  to  think  that  the  European  crisis  has  been  resolved  as  there  are  a 
number  of  interrelated  and  mutually  reinforcing  dimensions  which  mean  that  uncertainty 
remains. Although the risks from the sovereign debt crisis appear to have been reduced for 
the  meantime,  questions  about  the  sustainability  of  the  solution  persist,  particularly  in  the 
light of the fact that the European authorities have emphasised that the Greek bail-out model 
is not a precedent. The Portuguese economy is also under stress, and we could still see a 
repetition of the Greek crisis being played out there in the coming months. In the absence of 
a clear commitment to deal with a possible Portuguese crisis, the risk of contagion to other 
more  systemically  important  economies,  such  as  Italy  and  Spain,  will  increase.  Although 
some  of  the  peripheral  European  countries  are  relatively  small,  they  have  a  combined 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sovereign debt of around US$1 trillion, with a significant proportion being held by European 
banks. 
The  actions  to  resolve  the  Greek  debt  problem  have  involved  significant  losses  to  private 
sector bond-holders, many of which are European banks. In terms of the agreement, bond 
holders  will  accept  losses  in  excess  of  70  per  cent  of  the  value  of  the  debt.  Partly  as  a 
consequence  of  these  developments,  European  banks  are  now  undercapitalised,  with 
estimates  ranging  between  US$300  billion  and  US$400  billion.  This  has  resulted  in 
significant deleveraging by European banks, with indications of them selling assets in order 
to  achieve  their  required  ratios.  This  credit  crunch  in  Europe  is  being  exacerbated  by  the 
need to meet new capital requirements of raising the Tier 1 capital asset ratio to 9 per cent 
by  June  2012.  There  are  concerns  that  European  bank  lending  could  decline  by  around 
US$3 trillion over the next 18 months. 
The  interbank  market  is  also  dysfunctional  in  Europe,  reflecting  the  lack  of  trust  between 
banks. The ECB has attempted to alleviate the situation with the establishment of the Long 
Term  Refinancing  Operation  (LTRO)  facility,  which  has  to  date  granted  an  estimated 
US$1,35  trillion  in  loans  to  banks  at  low  interest  rates.  There  is  some  evidence  that  a 
significant proportion of this money has gone in to purchasing sovereign debt, but it is still too 
early to say how much will go to lending to households and businesses. 
The credit crunch is likely to reinforce the negative growth outlook for the region, and will in 
turn have its own negative feedback loop. The Euro area is expected to contract by around 
0,5 per cent this year, and the European Commission expects negative growth in 8 of the 
17 Eurozone  countries  this  year.  These  countries  include  Belgium,  Greece,  Spain,  Italy, 
Holland,  Austria  and  Portugal.  Widespread  fiscal  consolidation,  even  in  countries  with 
relatively  strong  fiscal  positions  such  as  Germany,  has  contributed  to  the  negative  growth 
outlook. A number of countries, such as Spain, Portugal and Ireland are attempting to reduce 
their deficit to GDP ratios by around 3 per cent per year for the next two years, and Italy by 
about 2 per cent per year. The negative growth outlook raises doubts about the ability of the 
Greek economy to adjust to the fiscal austerity that is being imposed on it. The economy has 
contracted  by  about  15  per  cent  in  the  past  two  years,  and  is  expected  to  contract  by  a 
further 4,4 per cent this year, while unemployment has increased from 7,7 per cent in 2008 to 
almost 20 per cent.  
At the root of these problems is a balance of payments crisis within the euro area between 
northern  and  southern  Europe.  The  loss  of  competitiveness  experienced  by  the  southern 
European  countries  and  their  consequent  balance  of  payments  deficits  has  in  effect  been 
financed  by  borrowing  from  the  Northern  Europeans.  This  is  not  sustainable  indefinitely. 
Under  normal  circumstances  the  adjustment  would  be  facilitated  through  exchange  rate 
depreciation,  but  with  this  option  ruled  out,  a  more  difficult  path  of  “internal  devaluation”, 
involving  absolute  reductions  in  wages  and  expenditure,  has  to  be  followed.  The  more 
reluctant  the  surplus  countries  are  to  increase  their  consumption  of  Southern  European 
goods, the more difficult the adjustment becomes and the more politically unpopular these 
measures become in the deficit countries. 
Apart from the European situation, prospects for other parts of the global economy appear to 
be more promising, but risks remain. The US economic growth has surprised on the upside 
in  recent  months,  but  fears  remain  that  this  nascent  recovery  could  be  short-lived.  In 
particular,  there  are  risks  that  political  conflicts  over  fiscal  policy  ahead  of  the  November 
elections could result in premature fiscal cutbacks, which, according to some estimates could 
have the potential to reduce US growth by up to two percentage points.  
There  are  also  indications  that  the  Chinese  economy  may  be  slowing,  but  the  Chinese 
authorities  have  the  ability  and  resolve  to  intervene  strongly  to  prevent  a  so-called  hard 
landing. One region with a more favourable outlook is sub-Saharan Africa, which is expected 
to grow by around 5,5 per cent this year. South Africa’s financial and trade links with Africa 
have  been  increasing  in  recent  years,  and  the  continent  is  fast  becoming  the  major 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
destination  for  our  manufactured  exports.  During  the  financial  crisis,  Africa  was  relatively 
protected from the fall-out, given the predominance of intra-regional trade, and South Africa 
would do well to encourage further two-way trade and investment with the region. 
One of the consequences of the global crisis has been the severe social dislocation that has 
accompanied  it,  and  it  is  questionable  how  long  such  pain  can  be  endured.  The  recent 
protests  on  the  streets  of  Athens  and  general  popular  opposition  raises  questions  as  to 
whether or not the latest initiatives are politically sustainable. History is replete with examples 
of how circumstances similar to those described lead to political polarisation and the rise of 
nationalism and/or populism. This is happening in the context of a divided Europe, with no 
consensus on the appropriate solutions to the problems, and irresolute leadership reflected 
in weak and tenuous coalition governments.  
The social problems are reflected in the spiraling of unemployment in some of the advanced 
economies.  This  is  particularly  the  case  when  it  comes  to  youth  unemployment.  In  this 
respect South Africa is no longer unique, with its estimated unemployment rate of 23,9 per 
cent,  and  youth  unemployment  at  around  50  per  cent.  The  negative  trends  in  Europe  in 
particular  are  quite  dramatic.  In  the  beginning  of  2008  the  unemployment  rate  in  the 
European  Union  was  6,9  per  cent  and  the  unemployment  rate  amongst  the  youth  (i.e. 
persons below 25 years of age) was 15,9 per cent. In January 2012 the unemployment rate 
in  the  EU  was  10,7  per  cent,  while  youth  unemployment  measured  22,4  per  cent.  The 
number of unemployed youth totaled 5,5 million.  
There are some stark divergences within the region, with overall unemployment ranging from 
4,0  per  cent  in  Austria,  to  23,3  per  cent  in  Spain,  and  youth  unemployment  ranging  from 
7,8 per cent in Germany to 48,1 per cent in Greece and 49,9 per cent in Spain. As a rule of 
thumb,  the  youth  unemployment  rate  is  between  2  and  3  times  are  high  as  the  total 
unemployment rate. Of the 27 EU countries, 20 of them have youth unemployment rates of 
20 per cent or more, and 7 of these are in excess of 30 per cent. This phenomenon is of 
particular concern, as the longer people remain out of work, the less likely they are to ever 
work, or work again. The unemployment get deskilled, demotivated and disaffected, leading 
to the attendant social hardships and drain on society. 
It is also not just Europe where unemployment has become a problem. US unemployment 
measured 5 per cent before the crisis, and peaked at around 10 per cent before declining to 
current levels of around 8,5 per cent. Youth unemployment is currently 16,0 per cent. In the 
UK, youth unemployment – at 22,2 per cent – is close to the 1 million mark. 
The  problem  of  youth  unemployment  in  the  advanced  economies  is  exacerbated  by  an 
ageing  population  which  is  putting  strain  on  fiscal  positions.  The  current  low  interest  rate 
environment in these economies will make it even more difficult for private pension funds to 
generate  adequate  returns  for  this  ageing  population,  with  potential  financial  demands  on 
governments.  This  factor  has  resulted  in  an  extension  of  the  working  age  in  a  number  of 
countries, which makes it even more difficult to solve the youth unemployment problem, with 
the associated fiscal demands at a time when such programmes are being scaled back. The 
potential adverse social consequences of these developments are profound. 
The  underlying  lesson  for  South  Africa  from  all  of  this  is  the  importance  of  generating 
sustained  and  employment-generating  growth  that  is  needed  to  attend  to  the  growing 
inequalities.  It  is  also  clearly  preferable,  particularly  in  the  short  run,  to  improve  a  debt  to 
GDP ratio by increasing GDP growth, as opposed to cutting down on the absolute level of 
debt. Fiscal consolidation that is done too quickly could cause growth to decline, and this will 
cause  the  debt  metrics  to  deteriorate  and  result  in  a  negative  debt  spiral.  When  fiscal 
sustainability is called into question, the challenge is to find a balance between such fiscal 
consolidation and the need for growth.  
As  I  have  indicated,  South  Africa’s  growth  outlook  in  the  short  to  medium  term  will  be 
impacted to a significant degree by global developments. Domestic economic growth in 2011 
measured 3,1 per cent following growth of 3,2 per cent in the final quarter of the year. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
growth  forecasts  for  2012  range  between  2,5  per  cent  and  3,0  per  cent,  with  the  latest 
forecast of the Bank being 2,8 per cent. This followed successive downward revisions during 
2011 as the European crisis intensified.  
Since  the  2009  recession,  growth  has  been  driven  primarily  by  household  consumption 
expenditure, which is clearly an undesirable and unsustainable growth path. Emphasis must 
be  given  to  ensure  that  growth  is  driven  by  investment.  There  are,  however,  signs  that 
investment expenditure growth is gathering pace, and this will be reinforced if the proposals 
around increased infrastructure expenditure are followed through on. According to the latest 
budget, public sector projects totaling R845 billion have been approved for the MTEF period. 
This  emphasis  on  infrastructure  investment  is  appropriate  as  it  is  likely  to  contribute  to 
improved economic efficiencies and helps with the alleviation of existing bottlenecks in the 
economy.  But  the  focus  on  infrastructure  is  not  new,  and  the  plans  have  often  not  met 
expectations,  particularly  since  the  2010  World  Cup.  For  example  in  2009/10,  only  83  per 
cent  of  the  amounts  budgeted  for  infrastructure  was  spent.  In  2010/11,  this  had  declined 
further to 68 per cent. 
Importantly, it is not only the government and state-owned enterprises that need to invest. 
Michael  Spence,  the  respected  growth  theorist,  in  his  book  “The  Next  Convergence”,  has 
shown  that  countries  which  have  sustained  growth  rates  of  around  7  per  cent  or  more  for 
25 years generally have government and public sector investment ratios of between 5 and 
7 per cent of GDP, and total investment rates of at least 25 per cent of GDP. Why emphasise 
a target of 7 per cent growth per annum? Because a consistent growth rate of 7 per cent will 
allow for a doubling of income every 10 years, whereas a growth rate of 3 per cent will take 
24  years  to  double  incomes.  South  Africa’s  gross  fixed  capital  formation  as  a  percentage 
GDP averaged around 15,5 per cent in the decade from 1994 and then accelerated to peak 
at around 23 per cent in 2008. This positive trend coincided with economic growth rates in 
excess of 5 per cent and a decline in the unemployment rate to 21,9 per cent by the fourth 
quarter  of  2008  .  Since  the  crisis,  this  investment  to  GDP  ratio  has  declined  and  in  2011 
averaged  around  19  per  cent.  Between  1994  and  2007,  government  and  public  sector 
investment averaged 4,4 per cent of GDP, but since 2008 it has averaged 8 per cent. 
We can conclude from this that the lack of investment is not simply a problem of government 
failure to invest. Private sector investment has also been lacking. But government does have 
an important role to play in providing the environment conducive to private sector investment. 
For example, a notable area where private sector investment has been severely lacking is in 
the  mining  sector.  This  may  be  due  in  part  to  uncertainties  created  by  the  regulatory 
environment, and lack of investment in rail infrastructure which has impeded the ability of the 
mines to get the ores to the ports. This also illustrates how government investment does not 
necessarily  crowd  out  private  sector  investment.  To  the  contrary  it  can  also  crowd  in 
investment, as in this example. 
Michael Spence sums it up appropriately as follows: “Put bluntly, growth requires investment, 
and that means present sacrifice for future gain. The job of leaders is in part to get everyone 
on board, to build a consensus behind a forward-looking vision, underpinned by a growth and 
development  strategy  that  is  credible.  Multiple  classes  of  participants  and  organized 
stakeholders need to be willing participants. These include labour, unions, businesses and 
entrepreneurs,  civil  society  organizations,  and  households  at  various  levels  in  the  income 
distribution.”  
It is not only investment in fixed capital that is essential. Human capital is as important, if not 
more so. It is generally recognised that South Africa’s schooling situation is seriously lacking 
in various respects, but of equal concern is the lack of training for technical skills. It is an 
indictment, for example, that South Africa needs to import skilled artisans such as welders. 
Germany has a very well established system of apprenticeships, but South Africa has gone 
backwards  in  this  respect.  Not  only  does  an  undertrained  and  undereducated  workforce 
constrain  economic  growth,  it  reinforces  the  cycle  of  unemployment  and  widening 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inequalities. As Michael Spence has noted, in a world in which knowledge and connectivity 
are increasingly the basis for value creation, failures in the educational system are the surest 
form of exclusion there is. 
It would be inappropriate for me to conclude without saying something about monetary policy 
and inflation, and the contribution monetary policy can make to the growth and employment 
trajectory.  We  know  that  unemployment  has  serious  socioeconomic  consequences,  but  so 
does high inflation. It is difficult to find examples in history where sustained economic growth 
and high inflation went hand in hand. But it is easy to find glaring examples of high inflation 
contributing to socioeconomic dislocation. The inter-war years in Germany, Latin America in 
the  1980s,  and  closer  to  home  in  Zimbabwe  in  the  previous  decade  are  good  examples. 
Zimbabwe got no advantages out of the hyperinflation, but it created severe hardships, and 
the Zimbabwe dollar has now disappeared. The burden of inflation gets borne by those who 
lose their jobs through this, and by those who are unable to hedge themselves against the 
ravages  of  accelerating  price  increases.  These  are  generally  the  poor  and  often  even  the 
middle classes, whose savings and pension funds would have been rendered worthless.  
It is not only hyperinflation that is the problem. Even moderate inflation is bad for the poor 
and for workers. An annual inflation rate of 10 per cent for example, which is regarded by 
some as acceptable, means that a worker receiving R1000 per month will need to be earning 
R2590 in 10 years time simply to be no worse off. With a 20 per cent inflation, this amount 
would need to be R6,190 per month, and with a 25 per cent inflation, the required break-even 
income would be R10,000. The higher the inflation rate, the more purchasing power would 
be lost between bargaining rounds. In the latter case, workers will have lost a quarter of their 
purchasing power by the time of the next wage adjustment. If left unchecked, high inflation 
tends to breed higher inflation. 
Apart  from  its  redistributive  effects,  high  and  variable  inflation  also  tends  to  undermine 
long-term  investment,  so  it  is  important  that  inflation  is  kept  under  control,  and  monetary 
policy is best placed to do this. But in trying to stem high inflation, monetary policy may have 
negative  short  run  effects  on  economic  growth.  Conversely,  monetary  stimulus  will  only 
impact on cyclical growth. Therefore there has to be sensitivity on the part of policy makers 
to the state of the business cycle. This is what the essence of flexible inflation targeting is: 
that if inflation is outside the target, there is some flexibility with respect to the time horizon 
within  which  inflation  is  brought  back  to  within  the  target,  in  order  to  smooth  the  cyclical 
adjustment.  Monetary  policy  can  help  growth  by  providing  a  stable  and  low  inflation 
environment conducive to investment, and by providing short-term stimulus, but it does not 
determine the underlying growth potential of the country. This is the domain of other policies 
and where the focus on infrastructure and other structural reforms is critical. 
Monetary policy is currently facing the challenge of a rising trend in inflation and a slowing 
domestic  economy.  According  to  the  macroeconomic  forecast  of  the  Bank,  inflation  is 
expected  to  peak  at  around  6,6  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year  and  then  to 
decline  moderately  before  returning  to  within  the  target  range  by  the  end  of  the  year.  But 
there are a lot of uncertainties related to this outcome. Upside risks are seen to be coming 
from international oil prices, particularly in the context of elevated tensions in the Middle-East 
relating  to  the  Iranian  nuclear  programme  and  associated  sanctions.  Administered  prices 
also  remain  a  concern,  with  the  tendency  for  prices  in  many  instances  to  be  set  without 
regard  to  the  inflation  target.  However  recent  developments,  including  the  below-inflation 
tariff  increase  granted  to  the  ports,  the  reduction  in  the  proposed  e-toll  tariffs  and  the 
reduction in the electricity tariff increase granted to Eskom are encouraging.  
The  rand  exchange  rate  could  pose  and  upside  or  downside  risk,  depending  on  global 
developments. The rand tends to depreciate when there are heightened risk perceptions in 
Europe, as investors tend to seek so-called safe havens. But these flows tend to reverse as 
risk perceptions improve. Currently the markets appear to be taking a more positive view of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
global developments and this has been reflected in the recent appreciation of the currency. 
However, as I indicated earlier, this can change very quickly. 
Until  recently,  core  inflation  –  that  is  inflation  excluding  petrol,  electricity  and  food  –  was 
relatively subdued, reflecting the absence of significant demand pressures in the economy. 
In general, monetary policy can do little to combat the impact or first round effects of inflation 
that  is  driven  by  exogenous  shocks.  However  the  most  recent  data  seem  to  suggest  that 
inflation  is  becoming  more  generalised,  and  may  reflect  the  emergence  of  demand 
pressures. This is something that the Bank will monitor very carefully.  
At  this  stage,  monetary  policy  remains  relatively  accommodative,  given  the  challenging 
growth  environment,  with  real  policy  interest  rates  slightly  below  zero.  As  I  have  outlined 
earlier, raising the growth potential requires a concerted and sustained investment boost in 
the economy. An accommodative monetary policy environment is only part of this story, and 
as  responsible  monetary  policy  makers,  we  recognise  that  keeping  inflation  under  control 
must  be  done  with  due  regard  to  the  possible  impact  on  employment  and  growth.  At  the 
same  time,  maintaining  price  stability  remains  central  to  our  mandate,  and  price  stability 
should be part of the societal consensus that is essential for the successful implementation 
of a forward-looking sustainable growth strategy.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
