DeLisle Worrell: The economic and financial system in Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Domestic Financial Institutions Conference, Bridgetown, 20 September 2012. 
 The time we spend together here today is an opportunity to reflect on the nature and effects 
of financial transactions in our economy, in an effort to better understand how the financial 
system works. We do well always to remember how imperfect is our understanding of the 
economic and financial system. In economics, as in many other areas of life, we often speak 
as though we are sure of the consequences of this or that policy, when in fact there are so 
many factors at work in every case that the outcome is always uncertain. That is why, from 
time to time, it is essential that we step back from the action and examine in some depth how 
things have turned out, and what that tells us about how things work. 
It is important that the Central Bank and the Financial Services Commission, the regulators, 
do this in collaboration with you, the private financial institutions. The economy works to our 
benefit only when all actors, the Central Bank, Government, financial institutions, firms and 
households all share an understanding of how the actions of each affects the others and the 
economy as a whole. A great strength of the Barbadian economy, and one which we should 
celebrate, is the quality of the institutions which inform the discussion of our economy. Our 
social partnership is celebrated around the world, and we need to pay tribute to the quality 
and comprehensiveness of our media’s coverage of economic issues. Today’s conference is 
a contribution to the study and discussion of our financial system, so that we can improve the 
way it works, in the interests of our national development. 
Our  agenda  today  includes  an  update  on  the  stability  of  our  financial  system,  which  we 
continue to monitor closely. In January we published a comprehensive report on the financial 
system, and we published an update in July. Our system is sound and our major institutions 
have  adequate  capital  and  reserves,  but  we  continue  to  see  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
prolonged  recession  on  credit  quality.  The  process  of  resolving  the  Clico  insolvency  is 
on-going,  managed  by  the  judicial  managers,  under  the  supervision  of  the  courts.  Other 
insurance companies are profitable. 
Our  Financial  Services  Commission  is  now  into  its  second  year,  and  there  have  been 
changes of substance in the regulation of nonbanks. The financial system as a whole, banks, 
other financial institutions, the FSC, Government and the Central Bank, are all preparing for 
the  next  Financial  Stability  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP),  planned  for  next  year.  The 
FSAP, which is conducted jointly by the IMF and World Bank, takes a comprehensive and in 
depth overview of the financial systems of their member countries, on a periodic basis. 
Our programme includes papers on interest rate policy and foreign exchange transactions, 
both  areas  where  we  have  revisited  past  experience  in  search  of  fresh  insight  about  the 
nature  and  effects  of  these  variables.  In  the  case  of  interest  rates  we  are  suggesting  a 
refinement of policy, to reflect the strong links between Barbados’ financial system and North 
America in a more systematic way. In the case of the foreign exchange market, it is unclear 
whether any change is warranted, and we look forward to your views on our presentation. 
We are happy to have as our luncheon speaker today Dr Arnold McIntyre, Co-ordinator of 
the  Caribbean  Technical  Assistance  Centre  (CARTAC),  among  the  most  useful  of 
organisations  of  its  kind  in  the  world.  CARTAC’s  strengths  include  the  fact  that  it  has 
effectively leveraged the expertise which the Caribbean already has in individual countries, 
and made it available to the region as a whole. The Centre has also been able to respond 
rapidly and in a targetted way to the perceived technical assistance needs of the Caribbean. 
Arnold will speak to us about the Centre’s work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We have set aside much of our agenda for opportunities to hear from the financial institutions 
that we serve. Mr Roger Archer will offer a perspective on how regulations might be crafted, 
and  we  have  two  panels.  The  first  is  on  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  and  are 
continuing,  in  the  practice  of  banking  and  related  financial  transactions.  I  am  particularly 
looking forward to the second, on investing in Barbados, because investment is the key to 
development and growth, and I believe we should always seek ways to ensure that finance is 
directed  to  activities  that  are  profitable,  and  will  enhance  the  growth  potential  of  our 
economy. 
The outcome of today’s session will be food for thought. This is not a decision making forum. 
It is true that we will be discussing past decisions and their effects, and we will be outlining 
the  framework  of  forthcoming  decision  making  in  at  least  one  area,  that  of  interest  rates. 
However, the importance of today’s meeting is not to be found in decisions taken, but in the 
exchange of views among ourselves on the matters we will discuss, so that we can all go 
away with ideas on how to do our jobs better. 
Thank you all for coming and enjoy today’s deliberations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
