Eddie Yue: Developing local-currency bond markets in Asia 
Statement by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
and  Head  of  the  Delegation  of  Hong  Kong,  at  the  45th  Asian  Development  Bank  Annual 
Meeting, Manila, 4 May 2012. 
 I would like to thank the Government of the Philippines for hosting the 45th Annual Meeting 
of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB).  I  would  also  like  to  congratulate  ADB  on  the 
successful conclusion of the Tenth Replenishment of the Asian Development Fund (ADF XI), 
which would provide critical resources to ADB to further its work in poverty reduction in Asia. 
The global economy has shown signs of improvement in 2012 following a marked slowdown 
amid  the  intensification  of  the  euro  zone  debt  crisis  in  the  latter  part  of  last  year. 
Nevertheless, significant downside risks remain, with the euro zone debt crisis yet to be fully 
resolved and rising oil prices adding further uncertainty to the recovery outlook. 
Asia has remained resilient so far, in large part attributable to the reforms taken by regional 
economies  over  the  years  to  strengthen  economic  fundamentals,  improve  fiscal  discipline 
and  enhance  the  resilience  of  their  financial  systems  since  the  Asia  financial  crisis. 
Nevertheless, the region is not immune from the lingering fragility in the global environment. 
To  date,  the  deleveraging  by  European  banks  has  not  caused  significant  short-term  credit 
tightening in Asia, with banks in the region and elsewhere having stepped in to fill the gap left 
by  European  banks.  However,  the  ability  of  Asian  banks  to  continue  to  take  up  the  slack 
could be constrained by the already high loan-to-deposit ratio and limited access to US dollar 
funding. More importantly, it is doubtful whether these non-European banks would have the 
appetite  to  take  up  long-term  project  and  infrastructure  financing,  which  is  a  specialised 
business traditionally dominated by the European banks. 
Any cutback in infrastructure financing could have serious repercussions for developing Asia, 
which has a strong need to build and upgrade infrastructure networks to promote sustainable 
growth,  create  employment  opportunities  and  boost  competitiveness.  ADB  estimates  that 
Asia requires as much as US$8.3 trillion in overall infrastructure investment between 2010 
and 2020, with an average of US$750 billion in annual infrastructure spending. It is therefore 
vital  to  further  develop  the  capital  markets  in  Asia,  in  particular  the  local-currency  bond 
markets,  to  effectively  channel  the  region’s  vast  savings  to  meet  its  huge  demand  for 
infrastructure financing. 
Asian governments have been making efforts to develop the bond markets. At the national 
level,  initiatives  such  as  consolidation  of  issuance  in  a  few  benchmark  maturities  and 
development of interdealer markets have helped increase liquidity and improve reliability of 
yield curves in a number of jurisdictions. Meanwhile, collaborative efforts are being made in 
regional  forums.  A  notable  example  is  ASEAN+3’s  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative  with  the 
strong support from ADB. The Initiative has been looking into both demand and supply side 
issues  pertinent  to  the  development  of  the  bond  markets.  Under  the  Initiative,  a  Credit 
Guarantee and Investment Facility has been set up as a Trust Fund of ADB to provide credit 
guarantee 
in 
ASEAN+3 markets. Another good example is the Asian Bond Fund project of the Executives’ 
Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP).  The  launch  of  the  ABF  funds 
introduced to the region’s bond markets a new low-cost and efficient product in the form of 
passively-managed index bond funds and helped catalyse infrastructure, tax and regulatory 
reforms at both the regional and domestic levels. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority took an 
active part in the design and implementation of the project. 
These efforts, along with the rapid economic growth and improved investment climate, have 
contributed to considerable growth in the local currency bond markets. According to ADB, the 
local  currency  bonds 
investment-rated 
to  allow 
issuers 
issue 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
amount of local currency bonds outstanding in emerging East Asia increased by more than 
ten folds from US$528 billion prior to the Asian financial crisis in 1996 to US$5,479 billion in 
2011.  We  have  also  seen  the  interesting  development  of  offshore  bond  markets.  In  Hong 
Kong, the RMB bond market has grown substantially since the first issuance in 2007, with 
total issuance increased to over RMB 100 billion in 2011 from RMB 10 billion in 2007. The 
range of issuers has also diversified, from predominantly the sovereign and banks in China 
to multinational companies and international financial institutions. Among the latter, ADB was 
the first to issue RMB bond in Hong Kong in October 2010. A number of multilateral agencies 
also  issued  RMB  bonds  in  Hong  Kong  after  ADB’s  debut  issue.  With  the  rapid  growth  of 
China’s  cross-border  trade  and  investment  flows,  the  offshore  RMB  bond  market  would 
provide  a  useful  financing  platform  and  facilitate  the  greater  use  of  RMB  in  these 
transactions, thereby minimising the currency risk associated with the use of a third currency. 
Notwithstanding  the  encouraging  developments  over  the  past  years,  the  capacity  of  the 
regional  bond  markets  is  still  limited  compared  with  the  huge  infrastructure  and  other 
financing needs of the region, resulting in heavy reliance on bank financing. Much work still 
needs  to  be  done,  including  but  not  limited  to  expanding  the  issuer  and  investor  types, 
gradual  liberalisation  of  barriers  to  entry  of  non-resident  investors,  promoting  financial 
infrastructure 
transparency,  more 
standardisation in legal and governance terms, to name a few. Policymakers will have a key 
role  to  play  in  facilitating  market  developments  and  removing  market  impediments  in  the 
process.  And  we  hope  to  see  ADB,  the  region’s  long-standing  partner  in  promoting  bond 
market development, to further its efforts and cooperation with governments in the region on 
this front. 
Thank you. 
improving  corporate  disclosure  and 
linkages, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
