Grant Kabango: Financial services laws for lawyers 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Grant  Kabango,  Deputy  Governor  (Supervision  of  Financial 
Institution)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the  seminar  on  “Financial  services  laws  for 
lawyers”, Zomba, 22 June 2012. 
 The President of the Malawi Law Society, Mr John Gift Mwakhwawa; The General Counsel 
and Bank Secretary, Mr Samuel Malitoni; Distinguished participants; 
Ladies and gentlemen; 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  for  me  to  address  this  distinguished  gathering  whose  main 
purpose  is  to  provide  an  opportunity  to  the Malawi Law Society to be acquainted with the 
financial services laws in particular, the Financial Services Act 2010, the Banking Act 2010, 
the Pensions Act 2010, the Securities Act 2010 and the Insurance Act 2010. 
This  seminar  will  also  afford  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  an  opportunity  to  highlight 
areas that are likely to be controversial in the financial sector, leading to litigation in the High 
Court and subordinate courts. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
As  a  way  of  background  the  legal  and  regulatory  reforms  project started way back in 
2002.  Under  the  auspices  of  World  Bank  and  the  Malawi  Government,  FIRST  Initiative,  a 
consultancy firm, was engaged to carry out an assessment of the financial system in Malawi 
in  2004  to  2005  through  the  Financial  Sector  Regulatory  Reforms  Programme.  The 
assessment concluded that the financial sector in Malawi was relatively underdeveloped and 
that there was need to institute measures to deepen and broaden the sector so that it should 
contribute more to economic growth of the country. The report also noted the financial sector 
to be bank-centric with very low penetration of non-bank financial products. In view of these 
findings, the report identified the following as challenges and requirements for the RBM and 
Government relating to the financial system: 
• 
The  need  to  introduce  measures  to  enhance  penetration of financial  services 
in  the  country particularly non-bank  financial products; 
The  need  to  introduce  measures  to  increase  overall  mobilisation  of  savings 
particularly  contractual  savings which are  long  term  in  nature  and  can  therefore 
be channelled into productive investments; 
The need to find ways to increase the use of markets relative to financial institutions; 
The  need  to  find  means  of  increasing  the  diversity  of  financial products available 
for diversification of risks. 
   Distinguished participants; 
As a way of dealing with the above challenges, the RBM and Government  came  up  with  a 
policy  drive  to  develop  a  vibrant  non- bank financial sector alongside the existing banking 
industry to  add a degree of resilience to the financial system. This was basically achieved 
through the introduction of comprehensive regulatory reforms  for  the  financial  sector  which 
involved  the  modernization  of  existing  legal  frameworks  such  as  the  Banking  Act, 
Insurance  Act and  Securities  Act;  and  development  of  new  laws  for  those  sectors which 
were  not  regulated  by  the  RBM,  for  example,  the  pensions,  microfinance and  financial 
cooperatives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It 
taking, 
lending,  payment  and  settlement  activities  of 
The central feature of the reforms was to consolidate the supervisory responsibility  for  the 
financial  sector  in  a  single  agency  and  bring  Malawi  in  line  with  international  best 
practice.  This  would  create  a platform for effective financial sector supervision from which 
the financial institutions can better contribute to the growth and development  of  the  country. 
On  its  part,  the  RBM  restructured  its regulatory  and  supervisory  function  in  2005  in  a 
bid  to  prepare  and improve  its  capacity  to  supervise  and  regulate  the  whole  financial 
system  in  Malawi.  This  was  done  by  splitting  the  function  into  two distinct  departments 
namely,  Bank  Supervision  and  Supervision  of  Non-Bank  Financial 
Institutions 
Departments.  The latter was split again  in  2010  into  Pensions  and  Insurance  Supervision 
Department  and  Capital  Market  and  Microfinance  Supervision  Department. 
is 
envisaged  that  the  two  departments  will  be  split  again  in  future  to recognize the distinct 
characteristics of the different sectors being supervised. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen; 
The  importance  of  a  vibrant  financial  sector  with  a  strong  legal  framework  cannot  be 
overemphasized.  Financial  institutions  play  a major  role  in  the  economic  growth  of  any 
country.  Deposit 
financial 
intermediaries  have  placed  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  at 
the  centre  of 
economic  activity  of  any  country.  In  addition,  other  sectors  of  the  financial  services 
industry such as life insurers, pension fund schemes, and equity markets broaden and offer 
depth  to  the  financial  system,  by  providing  infrastructure  for  pooling  long  term  national 
savings and re-channelling them into productive investments necessary for growth. General 
insurers on the other hand provide risk transfer  mechanism  that  allows  big  projects  to  be 
undertaken  in  a country without fear of risk. The RBM, in its efforts to facilitate strong and 
stable  growth  of  these  financial  institutions,  apart  from  the  laws that  have  been  enacted, 
has  organised  this  Seminar  with  the  aim  to  assist  legal  practitioners  understand  issues 
relevant  to  the  financial  services  industry.  This  will  also  help  in  reviewing  the  legal 
framework as  the  legal  practitioners share  experiences and  bring  to  light  issues that need 
attention. 
Thus, given the overall importance  of financial  institutions  in the development activities of 
any  country,  governments worldwide regard the financial  sector  as  an  industry  with  strong 
public  policy  implications,  whereby  the  development  and  stability  of  the  industry  are 
treated as  matters of  paramount importance. This  is  so  because it  is  well  recognised  that 
financial  sector  and  economic  development in any  country  go  hand  in  hand  and  that  the 
collapse  of  the  sector  can  have  serious  negative  effects  on  both  the  socio-economic  and 
political state of any country. It is therefore important that the financial sector be backed by a 
strong legal framework. This is even important realising  the  economies  are  susceptible  to 
crises  as  experienced  in  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  A  robust  legal  and  regulatory 
structure  can  act  as  a  bulwark  against  the  backdrop  of  the  crisis, providing  clarity  and 
confidence  for  market  players  and  consumers alike. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
It is pleasing to note that from 2010 to-date, Parliament has passed the following Acts: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Financial Services Act 
Banking Act; 
Reserve Bank of Malawi (Amendment) Act; 
Microfinance Act; 
Insurance Act 
Securities Act 
Credit Reference Bureau Act 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial Cooperatives Act and 
Pension Act. 
• 
• 
Of all these  Acts,  I wish  to draw  your  attention  to the Financial Services Act. This is an 
umbrella law for the financial services industry  which  is  interlinked  with  all  other  individual 
sector  laws  cited  above.  It  consolidates  the  supervisory  responsibility  for  the  whole 
financial  sector  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  Governor,  as  Registrar  of  Financial 
Institutions.  It  also  incorporates  more  detailed  requirements  for  licensing  of  all  financial 
institutions in order to be in tandem with current standards. Therefore, as we look at sector 
laws, we should always be mindful of the provisions of the Financial Services Act, which is an 
all encompassing law. 
Distinguished participants; 
You  may  recall  that  the  process  of  enactment  of  some  of  these  laws  was  not  always  a 
smooth one, often faced with objections  from various stakeholders of  some provisions. As 
such, the Reserve Bank of  Malawi  is  fully  cognisant  of  the  fact  that  the  implementation 
of these  financial  services  laws  shall  in  some  instances  be  met  with resistance,  thus 
giving  rise  to  legal  suits.  It  is  in  this  regard  that  we believe that  a  seminar of  this  kind  is 
very  important  and  timely,  as  it  will  give  you  lawyers  an  opportunity  to  familiarise 
yourselves  with these laws and take note of possible litigious areas. 
Looking  at  the  seminar  programme,  I  am  very  optimistic  that  the  objectives  of  this 
seminar  will  indeed  be  achieved.  Let  me  ask  all  distinguished participants  to  be  fully 
involved  in  this  seminar  so  that  at  the  end  of  the  day,  we  shall  all  benefit  from  the 
presentations  and discussions that will be made. It is the belief of the Reserve Bank that this 
is  just  the  beginning  of  such  consultations  with  the  Malawi  Law  Society  and  other 
stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector,  as  we  try  to  strengthen the financial sector, for the 
good of our nation. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Finally, I  would  like  to  thank Management of  Sunbird Ku  Chawe Inn for providing excellent 
facilities for this seminar. 
Once again, the Reserve Bank of Malawi warmly welcomes all distinguished  participants  to 
this seminar.  I wish  you very  fruitful deliberations. 
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for your attention and may God bless you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
