Thomas Jordan: No end to the debt society without a culture of stability 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, held at an “NZZ Podium” event, Zurich, 28 February 2012. 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
The most recent financial and economic crisis has resulted in an unprecedented rise in public 
debt.  However,  a  chronic  tendency  towards  deficits  and  higher  indebtedness  has  already 
been observed in a number of countries for the past few decades. Excessive public debt has 
a negative impact on long-term economic growth, and deprives a country of its freedom of 
action  during  a  crisis.  Sound  state  finances  are  thus  essential  for  ensuring  an  economy's 
competitiveness  and  maintaining  its  social  security  system,  and  hence  also  for  social 
solidarity.  Last  but  not  least,  excessive  public  debt  also  poses  a  serious  threat  to  price 
stability and monetary policy independence. 
Yet how can state budgets be consolidated over the long term? There are limitations on how 
far  fiscal  policy  powers  can  be  delegated  to  independent  groups  of  experts.  Because 
fundamental  decisions  on  taxation  or  expenditure  –  unlike monetary  policy  –  are aimed  at 
redistribution, they have to be taken at the political level. Even fiscal rules such as a deficit 
cap or debt ceiling can only achieve a lasting improvement of budgetary discipline if they are 
supported by a broad political consensus on the advantages of sound finances. Switzerland 
is a good example of this: thanks to the inclusion of the major political players in government 
responsibilities,  and  to  the  extension  of  direct  democracy  processes  even  to  financial 
matters,  a  deeply  rooted  culture  of  stability  has  developed.  It  is  this  which  provides  the 
foundation for the stabilising effect of the well designed and constitutionally anchored debt 
brake. This has made a decisive contribution to ensuring that federal government finances 
are in good shape despite the financial and economic crisis. 
As a general rule, any efforts to establish a sustainable fiscal policy in countries with debt 
problems can ultimately only bear fruit if they succeed in fostering a broad-based culture of 
stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
