Ardian Fullani: Albania’s Financial Sector Development Program 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  inaugural 
reception of the Financial Sector Development Program, Tirana, 9 February 2012. 
 Dear Mr. Spindler,  
Dear Mr. Williams, 
Dear Ms. Timofeeva, 
Dear participants, 
It is a special pleasure for me to be here in this ceremony, which marks the commencement 
of a new phase of cooperation with the Financial Services Volunteers Corps (FSVC). This is 
evidence of the successful existing cooperation and our commitment to take it further in the 
future. 
The Bank of Albania has benefited largely from the cooperation with the FSVC. In concrete 
terms,  this  cooperation  has  focused  primarily  on  strengthening  the  institution’s  oversight 
function. The assistance from the FSVC has addressed specific training needs for the Bank 
of  Albania’s  supervision  staff  and  has  complemented  with  concrete  activities  other 
development  projects  we  have  had  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World 
Bank.  
More  specifically  during  this  period,  we  have  been  assisted  to  draft  and  implement  the 
Supervision  Development  Plan  in  2004–07,  in  the  framework  of  the  cooperation  with  the 
World Bank.  
Later,  cooperation  challenges  and  needs  became  more  concrete  and  specific  against  the 
background  of  the  proliferation  of  the  international  financial  crisis,  re-conceptualization  of 
international  banking  supervision  standards  and  re-assessment  of  the  role  of  other  public 
authorities working to maintain the financial system’s stability.  
During 2008–09, the Bank of Albania started the revision of the regulatory and operational 
procedures to make them more comprehensive and solid with a view to tackle extraordinary 
financial situations. In this context, the FSVC has assisted us with expertise to amend and 
upgrade  the  relevant  manuals.  In  2010,  the  assistance  of  FSVC  was  requested  to  perfect 
operational  risk  supervision  and  assess  IT  infrastructure  adequacy.  In  addition,  during  the 
same  year,  assistance  was  received  as  regards  revising  the  credit  risk  manual.  In  2011, 
cooperation between the Bank of Albania and the FSVC focused on boosting banking risk 
assessment, this time around on liquidity and market risks assessment.  
Moreover, the assistance of FSVC has proven very useful for the regulatory and operational 
empowerment of the Albanian Deposit Insurance Agency (ADIA).  
I  would  like  to  underscore  the  appreciation  of  the  ADIA  and  the  Bank  of  Albania,  as  its 
supervisory  authority,  for  the  invaluable  contribution  of  FSVC  experts  on  drafting  ADIA’s 
Strategic  Development  Plan  2002–05;  preparation  of  payment  procedures 
the 
compensation  process  during  2008;  drafting  of  amendments  to  the  law  “On  deposit 
insurance”  in  2009,  and;  identification  of  further  legal  and  regulatory  improvements  to 
enhance ADIA’s capacities on insurance of liquidities.  
I would also like to point out that the FSVC’s assistance has been evident and effective. It 
has always been adapted to the Bank of Albania and ADIA’s concrete needs and provided 
swiftly.  The  deployed  experts  were  professionals  with  considerable  financial  and  legal 
experience  in  key  institutions  such  as  the  Federal  Insurance  Deposit  Corporation.  The 
expertise has proven rather useful for many of our staff and, at times, was provided as on-
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the-job  training,  for  example,  FSVC  experts  joined  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervision 
Department  inspectors  in  their  on-site  examinations.  I  am  confident  that  these  qualities  of 
FSVC’s assistance will be maintained in the future. 
A result of this fruitful cooperation is our shared commitment to extend it to the medium run. 
The parties have been in constant contact to identify the fields for future cooperation and I 
reckon that this process is being finalized in terms of project design and relevant details on 
development methodology and expected results. A preliminary assessment reveals that the 
scope of our future cooperation has expanded. Projects will continue to serve the objective 
for ongoing supervision capacity building in the fields of improvement of contingency plans, 
implementation  of  latest  amendments  to  international  banking  supervision  standards,  risk 
assessment  and  improvement  of  regulatory  requirements  for  responsible  management  by 
banking  and  financial  institutions.  The  assistance  may  be  expanded  to  include  underlying 
standards for payment systems and use of e-money, thus laying the grounds for the adoption 
of relevant requirements arising from EU directives. The cooperation of the FSVC with ADIA 
will  focus  on  the  implementation  of  the  Strategic  Development  Plan  2012–14  and  will 
address, more concretely, the modernization of the IT infrastructure and reporting system as 
well as other ancillary processes.  
Appreciating  the  distinct  qualities  of  FSVC’s  assistance  and  taking  into  account  the 
enhanced capacities of Albanian institutions to take in this assistance effectively, I deem that 
this  cooperation  should  be  supported  and  forego  the  concrete  realization  of  future 
development objectives. In this context, the assistance may be tailored to support the design 
of  a  holistic  project;  not  channeled  in  certain  segments  of  its  development,  but  focused, 
especially,  on  its  implementation  phase.  This  would  require  the  FSVC  and  the  Bank  of 
Albania  or  the  ADIA  to  define  respective  programs  and  other  necessary  requisites  so  that 
foreign  experts  may  provide  longer  term  assistance  to  ensure  consistency  of  the  training 
content  and  quality.  This  process  would  be  carried  out  also  by  a  thorough  ex-post 
assessment of these projects.  
Finally,  I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  US  Government  and  other  donors, 
USAID Mission in Albania, FSVC’s Board of Directors and its staff in Tirana for raising the 
necessary financial resources to support this cooperation program. I would like to reiterate 
the commitment of the Bank of Albania for a fruitful and effective cooperation.  
Thank You!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
