Mario Draghi: Interview with The Wall Street Journal 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in The Wall Street 
Journal, conducted by Messrs Robert Thomson, Matt Karnitschnig and Brian Blackstone on 
22 February 2012, and published on 24 February 2012. 
 WSJ: What inning are we in with Greece until we know if we’re at the resolution to end 
all resolutions? 
Mario  Draghi:  I  don’t  know  baseball.  But  if  we  didn’t  have  that  package  finalized,  there 
would  be  no  game.  So  this  could  be  the  beginning  of  a  new  world  for  Greece  where  the 
pending financing problems have been addressed. Now the policies will have to be enacted. 
The Greek Government has undertaken very serious commitments in the fiscal policy and in 
the  structural  policies  areas.  But  there  are  implementation  risks  and  probably  oncoming 
elections. The Eurogroup gave reasonable probabilities to the success of the program if the 
measures, especially the structural measures, were undertaken. 
Also  one  could  see  that  there  is  a  different  awareness  in  the  Greek  public  opinion  to  the 
extent  that  what’s  happening  is  painful  but  necessary.  The  number  of  people,  who  favour 
default, inflation or even exit from the euro doesn’t seem to be prevalent in Greece.  
WSJ: Do you think the acute phase of the crisis has passed? It struck us this week 
that once the deal was decided, we didn’t see the kind of elation we’ve seen after past 
programs. 
Draghi: It’s hard to say if the crisis is over. Let us look at the positive changes of the last few 
months.  There  is  greater  stability  in  financial  markets.  Many  governments  have  taken 
decisions  on  both  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  We  have  a  fiscal  compact 
where  the  European  governments  are  starting  to  release  national  sovereignty  for  the 
common intent of being together. The banking system seems less fragile than it was a year 
ago. Some bond markets have reopened.  
But  the  recovery  is  proceeding  very  slowly  and  remains  subject  of  downside  risks.  I  was 
surprised too that there was no elation after the approval of the package and this probably 
means that markets want to see the implementation of the policy measures. 
WSJ: When you look at the risk profile of the package and the deal, is the greatest risk 
arising from the streets of Greece, or is the greatest risk arising from a lack of growth 
in Greece? 
Draghi: In the end it seems the greatest risk is lack of implementation. Some measures are 
directly targeted to enhance competitiveness and job creation. Others foresee a radical fiscal 
consolidation.  The  two  are  very  complementary  to  ensure  a  return  to  growth  after  the 
unavoidable contraction in economic activity.  
WSJ: But some people say Greece is really suffering depression-like conditions, GDP 
off  15%  or  16%  peak  to  trough.  What  is  your  view  of  these  austerity  policies  in  the 
larger  strategy  right  now,  forcing  austerity  at  all  costs  in  order  to  bring  the  budget 
deficits down? 
Draghi:  This  is  actually  a  general  question  about  Europe.  Is  there  an  alternative  to  fiscal 
consolidation?  In  our  institutional  set  up  the  levels  of  debt-to-GDP  ratios  were  excessive. 
There  was  no  alternative  to  fiscal  consolidation,  and  we  should  not  deny  that  this  is 
contractionary in the short term. In the future there will be the so-called confidence channel, 
which will reactivate growth; but it’s not something that happens immediately, and that’s why 
structural reforms are so important, because the short-term contraction will be succeeded by 
long-term sustainable growth only if these reforms are in place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
WSJ: Austerity means different things, what’s good and what’s bad austerity? 
Draghi: In the European context tax rates are high and government expenditure is focused 
on current expenditure. A “good” consolidation is one where taxes are lower and the lower 
government expenditure is on infrastructures and other investments.  
WSJ: Bad austerity? 
Draghi: The bad consolidation is actually the easier one to get, because one could produce 
good numbers by raising taxes and cutting capital expenditure, which is much easier to do 
than cutting current expenditure. That’s the easy way in a sense, but it’s not a good way. It 
depresses potential growth. 
WSJ: Which do you think are the most important structural reforms?  
Draghi: In Europe first is the product and services markets reform. And the second is the 
labour market reform which takes different shapes in different countries. In some of them one 
has  to  make  labour  markets  more  flexible  and  also  fairer  than  they  are  today.  In  these 
countries there is a dual labour market: highly flexible for the young part of the population 
where labour contracts are three-month, six-month contracts that may be renewed for years. 
The  same  labour  market  is  highly  inflexible  for  the  protected  part  of  the  population  where 
salaries  follow  seniority  rather  than  productivity.  In  a  sense  labour  markets  at  the  present 
time are unfair in such a setting because they put all the weight of flexibility on the young part 
of the population. 
WSJ: Do you think Europe will become less of the social model that has defined it? 
Draghi:  The  European  social  model  has  already  gone  when  we  see 
the  youth 
unemployment rates prevailing in some countries. These reforms are necessary to increase 
employment, especially youth employment, and therefore expenditure and consumption.  
WSJ: Job for life… 
Draghi: You know there was a time when (economist) Rudi Dornbusch used to say that the 
Europeans are so rich they can afford to pay everybody for not working. That’s gone. 
WSJ: With Greece there was a lot of focus on achieving numeric targets. Now if you 
take countries like Portugal or Spain, if they get these big structural economic reforms 
right, should they have to be so focused on meeting specific deficit targets?  
Draghi: There is no feasible trade-off between the two. Fiscal consolidation is unavoidable in 
the present set up, and it buys time needed for the structural reforms. Backtracking on fiscal 
targets would elicit an immediate reaction by the market. Sovereign spreads and the cost of 
credit would go up. We’ve experienced all this. 
WSJ: Do you think Portugal will need another bailout? 
Draghi: No. We consider the program on track.  
WSJ:  Where  do  you  see  the  interbank  market  now?  Is  it  healing?  Is  it  still 
dysfunctional? 
Draghi: What we saw is that after the first (Longer Term Refinancing Operation) the senior 
unsecured  bond  market  reopened.  In  the  last  two  months  we  had  something  like 
EUR 40 billion  of  new  issuance,  which  is  as  about  as  much  as  it  was  in  the  previous  six 
months  or  more.  We  also  saw  EUR  30  billion  in  new  covered  bond  issuance.  But  for  the 
interbank markets to function we need a return of full confidence in the counterparty. We can 
address  only  the  liquidity  side  of  the  problem.  But  then  growth  prospects  have  to  pick  up. 
After  a  very  weak  fourth  quarter,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  progressively 
stabilizing at low levels.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
WSJ: It still seems as though credit has dried up in Spain, Italy and elsewhere.  
Draghi:  Our  last  bank  lending  survey  was  done  in  between  the  time  the  first  LTRO  was 
decided and when it was executed, so it gives only a partial picture of what is happening. 
That picture was not positive. Credit was tightening all over the euro area in different degrees 
of intensity, more dramatically in the southern regions. We have to ask ourselves why this is 
so.  The  LTRO  allotment  (in  December)  was  EUR  490  billion.  The  return  of  shorter-term 
liquidity from the banking system before the LTRO was about EUR 280 billion, so that the net 
injection was only EUR 210 billion. And the bank bonds coming due in the first quarter were 
also about EUR 210 billion. Therefore, it is likely that banks simply repurchased their own 
bonds coming due. We have avoided an even worse credit crunch.  
WSJ: Would you be open to doing more, or longer, LTROs if needed? 
Draghi: You know how we answer these questions. We never pre-commit. 
WSJ: The ECB protected its Greek bond holdings from losses by swapping the bonds 
for  new  ones.  Critics  say  the  ECB  should  suffer  the  fate  that  private  sector 
bondholders have suffered. What’s your response to that? 
Draghi:  The  Securities  Market  Program  bought  these  bonds  because  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  channels  were  broken.  The  purchase  of  these  bonds  was  done  for  public 
interest reasons. Also people tend to forget that this money the ECB has spent is not private 
money. It is public money, it is taxpayers’ money and the ECB is committed to protect the 
taxpayers’ money. 
WSJ: Will that lessen the impact of future purchases, or are you willing to wind down 
the SMP? 
Draghi: The SMP holdings are small if compared to the size of the European bond markets, 
and the interventions have become smaller and smaller in recent times. 
WSJ:  Can  you  rule  out  future  debt  restructurings?  Some  analysts  would  say  that  a 
country like Portugal would benefit from this. 
Draghi: We have confidence that the program countries are taking appropriate actions and 
that the targets of their programs are achievable and realistic. 
WSJ:  There’s  been  a  lot  of  discussion  on  whether  the  Chinese  will  get  involved, 
whether China will buy bonds. What do you see on Chinese institutional involvement 
in European financial markets? 
Draghi:  So  far  I  don’t  see  any  official  public  involvement  in  European  financial  markets. 
There have been lots of talks and conversations. I hear about them but I haven’t seen any 
official investment in European financial markets. 
WSJ: Over the past year two top German  officials at  the ECB resigned. The current 
Bundesbank  president  opposed  the  bond  swap  and  has  spoken  about  risks 
associated  with  the  three-year  LTROs.  Is  there  a  risk  Germany  becomes  isolated 
within the ECB? 
Draghi: The vote for the three-year LTROs was unanimous. Given the peculiar nature of the 
ECB, one of my objectives is that we have as much consensus as possible. We have to do 
the right things, and we have to do them together. 
WSJ: Looking at the debt crisis from the outside, people see all these crisis meetings 
and even though Europe has a lot of wealth it doesn’t seem to be able to channel the 
money  and  has  gone  to  the  IMF  three  times.  What  do  you  say  to  people  outside 
Europe?  Europe  seems  to  be  a  major  risk  and  doesn’t  appear  to  be  resolving  its 
problems on its own. 
Draghi: I wouldn’t take such a negative view. Many things have happened in Europe in the 
last year and a half. You have different countries that have different initial conditions – high 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
debt, low growth countries and countries with low debt and high growth – and they pose the 
fundamental  question  of  how  do  we  go  on  without  being  a  fiscal  union.  We  can’t  have  a 
system where you spend as you want, and then you ask to issue (debt) together. You can’t 
have a system where you spend and I pay for that. Before we move to a fiscal union we have 
to have in place a system where countries can show that they can stand on their own. And 
this is the prerequisite for countries to trust each other. This so-called fiscal compact treaty is 
actually a major political achievement because it’s the first step towards a fiscal union. It’s a 
treaty whereby countries release national sovereignty in order to accept common fiscal rules 
that  are  especially  binding,  and  accept  monitoring  and  accept  to  have  these  rules  in  their 
primary legislation so they are not easy to change. So that’s the beginning. 
WSJ:  You’ve  been  in  the  position  now  for  four  months.  Is  there  anything  that  has 
surprised you? Do you regret taking the job yet? 
Draghi:  Would  I  tell  you  that  if  it  was  true?  No,  I  don’t  regret  taking  this  job.  I’ve  been  a 
member of the Governing Council for six years, so certainly the new part of this job is the 
inner  machinery  of  the  ECB.  But  the  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the  related  decisions 
were part of my knowledge even before, because we shared decisions that were taken in the 
past. 
WSJ: Your first months saw a lot of activity. Is there much more the ECB can do when 
it comes to financial stability and economic growth? Has it done about as much as it 
can? 
Draghi:  What  I  am  going  to  say  doesn’t  imply  anything  as  far  as  future  monetary  policy 
decisions  are  concerned.  Within  its  primary  mandate  the  ECB  will  do  its  utmost  to  ensure 
price stability in the medium term and within the remit of the Treaty to foster financial stability.  
WSJ: What’s the first statistic you look at in the morning? 
Draghi: Stock markets. 
WSJ: Do you look at the euro exchange rate? 
Draghi: Not in the early morning. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
