Patrick Honohan: Philosophy of regulation and supervision 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the 
Central Bank of Ireland Stakeholder Conference, Dublin, 27 April 2012. 
 Let me begin by thanking all the participants in today’s conference, for your contributions and 
your interest in our work. This has been the Central Bank’s first public stakeholder event on 
regulation and we have tried to involve a wide spectrum of participants and guests. We take 
this wider perspective on stakeholder engagement because the financial crisis has impacted 
significantly  on  all  sectors  of  Irish  society  and  greatly  increased  public  awareness  of,  and 
interest in, financial supervisory issues. The Bank has taken other stakeholder initiatives over 
the  past  12  months  including  launching  a  dedicated  stakeholder  EU  and  International 
website portal and providing regular updates on developments.  
We have been remarkably fortunate to have had the participation of the Chairs of all three of 
the  European  Supervisory  Authorities,  Andrea  Enria  of  the  EBA,  Steven  Maijoor  of 
ESMA and  Gabriel  Bernardino  of  EIOPA,  and  as  if  that  wasn’t  enough,  an  especially 
absorbing speech by Adair Turner, Chair of both the UK Financial Services Authority and of 
the FSB Committee for Supervisory and Regulatory Cooperation.  
In  closing  today’s  conference,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  our  approach  to 
supervision here in Ireland.  
Our financial regulatory policies and practices are probably clear enough, given the number 
of policy statements, consultation documents and so on. 
But I am sometimes asked for a characterisation of our regulatory philosophy. 
After the crisis broke, it was clear that three major challenges faced Irish financial regulation: 
these relate to facts, philosophy and resources: 
 
 
 
First was the condition of the banks, with looming hard-to-measure, but evidently large credit 
losses in prospect. As I have previously remarked, when the banking system wakes up to its 
misapprehension  about  a  systemic  bust,  not  only  does  it  become  clear  that  the  level  of 
prospective  loan  losses  is  way  beyond  historical  experience,  but  the  range  of  uncertainty 
about  the  eventual  amount  that  can  be  recovered  from  loans  made  into  the  bubble  –  and 
therefore the loan-losses that will need to be provided for – becomes radically wider. Normal 
loan-loss  projections  become  almost  useless.  In  one  of  the  worst  ever  banking  crises  in 
history, this effect can hardly be overstated. 
Second, was recognition that the policy approach had failed and this meant that it needed to 
be replaced. I would pinpoint the location of the flaw in the policy approach to regulation as 
lying in the presumption that the instinct for self-preservation of well-governed firms would be 
sufficient  to  protect  the  system,  thereby  allowing  light-touch  regulation.  (The  presumption 
was mistaken: the banks were not well-managed from the risk point of view). This is not an 
approach or a flaw that was unique to Ireland, of course, and many in the room will recognize 
and  recall  the  global  rhetoric  –  political  and  otherwise)  that  rationalized  such  an  approach 
(though in Ireland I believe that it was accompanied by a greater degree of deference than 
was  necessarily  entailed  in  the  mind-set  that  brought  light-touch  financial  regulation  to  the 
world).  
the objective circumstances and condition of the financial system were difficult,  
the policy approach to regulation had failed and  
the resources applied to supervision were manifestly inadequate.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Actually, the approach might work reasonably well in an environment where risk aversion in 
the  market  is  high,  the  incentives  to  avoid  institutional  failure  are  large  and  the  system’s 
access to funding is limited. But in Ireland the approach presided over a property price and 
construction  boom  fuelled  by  the  globalised  financial  market  on  a  scale  exceeding  that  of 
anywhere  else  except  Iceland.  At  some  point,  common  sense  should  have  kicked  in  and 
generated a pragmatic regulatory override. In fact, there was an effort in Ireland to impose 
supervisory discretion through a capital surcharge on developer loans, but it was too timid, 
too late and based on inadequate information. 
Third, I won’t repeat what has been written already about the quantitative insufficiency of the 
supervisory  resources  that  were  brought  to  bear  on  banking  in  Ireland.  This  prevented  a 
sufficient flow of information that could have made top decision makers aware not only of the 
possibility  that  there  could  be  a  property  bust  –  everyone  knew  that  this  was  not  only 
possible but inevitable, with only the scale in doubt – but also the degree to which property 
loans  were  insufficiently  secured  against  anything  other  than  the  bubble-inflated  property 
itself. 
Well, all three of these challenges needed to be addressed: 
The first has been a slow and painful process of refining loss estimates in the face of what 
has been a surprisingly gradual erosion of wishful thinking, an inadequate information base, 
a protracted slide in asset prices and in the economy generally (exports apart). Large capital 
injections have been needed to cover now-projected losses. 
The third has been met with a substantial increase in staffing. After what has happened, we 
have not merely needed to ensure sufficient resources, but to put it beyond doubt that we 
have done so. No danger now, I think, that Ireland’s regulatory authority would be seen as 
insufficiently  resourced,  and  this  is  essential  to  bolster  confidence  in  the  financial  system 
generally – not just the banks. I am conscious that this has been and continues to be a costly 
exercise. The Government has not yet decided to pass through the full cost of the regulatory 
apparatus 
is  still  only  
50  per  cent  –  nevertheless,  the  market  certainly  complains  about  growing  out-of-pocket 
regulatory costs. 
Let  me  speak  a  little  more  on  the  second  aspect  –  regulatory  approach  or  regulatory 
philosophy. Where does that now stand? What is the current regulatory philosophy? 
There are a number of dimensions: 
 
the  percentage  passed-through 
the  regulated 
firms  – 
to 
Obtrusive  and  intrusive  as  opposed  to  light-touch.  The  previous  tendency  –  not 
confined to Ireland – to regard business leaders in financial services with awe and 
deference  has  had  to  be  abandoned.  Of  course  there  is  no  call  for  being 
disrespectful. But supervisors need to be prepared to be assertive with firms if, after 
a  period  of  dialogue,  they  remain  unconvinced  that  a  risk  has  been  properly 
mitigated.  Regulators  may  not  be  able  to  see  everything,  but  the  crisis  has  put 
beyond doubt the idea that bank CEOs can either. It follows from this that a culture 
of challenge has to be inculcated within organisations too, both the regulator and the 
regulated.  This  dimension  also  relates  to  a  more  challenging  fitness  and  probity 
regime  –  recently  extended  to  cover  not  only  new  entrants,  but  existing  directors, 
senior management and relevant staff. When the whole system has failed, it should 
not be a surprise to find that, one way or another, very few of those who were the 
very  top  decision  makers  in  Irish  banks  before  the  crisis  are  still  acting  as  bank 
directors today.  
Includes  examination  of  the  downside  risk  of  portfolios  and  positions,  not  just 
governance  arrangements  and  broad  business  plans.  To  be  sure,  supervisors 
cannot constantly monitor rapidly changing market portfolios, nor can they hope to 
track every transaction and exposure even in slower moving parts of the business. 
Indeed,  it  needs  to  be  recalled  that  the  increased  emphasis  that  has  rightly  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 placed  worldwide  (since  the  1980s)  on  governance  and  systems  was  originally  a 
rational  response  to  the  declining  ability  of  direct  supervision  of  each  institution’s 
activities.  
Application  of  supervisory  resources  proportionate  to  the  economic  damage  that 
needs  to  be  averted.  This  means  that  some  seemingly  well-run  but  systemically 
important  firms  may  receive  more  attention  than  a  less  sophisticated,  but  less 
significant firm. We have developed a comprehensive risk-weighting model, PRISM, 
both to do this triage and to define in an orderly way the type of engagement with 
each firm.  
Continuing  to  protect  the  consumer  against  abusive  practices,  while  ensuring 
prudential standards.  
  from 
is  more  relevant 
If  one  could  rely  on  financiers  to  pursue  policies  that  were  socially  optimal,  much  of  the 
supervisory  apparatus  might  be  redundant.  In  fact,  however,  the  incentives  of  decision 
makers  of  the  financial  firm  are  not  well  aligned  with  public  policy.  The  willingness  of 
governments to bail-out failing financial firms and their creditors in the crisis has exacerbated 
the temptation for financiers to take excessive risks. Heads they win, tails the Government 
picks up the tab. (To be sure, this is not the whole story. The very topmost Irish bankers have 
lost  much  –  wealth  because  of  shareholdings, status,  continued  salary  income  at  the  very 
high  rates  that  were  prevalent  before  the  bust,  and  so  on.  It  was  not  only  with  the 
Government’s money that they took risks; but the losses assumed by the Government have 
been the largest part. In Ireland, more than half of the prospective financial accounting losses 
will  have  been  borne  by  the  Government,  with  the  remainder  representing  loss  of 
shareholder value and haircuts on subordinated debt. But, in Ireland and elsewhere, banker 
compensation  has  not  been  well-aligned  with  long-term  performance,  whether  measured 
narrowly  by  shareholder  return,  or  –  as 
the  regulator’s  
perspective – with the wider welfare of society as a whole). 
Getting the overall incentives facing decision makers in financial firms right – ultimately more 
closely  aligned  with  public  policy  –  is  an  elusive  goal  which  is  also  being  pursued  at 
international  level.  It  is  the  structure  of  regulation,  taxation  and  resolution  policy  that  can 
bridge  the  gap  between  private  and  social  objectives  here.  For  the  most  part,  Irish 
regulations are defined by those adopted by the EU which in turn is coloured by the wider 
decisions at the level of the (international) FSB. In just a few cases we have decided to go 
beyond  this  and  required  “super-equivalence”  where  local  circumstances  of  the  industry 
seem to warrant it.  
(Examples here include requirements pertaining to the number of independent non-executive 
directors  and  capital  surcharges  against  the  risks  of  some  particularly  complex  insurance 
products.  Another  instance  would  be  capital  adequacy,  where  the  larger  uncertainties 
currently prevailing have warranted higher capital levels if the banks are to regain standing in 
the market. The Government being fiscally stretched, it has been tough for them to put up the 
necessary  capital  where  the  private  sector  hung  back.  The  Troika  funds  have  helped  
here  –  though  it  would  have  been  infinitely  more  helpful  if  the  capital  had  been  injected 
directly into the banks by the Troika funds, rather than being routed through the Government 
accounts, adding to the burden of Government debt.) 
In  general,  though,  although  super-equivalence  has  been  avoided  for  the  most  part,  as  a 
matter of principle, we cannot hide behind international standards as an excuse in any future 
failures  and  we  have  been  at  pains  to  argue  against  an  unduly  restrictive  straitjacket  of 
“maximum harmonisation” of capital standards in Europe. We owe this to our successors. 
Finally, a word on enforcement; the days when the raised eyebrow of the Governor could be 
relied upon to ensure compliance are long gone (though sometimes we have a go). Financial 
firms know that they operate in a rules-driven environment and that compliance is expected. 
Failure  to  enforce  could,  I  am  afraid,  be  taken  as  an  implicit  waiver  of  rules.  Such  lack  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
clarity is not consistent with the new philosophy. To help ensure that these matters are not 
side-lined by on-going supervisory responsibilities, the responsibility for enforcement in the 
Central  Bank  has  been  organisationally  separated  from  supervision.  Here  too  staffing  has 
been stepped-up: there is plenty of enforcement to be done. While the ideal result would be 
no successful prosecutions because of 100 per cent compliance, recent experience makes it 
clear  that  we  are  still  far  from  that  ideal.  As  such,  I  am  pleased  with  our  recent  record  of 
completing  enforcement  cases:  this  sends  an  important  and  effective  signal  to  regulated 
firms. Not all instances of non-compliance can be detected. While our risk-based approach to 
supervision  may  appear  to  mean  that  the  information  flow  to  the  enforcement  directorate 
implies that enforcement cases in practice might focus more on systemically important firms, 
we take steps to ensure that this is not the case. The threat of enforcement is there for all, 
big and small, and this is evidenced by those cases taken to date. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
