Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan-US economic relations – what we can learn 
from each other 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Information 
and Culture Center (JICC), Washington DC, 19 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have this opportunity to speak at the Japan Information and Culture 
Center  (JICC)  to  celebrate  the  centenary  of  the  city  of  Tokyo’s  gift  of  cherry  trees  to 
Washington  D.C.  as  an  expression  of  friendship.  Regrettably,  I  missed  the  chance  to 
appreciate the cherry blossoms on the banks of the Tidal Basin this year, but I can still find 
consolation  in  viewing  my  favorite  dogwoods  instead.  As  you  may  know,  dogwoods  were 
sent from the United States to the city of Tokyo as a gift in return, and we can still enjoy the 
beautiful flowers of these original trees at Tokyo Metropolitan Engei High School (Chart 1). 
The exchange of cherry and dogwood trees is just one small example of the deep ties that 
exist between Japan and the United States. From my perspective as a central banker, the 
economic  relationship  between  our  two  countries  is  definitely  the  cornerstone  of  a 
prosperous global economy. This relationship has had its ups and downs, as all inevitably 
do.  As  we  gradually  emerge  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  renew  our  resolve  in 
maintaining and strengthening the global economic system – thereby ensuring prosperity for 
all  –  I  believe  it  is  worthwhile  to  offer  my  observations  on  Japan’s  economy  with  special 
emphasis on Japan-U.S. economic relations. 
Some facts about Japan’s economy 
I. 
Before delving into the main subject, although you may already be familiar with facts about 
the economic interdependence of the two nations, as well as the state of Japan’s economy, 
let me share some fundamental ones with you. 
The economic interdependence of the two nations in recent years 
First, I would like to highlight a few such facts specific to the economic interdependence of 
the United States and Japan in recent years. In terms of GDP, the U.S. economy has the 
largest  and  Japan’s  economy  has  the  third  largest  within  the  global  economy.  The  two 
economies combined enjoy just over a 30 percent share of the global economy (Chart 2). A 
glance at some economic data easily confirms that the two nations still have close ties and 
are  important  partners  (Chart  3).  For  example,  looking  at  trade  figures,  the  United  States’ 
share  of  15  percent  marks  it  as  the  second  largest  destination  for  Japan’s  exports,  after 
China’s  19  percent.  Moreover,  it  appears  that  a  large  portion  of  the  exports  to  China  is 
eventually sent on to the United States after going through the assembly process in China. 
As  a  destination  for  U.S.  exports,  Japan  has  a  share  of  5  percent,  which  is  the  second 
largest after China when excluding the NAFTA countries. As you can see by the example of 
Apple’s  iPhone,  for  which  Japanese  manufacturers  produce  more  than  30  percent  of  the 
components,  the  industries  of  Japan  and  the  United  States  are  indeed  closely  connected 
(Chart 4). 
In  terms  of  international  investment,  the  share  of  the  United  States  as  a  destination  for 
outstanding foreign direct investment from Japan is the largest, at 30 percent (Chart 5). The 
share  of  the  United  States  with  respect  to  outstanding  inward  foreign  direct  investment  to 
Japan  is  also  the  largest,  at  34  percent.  From  the  other  side  of  the  picture,  the  share  of 
Japan in terms of outstanding inward direct investment to the United States is the second 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
largest, at 11 percent, after the U.K.’s 20 percent. Looking at securities investment, Japan’s 
U.S. Treasury holdings of 0.9 trillion U.S. dollars represent a share of 20 percent, second to 
China’s holdings of 1.2 trillion U.S. dollars, which give it a share of 26 percent. 
Japan’s economy after the bursting of a bubble 
Second, I would like to highlight some facts about the current state of Japan’s economy. With 
regard  to  growth  rates,  to  our  regret,  it  is  hard  to  claim  that  our  performance  has  been 
remarkable, and our experience has often been referred to in a negative context in recent 
years as “a lost decade” (Chart 6). Having said this, although our GDP growth rates have 
been on a declining trend, the average growth rate of GDP per capita in the past decade is 
almost the same as the average for the G-7 countries. Moreover, it is surprisingly not well 
known even among Japanese people that Japan recorded the highest growth rate among the 
G-7  countries  in  terms  of  GDP  per  working-age  population  –  that  is,  the  population  aged 
between  15  and  64  years.  Needless  to  say,  Japan  has  confronted  a  number  of  difficult 
challenges, just like other countries. In fact, there has been a series of problems in the past 
quarter  century,  including  the  forming  and  bursting  of  a  bubble,  the  subsequent  financial 
crisis, mild deflation, the aging of and decline in the population, and the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. At the same time, other advanced countries have also ultimately experienced at 
least some of the same problems as Japan, and this can be seen in developments since the 
mid-2000s.  One  clear  difference  between  Japan  and  other  advanced  countries  is  the  fact 
that Japan was the first to experience such problems and, in the absence of a textbook that 
might address them, had to tackle them through its own efforts. In this sense, Japan suffered 
from  these  difficulties  in  the  unique  position  as  a  forerunner.  Such  experiences  provided 
some lessons that helped us recently in dealing with the global financial crisis, as evidenced 
by the relative soundness of Japanese financial institutions. 
The long-term developments in Japan’s economy 
Third, I would like to take a look at how Japan’s economy has developed over a longer time 
span (Chart 7). Japan opened its doors to the world 160 years ago when a U.S. fleet led by 
Commodore Perry, who held an official letter from President Fillmore, anchored off the coast 
near the capital city. After experiencing rapid economic development, Japan became the first 
industrial nation among non-Western countries. Japan’s real GDP and GDP per capita back 
in  1870  –  for  which  relevant  statistics  are  available  –  were  26  percent  and  30  percent, 
respectively,  of  the  relative  figures  for  the  United  States  (Chart  8).  The  ratios  had  not 
changed  much  by  the  time  the  cherry  trees  were  sent  to  Washington  D.C.  as  a  gift  of 
friendship 100 years ago. They gradually rose thereafter, but the ratio in terms of GDP per 
capita  was  still  a  mere  44  percent  at  the  peak  before  World  War  II.  The  war  caused 
disruptive  economic  damage,  but  Japan,  after  making  strenuous  efforts 
toward 
reconstruction,  entered  a  period  of  rapid  and  high  economic  growth.  The  country’s  high 
growth period started in the mid-1950s and ended in the early 1970s. The average annual 
growth rate in this 15-year period was high, at 9.7 percent (Chart 9). 
There  have  been  various  discussions  about  the  factors  that  enabled  Japan’s  high  growth 
after the war, but given the time constraint, I would like to highlight just three of them. The 
first factor is favorable demographics. Japan benefited from the so-called “population bonus” 
that occurred when the total population increased together with the ratio of the working-age 
population. The second factor is the adoption of a market economy as a development model. 
Although  there  were  other  countries  with  growth  potential,  emerging  economies  including 
China only started to adopt a market economy model from the 1990s. In such a situation, 
Japan  benefited  from  the  free  trade  system  that  was  led  by  the  United  States  after  World 
War II. The third factor is that the Japanese firms and society developed a unique business 
model  that  placed  importance  on  long-term  relationships,  and  this  model  had  excellent 
compatibility  with  the  relatively  stable  global  economic  conditions  during  the  period  of  the 
Cold War. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Even  after  the  high  growth  period,  Japan  continued  to  enjoy  a  relatively  high  rate  of 
economic  growth  compared  to  other  advanced  countries.  As  a  result,  the  economic  gap 
between the United States and Japan narrowed and, at the height of the Japanese bubble 
economy  around  1990,  the  ratio  of  Japanese  real  GDP  to  U.S.  real  GDP  exceeded 
40 percent while the ratio in terms of real GDP per capita exceeded 80 percent (Chart 8). 
Against the background of the narrowing gap, the two nations experienced rising economic 
frictions, especially on the trade front, including over textiles in the 1970s and over autos and 
semiconductors  in  the  1980s.  In  such  an  environment,  Japan  initiated  so-called  “self-
restraint”  with  regard  to  exports.  Over  the  past  half  century,  the  U.S.  dollar  registered  its 
highest level in nominal terms in 1985. I should note that there is a universal phenomenon 
that trade frictions take place following the appreciation of currencies (Chart 10). 
The prospects for the U.S. economy: implications from Japan’s experience 
II. 
There  is  a  reason  why  I  have  spent  a  relatively  long  time  on  explaining  some  facts  about 
Japan’s  economy.  This  is  because,  judging  from  frequently  asked  questions  from  my 
American friends, I believe that such historical facts might be of some help in considering the 
prospects for the U.S. economy. One such frequently asked question is related to the policy 
conduct for the time being – that is, will the United States suffer the Japanese experience of 
“a lost decade”? The second question is based on a longer-run perspective – namely, how 
long can China continue to enjoy its current period of high economic growth? This question is 
seemingly  intended  to  draw  implications  from  Japan’s  past  experience  with  regard  to  the 
current state of the Chinese economy, which has great importance for the U.S. economy. 
to 
that  experienced  by  Japan 
Will the United States suffer the Japanese experience of “A Lost Decade”? 
Let me start with the first question. Before the global financial crisis, a prevailing view among 
economists in the United States was that, even if a bubble existed and burst, the economy 
could  avoid  a  big  downturn  similar 
if  aggressive 
macroeconomic policies were pursued promptly. Since 2009 – probably in reflection of this 
view – we have witnessed repeated episodes of rising optimism triggered by some signs of 
economic recovery, which are then followed by the resurgence of pessimism. 
Let’s look at some data. During the six years since 2006, when housing prices started to drop 
in  the  United  States,  the  average  real  GDP  growth  rate  was  low,  at  0.9  percent,  and  real 
GDP stayed at a level equivalent to 103 percent of the level seen in 2006 before the decline 
in real estate prices. In the case of the large bubble experienced by Japan in the latter half of 
the 1980s, the average growth rate for the six years following the record peak year of real 
estate prices was 2.1 percent and GDP stayed at a level equivalent to 107 percent of that 
seen  in  1990.  As  is  evident  from  these  figures,  the  negative  legacy  of  the  bursting  of  the 
bubble  is  enormous,  both  in  the  United  States  and  Japan.  A  similarity  is  also  observed  in 
terms  of  real  estate  price  developments  in  the  two  countries  (Chart  11).  Once  a  bubble 
bursts, economic entities that have expanded expenditures and debts need to go through a 
process  of  reducing  debt  to  a  normal  level.  During  that  process,  downward  pressure  from 
balance-sheet repair continues to weigh on economic activity. 
At the same time, there are many important differences between the two economies. 
The  first  difference  is  that  the  scale  of  the  bubbles,  which  determines  the  significance  of 
damage, appears to be smaller in the case of the United States. Looking at the size of capital 
gains arising from real estate and financial assets during the bubble period, this was larger in 
Japan, at 4.6 times nominal GDP compared to 3.1 times in the United States (Chart 12). The 
same conclusion can be drawn when we compare the size of capital losses. As the scale of 
this bubble was relatively small, the burden associated with balance-sheet repair should be 
smaller in the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  second  difference  is  with  regard  to  the  speed  of  dealing  with  non-performing  assets, 
which, importantly, reflects differences in the two economies’ financing structures (Chart 13). 
The  problem  in  the  United  States  started  with  an  increase  in  subprime  mortgage  loans  to 
households, which were financed by banks directly and indirectly in financial markets using 
securitized  products.  In  this  way,  relying  on  market  financing  tools,  banks  faced  pressure 
from market participants who recognized valuation losses, and the authorities had no choice 
but to inject capital into banks at an early stage using public funds. On the other hand, in the 
case of Japan, the funding of non-performing assets was mainly carried out by banks, which 
did not rely so much on capital markets. This funding structure failed to exert strong pressure 
on concerned parties to deal with non-performing assets promptly. 
The third difference is the relatively small burden shouldered by domestic investors. In the 
case of the United States, capital losses – that is, the costs associated with balance-sheet 
repair – were imposed not only on domestic investors but also shared by investors abroad to 
a  significant  extent.  This  corresponds  to  the  fact  that  investors  abroad  increased  their 
exposure  to  the  complicated  securitized  products  that  originated  from  subprime  loans 
(Chart 14).  On  the  other  hand,  in  Japan,  an  increase  in  debt  was  mainly  reflective  of 
borrowing  from  domestic  financial  institutions,  which  basically  shouldered  the  burden  of 
subsequent balance-sheet repair. 
The  fourth  difference  is  with  regard  to  demographics.  Japan  faced  a  rapid  aging  of  the 
population and its working-age population started to decline after reaching its peak in 1995 
(Chart 15). On the other hand, although its pace of increase has been on a declining trend, 
the U.S. working-age population is still growing, at 0.8 percent. At the same time, however, 
we need to pay attention to the fact that the pace of increase in the number of net immigrants 
has been diminishing, reflecting a recent decline in U.S. growth rates. 
The fifth difference is in terms of the flexibility of the economy. The U.S. economy has more 
flexibility,  as  witnessed  by  vigorous  entrepreneurship,  efficient  and  smooth  functioning  of 
labor  and  capital  markets,  and  the  country’s  leading  role  in  research  and  development. 
Nevertheless, we should bear in mind that the entry rate and labor mobility have remained at 
low levels after the bursting of a bubble. 
The sixth difference is with respect to the global economic environment surrounding the two 
nations.  Balance-sheet  repair  in  Japan  was  completed  in  the  early  2000s,  supported  by 
global  economic  upturns  such  as  strong  growth  in  the  United  States  and  in  emerging 
economies. However, global economic conditions are not favorable this time around. Japan’s 
bubble was a domestic one, whereas the recent financial crisis was a global credit bubble. In 
the  current  conjuncture,  the  European  debt  problem  is  exerting  an  impact  on  the  global 
economy,  including  the  U.S.  economy.  As  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  European  financial 
institutions increased their exposure to U.S. financial products, the U.S. housing bubble and 
excess debts in Europe are not independent from each other. Thus, the balance-sheet repair 
in the United States might take some more time. 
It is sometimes pointed out that one of the differences between the two bubbles is the sector 
in  which  excess  debt  accumulated:  the  corporate  sector  in  the  case  of  Japan  and  the 
household  sector  in  the  case  of  the  United  States.  What  matters  in  shaping  the  impact  of 
balance-sheet repair on economic activity, however, is whether such an adjustment is taking 
place in a sector driving economic recovery. In this sense, there is no significant difference 
between the two cases because, while economic recovery in the past has been led by the 
corporate sector in Japan, it has been driven by the household sector in the United States. 
An overall assessment of the differences seemingly indicates that the balance-sheet repair in 
the United States will likely end earlier than in the case of Japan, and I do hope that is the 
case. In the end, I think that the most important factor determining economic developments 
following the bursting of a bubble is the economy’s capacity to develop a new growth model 
that  best  suits  a  changing  economic  environment.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  its  stagnant 
economic  performance  largely  owed  to  its  failure  to  adjust  to  economic  globalization 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
associated with the collapse of planned economies, especially the breaking up of the Soviet 
Union, as well as to the IT revolution, both of which took place almost at the same time that 
Japan’s bubble burst. In the current conjuncture, the most significant changes taking place 
on  a  global  scale  are  the  swift  rise  of  emerging  economies  and  the  rapid  aging  of  the 
population.  Respective  corollaries  to  these  changes  are  a  rise  in  international  commodity 
prices and a deterioration in the fiscal balance. While Japan has had a tough time trying to 
develop a new growth model in response to these changes, we do have some strengths in 
this regard. First, Japan is located in Asia, the engine of global economic growth. Second, it 
has  a  high  level  of  technological  prowess,  which  is  necessary  when  adjusting  to  a  rise  in 
energy prices. Third, as they have faced the problem of an aging population ahead of the 
rest  of  the  world,  Japanese  firms  have  been  making  serious  efforts  and  progress  toward 
developing new business models that focus on markets for the elderly. As the governor of 
Japan’s  central  bank,  I  do  sincerely  hope  that  a  new  growth  model  for  Japan  will  be 
developed that takes advantage of these strengths. 
The prospects for the Chinese economy in light of Japan’s experience of high growth 
Now I would like to move on to the question of the sustainability of high growth in China.1 
Economic history tells us that a convergence of the sizes of two economies is likely to cause 
some sort of friction. A typical example is the aforementioned economic friction between the 
United States and Japan that reached its height in the latter half of the 1980s. As I referred to 
a short while ago, the average annual growth rate in Japan during the 15-year period of high 
growth that started in the mid-1950s was 9.7 percent. China’s high growth started in the early 
1990s,  and  its  average  growth  rate  over  the  last  twenty  years  is  10.2  percent,  almost  the 
same as Japan’s growth rate (Chart 16). What is different is the time span of the high growth 
period, which has been longer in the case of China. However, no country can maintain high 
growth forever. Therefore, looking at a slightly longer time horizon, a meaningful question is 
not  whether  China’s  high  growth  will  continue  but  whether  China  can  make  a  smooth 
transition from a high growth phase to a stable growth phase. This is a challenging task, and 
I have often been asked by Chinese friends to provide advice in light of Japan’s experience. I 
always note the following three points. 
First,  do  not  fall  into  a  mode  of  complacency.  When  high  growth  continues,  especially 
coupled  with  low  inflation,  such  favorable  economic  performance  tends  to  engender 
overconfidence.  Although  the  formation  of  bubbles  involves  a  complex  mechanism,  one 
crucial factor is excessive risk-taking caused by complacency and overconfidence. 
Second,  be  prepared  for  demographic  changes.  The  inverse  dependency  ratio,  which 
represents workers per non-working population, appears to have a positive correlation with 
real  estate  market  development  (Chart  17).  This  implies  that  attention  should  be  paid  to 
demographics as a factor contributing to the formation of financial bubbles. 
Third,  pay  attention  to  changes  in  financial  institutions’  behavior  following  financial 
liberalization.  Although  active  lending  by  financial  institutions  has  been  the  direct  cause  of 
the formation of bubbles in advanced economies, these institutions’ lending attitudes became 
aggressive as a result of fierce competition and an associated decline in profitability triggered 
by  financial  liberalization.  While  financial  liberalization  itself  is  necessary,  it  should  be 
pursued under a combination of appropriate regulations and supervision. 
I understand that these three pieces of advice do not directly answer the question from my 
American friends, which is “How long can China continue to enjoy its current period of high 
                                                 
1  For more details on high economic growth in China, please see Masaaki Shirakawa, “The Transition from High 
Growth  to  Stable  Growth:  Japan’s  Experience  and  Implications  for  Emerging  Economies”  (Remarks  at  the 
Bank 
2011. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2011/ko110506a.htm 
Helsinki),  May 
Anniversary 
Conference 
Finland 
200th 
5, 
of 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
economic growth?” I hope that China will successfully make a smooth transition from a high 
growth phase to a stable growth phase, which will arrive at some point in the future. 
The current state of and prospects for Japan’s economy 
III. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  prospects  for  Japan’s  economy  after  summarizing  its 
current state. 
Reconstruction after the Great East Japan Earthquake 
As for the current state of Japan’s economy, this cannot be described without referring to the 
effects of the tragic event known as the Great East Japan Earthquake, which occurred on 
March  11  last  year.  The  economy  significantly  suffered  from  the  multiple  shocks  of  the 
earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear power plant accidents.2 During this time of hardship, we 
received much support and encouragement from the government and people of the United 
States.  Soon  after  the  quake,  the  United  States  Armed  Forces’  Operation  Tomodachi,  or 
“Friends”  in  English,  provided  assistance  to  Sendai  Airport  and  restored  its  functionality 
about a month after the disaster (Chart 18). People in Japan really appreciate such support 
from the United States, from the bottom of their hearts. Looking back at all those efforts over 
the past year or so to overcome the difficulties caused by the disaster, I would like to make 
the following four observations. 
First,  I  am  very  impressed  by  Japanese  firms’  competitiveness  at  worksites.  Although  the 
earthquake caused serious damage to factories and business facilities, as well as disruptions 
in supply chains, such problems were overcome much earlier than initially anticipated thanks 
to the efforts and new creative ideas of concerned parties. 
Second,  there  are  differences  among  areas  in  terms  of  the  pace  of  reconstruction.  Those 
areas that suffered serious damage have not yet entered the full-scale reconstruction phase, 
although they have started to resume some economic activities. In the rest of the disaster 
areas, however, there are some signs of steady recovery in economic activity, including an 
increase in reconstruction-related capital investment and a recovery in private consumption, 
which had plummeted soon after the tragic event. 
Third, there are new initiatives motivated by experiences accumulated since the earthquake 
disaster. Firms have been reviewing their approach to risk management as well as relevant 
business  operations, 
for  example,  by  reexamining  business  continuity  plans  and 
reestablishing supply chains. With lingering uncertainty about the supply of electricity, firms 
have pursued various technological innovations and established new business models under 
the  slogans  of  “creating  energy”,  “saving  energy”,  and  “storing  energy”.  Such  positive 
initiatives  are  expected  to  create  new  demand  and  consequently  raise  Japan’s  growth 
potential in the medium to long term. 
Fourth, financial system stability was maintained. Despite the tremendous shock caused by 
the  earthquake,  we  have  managed  to  maintain  the  working  of  the  financial  system  and 
secure  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  The  Bank  of  Japan 
Financial  Network  System,  or  BOJ-NET,  which  plays  a  core  role  in  the  payment  and 
settlement of funds and Japanese government securities, has maintained stable operations 
after  the  quake  without  any  disruptions.  The  Bank’s  Fukushima  branch,  which  is  located 
about  40  miles  from  the  Fukushima  Daiichi  Nuclear  Power  Plant,  also  continued  with 
business  as  usual.  Despite  the  shocks  arising  from  the  European  debt  problem,  financial 
                                                 
2  For  more  details  on  the  state  of  Japan’s  economy  after  the  disaster  and  efforts  toward  rebuilding  and 
reconstruction,  please  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Great  East  Japan  Earthquake:  Resilience  of  Society  and 
Determination  to  Rebuild”  (Remarks  at  the  Council  on  Foreign  Relations  in  New  York),  April  14,  2011. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2011/ko110415a.htm 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
markets have also remained stable, except for a brief period soon after the quake. As can be 
judged  from  the  level  of  risk  spreads  in  funding  markets,  financial  markets  in  Japan  have 
been the most stable among those in advanced countries. 
The prospects for Japan’s economy 
Now I would like to move on to the current state of Japan’s economy and its prospects. 
After experiencing a sharp rebound from a plunge caused by the earthquake toward summer 
last year, economic activity has been more or less flat, reflecting downward forces deriving 
from the effects of a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen. More 
recently,  there  have  been  some  signs  of  a  pick-up.  The  Bank  of  Japan  believes  that  the 
economy  will  gradually  emerge  from  the  current  phase  of  flat  growth  and  return  to  a 
moderate  recovery  path  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  economies  picks  up,  led  by 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after 
the earthquake disaster gradually strengthens. The plausibility of such an outlook depends 
on the following two factors. 
The first factor is global economic developments. In this regard, the good news is that the 
stagnant  European  economy  has  recently  stopped  deteriorating  amid  receding  tail  risks 
arising from the European debt problem. Although some more time is needed to complete 
balance-sheet repair, U.S. economic conditions have also been gradually improving, mainly 
in the areas of consumption and employment. Business conditions in emerging economies 
are  also  gaining  support  from  somewhat  more  stable  inflation  rates  in  the  recent  period, 
which increases real purchasing power and creates more room for monetary easing. 
The second factor is reconstruction-related demand. The portion of the government budget 
earmarked  for  reconstruction  amounts  to  about  19  trillion  yen.  This  represents  about 
4 percent of Japan’s nominal GDP and 60 percent of the combined nominal GDP of the three 
disaster-stricken prefectures. This sizable budget will be disbursed over the next five years. 
Labor  market  conditions  in  the  disaster  areas  have  already  tightened,  especially  in 
construction-related sectors. The implementation of the budget is expected to become full-
fledged in the coming period, and this will further contribute to raising domestic demand. 
At this juncture, let me explain the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. For the time 
being, the Bank will aim to achieve the goal of 1 percent inflation in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of increase in the CPI and continue to pursue powerful monetary easing until the goal is 
in  sight,  mainly  through  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  and  the  purchase  of  financial 
assets (Chart 19). Monetary policy measures currently pursued by central banks in advanced 
economies, including the U.S. Federal Reserve and us, are called “unconventional monetary 
policy  measures”.  Looking  at  the  type  of  assets  purchased  and  the  gigantic  scale  of 
purchases, they are indeed “unconventional”. However, the transmission mechanism of such 
unconventional measures is not unconventional but actually quite conventional. As Chairman 
Bernanke  notes,  the  large-scale  purchase  of  financial  assets  aims  at  lowering  long-term 
interest  rates.  In  terms  of  assessing  monetary  policy  in  Japan  in  light  of  such  an  aim,  the 
financial  conditions  in  Japan  are  extremely  accommodative  (Chart  20).  For  example,  the 
interest  rate  for  corporate  bonds  with  a  maturity  of  5  years  is  0.5  percent  in  Japan  and 
1.4 percent  in  the  United  States.  The  mortgage  loan  rate  is  2.2  percent  in  Japan  and 
3.9 percent in the United States. Long-term interest rates applied for firms and households in 
Japan have been as low as those in the United States in real terms, based on real interest 
rates derived from long-run inflation expectations, on which economists place importance. 
One of the most significant challenges for Japan is to stem a declining trend in the potential 
growth  rate.  Although  several  factors  contribute  to  a  drop  in  this  rate,  a  significant  one  is 
responses to a change in demographics – namely, an aging of the population that has been 
progressing  at  a  pace  unprecedented  in  advanced  countries.  Although  the  aging  of  the 
population  lowers  the  potential  growth  rate  through  various  channels,  what  is  causing  a 
profound impact on the economy is not the aging itself but a delay in responding to such a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
demographic change. This delay is one of the major causes of a deterioration in the fiscal 
balance in Japan, which is coming into the spotlight these days. Uncertainty regarding future 
fiscal burden has also led to restrained spending by the working generations. In any case, a 
gradual  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate  has  been  significantly  contributing  to  mild 
deflation by bringing down expected future income and restraining expenditures. In addition 
to powerful monetary easing pursued by the Bank of Japan, in order to overcome deflation, it 
is crucial to make strenuous efforts to strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
Concluding words 
IV. 
As I have almost used up my time, let me conclude my remarks. Japan-U.S. relations are 
quite  often  described  as  one  of  the  most  important  relationships  in  the  world.  That 
importance, I believe, is not measured just in terms of the amount of trade between the two 
countries or their overlapping interests in the sphere of national security. The fact that both 
can  learn  a  lot  from  each  other  is also  a  valuable  asset  that  forms  the  cornerstone  of  the 
relationship. This is especially true with respect to stewardship of the economy, as it is not 
possible to conduct controlled experiments as regards economic policy. Of course, as I have 
noted today on current developments, while the best lessons we might learn from each other 
remain uncertain, our insights will be much, much better. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
