Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Economic and financial cooperation between 
China and Thailand 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Luncheon  to  inaugurate  the  Bank  of  Thailand  Beijing  Representative  Office,  Beijing, 
6 April 2012. 
 Your Royal Highness (Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn),  
Your Excellencies,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  Bank  of  Thailand  is  humbly  grateful  to  Your  Royal  Highness  Princess  Maha  Chakri 
Sirindhorn  for  graciously  presiding  over  this  Luncheon  to  inaugurate  the  Bank  of  Thailand 
Beijing Representative Office. The Bank of Thailand is privileged and honoured to celebrate 
this  auspicious  occasion  at  the  Residence  of  the  Ambassador  of  Thailand  here  in  Beijing 
among  a  group  of  honored  guests  who  have  been  part  of  the  long-standing  Sino-Thai 
relations.  
Today’s event provides a unique opportunity to celebrate not only the present achievements, 
but  also  to  pay  tribute  to  history  of  the  friendship  between  China  and  Thailand  that  has 
spanned over 700 glorious years since the Tang Dynasty and the Sukhothai Era.  
Our cooperation first began in the form of trade, which remains to this day the strongest tie 
between our two nations. Along with the flows of trade from China came the cultural heritage, 
which  is  why  our  cultural  linkage  is  deeply  rooted  –  in  all  aspects  of  the  arts,  culture  and 
cuisine.  
Your Royal Highness, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  long-standing  relations  between  our  two  economies  have  provided  a  solid  foundation 
that shaped our modern economic and financial relationships.  
Trade value between our two countries has grown tremendously over the last decade. With 
the  highest  growth  recorded  among  our  major  trading  partners,  China  has  now  become 
Thailand’s largest export destination and the second largest trading partner.  
For more than 30 years, Thai businessmen have invested in China and I understand that we 
are the first of the ASEAN countries to invest in China. Chinese investment in Thailand has 
also increased significantly and China is now the fourth largest foreign investor in Thailand.  
Thai commercial banks have long had a presence in China to better respond to the needs of 
their  customers  in  China,  namely  Bangkok  Bank,  Kasikorn  Bank,  and  Krung  Thai  Bank. 
Likewise, Bank of China and ICBC, the two largest Chinese banks, are already operating in 
Thailand.  
In  addition  to  these  bilateral  relations,  our  cooperative  spirit  has  also  extended  to  the 
multilateral frameworks. Please allow me to name just a few important ones. related to the 
economic and financial cooperation.  
The  first  is  the  ASEAN,  China,  Japan  and  Korea  or  ASEAN+3.  Significant  achievements 
under  this  forum  include  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization  which  pool  resources 
within  the  region  to  safeguard  against  risks  and  volatilities,  and  the  setting  up  of  the 
ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic and Research Office or AMRO to act as a surveillance unit for the 
region.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The other is the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks or EMEAP, which 
have helped develop the capital market in the region through the establishment of the Asian 
Bond Fund and many other initiatives.  
The  increasingly  important  role  of  China  to  the  Thai  economy  and  financial  system  has 
brought about the need for broader and deeper understanding of the Chinese economy and 
a more proactive response from public agencies, including the Bank of Thailand, to seek a 
presence in China.  
Your Royal Highness, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Following  the  initial  foothold  in  the  form  of  two  representative  offices  in  New  York  and 
London twenty years ago, the Bank of Thailand recently established a representative office 
here in Beijing. The Beijing office is our first representative office in Asia. I also believe that 
we  are  the  first  central  bank  from  the  ASEAN  region  to  have  its  representative  office  in 
China.  
But,  being  the  first  is  not  the  only  measure  of  success  for  our  journey  here.  Since  its 
establishment last year, our Beijing representative office has fulfilled its objectives to further 
promote closer ties between the Bank of Thailand and the People’s Bank of China, as well as 
other Chinese government agencies. The office also aims to sharpen its focus and first-hand 
understanding of the economic and financial developments in China. 
This  achievement  is  well-illustrated  by  the  deepening  financial  cooperation  between  China 
and Thailand. In December last year, the People’s Bank of China and the Bank of Thailand 
concluded the bilateral local currency swap arrangements during the visit of Vice President 
Xi Jinping to Thailand. The Agreement provides for the exchange of respective local currency 
upto 70 billion yuan or 320 billion baht, to facilitate bilateral trade and investment. I believe 
this is a crucial role that the public sector can provide to give assurance to the private sector 
on  the  availability  of  their  access  to  the  yuan  and  the  baht  for  their  trade  and  investment 
needs.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  received  approval  from  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and 
China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  to  participate  in  the  interbank  bond  market  and 
securities  market  here  in  China.  Our  investment  would  allow  our  asset  allocation  and 
diversification  to  better  reflect  the  increasingly  important  role  of  the  yuan  in  international 
monetary system.  
Last  but  not  least,  I  hope  that  the  inauguration  of  our  Beijing  representative  office  will  be 
more than just another success story. I truly hope that the spirit and friendship behind this 
long-standing  relations  and  successes,  nurtured  earnestly  over  centuries,  will  continue  to 
serve  as  solid  foundations  that  will  lead  to  even  greater  and  closer  future  cooperation 
between our two nations.  
Let me end by thanking everyone for being an important part of this success. And, with Your 
Royal Highness’ permission, may I propose a toast to future success and cooperation as well 
as to your Royal Highness’s good health and prosperity. 
Thank you. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
