Elizabeth A Duke: The housing market 
Testimony  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 28 February 2012. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and members of the Committee, thank you for 
inviting me to talk about the current situation in housing markets.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  keen  interest  in  the  state  of  housing  and  has  been  actively 
engaged  in  analyzing  issues  in  the  housing  and  mortgage  markets.  Issues  related  to  the 
housing market and housing finance are important factors in the Federal Reserve’s various 
roles in formulating monetary policy, regulating banks, and protecting consumers of financial 
services. In particular, the failure of the housing market to respond to lower interest rates as 
vigorously as it has in the past indicates that factors other than financial conditions may be 
restraining  improvement  in  mortgage  credit  and  housing  market  conditions  and  thus 
impeding  the  economic  recovery.  Federal  Reserve  staff  have  been  actively  working  to 
understand  the  reasons  behind  the  impairment  in  housing  and  mortgage  markets  and  the 
tradeoffs  involved  in  designing  policies  that  would  remove  obstacles  to  normal  market 
functioning.  
On January 4, 2012, the Federal Reserve released a staff paper titled “The U.S. Housing 
Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations,” which is attached at the end of 
my written  statement. The paper provides information on current conditions in the housing 
market and analytic background on some housing market issues. Although the paper does 
not include recommendations for any specific policy actions, it does lay out a framework for 
discussion  by  outlining  some  options  and  tradeoffs  for  policymakers  to  consider.  My 
testimony today will be drawn from this paper.  
Six years after aggregate house prices first began to decline, and more than two years after 
the  start  of  the  economic  recovery,  the  housing  market  remains  a  significant  drag  on  the 
U.S. economy.  In  a  typical  economic  cycle,  as  the  economy  turns  down  households 
postpone  purchases  of  durable  goods  such  as  housing.  Once  the  cycle  bottoms  out, 
improving economic prospects and diminishing uncertainty usually help unleash this pent-up 
demand. This upward demand pressure is often augmented by lower interest rates, to which 
housing demand is typically quite responsive.  
The current economic recovery has not followed this script, in part because the problems in 
the  housing  market  are  a  cause  of  the  downturn  as  well  as  a  consequence  of  it.  The 
extraordinary fall in national house prices has resulted in $7 trillion in lost home equity, more 
than half the amount that prevailed in early 2006. This substantial blow to household wealth 
has significantly weakened household spending and consumer confidence. Another result of 
the  fall  in  house  prices  is  that  around  12  million  households  are  now  underwater  on  their 
mortgages – that is, they owe more on their mortgages than their homes are worth. Without 
equity  in  their  homes,  many  households  who  have  experienced  hardships,  such  as 
unemployment  or  unexpected  illness,  have  been  unable  to  resolve  mortgage  payment 
problems through refinancing their mortgages or selling their homes. The resulting mortgage 
delinquencies  have  ended  in  all  too  many  cases  in  foreclosure,  dislocation,  and  personal 
adversity. Neighborhoods and communities have also suffered profoundly from the onslaught 
of  foreclosures,  as  the  neglect  and  deterioration  that  may  accompany  vacant  properties 
makes neighborhoods less desirable places to live and may put further downward pressure 
on house prices.  
An  ongoing  imbalance  between  supply  and  demand  exacerbates  these  problems  in  the 
housing  market.  For  the  past  few  years,  the  actual  and  potential  supply  of  single-family 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
homes for purchase has greatly exceeded the effective demand, in part because of the large 
number of homes that have come back onto the market after moving through the foreclosure 
process. The elevated pace of foreclosures, unfortunately, is likely to be sustained for quite a 
while and therefore will continue to put downward pressure on home prices.  
At  the  same  time,  a  host  of  factors  have  been  weighing  on  housing  demand.  Many 
households have been reluctant or unable to purchase homes because of concerns about 
their  income,  employment  prospects,  and  the  future  path  of  home  prices.  Tight  mortgage 
credit  conditions  have  also  prevented  many  households  from  purchasing  homes.  Although 
some  retrenchment  in  lending  standards  was  necessary  and  appropriate  given  the  lax 
standards that prevailed before the crisis, current lending practices appear to be limiting or 
preventing lending even to creditworthy households.  
In  the  paper,  we  discussed  the  benefits  and  costs  of  a  variety  of  policy  options  that  have 
been  proposed  to  respond  to  these  difficult  housing  issues,  including  increasing  credit 
availability for households seeking to purchase a home or to refinance an existing mortgage; 
exploring  the  scope  for  further  mortgage  modifications,  including  encouraging  short  sales 
and  deeds-in-lieu  of  foreclosure  in  cases  where  foreclosure  cannot  be  avoided;  and 
expanding  the  options  available  for  holders  of  foreclosed  properties  to  dispose  of  their 
inventory  responsibly.  Any  policy  proposals,  though,  will  require  wrestling  with  difficult 
choices and tradeoffs, as initiatives to benefit the housing market will likely involve shifting 
some of the burden of adjustment from some parties to others.  
I  greatly  appreciate  the  leadership  that  the  Senate  Banking  Committee  has  shown  on  the 
profound  challenges  facing  the  housing  market.  For  its  part,  the  Federal  Reserve  will 
continue  to  use  its  policy  tools  to  support  the  economic  recovery  and  carry  out  its  dual 
mandate to foster maximum employment in the context of price stability. In its supervisory 
capacity,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  encourage  lenders  to  find  ways  to  maintain 
prudent lending standards while serving creditworthy borrowers.  
Thank you again for inviting me to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
