Philip Lowe: The forces shaping the economy over 2012 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Committee for Economic Development of Australia, Sydney, 16 February 2012. 
 This  is  the  third  year  that  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  participating  in  CEDA’s  annual 
Economic and Political Overview. Each of these years has brought us yet  more economic 
surprises  and  challenges.  In  2010,  the  world  economy  grew  surprisingly  quickly  and 
commodity  prices  increased  sharply.  Then  in  2011,  global  growth  fell  short  of  what  was 
widely expected and the sovereign debt problems in Europe came to dominate much of the 
global economic and financial news.  
This morning, I would like to discuss some of the issues that are likely to shape the economic 
environment  over  2012.  These  issues  were  also  set  out  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  quarterly 
Statement on Monetary Policy that was released last Friday.  
The global environment 
It  is  appropriate  to  start  off  with  developments  in  the  global  economy,  with  the  troubles  in 
Europe seemingly in our newspapers every day. 
As  was  widely  reported  in  mid  January,  the  IMF  recently  lowered  its  forecasts  for  world 
growth. It is now expecting global GDP to increase by around 3¼ per cent in 2012, which is 
nearly  ¾  of  a  percentage  point  lower  than  the  forecast  made  in  September  last  year 
(Graph 1). This rate of growth is below average, although it is well within the normal range of 
outcomes, and it is nothing like the very weak outcome recorded in 2009. 
 The  downward  revision  is  largely  due  to  developments  in  Europe,  with  the  European 
economy  now  seemingly  in  recession.  What  we  are  seeing  there  is  a  fundamental  shift  in 
fiscal policies. For more than 30 years, many European governments spent much more than 
they raised in revenues. And financial markets were prepared to finance the difference at low 
interest rates, apparently ignoring the steady build-up of debt. This, of course, has now all 
changed and this change is a wrenching experience for the countries concerned. The sharp 
economic  contraction  has  led  to  large  increases  in  budget  deficits  at  a  time  when  the 
tolerance of public debt has diminished and financial markets, after having ignored risks for 
many years, can now see risks everywhere.  
These changes are also proving very difficult to manage. The task is made more complicated 
by  having  a  single  central  bank,  but  many  fiscal  authorities.  This  set of  arrangements  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
opened up issues that normally do not arise. Not least of these is the question of under what 
conditions is it appropriate for the single central bank to buy the government bonds of just 
one,  or  a  few,  of  the  members  of  the  currency  union.  This  is  an  issue  that  the  Federal 
Reserve in the United States, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan have not had to 
confront  as  they  embarked  on  their  own  large-scale  purchases  of  government  debt  in  an 
effort to lower long-term yields. 
Working through the various challenges is taking the Europeans time. The process has been 
frustratingly slow and we have witnessed some missteps along the way. But for all of that, we 
should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  progress  is  being  made.  Late  last  year  there  was  a 
palpable sense that something might go badly wrong over our summer. Clearly, that has not 
happened.  Instead,  government  bond  yields  for  some  of  the  troubled  countries  in  Europe 
have declined a little (Graph 2). Equity markets have picked up and confidence has improved 
a bit. And significantly, bank debt markets are functioning again, although the cost of issuing 
bank debt, relative to government yields, is higher than it was in the middle of last year.  
 
  As my colleague, Guy Debelle, discussed earlier this week, an important development over 
recent  months  was  the  ECB’s  decision  to  make  unlimited  funds  available  (subject  to 
adequate collateral) to the European banking system for three years at an interest rate of just 
1  per  cent.1  All  up,  around  ½  trillion  euros  have  been  lent  and  a  further  operation  is 
scheduled to take place later this month. There has also been progress through the various 
euro-area  summits  in  building  political  structures  that,  over  time,  have  the  prospect  of 
delivering more disciplined fiscal policy than has been the case in the past. 
Clearly,  more  will  need  to  be  done,  and  there  is  still  the  possibility  of  a  very  disorderly 
outcome  in  Europe.  But,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  the  probability  of  this  seems  to  have 
declined a little. Obviously how things play out on this front will have a major bearing on how 
the world economy evolves over 2012. 
A related issue that I suspect will be discussed frequently in 2012 and beyond is the impact 
of  fiscal  consolidation on  economic  growth.  Over  2012  and  2013,  fiscal  policy  is set  to  be 
quite  contractionary  in  both  Europe  and  the  United  States  as  governments  attempt  to  put 
their public finances on a sounder footing. Indeed, the aggregate fiscal contraction across the 
advanced economies is likely to be the largest seen for many decades. This is not because 
                                                 
1   Debelle, G, “On Europe’s Effects on Australian Financial Markets”, Address to Bloomberg Seminar, Sydney, 
14 February 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  size  of  the  fiscal  consolidations  in  individual  countries  is  unprecedented,  but  rather 
because  the  consolidations  are  occurring  simultaneously  in  a  large  number  of  countries. 
Unusually,  they  are  also  taking  place  in  an  environment  where  output  in  the  affected 
countries is considerably below potential. 
The economic literature is mixed on the effects of fiscal consolidation on growth. There are 
certainly  some  examples  where  consolidation  has  been  associated  with  fairly  strong  GDP 
growth.  But  in  most  of  these  examples,  the  countries  undertaking  the  fiscal  consolidation 
have benefited from some combination of robust growth in their trading partners, an easing 
of monetary policy and a depreciation of their exchange rate. Given the nature of the current 
situation,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  advanced  economies,  as  a  whole,  can  benefit  from  these 
factors.  There  is  therefore  a  material  risk  that  fiscal  consolidation  weakens  growth  in  the 
short  run,  which  leads  to  more  fiscal  consolidation  in  order  to  meet  previously  announced 
targets and, in turn, yet weaker growth. We are currently seeing this dynamic play out in a 
couple of the countries in southern Europe. If it is not to be repeated on a wider scale, the 
fiscal consolidation in the North Atlantic economies will need to be accompanied by reforms 
to the supply side that lift the underlying rate of growth of these economies.  
As interesting as the developments in Europe are, it is important that we do not lose sight of 
what is going on elsewhere in the world. In the United States, the recent data, particularly on 
the  labour  market,  have  been  better  than  was  widely  expected  (Graph  3).  There  are  also 
some tentative signs of improvement in the housing market. Corporate balance sheets are 
generally in good shape and borrowing costs are low. While, undoubtedly, the US economy 
still faces many challenges, it does seem to have emerged from the soft patch in the middle 
of 2011 with some momentum. 
  The Chinese economy is also continuing to grow solidly. The pace of growth has slowed, but 
it has done so in line with the authorities’ intentions. Inflation in China has also moderated. 
Across the rest of east Asia, the recent data have been mixed. Nevertheless, for the region 
as a whole, growth in 2012 is expected to be around trend, with domestic demand likely to 
play a more important role in generating growth than it has for most of the past two decades.  
Overall, as the IMF recently noted, the global risks still look to be tilted to the downside. But 
the  better-than-expected  US  data  and  signs  of  some  progress  in  Europe  have  lifted 
sentiment  a  little  since  the  turn  of  the  year.  In  January,  business  surveys  for  the 
manufacturing sector (the so-called PMIs) were up across the globe – in the United States, 
China, east Asia and even in the euro area (Graph 4). A similar picture is also evident in the 
available surveys for the services sector. While it is too early to be confident that this trend 
will  continue,  these  timely  surveys  suggest  that  2012  started  a  little  better  than  many  had 
expected.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 The Australian economy 
I would now like to turn to developments in Australia. 
At the moment, the economy is being influenced by a large number of factors. These include 
the  sovereign  debt  problems  in  Europe,  the  changes  in  household  spending  patterns,  and 
the softness in the housing market. But this morning I would like to focus on the two factors 
that  are  perhaps  having  the  most  profound  effects.  And  they  are,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
investment and terms of trade boom and, on the other, the very high exchange rate. These 
factors are, of course, interlinked, and in many respects are different sides of the same coin. 
The investment boom in the resources sector, which the RBA has been discussing for some 
time, is clearly well underway. Over the past year, business investment has risen by around 
20 per cent and there is more to come. Given the plans that have already been announced, 
the  RBA  is  expecting  double  digit  increases  in  business  investment  in  each  of  the  next 
couple of years. If this occurs, it would take the ratio of investment to GDP to a record level 
by a considerable margin (Graph 5). 
 
It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  this  is  a  once-in-a-century  investment  boom.  It  is,  of 
course, occurring at a time when the terms of trade are also at a very high level, with the 
industrialisation and urbanisation of Asia supporting commodity prices and putting downward 
pressure on the prices of manufactured goods. This boom is having positive spill-over effects 
to a number of industries, with some of these effects being direct and others being indirect.  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The indirect effects come through a variety of channels. Day to day, they can be hard to see 
but  they  do  percolate  through  the  economy.  In  effect,  there  is  a  chain  that  links  the 
investment boom in the Pilbara and in Queensland to the increase in spending at cafés and 
restaurants in Melbourne and Sydney. This chain starts with the high terms of trade that has 
pushed  up  the  Australian  dollar.  In  turn,  the  high  dollar  has  meant  that  the  prices  that 
Australians pay for many manufactured goods are, on average, no higher than they were a 
decade ago, despite average household incomes having increased by more than 60 per cent 
over this period. The stable prices for many goods, combined with strong disposable income 
growth  means  there  is  more  disposable  income  to  be  spent  on  services  in  the  cities  and 
towns far from where the resources boom is taking place. As I said, this chain can be hard to 
see, but it is real, and it is one of the factors that have had a material effect on the Australian 
economy over recent years.  
At the same time, the high exchange rate is having a contractionary effect on other parts of 
the economy, as it reduces the international competitiveness of some industries. Over recent 
months,  the  Australian  dollar  has  appreciated  despite  the  uncertainty  about  the  global 
economic outlook and some decline in commodity prices since mid 2011. After adjusting for 
differences  in  inflation  rates  across  countries,  the  exchange  rate  is  currently  at  around  its 
highest level since the early 1970s (Graph 6). 
 
  The  effects  of  the  high  exchange  rate  are  evident  in  the  manufacturing,  tourism  and 
education  sectors,  as  well  as  some  parts  of  the  agriculture  sector  and,  more  recently,  in 
some  business  services  sectors.  With  the  exchange  rate  having  been  high  for  some  time 
now,  more  businesses  are  re-evaluating  their  strategies,  as  well  as  their  medium-term 
prospects.  In  some  cases,  this  is  prompting  renewed  investment  to  improve  firms’ 
international  competitiveness.  But  in  other  cases,  businesses  are  scaling  back  their 
operations  in  Australia  and  some  are  closing  down.  These  changes  are  obviously  very 
difficult for the firms and individuals involved.  
Both the investment boom and the very high level of the exchange rate are historically very 
unusual events. This makes it difficult to assess their net effect. It seems, however, that over 
the  past  year  these  forces  have  balanced  out  reasonably  evenly.  Abstracting  from  the 
weather-related disruptions in early 2011, GDP growth over the year was likely to have been 
around trend. Underlying inflation was at the midpoint of the medium-term target range. The 
unemployment rate remained low at 5–5¼ per cent. And most lending rates in the economy 
were around average by end year.  
It is fair to say that very few developed economies could make these same claims. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Looking forward, there are reasonable prospects that these favourable aggregate outcomes 
can continue for a while yet. The RBA’s central forecasts, which were released last week, are 
for  around  trend  growth  in  the  economy  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  and  for  underlying 
inflation  to  remain  in  the  2–3  per  cent  range.  The  unemployment  rate  is  also  expected  to 
remain low, although some increase is possible over coming months. 
At  the  industry  level,  the  picture  is  a  lot  more  complicated.  The  economy  is  clearly  going 
through a period of heightened structural change, and this is set to continue. Some industries 
are expanding in relative importance, while others are contracting. Given this, it is difficult to 
be sure how the countervailing expansionary and contractionary forces will balance out. So 
at the RBA we are carefully examining every piece of data that comes in for insight into the 
net effect of these forces. We are also frequently talking to businesses and industry groups 
to better understand what is happening in firms at the forefront of structural change. It is the 
balance  between  these  various  forces  that  is  likely  to  be  a  major  influence  on  how  the 
Australian economy evolves over 2012 and beyond. 
Before  I  conclude,  I  would  like  to  say  just  a  few  additional  words  about  the  outlook  for 
inflation. 
Over recent quarters, headline inflation has come down as expected due to the unwinding of 
the large rise in fruit and vegetable prices that occurred in early 2011 (Graph 7). Over the 
next few quarters further declines in the year-ended headline inflation rate are expected as 
the earlier increases in food prices fall out of the figures. Indeed, it is likely that the headline 
rate will fall below 2 per cent in the middle of 2012, before increasing again to above 3 per 
cent. This increase is partly due to the introduction of a price on carbon, which is estimated 
to add 0.7 percentage points to headline inflation in the 2013 financial year. As was the case 
with  the  introduction  of  the  GST  more  than  a  decade  ago,  the  Bank  will  look  through  this 
direct effect when setting monetary policy. In underlying terms, inflation is expected to remain 
within  the  2–3  per  cent  range  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  with  the carbon  price  adding 
around ¼ percentage point to underlying inflation in the 2013 financial year.  
 One  interesting  aspect  of  the  recent  inflation  data  is  the  divergent  trends  in  the  prices  of 
internationally traded items and the prices of goods and services that are not internationally 
traded (Graph 8). Over recent times, the prices of non-traded goods and services have been 
increasing at a fairly firm pace, although down markedly from the rates in 2007 and 2008. 
The  overall  CPI  inflation  rate  has,  however,  been  held  down  by  a  decline  in  the  prices  of 
tradable goods as a result of the exchange rate appreciation. But the prices of these goods 
are  unlikely  to  continue  to  fall  over  the  medium  term,  particularly  as  the  effects  of  the 
exchange rate appreciation dissipate. As a result, some slowing in the rate of increase in the 
prices of non-tradables is likely to be required at some point for overall inflation to remain 
consistent with the mid-point of the target range.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While  we  cannot  be  sure  that  non-tradables  inflation  will  moderate,  there  are  reasonable 
prospects that it will do so. The Bank is expecting a modest pick-up in productivity growth 
over the period ahead from the low rates of recent years, as well as a slight moderation in 
wage  growth.  Together,  these  developments  would  help  lessen  cost  pressures  in  the 
economy and thus see some slowing in the rate of non-tradables inflation. In the event that 
they did not occur, it is likely that non-tradables inflation would be uncomfortably high.  
 Conclusion  
So, to conclude, 2012 will no doubt again contain its fair share of surprises. Globally, we are 
seeing events that are historically very unusual, including widespread fiscal consolidation in 
the  advanced  economies  and  the  rapid  development  of  emerging  market  economies,  with 
hundreds  of  millions  of  people  entering  the  global  economy.  In  Australia  too,  we  are 
experiencing  events  that  are  historically  unusual  –  a  huge  boom  in  investment  and  a  very 
high exchange rate, both of which are related to the very high level of the terms of trade. 
In  this  environment,  economic  forecasting  seems  to  have  more  than  the  usual  number  of 
pitfalls. However, we can take some comfort from the fact that despite these powerful forces, 
the Australian economy started 2012 in relatively good shape. Growth has been around trend 
and  inflation  is  consistent  with  the  target,  and  there  are  reasonable  prospects  for  this  to 
continue. We also have much more flexibility to deal with unfolding events than almost any 
other developed economy. 
I wish each of you success as you navigate your own way through 2012.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
