Jean-Pierre Danthine: Monetary policy is not almighty  
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Journée Solutions Bancaires, Geneva, 31 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you all today. At the outset, please allow me to 
thank the organisers at Unicore for having invited me to speak at the 14th Journée Solutions 
Bancaires to be held here in Geneva.  
Today, I will reflect on what monetary policy can and cannot do. I would like to emphasise 
where central banks’ powers and responsibilities end and where those of fiscal policy and the 
private sector begin. “Why is he focusing on this now?” I hear you ask. “We are in the midst 
of  a  crisis.  Shouldn’t  he  be  emphasising  what  central  banks  can  do,  instead  of  what  they 
cannot?” My answer to you is this: while the monetary policy measures taken in recent years 
have had a stabilising effect, today, monetary policy has acquired a degree of prominence 
that could lead to its powers and its reach being overestimated. Central banks are far from 
almighty and, in efforts to emphasise this, I will review the various policy options at the zero 
lower bound and the risks associated with the measures currently in place. I will first examine 
the issue in universal terms, before concentrating on the very unusual case of Switzerland. 
Conventional policy options at the zero lower bound 
Conventional  macroeconomic  theory  states  that,  when  interest  rates  are  at  the  zero  lower 
bound, monetary policy becomes ineffective and economic policy action should concentrate 
on fiscal measures. In slide 1, the depiction of the economy using the standard IS/LM model 
summarises  this  point  of  view.  As  you  can  see,  the  economic  situation  is  represented  in 
terms of two key  variables, the interest rate and output (or GDP). Economic equilibrium is 
represented by the intersection of the IS and LM curves. The first corresponds to the interest 
rate  and  GDP  levels  that  balance  savings  and  investment  and  the  second  represents  the 
combinations of these two variables, which equilibrate the demand and supply of money. 
Expansionary monetary policy corresponds to pulling the LM curve to the right. When interest 
rates  are  at  the  lower  bound,  however,  the  LM  curve  is  horizontal.  At  this  point,  pulling  a 
horizontal to the right has absolutely no impact on the intersection of the IS and LM curves, 
and  therefore  on  the  equilibrium  level  of  output.  Conventional  monetary  policy  hence 
becomes ineffective. Intuitively, if interest rates are at the zero lower bound they cannot be 
lowered further, yet it is precisely by lowering interest rates that monetary policy can stabilise 
the real economy.  
By contrast, it is at the zero lower bound that the potential benefits of fiscal policy are most 
significant.  As the  same  diagram  suggests,  it  is  precisely  when  the  LM  curve  is flat  that  it 
becomes  most  appealing  to  use  fiscal  policy.  This  is  because  a  fiscal  stimulus  is  not 
counteracted  by  an  increase  in  interest  rates  –  that  would  lead  to  a  what  is  known  as  a 
“crowding out” of private investment − and thus fully translates into increased output (slide 2).  
The challenges associated with fiscal imbalances  
Of  course,  the  functioning  of  a  IS/LM  model  is  simpler  than  that  of  the  real  economy.  In 
practice, the effectiveness of fiscal policy, even at the zero lower bound, is more ambiguous. 
There  are  several  reasons  for  this.  Governments’  decision-making  processes  can  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
laborious, for example, so fiscal stimulus may not be implemented when it is most needed.1 
Similarly,  it may take time for fiscal stimulus to take effect or, in the case of a small open 
economy, it may simply evaporate in the form of increased imports. Whatever the case may 
be, the root of the current challenges is different. It resides in the fact that many countries 
now have very little leeway with which to undertake fiscal policy manoeuvres. As a result, it is 
becoming  increasingly  difficult,  sometimes  impossible,  for  public  authorities  to  use  fiscal 
policy to support the recovery, even when this may seem appropriate.  
Most mature economies would have been in a better position to address the current situation 
if their fiscal reserves had been more significant at the onset of the crisis. In several cases, 
public debt-to-GDP ratios were already around 60% or even above. Yet, since 2008, many 
governments  have  actively  used  fiscal  policy  to  combat  the  effects  of  the  crisis  and  to 
refinance the banks. As a result, the debt-to-GDP ratios of G7 countries, for example, have 
increased  by  an  unweighted  average  of  almost  30  percentage  points  (slide 3).  As  a 
consequence, today,  the  option  of  implementing  new  fiscal  stimuli  has  been  virtually  ruled 
out.  
Monetary policy: in the frontline once again 
When  it  comes  to  economic  policy  matters,  central  banks  have,  therefore,  returned  to  the 
limelight somewhat by default.  
In the current crisis, monetary policy has proved more effective than the IS/LM model might 
suggest.  This  is  essentially  because  central  banks  have  resorted  to  using  various 
combinations  of  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  to  help  provide  conditions 
conducive  to  economic  growth  in  a  context  of  deflationary  risks  .  Here,  the  aim  has  often 
been to impact long rates directly, given that it was no longer possible to influence short-term 
rates. Several central banks have therefore purchased assets to put pressure on their longer-
term yields (quantitative easing). To the same end, some have extended the maturity of the 
assets  on  their  balance  sheets,  while  others  have  purchased  private  sector  assets  to 
contribute  to  the  easing  of  market  conditions  (credit  easing).  Meanwhile,  others  have 
conducted  foreign  exchange  interventions  to  reduce  pressure  on  the  export  sector  and  to 
ease monetary conditions. Many have also made implicit or explicit long-term commitments 
to foster expectations of future low rates.  
The  scale  of  central  bank  intervention  has  been  significant,  as  indicated  by  the  combined 
balance  sheets  of  central  banks  in  the  US,  the  UK,  the  euro  area,  Japan,  China  and 
Switzerland, for example. The total now amounts to some USD14 trillion (slide 4), i.e. over 
30%  of  GDP  in  these  currency  areas.  These  exceptional  monetary  policy  measures  do, 
indeed, appear to have exerted downward pressure on interest rates, thus sustaining the real 
economy in the spirit of the IS/LM model.  
What are the risks associated with these policies? 
Despite  these  positive  (short-term)  effects,  I  would  first  like  to  argue  that  the  general 
message of the IS-LM diagram has not been invalidated by recent central bank actions. That 
is to say, when interest rates are close to zero, it is most appropriate to resort to fiscal policy 
and monetary policy becomes less effective. 
Moreover,  the  current  policy-mix  can  entail  risks,  to  which  I  would  now  like  to  draw  your 
attention.  My  greatest  concern  is  that  the  general  public  could  come  to  overestimate  the 
impact  of  central  banks’  actions  and  the  suitability  of  their  intervention  in  each  and  every 
                                                
1   For  a  discussion  of  the  impact  of  fiscal  measures  in  Switzerland  between  2008  and  2010,  see,  “Die 
Konjunkturmassnahmen  des  Bundes  2008–2010:  Evaluation  der  Konzeption  und  Umsetzung  der 
Stabilisierungsmassnahmen,” Swiss Federal Audit Office, May 2012.   
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economic situation that is deemed “unsatisfactory”. This could result in central banks being 
perceived as all-powerful, though such expectations are far from realistic. Troubled financial 
markets and dangerous economic circumstances required the implementation of exceptional 
measures. Even if these measures have a welcome impact in the short term, central banks 
must  remain  focused  on  their  core  mission,  which  is  to  ensure  price  stability.  This  is  their 
long-run contribution to economic well-being. Monetary policy does not create wealth in and 
of itself. It is the innovative and entrepreneurial strengths of the private sector, not short-term 
monetary policy measures, that are the engines of real sustainable growth. 
Could  the  short-term  liquidity-creating measures  pose  a  risk for  price  stability?  This  risk  is 
often alluded to, and central banks are acutely aware that any measures must be rigorously 
and repeatedly assessed to prevent any mid-term resurgence of inflation. In any case, there 
are well-identified means of quickly reversing the effects of an abundance of liquidity, though 
it  is  true  that  the  timing  of  such  “exit”  measures  is  a  matter  of  delicate  monetary  policy 
assessment.  
Today, however, abundant liquidity and extended periods of low interest rates are recognised 
as  posing  a  risk  to  financial  stability.  One  of  the  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis  is  that  price 
stability  is  not  sufficient  for  financial  stability.  Many  central  banks  are  therefore  placing 
greater weight on financial stability concerns in their decision-making processes. To this end, 
several  now  envisage  the  use  of  specific  new  (“macroprudential”)  instruments  to  directly 
address the risks to financial stability. 
It  is  also  worth  considering  whether  central  banks’  recent  activism  could  undermine  their 
independence. Several critics claim that, by implementing measures such as quantitative and 
credit  easing,  central  banks  have,  at  times,  adopted  “quasi-fiscal”  policies  and  that  the 
boundaries  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  were,  thus,  blurred.  Yet,  central  bank 
independence  is  a  delicate  democratic  concept.  Its  objective  is  to  prevent  temporal 
inconsistencies in the policies pursued from leading to results that could harm the economy 
as a whole. In other words, independence enables central banks to focus on price stability in 
the  long-term  interests  of  a  country,  as  opposed  to  prioritising  the  short-term  demands  of 
specific  political  or  economic  interest  groups.  At  present,  the  use  of  unconventional 
measures is largely motivated by the fact that monetary policy is at the zero lower bound and 
fiscal  policy  options  are  very  limited.  These  are  exceptional  responses  to  exceptional 
circumstances and should remain so.  
Finally, it is important to acknowledge that, by expanding their balance sheets, central banks 
have  had  to  assume  increased  financial  risks.  Many  central  banks  have  purchased  bonds 
when interest rates were very low. They are therefore exposed to considerable interest rate 
risks,  which  could  lead  to  significant  balance  sheet  losses  and  even  to  negative  equity 
positions.  In  the  short  term,  this  is  not  a  problem  as  it  does  not  affect  a  central  bank’s 
capacity to fulfil its mandate. After all, as a central bank has banknote-issuing privileges, it 
cannot become illiquid. Moreover, it is normally in a position to rebuild its equity in the longer 
term. Nevertheless, it is not desirable, even for a central bank, to experience a long period of 
negative equity as this could generate doubts about its credibility.2 
Switzerland: a very special case 
Although the recent crises have been global in nature, every country has had to define policy 
in response to the specific circumstances that affect it. The Swiss case is very special as our 
country still has the leeway to undertake fiscal manoeuvres. Instead, we are confronted by 
another  major  challenge,  the  exceptional  power  of  our  currency.  As  we  all  know,  the 
increased uncertainty and extreme risk aversion, which arose as a result, drove the Swiss 
                                                
2   Cf. Jordan (2011) for more details on this topic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
franc to an all-time high in early August of 2011, posing a threat to the economy and carrying 
the risk of severe deflationary developments. As I already mentioned, fiscal policy remained 
a conceivable means of addressing this problem as our country’s debt-to-GDP ratio is less 
than 40% and its public sector budget has been in surplus for the last six years. It was not, 
however, as the massively overvalued Swiss franc first threatened demand for Swiss exports 
and Switzerland is, of course, not in a position to stimulate the entire world economy. In this 
particular case, it was inappropriate to resort to fiscal policy. It was therefore up to the SNB 
to take action. It implemented measures aimed at a substantial and sustained weakening of 
the  Swiss  franc.  After  provoking  an  exceptional  increase  in  liquidity  in  August,  on 
6 September  2011  the  SNB  announced  that  it  would  no  longer  tolerate  a  EUR/CHF 
exchange  rate  below  CHF  1.20.  This  measure  remains  the  focal  point  of  Swiss  monetary 
policy.  In  the  current  global  context,  Switzerland’s  economic  situation  does  not  justify  any 
strengthening  of  monetary  conditions  and  this  should  remain  the  case  for  the  foreseeable 
future. The SNB continues to enforce this minimum rate with the utmost determination and 
remains prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. 
From  a  conceptual  perspective,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  is  not  a  quantitative  easing 
measure  and  most  of  my  generic  comments  do  not  strictly  apply  to  the  Swiss  case. 
Nevertheless, the risks associated with this measure do, to a certain extent, resemble those I 
just described. The first of these risks is that the minimum exchange rate may superficially 
seem like a simple or straight-forward measure, which may in turn give the impression that 
monetary policy  is a catch-all problem-solver, i.e. that it is almighty. This is clearly not the 
case.  Monetary  policy  has  neither  the  capacity  nor  the  mandate  to  protect  the  Swiss 
economy from all the shocks to which it is subjected. The aim of the minimum exchange rate 
is  to  avert  the  worst  possible  developments  in  zero  interest  rate  environment.  It  is  not  a 
response to each and every challenge with which the Swiss economy is faced, nor can it be 
implemented at any desired level, free of any risk.  
The  SNB’s  mandate  is  still  to  ensure  price  stability.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  has 
decreased  the  deflationary  and  recessionary  risks  associated  with  a  massively  overvalued 
currency. It is entirely in line with our mandate. Furthermore, there is no risk of inflation in 
Switzerland  for  the  foreseeable  future.  However,  the  SNB  does  recognise  that  the  long 
period of low interest rates we are experiencing constitutes a danger to the stability of the 
financial  system.  The  domestic  credit  and  real  estate  markets  are  vibrant  and  there  are 
concerns  about  the  possible  build-up  of  imbalances,  which  could  eventually  lead  to  price 
corrections and substantial losses in the Swiss banking sector. There is no doubt, however, 
that,  in  the  current  context  of  global  economic  indications  of  downside  risks  to  the  Swiss 
economy, current interest rate levels and the minimum exchange rate are vital. Any concerns 
about the housing market must, therefore, be addressed by alternative means. The SNB thus 
advocates  the  introduction  of  a  “countercyclical  capital  buffer”,  a  macroprudential  tool 
targeted  at  the  specific  situation  we  are  experiencing.  If  the  SNB’s  recommendations  are 
implemented, the banks will be legally obliged to meet specific equity capital requirements as 
soon  as  certain  indicators  on  the  real  estate  and  mortgage  markets  show  signs  of 
unsustainable growth. 
The concept of central bank independence is widely recognised in our country. The fact that 
an independent monetary policy best serves the interests of the country is rarely disputed. In 
the  current  exceptional  circumstances,  the  imposition  of  a  minimum  exchange  rate  is  a 
measure that has received strong support from economic and political actors in Switzerland 
and  abroad.  Both  the  IMF  and  the  OECD  recently  confirmed  that  this  was  an  appropriate 
response3 to the risk of economic contraction and deflation in our country.4 Given the perfect 
                                                
3   OECD (2012). 
4  
IMF (2012). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
alignment  of  this  exceptional  monetary  policy  measure  with  the  pursuit  of  the  SNB’s  price 
stability  mandate,  one  would  imagine  that,  in  the  future,  the  National  Bank’s  independent 
status will remain as strongly anchored as in the past.  
Finally, it is important to consider the risks associated with the SNB’s inflated balance sheet. 
Our balance sheet has become more volatile, principally because it has grown in size − it is 
four to five times larger than it was in 2007 – but also because of the volatility of the overall 
environment.  In  the  course  of  the  last  two  years,  risks  have  manifested  themselves  both 
positively and negatively. In 2010, for example, the SNB experienced its biggest ever loss, 
but  in  2011,  it  also  experienced  one  of  its  largest  gains.  The  much  increased  size  of  our 
balance  sheet,  the  unavoidable  exchange  rate  risks  associated  with  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves and a dependence on developments in the gold and capital markets, mean that the 
high volatility of the SNB’s annual results will be a standard feature of the near future.  
In this respect, it is important to emphasise that monetary policy considerations always take 
precedence  over  those  regarding  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  risks.  It  is  therefore  worth 
repeating that there is a very high level of uncertainty in the international environment. An 
appreciation of the Swiss franc would again expose the Swiss economy to considerable risks 
and,  once  more,  endanger  both  price  stability  and  economic  situation.  Given  this  state  of 
affairs,  the  SNB  will  continue  to  enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  utmost 
determination  and,  should  the  economic  outlook  and  the  threat  of  deflation  require,  is 
prepared to take further measures at any time.  
Concluding remarks  
In closing, I would like to summarise my message. The unconventional measures the SNB 
and several other central banks continue to implement are tailored responses to exceptional 
circumstances. Their impact should nevertheless not be overestimated, and the associated 
risks must be recognised. Central banks are the guardians of price stability. Taking the broad 
economic  situation  into  consideration,  they  can  promote  conditions  that  are  conducive  to 
growth. But central banks are not almighty. Monetary policy does not create wealth in and of 
itself,  only  financial  and  economic  actors  can  harness  the  very  best  of  their  innovative, 
technological and creative talents to generate value and promote sustainable growth. 
References 
Gurria, Angel, OECD Secretary-General. 2012. “Policy priorities for a stronger, cleaner and 
fairer  Swiss  economy.”  Remarks  delivered  at  the  launch  of  the  2012  OECD  Economic 
Survey of Switzerland. 24 January 2012. 
International Monetary Fund. 2012. Switzerland: 2012 Article IV Consultation – Staff Report; 
Public  Information  Notice  on  the  Executive  Board  Discussion.  Statement  by  the  Executive 
Director for Switzerland. IMF Country Report No. 12/106. May 2012. 
Jordan, Thomas. 2011. “Does the Swiss National Bank need equity?” SNB. Speech to the 
Statistisch-Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft. Basel. 28 September 2011.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
