Andreas Dombret: Twenty-five years of Bundesbank’s representative 
office in Tokyo 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the opening of the enlarged office of the Deutsche Bundesbank in 
Tokyo, Tokyo, 6 September 2012. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Governor Shirakawa, 
Vice Minister Nakao, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This is my third visit to Tokyo since I took over as the Bundesbank’s “foreign minister”– that 
is the Bundesbank’s Board Member responsible for international relations. The long-standing 
partnership between the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank singles out Japan as one of our 
key  partners  in  the  international  sphere.  For  this  reason,  my  first  bilateral  visit  at  the 
Bundesbank  brought  me  to  Tokyo  in  2010.  It  was  my  explicit  wish  back  then  to  come  to 
Japan first. Needless to say, that I am glad to be back again. 
And  it  is  a  great  pleasure  for  my  colleague  Joachim  Nagel  and  me  to  welcome  such  a 
distinguished  gathering  of  central  bankers,  government  officials,  representatives  of  the 
financial community and friends. All of you have come despite a busy schedule. This reflects 
the reputation our representative office has gained in its 25 years of existence and the close 
and  successful  cooperation  which  exists  between  you,  our  Japanese  hosts,  and  the 
Bundesbank. Also on behalf of my colleague Joachim Nagel, our thanks therefore go to all 
those who have been supporting the Bundesbank over so many years. You will appreciate 
me mentioning our colleagues from the Bank of Japan in particular. 
Today,  financial  markets  are  awaiting  the  decision  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  In  the 
following, I will focus on some important aspects from the viewpoint of the Bundesbank. 
The European sovereign debt crisis 
2. 
Let me start with an important statement: the euro is a stable and successful currency, both 
politically and economically. It is the showpiece project of political integration in Europe and 
has,  since  it  was  introduced,  successfully  safeguarded  price  stability.  And  still  doubts  are 
being voiced about the euro’s continued existence. European Monetary Union is facing the 
greatest challenge in its history. 
The founding fathers knew  very  well  that  in  the  European  Monetary  Union  –  with  a  single 
monetary policy but national fiscal policies – safeguards were needed to ensure sound fiscal 
policy. Otherwise, the deficit bias would be reinforced. Unsound fiscal policies in turn would 
make it more difficult for monetary policy to maintain price stability at low interest rates and 
could  lead  to  pressure  on  the  central  bank  to  “communitise”  government  debt  through  its 
balance sheet. 
The  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  to  what  for  the  countries  at  the  euro  area 
periphery  were  historically  low  levels  had  a  number  of  implications.  In  some  countries, 
private  or  government  consumption  grew  faster  than  the  economy’s  potential  output.  In 
addition,  in  some  countries,  a  significant  real-estate  bubble  was  the  consequence.  The 
international  competitiveness  in  a  number  of  countries  deteriorated.  Necessary  reforms  to 
make  labour,  product  and  services  markets  more  flexible  were  postponed.  The  global 
financial crisis revealed these unsustainable developments, which are reflected in the form of 
deteriorating public finances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Greece was the first Eurozone country which lost market access when investors questioned 
the sustainability of its public finances. In the absence of a joint assistance mechanism, the 
country  initially  obtained  bilateral  loans  from  other  euro  area  countries. The  IMF,  too,  was 
involved  in  providing  assistance.  All  support  was  tied  to  strict  conditionality.  This 
conditionality was meant to reinforce the policy measures taken to mend economic structures 
and  government  finances.  Strict  conditionality  must  be  the  precondition  for  financial 
assistance so as to avoid disincentives and ensure the programme’s success. 
A temporary crisis resolution mechanism – the European Financial Stability Facility – was set 
up  between  EMU  countries  in  2010.  It  will  be  replaced  by  a  permanent  mechanism  –  the 
European Stability Mechanism – probably before the end of this year. As the crisis went on, 
both  the  EFSF  and  ESM  were  expanded  and  their  firepower  was  increased.  More 
specifically,  they  can  now  include  not  only  loans  to  governments;  they  can  also  comprise 
precautionary  credit  lines,  interventions  in  the  primary  and  secondary  markets,  and 
special-purpose  loans  to  euro  area  states  for  the  purpose  of  recapitalising  financial 
institutions. 
Since then, support programmes have also been set up for both Ireland and Portugal. For 
Greece,  a  second  rescue  package  has  been  approved,  combined  with  extensive  debt 
restructuring.  More  recently,  Spain  has  expressed  its  intention  to  apply  for  assistance  to 
restructure  its  banking  sector.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Spanish  government  to  act 
decisively now. 
Generally speaking, these temporary support measures buy time until sustainable measures 
become effective. But a firewall cannot extinguish a fire. The fire has to be extinguished by 
fiscal consolidation and fiscal reforms. 
In this context, the EU member states demonstrated their ability to act collectively in crisis 
situations by agreeing on a number of important measures. One of these is the Treaty on 
Stability,  Coordination  and  Governance  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  This  treaty, 
which is due to become effective on 1 January 2013, comprises a fiscal compact. Its main 
component is anchoring the commitment to enact laws, requiring budgets of member states 
to be at least close to balance in structural terms. 
Nevertheless,  structural  adjustments  are  needed  not  just  for  public  finances  but  also  to 
address  macroeconomic 
the  preserve  of  national 
governments. The process of implementing necessary policy measures at the national level 
has  already  begun  in  some  countries.  Labour  markets  have  been  deregulated,  and 
institutional  impediments  to  competition  have  been  eliminated.  Some signs  of  success  are 
already  emerging  in  the  export  sectors  of  crisis-hit  countries.  The  budgetary  situation  has 
also improved. 
Markets,  however,  are  not  yet fully  convinced  that  these  efforts  will  be  sustained.  But  one 
thing  is  clear:  Although  the  first  steps  have  been  taken,  further  extensive  consolidation 
measures and structural reforms are very much necessary. 
The Eurosystem responded to the crisis by cutting interest rates and launching non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures.  It  provided,  for  the  first  time,  three-year  liquidity  in  two 
longer-term  refinancing  operations.  Another  non-standard  measure,  the  Securities  Market 
Programme, has been the subject of debate. We at the Bundesbank continue to believe that 
purchases  of  government  bonds  by  the  Eurosystem  reduce  pressure  on  governments  of 
countries  that  are  in  the  markets’  spotlight  to  consolidate  their  budgets  and  embark  on 
structural reforms. By no means, they should become the “new normal”. 
Through  these  measures,  monetary  policy  is  increasingly  strained.  It  makes  a  world  of 
difference whether it is the Eurosystem or a stand-alone central bank, like the Bank of Japan, 
that is using its balance sheet as a tool to combat a crisis. In the Eurosystem’s case, balance 
sheet measures and the risks of losses related to them have an important implication. They 
involve shifting burdens from the taxpayers of one member state to those of another. Such 
imbalances.  Both  areas  remain 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
burden-sharing, however, is the task of democratically elected fiscal policymakers and not of 
monetary policy. 
There is no quick fix for the European sovereign debt crisis. However, the measures already 
taken by some countries are steps in the right direction. If this direction is maintained, if the 
segregation of monetary policy from fiscal policy is upheld and once a decision is taken on 
the monetary union’s future institutional shape, the foundations for a lasting solution should 
be in place. 
Closing remarks 
3.  
Let me now return to Japan, our host country. 25 years have passed since the Bundesbank 
opened its representative office in Tokyo. Since then, it has successfully helped improve our 
understanding  of  the  Japanese  economy.  Many  of  the  developments  which  our  office 
reported proved to be of importance for our own policies. Let me mention the lessons from 
the build-up, bursting and clean-up of the Japanese financial bubble and, in particular, the 
Bank of Japan’s experience in the fields of financial stability and unconventional monetary 
policy.  Another  example  is  the  Lehman  collapse  in  September  of  2008.  Both  the 
Bundesbank’s  office  in  Tokyo  and  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  office  in  Frankfurt  provided  an 
efficient channel for a vital bilateral flow of information. 
Germany  stood  side  by  side  with  Japan  in  the  difficult  times following  the  tragic  events  of 
11 March,  2011.  We  are  pleased  to  learn  that  the  Japanese  economy  is  on  a  path  to 
recovery.  Against  this  background  I  am  particularly  happy  that  the  anniversary  of  our 
representative office coincides with the inauguration of our new premises. Moreover, within 
these enlarged premises, we will set up a trading office which will begin operating this month. 
My colleague Joachim Nagel will now give you more information in this regard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
