Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Global regulation and offshore  
centres – onshore vs offshore 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the GCC Private Banking Conference, Manama, 7 March 2012. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is a great pleasure and a privilege to be addressing this conference. Over the course of the 
day  speakers  and  delegates  will  debate  and  reflect  upon  many  aspects  of  the  Private 
Banking environment, and I have no doubt that the initiatives which will be identified here will 
provide interesting and useful ideas. 
My speech today will concentrate on the importance of regulation to the financial industry in 
general, and the Private Banking environment in particular. I shall explore what the CBB has 
done, explain why that has been beneficial to our stakeholders, and provide an insight into 
our priorities in the coming period. 
The CBB has a proud regulatory history. Our framework has been moulded over many years, 
and  it  has  served  our  stakeholders  well  in  times  of  local,  regional,  and  international 
turbulence.  It  provides  clear  leadership  and  direction  to  licensees,  and  it  is  designed  to 
provide investors with a detailed understanding of the way in which the CBB expects banks 
and financial institutions to discharge their responsibilities. This is due, at least in part, to our 
philosophy of “constant improvement”. As such a great deal of our work is pro-active, and all 
of our work is designed to mitigate risk in a controlled manner whilst accepting that risk is an 
inherent ingredient in the financial industry. 
We  consult  with  practitioners  and  the  various  other  stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector  to 
understand  their  needs  and  desires,  and  we  strive  to  be  responsive  to  those  needs.  A 
fundamental premise of our approach is that we make considerable efforts to ensure that our 
licensees  understand  the  importance  of,  and  implement  and  comply  with,  recognized 
international best practice in their field. 
But not everything is local. Global capital flows are critical for Bahrain. We are a small nation; 
we  have  an  open  economy  and  we  do  not  impose  complex  capital  controls.  We  welcome 
ethical investment from any source, and we recognize that inward capital flows benefit the 
wider  economy.  In  keeping  with  those  goals,  the  CBB  has  introduced  a  number  of 
improvements to our regulations during the recent past, many of which have had an impact 
on the wealth management industry, either directly or indirectly. 
For example the role of corporate governance has been enhanced, and the CBB was a key 
player  in  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Code  for  the 
Kingdom of Bahrain. Among other requirements, this enshrines the principles of independent 
Board members; the need for timely, accurate, and comprehensive disclosure of the control 
frameworks which financial institutions rely upon; and the importance of Board level oversight 
of the activities of the organization. It emphasizes accountability, and sets out the standards 
which  financial  institutions  are  required  to  comply  with.  Effective  governance  from  the  top 
provides comfort to investors that their interests are of critical importance. 
There  are  clear  standards  for  the  ring-fencing  of  clients’  money.  There  have  also  been  a 
number of improvements in the regulations relating to control frameworks in general, and risk 
management practices in particular. The rules relating to public disclosure and transparency 
have been continually and significantly improved. The rules relating to business and market 
conduct  have  been  enhanced,  and  several  other  areas  of  the  CBB  Rulebook  have  been 
simplified.  Each  and  every  one  of  these  initiatives  has  been  designed  with  the  aim  of 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
enhancing clients’ confidence, and to demonstrate that Bahrain is a safe jurisdiction in which 
to undertake business. 
One  of  the  major  components  of  the  growth  and  development  of  wealth  management  in 
recent  years  has  been  the  contribution  of  the  Islamic  banking  sector.  Shari’a  compliant 
banking continues to go from strength to strength, and Bahrain has been a major hub of the 
activity. The CBB has always been an active and enthusiastic supporter of Islamic finance, 
and over the years it has played a major role in encouraging the industry to seek creative 
and innovative products which will place Islamic finance at the forefront of the global financial 
industry. In the regulatory environment we are actively engaged with both AAOIFI and the 
IFSB,  and  we  have  been  a  key  player  in  the  development  and  implementation  of  the 
standards which form the framework of the Islamic banking industry. Our contribution to the 
industry will continue to be a core element of our strategy moving forward. 
In a wider context, the CBB is an integral part of the global financial regulatory community. 
During the last four years that community has had to respond to many shortcomings which 
initially  became  apparent  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and  which  were 
exacerbated  by  the  consequences  of  imprudent  lending,  high-risk  investments,  and  the 
liquidity  crisis.  The  financial  industry  in  general  has  been  criticized  heavily  from  many 
quarters, and regulators have not been immune to that criticism. Our approach has been to 
seek long-term solutions. We understand the risks of implementing a “quick fix”; and we are 
cognizant  that  speed  does  not  always  equal  quality.  At  the  same  time  we  recognize  that 
protecting  customers  of  the  financial  sector,  and  being  seen  to  do  so,  is  of  paramount 
importance. 
In  most  instances  the  measures  have  been  appropriate  and  prudent,  and  they  have  been 
designed  with  the  best  interests  of  the  consumer  as  the  foundation.  It  is  obviously 
challenging to reach consensus in a global market, and some changes have been criticized 
as excessively stringent and even anti-competitive. I do not believe that is true. 
Going  forward,  the  CBB  intends  to  concentrate  on  five  major  global  regulatory  initiatives 
throughout 2012 and beyond. These are: 
 
the implementation of a meaningful and achievable set of revised capital adequacy 
standards, often referred to as Basle III; 
enhanced  liquidity  requirements,  which  are  also  included  within  the  Basle  III 
framework; 
improvements in the corporate governance framework, where we are continuously 
refining our interpretation of the Corporate Governance Code; 
continuing  to  strive  for  improvements  of  the  Islamic  finance  regulations  in 
coordination with the IFSB; and 
relevant regulatory enhancements in respect of capital markets. 
 
These are challenging aspirations, and we anticipate that there will be many bumps in the 
road over the coming months and years as we strive to provide an effective, efficient, and 
pragmatic regulatory framework. 
In closing, I wish you all a very constructive and enjoyable conference, and I look forward to 
the contribution that the ideas presented today will provide to the growth and development of 
the wealth management sector of the financial industry. 
Thank you for your attention. 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
