Dejan Šoškić: Challenges for macro- and microprudential policies in 
Serbia 
Speech by Mr Dejan Šoškić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the closing event of 
the  Eurosystem  Cooperation  Programme  on  “Strengthening  macro-  and  microprudential 
supervision in EU candidates and potential candidates”, Frankfurt, 16 January 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First of all, on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia I would like to express our gratitude to 
the  ECB  for  organizing,  and  inviting  us  to  participate  in  the  Eurosystem  Cooperation 
Programme  on  strengthening  macro  and  micro-prudential  supervision  in  EU  candidate 
countries  and  potential  candidate  countries.  It  has  been  a  valuable  capacity  building 
experience for the National Bank of Serbia.  
Out  of  a  number  of  well-known  systemic  risk  factors,  lending  in  foreign  exchange1  to 
unhedged borrowers has a special role in some of the small open economies of the EU and 
EU  candidate  countries.  This  phenomenon  of  FX  borrowing  by  unhedged  financial  clients 
has its history in many countries across the world. However, it produces specific challenges 
to  the  emerging  economies  without  enough  hedging  instruments  available,  which  still  face 
challenging  current  account  deficits  and  where  FX  lending  is  relatively  widespread 
throughout the economy. Moreover, some of these countries have a relatively recent history 
of  price  instability  and  overall  financial  instability.  A  good  example  in  the  group  of  such 
countries is Serbia. 
What are the major challenges of FX lending in Serbia? 
In  addressing  this  issue,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  in  financial  systems  with  widespread  lack  of 
confidence due to the recent history of high inflation and widespread banking insolvencies, 
as was the case with Serbia at the beginning of 2000s, FX lending has played a significant 
role in creating longer term financial assets, important for the increase in investments and 
economic growth. However, persistence of relatively high level of FX denominated financial 
instruments in a financial system (around 70% of bank assets in Serbia) can have several 
serious consequences:  
First: It hampers the effectiveness of the monetary policy and increases the volatility of the 
reference rate set by the central bank. Since the level of the reference rate directly influences 
the  local  currency  term  structure  of  interest  rates,  if  a  price  of  the  majority  of  financial 
instruments is not related to the movement of the local currency reference rate (but rather to 
the  movement  of  LIBOR,  EURIBOR  or  other  international  rates),  the  effectiveness  of  the 
local  currency  reference  rate  as  a  major  monetary  policy  tool  is  lower  and  its  movements 
need to be more volatile to produce the same results compared to a less dollarized financial 
system (i.e. euroized, in most of these countries). 
Second: If a System relies heavily of FX lending to unhedged borrowers, the link between the 
market risk (FX rate movement) and the credit risk of unhedged borrowers becomes strong. 
This component of the credit risk, as we know, has not been addressed satisfactorily in most 
of  traditional  risk  management  practices.  Besides,  unlike  other  credit  risk  factors,  it  is  not 
related  to  any  specific  industry,  region  or  profession,  but  is  nationwide  and  affects  all 
unhedged  borrowers  regardless  of  their  employment  status,  industry  sector  or  town  or 
province  of  their  residence.  So,  there  is  a  relatively  high  correlation  between  the  FX  rate 
movement and the movement of credit risk (and the NPLs) in the system.  
                                                 
1 
Includes FX linked local currencylending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(ESRB) 
Third:  If  the  bank  capital  is  expressed  in  local  currency  and  the  bank  assets  are 
predominantly FX linked (as is the case in Serbia), movement of FX rate (even without any 
increase in the risk of assets), influences capital adequacy. This produces potentially higher 
capital adequacy volatility than in the system with less FX lending. With the increase of credit 
risk driven by FX movements, the risk weighted assets – naturally –increase, too. And this 
additionally  influences  capital  adequacy  volatility.  In  such  a  system,  obviously,  there  is  an 
additional need to increase capital buffers because of the systemic inclination towards higher 
volatility in capital adequacy. 
Fourth: There is obviously much less room in such a financial system for using the exchange 
rate as an automatic stabilizer for external shocks and potentially can impose higher burden 
on FX reserves of the country.  
What has Serbia done so far? 
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  (NBS)  officially  initiated  the  so-called  dinarization  strategy  in 
early 2010 with a goal to gradually increase the use of local currency – the dinar –throughout 
the  financial  system.  This  strategy  relies  on  the  involvement  of  all  key  stakeholders  –  the 
NBS, government, banking sector, corporates, and households. While inevitably most of the 
activities are undertaken by the NBS and the banking sector, increasing the awareness of 
the public and receiving an active support of the government are vital for the success of this 
strategy. 
In  September  2011  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
issued  a  set  of 
recommendations  on  lending  in  foreign  currencies,  since  foreign  currency  lending  to 
unhedged  borrowers  has  recently  also  increased  in  a  number  of  EU  member  states.  We 
were pleased to see that our dinarization measures so far, and plans in our strategy for the 
future,  fully  coincide  with  ESRB  recommendations.  As  stated  in  the  document,  excessive 
foreign  currency  lending  may  produce  significant  systemic  risks  in individual  countries  and 
may create conditions inducing negative cross-border spillover effects. The new set of ESRB 
recommendations deals with consumer protection issues, borrowers’ creditworthiness, credit 
growth  fuelled  by  FX  lending,  internal  risk  management  of  banks,  additional  capital 
requirements, liquidity and funding as well as reciprocity and cooperation among supervisors.  
Dinarization strategy in Serbia rests on three inter-connected pillars. 
The first pillar relies on delivering low and stable inflation and strengthening the stability of 
the  overall  macroeconomic  environment.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  most  general,  but  also  the 
most  important  goal  and  it  focuses  on  countering  the  history  of  macroeconomic  instability 
experienced  in  Serbia  during  the  1990’s.  This  prior  instability  is  believed  to  be  one  of  the 
main reasons for the high level of euroization of the Serbian economy. In this respect, the 
NBS will continue to implement and further reinforce its Inflation targeting regime.  
The  second  pillar  consists  of  measures  geared  at  promoting  dinar-denominated  financial 
instruments  and  markets,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  development  of  the  dinar  bond 
market.  In  this  respect,  government,  corporates,  banks  and  the  IFIs  (both  as  issuers  and 
guarantors) can play an important role. Development of an actively traded dinar yield curve is 
an important milestone of this pillar.  
The third pillar aims to promote hedging of the existing foreign currency risks. The NBS has 
been leading the efforts in this field, working together with the banking sector on introducing 
and  developing  basic  hedging  instruments  in  both  the  interbank  market  and  in  client 
transactions.  The  National  Bank  introduced  regular  foreign  exchange  swap  auctions  for 
banks. In addition, the NBS has organized a series of seminars and conferences on foreign 
exchange hedging in the country and launched a foreign exchange hedging webpage. 
Throughout 2011, the NBS continued to implement measures geared at a greater use of the 
dinar and a gradual reduction of the FX risk in the domestic financial system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In early 2011, in the area of monetary policy instruments, the NBS adopted the new 
1. 
Decision  on  Banks’  Required  Reserves  with  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  with  an  aim  to 
strengthen  the  local  currency  and  longer  term  liability  side  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets. 
Reserve  requirements  for  local  currency  sources  of  bank  funding  were  set  to  0%  (for 
maturities  over  two  years)  and  5%  (for  maturities  up  to  two  years).  However,  the  reserve 
requirement ratio for FX sources of funding is set to 25% (for maturities over two years) and 
30% (for maturities up to two years). The message intended for banks was the promotion of 
financial stability, namely:  more long term funding and more local currency funding equals 
cheaper financing.  
Also, daily liquidity loans and short-term dinar loans may be extended to banks by the NBS 
only against the collateral of dinar securities issued by the Republic of Serbia and the NBS. 
In  case  of  need,  the  NBS  will  also  conduct  dinar  liquidity-providing  repo  operations,  again 
against the collateral of dinar securities. To encourage interbank FX  swap trading and the 
development  of  the  FX  hedging  market,  the  NBS  continued  conducting  3-month  FX  swap 
auctions in 2011. 
2. 
In  May  2011,  the  NBS  adopted  the  Decision  on  Measures  for  Safeguarding  and 
Strengthening Stability of the Financial System. The decision entering into force in June 2011 
introduced a set of measures regarding FX-denominated and FX-indexed lending to citizens: 
a) FX-denominated and FX-indexed loans may be approved only subject to a down payment 
or placement of deposit of no less than 30% of the loan amount. This rule does not apply to 
housing loans; b) The LTV of FX-denominated and indexed mortgage loans are limited to a 
maximum of 80%; c) Loans may be indexed only to the euro, i.e. banks can no longer grant 
loans indexed to the Swiss franc and other currencies.  
3. 
The  Law  on  the  Protection  of  Financial  Services  Consumers,  which  entered  into 
force in early June and is implemented as of December 2011, prescribes an obligation for 
banks to primarily offer to their clients loans in dinars, and to provide an FX linked product 
only at client request. In such a case, bank is obliged to warn their clients of the FX risk they 
assume. 
4. 
By the end of 2011, preparations for introduction of Basel II in 2012 were completed. 
Domestic  banking  sector  was  recapitalized  to  a  large  extent  and  new  risk  management 
capacities with the banks were developed. In June 2011, the Executive Board of the NBS 
adopted a set of six decisions introducing Basel II standards and with the new Decision on 
the Classification of Bank Balance Sheet Assets and Off-Balance Sheet Items of December 
2011, the framework for Basel II implementation was fully set. The last NBS by-law was also 
a first step towards dynamic (countercyclical) provisioning that we want to develop more in 
the future.  
As we saw in September 2011, ESRB recommended to the regulatory authorities to consider 
applying additional capital requirements (within pillar 2 of Basel II standards) for banks not 
capitalized enough to cover the specific risks arising from excessive FX lending. In line with 
that  recommendation,  we  have  provided  a  possibility  for  the  NBS  as  a  supervisor  to  set 
capital adequacy ratio (CAR) for a particular bank above the regulatory minimum (which is 
12% in Serbia). 
In the period from 2007 to 2011, banking sector in Serbia experienced gradual deterioration 
in  the  quality  of  its  credit  portfolio.  Still,  the  sector  remains  liquid,  solvent,  has  high  loss 
provisions, and is therefore stable. Household bank deposits have increased during 2011 to 
their  historic  peak,  more  than  EUR  3  billion  above  end  2008.  Despite  the  overall  market 
circumstances  and  certain  regulatory  costs,  banking  sector  in  Serbia  remains  reasonably 
profitable compared to the rest of the region (in terms of both ROA and ROE). 
What is important for the future? 
The  most  important  thing  in  the  period  ahead  is  to  constantly  try  to  fully  understand  the 
markets and to closely follow developments on an ongoing basis. Full awareness of the risks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
taken by banks, other financial institutions, their clients and the system as a whole should be 
considered  a  must.  This  especially  needs  to  be  the  case  with  the  development  of  new 
financial instruments with a large leverage generating potential. It is important to be realistic, 
to  understand  where  the  system  stands,  and  where  we  want  it  to  be  in  the  future. 
Communication  and  cooperation  are  of  the  essence,  not  only  among  the  supervisors 
themselves,  but  also  with  the  financial  industry.  We  should  always  be  reminded  that 
preservation  of  financial  stability  with  competitive  and  relatively  free  financial  markets  is  in 
the long term interest of both the regulators and the industry, and is essential also for the 
future growth and the overall prosperity of market economies throughout the world. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
