Jörg Asmussen: A European agenda 20… 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the “Welt”-Währungskonferenz (“Welt” currency conference), Berlin, 21 May 2012. 
 Mr Eigendorf,  
Professor Hennerkes,  
ladies and gentlemen,  
I am delighted to be speaking to you here today at the Axel Springer House as part of this 
year’s “Welt”-Währungskonferenz (“Welt” currency conference). 
Axel  Springer  once  said:  “Berlin  is  the  heart  of  Europe,  I  know  of  no  other”.  Many  of  my 
European  colleagues  would  nominate  other towns  and  cities  as  the  heart  of  Europe,  but  I 
wanted to start with this quote because of the time from which it dates: 1973. Berlin was a 
divided city at that time, the symbol of a divided Europe. The Iron Curtain ran right through it. 
Today – almost 40 years later – Berlin is the flourishing capital of a reunified Germany, again 
at the centre of a united Europe. The only thing that is missing in this flourishing capital is a 
functioning airport. 
Over  the  last  20  years,  central  and  eastern  Europe  has  become  an  integral  part  of  a 
European Union which has grown ever closer over time. This is especially true with regard to 
monetary  integration:  the  euro  is  now  the  single  currency  of  17  countries  of the  European 
Union, from Estonia to Portugal, from Ireland to Cyprus. 
We were shown how much Europe has grown together just two weeks ago. On 6 May the 
people of Greece and France went to the polls. The clear reactions throughout Europe have 
demonstrated once again how close national and European politics are – particularly in times 
of crisis. 
Recent developments show that many of the great political challenges require a European 
response. The answer to the crisis is not less Europe, but more.  
It is crucial in this context that the indisputable advantages of a stable single currency are 
safeguarded by a Europe that is capable of action. The situation in Europe – and in Greece 
in  particular  –  is  difficult  at  present.  However,  the  past few  years  have  provided  us  with  a 
number of insights which make me optimistic about the future development of Economic and 
Monetary Union: 
The euro is good for Europe and good for Germany. 
1. 
The ECB’s monetary policy ensures a stable currency in the euro area. 
2. 
3. 
Europe is capable of reforming. 
I would like to add a question to this list: 
4. 
How can we develop Europe further? What should be on the agenda?  
The euro is good for Europe and good for Germany 
1. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  in  now  17  EU  Member  States  has  had  clear  political  and 
economic advantages. We benefit on a daily basis from the single currency, and this is also 
true during the crisis. Allow me very briefly to run through the facts again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The euro is a stable currency. 
Over the period since the introduction of the single currency, the average inflation rate in the 
euro area has been 2%. In Germany, incidentally, the rate since 1999 has been 1.6%. Such 
results were not matched over a comparable period in the 50-year history of the Deutsche 
Mark. Confidence in the currency is also reflected in the fact that inflation expectations in the 
euro area are stable and in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability, i.e. below but close 
to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  In  addition,  the  euro  has  established  itself  as  a  second 
important international reserve currency alongside the US dollar. Its international significance 
is greater than that of the legacy currencies combined. 
The euro has supported economic integration in Europe.  
The introduction of the single currency meant the end of exchange rate risk for cross-border 
trade within the euro area. Companies and individuals no longer have to protect themselves 
against this risk. The euro is estimated to have accounted for an increase in intra-European 
trade volumes of between 5% and 20%. Even the cautious estimates represent a remarkable 
increase. This  stimulating  effect  on  intra-European  trade  has  made  itself felt  most  of  all  in 
Germany. In the first ten years of Monetary Union, for example, real exports from German 
companies to other euro area countries rose from around 13% of German GDP to 20%. 
The euro is an anchor of stability in the crisis.  
Without  the  euro,  there  would  have  been  high  exchange  rate  volatility  between  the 
currencies  of  Europe  during  the  crisis.  In  the  past,  Germany’s  European  trading  partners 
repeatedly  devalued  their  currencies  in  order  to  remain  competitive  in  price  terms.  The 
external value of the Deutsche Mark vis-à-vis the Italian lira, for example, rose by 50% in just 
five  years  during  the  oil  crisis  in  the  1970s.  Experience  has  shown  that  such  volatility 
regularly  results  in  high  adjustment  costs  in  the  real  economy.  We  need  only  look  at 
Switzerland,  which  is  currently  having  to  contend  with  a  strong  appreciation  of  the 
Swiss franc.  
This brings me to the institution that is inextricably linked with the success of the euro: the 
ECB. 
The ECB’s monetary policy ensures a stable currency in the euro area 
2. 
The ECB has acted resolutely during this crisis to safeguard price stability in the euro area in 
line with its mandate and with full independence. On 9 August 2007, for example, the ECB 
was  the  first  central  bank  worldwide  to  react  decisively  to  the  turbulence  emerging  in  the 
financial markets.  
However,  the  financial  market  situation  deteriorated  so  dramatically  in  the  course  of  2008 
that the transmission of monetary policy was significantly disrupted. Central banks across the 
world were repeatedly faced with a situation in which liquidity in short and longer-term money 
markets  threatened  to  dry  up.  In  this  context,  the  conventional  monetary  policy  of  the 
Eurosystem  also  reached  the  limits  of  what  it  could  achieve.  Against  the  backdrop  of  this 
extraordinary situation, the ECB took a number of “non-standard” monetary policy measures. 
These mainly include refinancing operations with full allotment against collateral, longer-term 
refinancing  operations  with  an  extended  maturity  and  the  expansion  of  the  list  of  assets 
eligible to be used as collateral. All these non-standard measures are temporary in nature 
and can in principle be withdrawn at any time if we see upside risks to price stability. 
In Germany the ECB’s two three-year longer-term refinancing operations in particular have 
made headlines. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The aim of these operations was to guarantee the refinancing of the banking system over the 
longer  term  in  order  to  support  the  flow  of  credit  from  banks  to  the  real  economy.  The 
demand from banks was high, with around 500 institutions participating in the first operation 
in December 2011. For standard longer-term refinancing operations, this figure is closer to 
100. The second operation, in February 2012, had around 800 participants, including a large 
number  of  small  credit  institutions,  more  than  half  of  which  were  German.  These  banks 
frequently grant loans to small and medium-sized businesses, which form the backbone of 
growth and employment in the euro area. 
In  these  two  operations  the  Eurosystem  allotted  around  a  trillion  euro,  although  the  net 
provision  of  liquidity  was  only  about  half  that  figure.  These  are  large  sums.  I  would  ask, 
however, that you bear the following points in mind:  
First,  the  interest  rate  in  these  two  operations  is  linked  to  the  rate  in  the  ECB’s  main 
refinancing  operations.  If  the  ECB  increases  its  rates,  the  costs  will  also  rise  for  financial 
institutions over the remaining life of the operations.  
Second,  the  ECB  can  at  any  point  withdraw  this  liquidity  through  liquidity-absorbing 
operations. In addition, credit institutions have the option of early repayment of the liquidity to 
the ECB after one year. 
Some still fear that the generous provision of central bank liquidity will lead to a considerable 
erosion  of  the  value  of money.  Let me  emphasise  here  that,  in  order to  judge  the  liquidity 
situation in the economy, one should look not at the central bank’s balance sheet, but at the 
aggregated  balance  sheet  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  ECB  liquidity  is  a  very  special 
form  of  money.  It  can  first  of  all  simply  be  used  to  make  payments  between  banks  with 
accounts at the ECB or to fulfil minimum reserve requirements. 
There is no automatic mechanism which converts this liquidity into credit or asset purchases. 
Lending  and  purchasing  decisions  are  made  by  the  banks  alone,  on  the  basis  of  their 
financial situation, their risk aversion and the demand for credit from the real economy and 
households.  We  can  also  see  that  euro  area  inflation  expectations  remained  stable  both 
before and after the three-year operations. 
It  is  true,  however,  that all  central  bank  operations  involve  credit  risk. This  applies  to  both 
standard and non-standard measures, in economically good as well as bad times. For this 
reason, every central bank operation is covered by collateral. The quality of this collateral is 
very carefully evaluated on an ongoing basis by our internal risk management team. Large 
haircuts  are  made,  and  the  credit  amount  is  thus  oversecured.  In  the  case  of  the  credit 
claims recently added to the list of eligible collateral, the haircut amounts to 53% on average, 
and reaches up to 75% in individual cases.  
It is also true that the non-standard measures have resulted in an increase in the now much 
discussed  TARGET2  balances  of  some  national  central  banks  in  the  Eurosystem.  The 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  for  example.  The  TARGET2  net  balance  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank  vis-à-vis  the  ECB  stood  at  €644  billion  in  April.  Contrary  to  certain  reports, 
however, the TARGET2 imbalances do not indicate that urgently needed funds are flowing 
out of countries such as Germany. In actual fact, excess liquidity is available at Germany’s 
banks.  Misunderstandings  in  this  respect  can  thus  lead  to  incorrect  conclusions.  For 
example, it has been suggested that TARGET2 balances should have an upper limit. But this 
would  mean  that  the  free  movement  of  capital  between  euro  area  banks,  which  is 
guaranteed by the European treaties, would come to a standstill. 
The  TARGET2  balances  are  a  symptom  and  show  rather  that  the  interbank  market  is  not 
functioning smoothly as it did prior to August 2007 and that the Eurosystem central banks 
have to ensure that liquidity also reaches those areas with impaired money markets.  
With  dysfunctional  money  markets,  the  ECB  would  not  be  able  to  successfully  conduct  its 
monetary policy. Through its interventions in the money and near-money markets, the ECB 
has – fully in line with its mandate – also played an active and successful role in tackling the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
financial and economic crisis in the euro area. Upside and downside risks to price stability 
could thus be adequately contained at any time.  
Following on from this observation, I would like to turn to the role of governments and politics 
in  the  current  crisis.  The  crisis  has  revealed  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  the  euro  area’s 
economic policy management framework. 
Europe is capable of reforming 
3. 
Europe has proved, since the outbreak of the financial crisis, that is it capable of reforming 
and strengthening its ability to act.  
• 
The  creation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  three  European 
Supervisory  Authorities  has  brought  into  being  a  new  financial  supervisory 
architecture, responding to the need for macro and micro-prudential supervision at 
the European level. 
The Stability and Growth Pact has been strengthened, and a fiscal compact agreed 
in a very short period of time. It is now important that the fiscal compact be rapidly 
implemented, without changes, in at least all countries of the euro area. 
A  procedure  has  been  introduced  to  enable  macroeconomic  imbalances  to  be 
identified and corrected at an earlier stage.  
The  agreement  on  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  and  the  decision  to 
effectively increase its size and bring forward its starting date will further improve the 
effectiveness  of  European  crisis  management.  It  is  essential  that  the  ESM  be 
operational on 1 July. 
   product market reforms; 
labour market reforms; 
financing of reforms. 
The fiscal compact can be complemented by measures to increase growth. Such measures 
would be helpful additions, but the fiscal pact must not be renegotiated or weakened.  
It  is  wrong  to  pit  fiscal  consolidation  against  growth.  We  need  both.  Talking  about  more 
growth does not mean moving away from the fiscal policy strategy pursued so far. It is not a 
matter  of  boosting growth  over  the  next  one  to  two  quarters  with  credit-financed  spending 
programmes, but of increasing potential growth. No one is against growth. The crucial and 
rather difficult question to answer is how, in ageing societies, to increase potential growth.  
I  think  that  the  fiscal  compact  can  be  complemented  by  package  of  growth-enhancing 
measures with three components:  
• 
• 
• 
The product market reforms could include, for example, the completion of the internal market 
for  services.  70%  of  the  EU’s  GDP  comes  from  services,  but  only  20%  of  services  are 
provided on a cross-border basis.  
Labour  market  reforms could  be  inspired  by  the  Agenda  2010  programme  in  Germany.  In 
particular,  labour  mobility  needs  to  be  increased  in  the  euro  area  (the  theory  says,  we 
remember, that an optimal currency area requires full mobility of labour). Mobility could be 
increased  through  broader  recognition  of  qualifications  within  Europe,  greater  portability  of 
pension rights, language courses and a European network of job centres. 
The reforms could be financed with loans from the European Investment Bank (EIB) or EIB 
project bonds (which are not the same as Eurobonds). The prerequisite for this, however, is 
useful  projects.  In  much  of  Europe  there  is  no  need  for  a  complete  overhaul  of  classical 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
infrastructure, but many places are lacking in modern digital infrastructure. It would also be 
possible to divert already available EU structural and regional funds.  
These growth-enhancing measures will only have an effect once a critical mass of elements 
have been put into place. The form of the elements is less important. 
As you will remember, the fiscal compact has been signed by 25 countries. For the EIB or 
the EU budget to be used, all 27 Member States are needed. This means that the form of the 
fiscal compact cannot simply be replicated in a comparable growth compact.  
The  results  of  such  growth-enhancing  measures  will  not  appear  for  some  time.  In  the 
meantime,  I  personally  consider  it  necessary  to  pursue  active  labour  market  policies,  to 
prevent  major  social  tensions.  Youth  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  was  22%  in 
March 2012.  
How can we develop Europe further? What should be on the agenda? 
4. 
Jacques Delors famously said that Europe is like a bicycle: if it stops moving forward it falls 
over.  
But European integration is not an end in  itself. It must have a purpose for the citizens of 
Europe. It must offer them prosperity, security and freedom.  
In  Germany,  European  integration  has  thus  far  been  largely  a  project  for  the  political, 
economic and academic elites. Our constitution does not provide for direct referendums, so 
many people are now saying “I wasn’t asked”. This is made all the more important by the fact 
that a monetary union is ultimately also partly a political union.  
I therefore suggest that we now engage in open political debate on what Europe should look 
like ten years from now. In this we face a trilemma, which Martin Höppner, Armin Schaefer 
und  Hubert  Zimmermann  put  well  in  an  article  on  27  April  in  the  “Frankfurter  Allgemeine 
Zeitung”: “Enlargement, deepening and democracy – the trilemma of European integration. 
Of the three aims of the EU, only two can ever be achieved at the same time, at the expense 
of the third”.  
My choice would be deepening (of the euro area) and democracy. Others may have other 
ideas. This is something that can and must be discussed.  
The  advantages  of  Monetary  Union  are  so  great  that  we  should  stabilise  them  through 
deepening. This means a fiscal union and a financial market union (banking union) as well as 
a democratically legitimised political union.  
My first ideas on this are: 
i) In the area of financial market union, Europe is facing two central challenges:  
First, the close financial links between banking sectors and public finances in an environment 
of slowing growth has often led to a downward spiral. An economy that is barely growing or 
in recession has an effect on the budget situation and, as a consequence, on the prices and 
yields of the relevant government bonds, many of which are held on banks’ balance sheets. 
At  the  same  time  conditions  for  banks  deteriorate.  All  this  leads  to  the  aforementioned 
liquidity shortages on the interbank markets. These, in turn, can cause solvency problems. 
But the loss of confidence means there are fewer and fewer private investors willing to give 
the banks the capital they need. And the government has less and less leeway to push the 
recapitalisation  or  restructuring  of  the  banks  forward  itself  –  and  so  the  situation  spirals 
further and further down. 
Second, European financial market regulation and crisis management suffer from a potential 
conflict  of  interest.  While  national  supervisory  authorities  are  supposed  to  ensure  the 
functioning  of  the  European  financial  market,  they  are  politically  accountable  to  national 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
taxpayers. A national supervisory authority will therefore ultimately tend to put the interests of 
its own taxpayers above the smooth functioning of the European financial market. 
In order to be better prepared in a potential future crisis, therefore, the financial links between 
banking sectors and public finances must be loosened, and the conflict of interest between 
national crisis management and European rules must be removed. For this purpose the work 
on  a  European  regulatory  framework  must  first  be  concluded,  particularly  as  regards  the 
European capital requirements. Following the agreement by the EU economics and finance 
ministers  on  the  “CRD  IV”  package  on  15  May  we  have  come  a  step  closer  to  finding  a 
solution here. 
A  financial  market  union  also  needs  a  joint  financial  market  supervisory  authority  for 
systemically  important,  cross-border  financial  institutions  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  a 
settlement system for such institutions. 
ii) With regard to fiscal union, monetary policy has thus far been centralised, whereas the 
fiscal union has been organised in a decentralised manner by the 17 member countries and 
coordinated through the Stability and Growth Pact. We need to shape fiscal policy in such a 
way that it meets the stability requirements of a currency union. This applies to both how the 
institutions are set up and the actual fiscal policy strategy. A first step in this direction has 
already been taken in the form of the ESM, which could be followed by a special fund from 
the EU budget for the euro area.  
iii) Concerning political union, I would like to focus less on the executive and more on its 
democratic legitimacy. The crisis management over the last two years was conducted purely 
on  an  intergovernmental  basis.  This  was  the  right  way  forward,  as  it  enabled  us  to  act 
quickly.  However,  it  is  now  time  to  strengthen  the  European  Parliament.  In  essence,  the 
opinion of the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany was that the European Parliament is 
not a “proper” Parliament, as it does not have the right of initiative. This could be changed. 
Time  and  again,  the  European  Parliament  is  accused  of  simply  being  a  “spending” 
parliament.  Generally,  one  is  more  cautious  with  regard  to  spending,  if  one  is  also 
responsible for raising the necessary funding. This could be introduced step by step for the 
European Parliament: for example, a financial transaction tax could feed into the special fund 
from the EU budget if it were levied in the euro area alone. Another idea, which would be 
quick and easy to implement, is that meetings could be held between the euro area members 
of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament. 
These are just some initial ideas, and I think an open discussion on where Europe should be 
in ten years would be worthwhile. 
Thank you very much.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
