Jörg Asmussen: New ECB premises topping out ceremony 
Welcome address by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  New  ECB  premises  topping  out  ceremony,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
20 September 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Fellow members of the Governing Council and General Council, 
Sehr geehrter Herr Oberbürgermeister Feldmann, 
Sehr geehrter Herr Pöllath, 
Sehr geehrter Herr Professor Prix, 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
Today’s ceremony marks another significant milestone for the ECB’s new home and for the 
city of Frankfurt. The last time we came together here, for the ceremony to mark the laying of 
the foundation stone in spring 2010, the Grossmarkthalle and a large pit were the dominant 
features  of  the  construction  site,  with  the  works  not  yet  having  begun.  The  ECB’s  then 
President,  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  warmly  welcomed  the  construction  companies  and  their 
workers. Today, two years and four months later, the site looks quite different. We owe this 
remarkable  achievement  to  the  many  people  who  have  been  involved  in  this  enormous 
project.  
On behalf of all my colleagues on the Governing Council, I would like to congratulate all of 
you who have helped to create this unique building complex.  
Im  Namen  aller  meiner  Kollegen  des  EZB-Rats  möchte  ich  allen  gratulieren,  die  dazu 
beigetragen haben, diesen einzigartigen Gebäudekomplex zu errichten. 
Some of you have been involved in this project from the very beginning, others joined at the 
planning stage and then, once the construction companies and their workers arrived on site, 
the number of project participants doubled. And yet more new partners will join us between 
now  and  when  the  new  ECB  premises  are  complete.  I  am  impressed  to  see  how  COOP 
HIMMELB(L)AU’s vision has become reality over the last two years of intensive construction 
works. 
It  was  by  the  time  I  became  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board  that  the  high-rise 
structure began to rise above the buildings around it. Looking eastward from my office in the 
Eurotower, I have been able to watch the towers grow, and now the high-rise can be seen 
from many locations within the city and even from outside the city. The main structural works 
for the high-rise have now been completed, and we are already one step closer to moving to 
the Ostend, the ECB’s new neighbourhood.  
Special  thanks  go  to  the  construction  companies,  especially  to  all  members  of  Züblin  and 
Spannverbund  and  their  subcontractors.  Their  continuous  work  and  strong  commitment  to 
delivering the required quality on time has made it possible for us to have this celebration 
here today and to be able to gaze up at this impressive structure. 
It  is  a  great  achievement  that  we  can  already  use  all  three  of  the  main  elements  of  the 
building complex:  
• 
• 
• 
entering here via the entrance building, the future main entrance of the ECB, and  
celebrating the topping out in the Grossmarkthalle, actually in the future cafeteria,  
while enjoying the view of the double office tower.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  vision  of  the  architect  Mr  Wolf  Prix  and  his  team  was  to  create  a  new  and  unique 
landmark, combining “old and new” and his vision has now come to fruition for the ECB, a 
truly European institution.  
Let us look back on some of the milestones that have been accomplished so far.  
The double office tower has almost reached its final height of 185 metres. The last office floor 
was laid a few weeks ago, while the various platforms and steel structures within the atrium 
are currently being completed.  
The  restoration  of  the  Grossmarkthalle  is  another  remarkable  element  of  the  ongoing 
construction works. The former splendour of the facades and the concrete roof shell structure 
is slowly being restored, evoking again the vision of its architect, Martin Elsaesser. I would 
like to thank the company Torkret, which built the original market hall in the 1920s, for their 
excellent work and for being able to find suitable solutions – together with the architects and 
planners – for any surprise the old building fabric threw up. 
The next steps will also be important. Since the beginning of this year a myriad of technical 
equipment  has  been  on  site  and  hundreds  of  workers  are  busy  installing  the  necessary 
technical infrastructure to ensure everything runs smoothly from an operational perspective 
once we move to our new premises. Fit-out works and the installation of walls and floors are 
also  continuing  in  parallel,  all  taking  place  behind  the  newly  completed  facades  of  the 
high-rise and the restored Grossmarkthalle. Most visibly, the antenna and the technical areas 
will be installed at the top of the double office tower by the end of this year. 
We  are  monitoring  the  construction  progress,  costs  and  price  developments  very  closely, 
adjusting and adapting where necessary. As a public institution, we are committed to using 
our  resources  responsibly.  This  is  essential.  So  far  the  ECB  has  spent  approximately 
€530 million in construction and other costs, including the purchase of the site. In 2005 the 
overall  investment  cost  was  estimated  at  €850  million  at  2005  constant  prices.  It  is 
anticipated  that  increases  in  the  price  of  construction  materials  and  construction  activities 
from 2005 until the completion of the project in 2014 will lead to a €200 million increase in the 
overall investment cost.  
In addition, there have been a number of unforeseen challenges that needed to be dealt with. 
The  two  major  challenges  unforeseen  in  2005  were,  first,  that  the  original  tender  for  a 
general contractor did not yield a satisfactory result and the ECB had to change to a different 
contractor model, and second, that the Grossmarkthalle – a large industrial heritage building 
from  1928  –  presented  a  number  of  challenges  that  were  not  detected  in  the  initial 
examination conducted prior to the acquisition:  
• 
• 
the foundations turned out to be insufficient and required additional support;  
the  roof  coverage  was  found  to  be  contaminated  and  therefore  could  not  be 
disposed of as envisaged;  
and parts of the concrete construction had insufficient steel support.  
• 
These  factors  are  likely  to  account  for  additional  costs  of  about  €100–150  million,  or  a 
10–14% increase in the overall investment cost. The resulting delay in the construction works 
on  the  Grossmarkthalle,  as  well  as  the  entrance  building,  has  been  incorporated  into  the 
existing time schedule. 
I took on this project in the middle of the construction phase being aware that challenging 
projects as this face many obstacles. I hope that, as in the past, any future issues will be 
successfully overcome and that the result will fulfil our requirements.  
My thanks go to the entire team of the New ECB Premises Project Office, for their continuous 
commitment and relentless efforts. It is very impressive to see what all of you working on this 
project  have  achieved  together  so  far,  not  only  our  Project  Office,  but  also  the  architects, 
planners,  project  management  experts  and  construction  managers  as  well  as  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
construction companies, their subcontractors and all experts and workers! I have full trust in 
all of you that the good cooperation and commitment to this European project will lead to a 
successful  completion  and  a  functional  headquarters  for  the  ECB  and  for  all  its  staff  and 
visitors.  The  end  product  will  meet  our  objective  to  provide  the  ECB  with  energy-efficient, 
functional  and  safe  headquarters,  while  allowing  for  the  necessary  flexibility  to  foster 
interaction  and  communication  –  not  only  among  staff,  but  also  with  our  colleagues  of  the 
Eurosystem, the European Systemic Risk Board and other institutions. In addition, the new 
premises will reflect the values – integrity, excellence, efficiency and transparency – that are 
essential to our activities.  
Ich  bin  sehr  froh  darüber,  dass  ich  heute  hier  stehen  und  sagen  kann,  dass  bisher  kein 
schwerer Unfall auf der Baustelle geschehen ist – und dass, obwohl Hunderte von Menschen 
gleichzeitig auf der Baustelle arbeiten. Ich wünsche mir und hoffe sehr, dass dies auch für 
die restliche Bauzeit so bleiben wird. Ihnen allen hier auf der Baustelle viel Glück und alles 
Gute. Bleiben Sie gesund und passen Sie gut auf sich auf.  
I am grateful that I can stand here today and say that there have been no major accidents on 
the construction site – even though hundreds of people are working here at the same time. I 
very much wish that this will continue to be the case for the remainder of the construction 
process and extend my best wishes to all of you working here on the site. Stay healthy and 
safe. 
Ich  hoffe,  dass  die  Menschen  hier  in  Frankfurt  und  andernorts  unseren  Neubau  als 
Bereicherung der Frankfurter Skyline und der europäischen Landschaft ansehen. Wir in der 
EZB freuen uns, Sie und alle Besucher aus Frankfurt, Europa und der übrigen Welt 2014 in 
unserem neuen Gebäude willkommen heißen zu dürfen. 
I hope that our new premises will be viewed by the people of Frankfurt, and beyond, as an 
enrichment of Frankfurt’s skyline and the landscape of Europe. We at the ECB look forward 
to welcoming all of you and all our visitors from Frankfurt, Europe and the world to our new 
home in 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
