Már Guðmundsson: Capital flows and fragmentation of the international 
financial system 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, in Session I in 
the conference “Fragmentation in the international financial system – can the global economy 
become  one  again?”,  organised  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  the 
Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee, Cappadocia, Turkey, 14 July 2012. 
 For  the  most  part,  I  will  discuss  some  flaws  in  the  international  monetary  and  financial 
system(s) (IMFS) and in the European Union (EU) framework for cross-border banking and 
financial stability as they relate to both net capital flows and vulnerabilities in gross capital 
positions. My perspective on these issues is that of a policy-maker from a very small, open, 
and what used to be financially integrated economy, but it is also informed by the work I was 
involved in during my tenure at the Bank for International Settlements. 
The current international and monetary and financial system is in some sense a non-system, 
a hybrid of miscellaneous exchange rate regimes and diverse rules on cross-border capital 
flows and activities of financial institutions. This opens the door to country choices that, in the 
aggregate,  cause  and  perpetuate global  current  account  imbalances. This  problem  and  its 
solution have been discussed extensively, and I will not dwell on that topic here. Instead, I 
want to pose this question: Supposing that all countries had free capital movements, freely 
floating  exchange  rates,  and  first-rate  macroeconomic  policies  aimed  at  internal  balance, 
would everything then be fine, at both the national and global level?  
I think there are strong indications that it would not be. 
There are a few reasons for this. First of them is the tendency of exchange rates to move 
away from equilibrium values for extended periods, with sharp corrections at the end of the 
process  and  with  excess  volatility  throughout.  The  research  on  this  phenomenon  is  still 
ongoing,  but  there  are  strong  indications  a  number  of  factors  suggest  that  the  process  is 
related at least partly to how asset markets function and how expectations are formed, and 
would not disappear even if macroeconomic policies were perfect. 
There  will  be  net  capital  flows  associated  with  this  process,  as  well  as  swings  in  current 
accounts  and  effects  on  domestic  financial  systems  that  can  ultimately  lead  to  serious 
financial  instability.  In  a  small,  open,  and  increasingly  financially  integrated  economy,  the 
process runs as follows: Domestic interest rates at the longer end of the maturity spectrum 
tend to become more closely correlated with the global rate, or the rate of the largest trading 
partner,  and  less  correlated  with  the  domestic  policy  rate.  This  means  that  monetary 
transmission  tends  to  go  increasingly  through  the  exchange  rate  channel,  which  is  only  a 
problem,  however,  if  the  exchange  rate  behaves  badly.  Unfortunately,  there  is  copious 
evidence to suggest that it is a problem. Uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) does not hold 
except over long horizons. On the contrary: Interest rate differentials give rise to widespread 
carry  trading,  which  is  by  nature  a  bet  against  UIP.  Exchange  rates  thus  diverge  from 
fundamentals  for  protracted  periods,  followed  by  sharp  corrections.  So  the  exchange  rate 
often seems to be as much a source of shocks and instability as a tool for adjustment and 
stabilisation. Ultimately, these cycles take the boom-bust form and, in extreme cases, result 
in serious financial instability or crisis. So this is basically a macroeconomic problem that can 
turn into a financial stability problem. 
Another  reason  is  related  to  vulnerabilities  deriving  from  the  size  and  composition  of 
countries’ gross capital positions and, behind that, of banks, governments, corporations and 
households.  These  are  currency  mismatches  and  maturity  mismatches  in  terms  of  foreign 
currency. While current account imbalances and wayward exchange rates can be termed the 
net capital flow problem, we can call this the gross capital problem. Of course, the second of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
these  will  turn  into  a  net  flow  problem  at  the  critical  moment,  thus  affecting  the  exchange 
rate;  for  instance,  when  there  is  a  run  on  foreign-denominated  gross  liabilities  that  were 
previously  matched  with  more  illiquid  gross  assets.  But  the  difference  is  that,  prior  to  the 
crisis,  the  net  capital  flow  problem  was  there  for  everybody  to  see,  in  the  form  of  global 
current account imbalances – or, in my country, huge capital inflows, a double-digit current 
account  deficit,  excessive  credit  growth,  and  an  asset  price  bubble.  But  the  gross  capital 
problem  was  hidden  and  not  much talked  about. To  take  an  example,  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole  had  a  more  or  less  balanced  current  account  position.  A  factor  that  garnered  little 
attention  before  the  crisis,  however,  was  that  European  banks  had  built  up  huge 
USD-denominated  balance  sheets  that  were  also  balanced  to  a  large  extent  –  except,  of 
course,  in  maturity.  This  became  a  major  problem  when  there  was  a  run  on  such  dollar-
denominated bank liabilities post-Lehman, and many big European banking names might not 
still be with us were it not for the USD swap lines granted to the ECB, the BoE, and the SNB. 
The  gross  capital  problem  is  basically  a  financial  stability  problem  that  can  turn  into  a 
macroeconomic problem. 
So the financial crisis revealed a major fault line in cross-border banking, in the form of large 
foreign  currency  balance  sheets  featuring  significant  maturity  mismatches,  but  with  limited 
lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) facilities in terms of foreign currency. Maturity mismatches are 
the bread and butter of modern banking, of course, and we know how to deal with the risk in 
a domestic setting: with central bank LOLR operations and deposit insurance, complemented 
by  regulation  and  supervision,  partly  to  deal  with  the  moral  hazard  issues  created  by  this 
safety net. 
Of  course,  central  banks  can  lend  out  their  foreign  exchange  reserves,  but  there  is  a 
well-known limit on that process. Some form of global liquidity provision is therefore called 
for. The swap lines granted during this crisis were precisely that, and most studies seem to 
support the conclusion that they made the crucial difference in relieving the strain in banks’ 
foreign  exchange  funding.  To  a  significant  degree,  this  was  the  domestic  LOLR  process 
replicated at the international level. 
We  have  a  solution,  then,  at  least  at  the  conceptual  level.  But  it  is  not  clear  that  it  is  a 
reliable,  practicable  solution.  At  present,  the  swap  lines  are  not  a  permanent  and  reliable 
feature  of  the  international  monetary  system;  for  instance,  they  have  been  challenged 
vehemently  in  political  discussion  in  the  US.  Furthermore,  there  are  important  unresolved 
governance issues, such as who should decide which countries get a swap line and which do 
not. It is thus an important item on the reform agenda to clarify the extent to which standing 
foreign currency LOLR facilities for solvent cross-border banks can be set up without going 
through  national  governments.  This  is  one  of  the  key  issues  currently  under  review  in  the 
case of the Spanish banking crisis.  
Let me now say a few words about Iceland’s financial crisis, as it puts the issues raised so 
far into sharp focus, but then lead us into the crisis in EU banking. 
Iceland was already on its way into a recession when its three cross-border banks failed in 
the  first  week  of  October  2008.  This  was  partly  unrelated  to  the  banking  collapse  and 
followed the turn of the domestic economic cycle, after an unsustainable boom and serious 
overheating during 2005–2007 and a currency crisis in the first half of 2008. . The proximate 
cause of the demise of the banks was the post-Lehman run on foreign exchange liabilities, 
which amounted to 7.5 times Iceland’s GDP, while their total balance sheets were 10 times 
GDP. The banking collapse and the associated wealth loss and further depreciation of the 
currency deepened the recession.  
Two separate but interrelated sub-stories of the large Icelandic saga were converging in a 
tragic grand finale that autumn. These were:  
1. 
Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic management in small, 
open,  and  financially  integrated  economies.  (Net  capital  flow  problem  and 
fundamentally nothing new). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2. 
The rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of EU legislation 
(the European “passport”). (Gross capital problem and unique in Icelandic history – 
and, at the time, in EU history). 
The banking system expanded very rapidly in just five years, from a combined balance sheet 
of less than 2 times GDP (at the end of 2003) to almost 10 times GDP (in mid-2008). Most of 
this  expansion  was  cross-border,  and  a  lot  of  it  had  very  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both 
financing and investment took place abroad.  
A number of domestic mistakes were made throughout the process, and I do not have time 
to  go  into  them  here,  but  the  expansion  of  the  banks  was  greatly  facilitated  by  Iceland’s 
membership in the European Economic Area (EEA), as the EEA Agreement provides a legal 
and regulatory framework based on European Union Directives, including free movement of 
capital  and  provision  of  financial  services.  The  underlying  principles  are  those  of  home 
licencing  for  operations  anywhere  in  the  EEA  and  of  a  level  playing  field  for  competition, 
where  size  and  location  supposedly  do  not  matter.  This  European  “Passport”  enabled  the 
Icelandic  banks  to  operate  throughout  the  EEA,  including  through  branches  in  other  EEA 
countries.  
We now know that there are deep flaws in this framework and that these flaws are important 
elements in the current euro area crisis. A key issue here is the contradiction between, the 
European  passport  rights  on  the  one  hand  and,  on  the  other  hand,  national  supervision, 
national deposit insurance and national crisis management and resolution regimes. This is 
what  recent  proposals  of  a  banking  union  are  supposed  to  deal  with.  However,  for  EEA 
countries outside the euro area, this framework also has embedded in it a potentially huge 
foreign currency liquidity risk in the banking system that is not covered by a  lender of last 
resort.  
Let me conclude by briefly outlining what I think the analysis so far means in terms of reform 
of national monetary and financial stability frameworks, on the one hand, and EU and global 
frameworks (IMFS), on the other hand. 
At  the  national  level,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  frameworks  might  respond  to  recent 
experience by moving away from free floating towards some form of managed float. I call it 
“inflation  targeting  plus”,  where  an  inflation  target  is  linked  with  active  foreign  exchange 
intervention policy aiming at reducing excess volatility and leaning against capital inflows but 
without targeting an exchange rate level, and the joint striving for price and financial stability 
is supported by macroprudential policy and fiscal policy. In addition, countries will consider 
tools  aimed  directly  at  the  net  capital  inflow  problem,  including  taxes  or  reserve 
requirements. The gross capital problem will be dealt with by putting prudential limits on the 
size  and  composition  of  home-headquartered  banks’  foreign  currency  balance  sheets  and 
foreign-denominated  lending  to  domestic  households  and  unhedged  companies.  In  the 
absence  of global  and  EU  reforms,  individual  countries  will  therefore  self-insure  in  various 
ways and impose prudential restrictions that might further fragment the international financial 
system. 
At the EU or euro area level, it is logical to consider some kind of a banking union, but in my 
mind, this would involve a two-tier system, wherein domestically oriented banks that are not 
systemically  important  for  the  area  as  a  whole  will  remain  within  the  domestic  system  of 
supervision, deposit insurance, and LOLR. 
What  should  happen  at  the  global  level  is  somewhat  less  clear  to  me.  Some  temporary 
retrenchment  is  probably  not  undesirable  at  this  point,  as  cross-border  banking  –  and 
perhaps  financial  globalisation  more  generally  –  far  outpaced  developments  in  public 
frameworks. The issue of global liquidity provision to banks needs further exploration. And 
finally, if countries are increasingly taking unilateral action to protect themselves, someone  
–  probably  the  IMF  –  must  monitor  the  process.  Going  forward,  some  rules  of  the  game 
might have to be considered so that we are not faced with unintended consequences for the 
global system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
