Fahad Bin Abdullah Al-Mubarak: Combatting money laundering and 
terrorism financing 
Speech by H E Dr Fahad Bin Abdullah Al-Mubarak, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary 
Agency and Chairman of Anti-Money Laundering Permanent Committee, to the 51th Plenary 
Meeting of Middle East & North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF), Jeddah, 
28 April 2012. 
 the  speed  factor 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am pleased to welcome you in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. It also gives me pleasure to 
meet you all in this important regional meeting which is the 51th Meeting of MENAFATF. The 
meeting  encompasses many  essential  and  important  issues  of common  interest  and  ways 
that would, in turn, promote cooperation to better levels. All peoples count on the unique role 
played by your Task Force to protect countries of this region against repercussions of money 
laundering and financing terrorism crimes. I wish your meeting all success and wish you all a 
good stay in Jeddah.  
Dear Audience,  
Increasing attention has been paid to anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing 
systems over the past years. This has been due to the great progress witnessed in financial 
and banking systems, diversity of communication means, simplicity of money movement and 
advanced  payment  systems.  However, 
in  conducting  commercial 
transactions, existence of indirect financial operations and unreal existence of dealers have 
led  to  great  risks.  Some  of  these  risks  are:  potential  abuse  of  these  developments  in 
performing illegal objectives. Combating money laundering crimes and countering terrorism 
financing  are  among  the  priorities  that  the  international  society  is  seeking  to  achieve  to 
protect the global financial system and counter risks that might obstruct the course of secure 
commercial transactions among countries.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
We  are  pleased  to  host  this  meeting  in  the  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia  in  pursuance  of  the 
Kingdom’s plans of sponsoring and supporting international and regional efforts in this area. 
The  efforts,  which  were  initiated  at  the  early  09s,  are  promising  to  combat  such  risks  by 
issuing laws and setting up measures and regulations that ensure monitoring activities and 
early  detection  and  prevention  of  financial  crimes  and  taking  actions  against  perpetrators. 
This  is  clear  evidence  of  the  Kingdom’s  compliance  with  the  international  community’s 
requirements in this respect. The Kingdom spares no effort in combating money laundering 
and terrorism financing, boosting the role and effectiveness of national agencies concerned 
with  the  systems  related  to  combating  such  financial  crimes  to  cope  with  international 
developments, and increase the level and effectiveness of appropriate agencies working in 
this field.  
It is worth mentioning here the approval by the Council of Ministers of updating the AML Law 
to  fully  comply  with  international  requirements,  especially  with  the  assessment  team’s 
recommendations stated in the Assessment Report on the Kingdom. This is a clear sign of 
the  Government  of  the  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques’  attention  paid  to  compliance 
with combating money laundering and terrorism financing in line with international standards 
in this regards.  
Dear Audience,  
The international, regional and national combined efforts to combat money  laundering and 
terrorism  financing  are  stringent  evidence  of  combating  those  crimes  and  the  consequent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economic, social and security risks they may cause. Accordingly, the Kingdom has supported 
efforts  aimed  at  developing  international  frameworks  capable  of  monitoring  the  global 
financial  system  to  detect  such  offenses.  The  Kingdom  is  one  of  the  countries  that 
participated in and called for the creation of the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action 
Task Force. It is still supporting all the efforts of the FATF and MENAFATF, whether through 
its permanent participation in work teams and supporting activities that enhance the work of 
the  two  entities  or  through  its  commitment  to  raise  the  level  of  its  government  organs, 
financial and non-financial institutions and making sure that its related laws are in line with 
the international requirements. In addition, it supports the IMF’s Technical Assistance Fund.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
To achieve our objective, we should work together to promote awareness of the gravity of 
such  crimes  and  protect  all  segments  of  the  society,  its  government  organizations,  and 
financial  and  non-financial  institutions.  In  this  aspect,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  recent 
FATF’s  recommendations  issued  to  strengthen  the  international  efforts  in  the  fight  against 
this global scourge and make necessary adjustments to the systems and techniques of their 
detection  and  combating.  On  this  occasion,  I  would  like  make  reference  to  the  results 
achieved by FATF, after reviewing and revising the recommendations. There is no doubt that 
the  updated  recommendations  will  enhance  the  level  and  methods  of  protection  of  the 
economic system against such type of crimes threatening it.  
In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks and gratitude for your respected group for its 
achievements accomplished during its short life, wishing you continued success. I thank the 
organizers for their efforts. I also welcome you again in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and I 
hope that your meetings in this session will be a success. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
