Masaaki Shirakawa: Finance in Asia – banking business and capital 
markets 
Keynote address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the dinner 
reception,  hosted  by  the  Japan  Securities  Dealers  Association,  preceding  the  International 
Conference, Tokyo, 9 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Thank you very much. It is my pleasure to speak at this dinner reception hosted by the Japan 
Securities Dealers Association that precedes tomorrow’s international conference. 
The conference, entitled “Asian Market Integration and Financial Innovation”, brings together 
senior officials from such international forums as the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), as well as 
a number of capital market experts in Asia. I look forward to lively discussions tomorrow on 
the  future  evolution  of  Asian  financial  and  capital  markets,  the  direction  of  the  strategic 
reshaping of financial infrastructures in Asia, and other important subjects. 
Since  the  Lehman  crisis  in  2008,  major  central  banks  have  undertaken  a  variety  of  policy 
measures  that  transcend  the  conventional  boundaries  of  central  banking.  In  this  process, 
central banks have become more closely involved in capital markets. For example, the Bank 
of  Japan  has  been  buying  risk  assets  such  as  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs), and domestic real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). These purchase programs are 
truly extraordinary in central bank history. 
Given that the global financial landscape, including policy responses, is undergoing profound 
changes, today I would like to share my views on financial and capital markets in Asia, with a 
principal focus on the interplay between banking business and capital market development. 
Current economic conditions in Asia 
II. 
Let me start with the recent economic and financial developments in Asia.  
We are now entering the third year since the European sovereign debt problem surfaced in 
Greece. Without doubt, the way the debt problem in Europe will play out remains a key factor 
shaping  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  global  economy.  Concurrently,  for  the  past  several 
years emerging economies have been the propelling force behind global economic growth. 
Among  them,  Asian  countries  have  displayed  particularly  robust  growth,  driven  mainly  by 
China and India. In its latest projections, the International Monetary Fund expects the global 
economy  to  grow  by  3.3  percent  this  year,  with  the  27  countries  of  developing  Asia 
contributing nearly 60 percent of that. 
Despite  the  concerns  over  the  global  economic  outlook,  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that 
Asian economies are better placed to sustain solid growth. Most fundamental are their rich 
human  resources,  rapid  urbanization,  and  a  competitive  technological  base.  In  addition, 
various policy initiatives taken after the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s have played an 
important part. In response to the Asian crisis, countries in this region carried out ambitious 
reforms on many fronts, including fiscal consolidation, monetary policy management aimed 
at  price  stability,  improvement  of  financial  supervision  and  regulation,  and  development  of 
regional  financial  markets.  In  hindsight,  the  Asian  crisis  could  be  considered  a  blessing  in 
disguise in the sense that it prompted tough reforms which in normal times might have been 
difficult. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Yet,  Asian  economies  are  not  immune  to  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe.  Three 
potential  channels  of  contagion  can  be  noted:  first,  trade  links;  second,  financial  market 
disturbances;  and  third,  deleveraging  by  European  financial  institutions.  Naturally,  these 
three channels are not mutually exclusive. For instance, the longer the disturbance continues 
in European financial markets, the harder the hit to the balance sheets of European financial 
institutions,  which  causes  European  deleveraging  in  Asia.  If  this  spreads  to  disrupt  trade 
finance, Asian economies heavily reliant on exports would surely suffer. 
So  far,  the  spillovers  from  Europe  to  Asia  have  been  mild.  Deleveraging  by  European 
financial institutions looks moderate for the most part, with Asian financial institutions filling 
the shoes of European banks in some cases. Given that European financial institutions have 
enjoyed  a  visible  presence  in  Asian  financial  businesses  –  most  notably  in  corporate 
syndicated loans, trade finance, and lease finance involving ships and aircraft – it is sensible, 
however, to pay careful attention to deleveraging by European financial institutions. 
Business model of Asian financial institutions 
III. 
With regard to the brisk growth of Asian countries, there is another factor we should keep in 
mind. This is the limited exposure of Asian financial institutions, in the run-up to the subprime 
crisis, to complex securitized products and risk transfer techniques. 
It  seems  that  the  subprime  crisis  has  generated  skepticism  or  soul-searching  vis-à-vis 
cutting-edge  financial  innovations.  In  order  to  enhance  social  welfare,  such  innovations 
should  be  in  line  with  the  core  functions  of  finance,  that  is,  financial  intermediation  and 
payment and settlement services. Without this connection, financial innovations cannot help 
boost the productivity of the economy at large.1 We can see that some resecuritized products 
deviated  from  this  basic  tenet  before  the  subprime  crisis.  Even  in  simple  secured 
transactions such as repos, the same securities posted as collateral were used repeatedly 
for a chain of transactions, with liquidity multiplying in the process. Put differently, we saw a 
sharp increase in collateral velocity through the nexus of repo transactions. We now know 
that Asian financial institutions were not deeply involved in such financial daisy chains, which 
probably helped them navigate the post-Lehman turbulence. 
Asian banks have been known for their traditional or basic business models, in which loans 
are  funded  primarily  by  domestic  deposits.  In  fact,  the  loan-to-deposit  ratios  are  below 
100 percent  in  many  Asian  countries  (Chart  1).  Business  models  built  on  such  domestic 
deposits  are  less  susceptible  to  an  acute  funding  squeeze  than  models  dependent  on 
wholesale funding. I think this feature has also provided Asian banks with some advantages 
over their Western counterparts in weathering the current crisis. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  economic  ties  among  Asian  countries  have  grown  stronger  on  the 
back of continued economic growth in this region. In line with this, cross-border transactions 
have grown substantially and  more sophisticated financial services are being called for. In 
this regard, the expansion of the so-called transaction banking services in Asia is noteworthy. 
Transaction  banking  makes  it  possible  to  provide  cash  management  and  trade  finance 
services in an integrated fashion and beyond national borders. In a similar vein, supply chain 
finance  seems  to  be  gaining  momentum  in  Asia  as  the  need  grows  for  cash  flow 
management through the entire supply chain. 
                                                 
1  For further discussion on this point, see Masaaki Shirakawa, “What Is So Special about Financial Innovation?” 
keynote  address  at  the  conference  entitled  “Welfare  Effects  of  Financial  Innovation”  held  by  the  De 
Netherlandsche  Bank  (via  videoconference)  on  November  11,  2011  (available  at  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/ 
announcements/press/koen_2011/ko111114a.htm). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Challenges for Asian financial institutions 
IV. 
These developments suggest that the business model of Asian banks is evolving, and is not 
immutable. In this connection, I would like to mention two challenges facing Asian banks. 
The  first  challenge  concerns  demographics.  We  all  know  that  Japan  is  already  feeling  the 
pinch  of  this  headwind.  Asian  countries  now  enjoy  ample  labor  forces,  but  rapid  aging 
coupled  with  low  birth  rates  will  inevitably  present  these  countries  with  demographic 
adversities  in  the  next  decade  or  so.  In  fact,  the  ratios  of  working-age  population  to  total 
population are nearing their peaks in many Asian countries, which means that the size of the 
labor force relative to population in these economies will start diminishing in several years 
(Chart  2).  These  demographic  changes  could  constrain  economic  growth  from  both  the 
supply  and  demand  sides.  For  the  banking  industry,  population  aging  could  shrink  the 
depositor base through dwindling savings. 
One way to mitigate this negative trend is to promote financial inclusion – that is, a provision 
of  financial  services  to  wider  segments  of  society.  In  Asia,  this  can  be  done  by  taking 
advantage of the rapid expansion of the middle-income population and small enterprises. In 
this context, the prevalence of mobile banking in Asia is remarkable. Mobile banking aims to 
connect  mobile  phone  users  with  basic  financial  services,  giving  them  greater  access  to 
financial  intermediation  and  payment  and  settlement  services.  Designed  properly,  mobile 
banking could offer great promise in terms of improving social welfare. 
The second challenge for Asian banks is to strengthen risk management amid the increasing 
demand for longer-term credit. Because of rapid urbanization and industrial agglomeration, 
Asian countries are in need of well-functioning infrastructure such as transportation, energy 
supplies,  and  telecommunication  networks.  According  to  the  Asian  Development  Bank, 
estimates  of  infrastructure  needed  in  Asia  from  2010  through  2020  could  reach  roughly 
8 trillion U.S. dollars.2 To satisfy this need, reliance on fiscal spending alone is not sufficient. 
Instead,  it  is  necessary  to  effectively  mobilize  private-sector  funds  such  as  bank  loans. 
Normally, infrastructure loans have maturities longer than ten years, exceeding the average 
deposit  maturities  by  wide  margins.  Unless  these  maturity  mismatches  are  managed 
appropriately,  banks  cannot  involve  themselves  in  long-term  infrastructure  projects.  This 
problem also exists for long-term mortgage loans. For Asian banks, therefore, dealing with 
maturity mismatches poses a formidable challenge going forward. 
Development of capital markets in Asia 
V. 
In order to reduce maturity mismatches of banks as intermediaries, development of capital 
markets, especially corporate bond markets, will play a key role.3 In this regard, I would like 
to  mention  two  points. First,  if  banks  can  diversify  their  funding  sources  by  issuing  bonds, 
they will be able to manage maturity mismatch risks more effectively. Second, development 
of  corporate  bond  markets  will  facilitate  direct  funding  of  infrastructure  investment. 
Infrastructure projects, because of their long-term nature, are prone to unexpected shocks. If 
both bond issuance and bank loans are available, the stability of funding for such projects will 
presumably be enhanced. 
Unfortunately,  Asian  corporate  bond  markets  are  far  from  fully  developed.  A  number  of 
projects are underway to nurture regional corporate bond markets, and the Bank of Japan 
has participated actively in some of these initiatives, including the successful launch of the 
                                                 
2  For  more  details,  see  Asian  Development  Outlook  2010  Update:  The  Future  of  Growth  in  Asia,  Asian 
Development Bank, 2010. 
3  For more details, see “Weathering Financial Crises: Bond Markets in Asia and the Pacific”, BIS Paper No. 63, 
Bank for International Settlements, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Asian Bond Fund (ABF). But the saving-and-investment balance in Asia has remained lop-
sided  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  In  other  words,  Asia  has  excess  savings,  with  the 
region’s  investment  still  below  the  levels  seen  prior  to  the  Asian  crisis.  Development  of 
corporate bond markets in Asia is one effective way to align savings with investment within 
the  region.  Also,  given  the  aging  trends  in  Asia,  well-developed  corporate  bond  markets 
would offer the additional merit of creating long-term investable assets for such institutional 
investors as pension funds and life insurance companies. 
With regard to capital markets, I would also like to touch briefly on the subject of Asian stock 
markets  because  stock  markets,  together  with  bond  markets,  are  a  vital  part  of  capital 
markets. 
Asian stock markets have grown exponentially in recent years. According to statistics from 
the World Federation of Exchanges, equity finance in the Asia-Pacific region accounted for 
46 percent of the world total last year. During the same period, half of all global initial public 
offerings took place in the Asia-Pacific region. Asia’s stock market capitalization accounts for 
31 percent of the global total, indicating that the pace of recovery in stock markets following 
the Lehman crisis is fastest in this part of the world (Chart 3). 
It  seems  that  a  virtuous  cycle  is  operating  in  Asian  stock  markets,  in  which  larger  trading 
volumes and higher market liquidity reinforce each other, prompting both regional and foreign 
firms to seek funding in Asia. Last year, for example, we saw Glencore, one of the world’s 
leading commodities traders, listed in both London and Hong Kong. This event points to the 
vitality of Asian stock markets.  
By making its stock markets more attractive as funding venues, Asia can open up its plentiful 
savings to globally active firms. The flip side of this is that Asian investors will have greater 
opportunities  to  invest  abroad.  To  achieve  further  development  of  Asian  capital  markets 
based  on  their  interactions  with  global  firms,  it  seems  necessary  to  harmonize  market 
infrastructures and financial regulations at regional levels. In this respect, I think that Europe 
offers some insights for Asia in terms of its experience of financial market integration. 
To broaden the degree of financial market harmonization, market participants also need to 
play a prominent role. For instance, cross-national tie-ups between stock exchanges would 
not only create efficiency gains in systems terms but also have the potential to alter the entire 
dynamics  of  the  regional  capital  markets.  A  notable  example  is  the  ASEAN  Trading  Link 
initiative, which aims to build a joint electronic platform for cross-border trading between the 
exchanges  of  some  ASEAN  countries.  I  look  forward  to  seeing  how  this  and  other  intra-
regional projects will reshape Asian capital markets in the years ahead. 
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
Today I presented my views on banking business and capital markets in Asia. Coexistence 
of robust banking systems and capital markets is conducive to financial system stability. But 
this is not a sufficient condition for such stability. In Asia – where a deepening of trade links 
has  preceded  that  of  cross-national  financial  ties  –  ample  scope  remains  for  regional 
financial cooperation. In collaboration with colleagues in this part of the world, the Bank of 
Japan  remains  committed  to  the  salutary  development  of  financial  and  capital  markets  in 
Asia,  while  placing  a  special  focus  on  central  bank  expertise  in  payment  and  settlement 
infrastructures, cross-border collateral arrangements and so forth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  5
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
