K C Chakrabarty: Corporate Debt Restructuring – issues and way 
forward 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Conference  2012,  organized  by  Centrum  Group,  Mumbai, 
11 August 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri M.P.Baliga, Ms Dimple Bhandia and Shri M. K. Poddar in preparation of this address 
is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Ms.  Soundara  Kumar,  Deputy  Managing  Director,  State  Bank  of  India,  Mr.  Siby 
Anthony,  Managing  Director  &  CEO,  Edelweiss  Asset  Reconstruction  Co.  Ltd., 
Mr. R. Sundaram, President (Finance) & Company Secretary, Indo Count Industries Limited, 
Mr.  T.R  Madhavan,  Executive  Chairman,  Centrum Group,  and,  seated  in front  of the  dais, 
Mr. Chandir Gidwani, Promoter, Centrum Group, other distinguished guests, members of the 
print  and  electronic  media,  ladies  and gentlemen, I  wish  all  of  you  a  very  good  morning. I 
must  also  remember  in  absentia,  Mr.  K.  V.  Krishnamurthy,  ex-Chairman  and  Managing 
Director, Bank of India, because of whose request I am here today. It is indeed my pleasure 
to  be  here  today  to  discuss  this  very  topical  subject  of  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  –  a 
subject in which I also have a lot of personal interest. 
2.  
Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) or simply restructuring of loans and advances, 
with all its pros and cons, is an effective financial tool, especially during the times of crisis, for 
smoothening the adverse effects of economic downturns on the borrowers of credit as well 
as their lenders. I congratulate the organisers of the Seminar for choosing this very relevant 
topic at a time when the world economy has completed five years since the sub-prime crisis 
in the USA in mid-2007, which gave way to the full-fledged global financial crisis of 2008 and 
the global recession of 2009, the fourth such recession since World War II. The present crisis 
and the global recession of 2009, like the previous three global recessions of 1975, 1982 and 
1991 and the great depression of the 1930s, have necessitated the banks all over the world 
to deleverage as also to restructure a large number of their household and corporate debt. 
But, any kind of restructuring has to be accompanied by prudence on the part of the lenders 
and financial discipline on the part of the borrowers. Absence of these conditions results in 
dead weight loss to the society in general. 
Ethics and the role of finance professionals 
3. 
I will also like to quote two statements from the corporate mission of the organiser 
(Centrum Group) of this Conference, which interconnect the reasons for and solutions to the 
woes of the financial sector and which is also relevant to the topic of my discussion. 
• 
Challenge  the  status  quo  and  provide  financial  consultancy  and  syndicated 
products to deliver value beyond expectations. 
Focus on conducting business ethically. 
• 
Firstly,  challenging  the  status  quo  and  delivering  value  beyond  expectations  require 
innovation in products and services. However, ethics help in preventing misuse. These facts 
can be seen in the genesis of the global financial crisis. It was not the innovative financial 
products but the lack of ethics in their design and sale which led to the crisis. CDR was also 
a  beautiful  innovation  to  protect  the  values  of  both  the  corporates  under  distress  and  the 
credit  portfolio  of  their  lenders.  However,  due  to  the  extraordinary  rise  in  the  number  and 
volume of advances being restructured under the scheme in recent times, it has come under 
media scanner, and engaged the attention of the financial market players, the borrowers, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regulators  and  the  policy  makers.  However,  it  appears  that  the  provisions  of  the  CDR 
mechanism  have  not  been  used  very  ethically  and  judiciously,  giving  rise  to  the 
unprecedented increase in cases under CDR. 
4. 
Viability  criteria,  a  critical  element  in  any  restructuring,  and  its  assessment  brings 
into  picture  a  number  of  professionals  apart  from  the  essential  counterparties  to  a  loan 
agreement,  i.e.  the  borrowers  and  the  lenders.  Financial  services  companies  and 
professionals  comprising  of 
investment  bankers,  Chartered  Accountants,  Company 
Secretaries,  Surveyors,  Chartered  Engineers,  Financial  Analysts,  Cost  Accountants, 
Lawyers, etc., play a very important role in assessing the viability of restructuring proposals. 
Due to constraints of time and skills as also because of statutory requirements, lenders have 
to  rely  on  the  due-diligence  done  and  certificates  given  by  such  professionals.  However, 
such  decisions  are  prone  to  Type  I  and  Type  II  errors  of  statistics,  i.e.  an  unscrupulous 
borrower  with  an  unviable  account  may  avail  the  benefit  of  restructuring  and  at  the  same 
time, a bonafide borrower with a viable account may be denied the opportunity to resurrect 
his account. Therefore, ethics and professionalism of individuals in such positions go a long 
way in ensuring that such errors do not occur. Centrum and other professionals, therefore, 
must ensure that their mission statements and professional codes of conduct do not remain 
mere fancy statements but become their raison d’être. 
5. 
Against  this  backdrop, I  will  structure  my  discussions  in  various  segments.  First, I 
will  elaborate  on  what  constitutes  debt  restructuring  and  the  genesis  of  restructuring, 
including  that  of  corporate  debt  restructuring,  in  the  country.  I  will  then  discuss  why 
restructuring is important and also what is the role of regulators in debt restructuring. Debt 
restructuring, in particular corporate debt restructuring, has become a subject of discussion 
of late. I will touch upon the reasons why this is so, going on to talk about why the Reserve 
Bank  is  concerned  in  this  regard.  Finally,  I  will  outline  what  I  feel  is  the  way  forward  if 
restructuring is to continue as an instrument for ensuring the well being of lenders, borrowers 
and the society at large. 
What is restructuring and its genesis 
As I briefly mentioned a little while ago, any change in the Terms and Conditions of 
6. 
the loan or credit, especially in respect of its servicing, is called restructuring of loan/ debt. 
Corporate debt restructuring is a specialised institutional mechanism for restructuring large 
exposures involving more than one lender under consortium/multiple banking arrangements. 
7. 
Stijn  Claessens  of  the  World  Bank  has  defined  and  explained  in  detail  the  term 
“restructuring”  in  his  seminal  paper  “Policy  Approaches  to  Corporate  Restructuring  around 
the  World:  What  Worked,  What  Failed?”  I  quote  “Restructuring  refers  to  several  related 
processes:  recognizing  and  allocating  financial  losses,  restructuring  the  financial  claims  of 
financial institutions and corporations, and restructuring the operations of financial institutions 
and  corporations.  Recognition  or  resolution  involves  the  allocation  of  existing  losses  and 
associated  redistribution  of  wealth  and  control.  Losses  –  that  is,  differences  between 
financial institutions’ and corporations’ market value of assets and nominal values of liabilities 
–  can  be  allocated  to  shareholders  by  dilution,  to  depositors  and  external  creditors  by 
reduction (of the present value) of their claims, to employees and suppliers by payment of 
lower wages and prices, and to the government – that is, the public at large – through higher 
taxes, expenditure cuts, or inflation. Financial restructuring for corporations can take many 
forms: rescheduling (extension of maturities), lower interest rates, debt for equity swaps, debt 
forgiveness, indexing of interest payments to earnings, and so on. The main aims of financial 
restructuring  are  separating  and  treating  appropriately  viable  and  nonviable  firms  and 
creating  the  right  incentives  for  operational  restructuring.  Operational  restructuring,  an 
on-going process, includes improvements in efficiency and management, reductions in staff 
and  wages,  sales  of  assets  (for  example,  reduction  in  subsidiaries),  enhanced  marketing 
efforts, and so on, with the expectation of higher profitability and cash flow”. Unquote. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
8. 
Before  I  go  into  the  details  of  the  issues  involving  CDR  in  India,  I  will  like  to 
elucidate, in brief, the evolution of restructuring. Restructuring of loans and advances is not a 
new  phenomenon  in  India  and  terms  such  as rescheduling / renegotiation  / rehabilitation / 
restructuring have been used interchangeably by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and banks 
since long. Reserve Bank’s prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances have evolved 
over a period of time from simple instructions to reschedule the loans of people affected by 
natural calamities in the late 1970s to comprehensive guidelines on restructuring of loans to 
large  corporates  under  consortium/multiple  banking  arrangement.  The  guidelines  gradually 
evolved in tune with the changing dynamics of the financial and real markets by taking into 
account  the  international  best  practices,  recommendations  of  various  committees  and 
feedback  from  the  stakeholders.  CDR  is  a  specialised  institutional  arrangement  for 
restructuring of large credit exposures of multiple banks to corporates. 
9. 
The need for such a specialised institutional mechanism arose in the background of 
difficulties faced by banks while restructuring their large exposures involving more than one 
lender,  under  consortium/multiple  banking  arrangement.  While  it  was  easier  for  banks  to 
negotiate the terms of restructuring of their own exposure with their customers, they found it 
difficult  to  co-ordinate  their  negotiation  and  monitoring  efforts  where  restructuring  involved 
multiple lenders. Therefore, a need was felt to devise a system where restructuring of large 
corporate  exposures  from  multiple  banks  under  consortium/multiple  banking  arrangements 
could  be  carried  out.  The  Reserve  Bank  was  seized  of  the  matter  and  it  put  in  place  the 
scheme of CDR in August 2001 based on the mechanism prevalent in countries like the U.K., 
Thailand,  Korea,  Malaysia,  etc.  These  guidelines  were  finalised  after  extensive  discussion 
between Government of India, Reserve Bank, Banks and FIs. 
10. 
The  objective  of  the  CDR  framework  was  to  ensure  timely  and  transparent 
mechanism for restructuring the corporate debts of viable entities facing problems, outside 
the purview of BIFR, DRT and other legal proceedings, for the benefit of all concerned. In 
particular, the framework aimed at preserving viable corporates affected by certain internal 
and external factors, thereby minimizing the losses to the creditors and other stakeholders 
through an orderly and coordinated restructuring programme. Viability of the account was an 
important condition for restructuring with malfeasance/fraud and cases of wilful default being 
barred  from  the  CDR  mechanism.  These  guidelines  also  adopted  the  existing  asset 
classification  benefit  available  to  fully  secured  standard  accounts,  on  restructuring,  which 
was  previously  permitted  vide  a  March  2001  circular.  These  guidelines  on  CDR  were 
subsequently reviewed and revised on the basis of recommendations of a High Level Group 
under  the  Chairmanship  of  Shri  Vepa  Kamesam,  in  February  2003  and  a  Special  Group 
under  the  Chairmanship  of  Smt.  S.  Gopinath,  in  November  2005.  Subsequent  to  these 
reviews,  guidelines  on  CDR  mechanism  allowed  restructuring  of  exposures  of  Rs.10  crore 
and above and restructuring of accounts even classified as Doubtful, subject to their viability, 
under category 2 CDR System. Through these guidelines, RBI also delegated the authority 
to  approve  the  corporate  debt  restructuring  packages  to  CDR  Standing  Forum  and  CDR 
Empowered Group and retained with itself only the authority to issue the broad guidelines. 
The  current  comprehensive  guidelines  on  CDR  as  well  as  non-CDR  restructuring  were 
issued in August 2008. 
Why is restructuring required? 
Let me now turn to the question of why restructuring is required. You would agree 
11. 
that it is a societal convention to attempt to assist anyone in distress. Similarly, restructuring 
is  a  tool  to  lend  a  hand  of  assistance  to  borrowers  who  are  temporarily  in  distress,  in 
particular, where the distress is caused by circumstances beyond the control of the borrower. 
Thus,  debt  restructuring  may  be  required  under  certain  circumstances  viz.  a  general 
downturn in the economy or in any particular sector, which result in the deterioration in the 
financial health of borrowers. It may also be warranted in case of emergence of legal or other 
issues  that  cause  delays,  particularly  in  cases  of  project  implementation.  External 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
developments, such as global factors may also result in widespread impact on the financial 
health of borrowers and may necessitate use of restructuring as a tool to help the borrower 
tide over difficult circumstances. 
Restructuring of accounts – role of the regulator 
12. 
Let me now turn to the role of the regulator in restructuring of accounts. But first let 
me  explore  some  myths  which  are  commonly  accepted  about  restructuring  in  the  country. 
First, it is a prevalent misconception among the industry and borrowers that restructuring can 
be carried out only in cases of standard accounts. The Reserve Bank has clarified time and 
again that even the accounts classified as substandard and doubtful can be restructured, if 
found  viable.  However,  the  asset  classification  benefit  of  retention  of  standard  account 
classification  after  restructuring,  although  it  being  an  event  of  impairment,  is  a  regulatory 
forbearance. Such regulatory forbearance is available on certain conditions laid down by the 
Reserve Bank’s guidelines. But accounts can always be restructured outside the regulatory 
forbearance, if found viable. 
13. 
Even  the  accounts  which  are  compulsorily  downgraded  on  restructuring  due  to 
absence  of  regulatory  forbearance  can  be  upgraded  after  satisfactory  performance  during 
the  specified  period.  Industry,  borrowers  as  well  as  banks  approach the  Reserve  Bank for 
granting them the permission to restructure their accounts on account of some hardship. As 
the RBI guidelines on restructuring are comprehensive and applicable to all borrowers and 
they already provide some regulatory forbearance, such requests imply a request for further 
relaxations in our guidelines. 
Such frequent tweaking with regulatory guidelines is not an ideal practice and therefore, the 
Reserve Bank generally does not agree to such requests. At times an impression is created 
that  such  refusals  imply  that  these  accounts  cannot  be  restructured.  However,  the  fact 
remains that restructuring of viable accounts is always in the domain of the banks and it is 
the duty of the banks to nurture a viable account even in the absence of asset classification 
benefit. 
14. 
Having  presented  some  of  these  common  misconceptions  about  the  regulatory 
approach to restructuring; let me know turn to why regulators are interested in what is, after 
all,  a  bilateral  commercial  decision  between  the  borrower  and  the  bank.  The  regulator’s 
interest in restructuring emerges from the close linkages between restructured accounts and 
non-performing  advances  (NPAs).  Let  me  elucidate.  If  the  terms  and  conditions  of  loans, 
especially  in  relation  to  repayment  are  not  adhered  to,  especially  for  a  specified  period  of 
time, account is classified as an NPA. If accounts are restructured, then too, the terms and 
conditions of the loans are not fulfilled. But such accounts are not always classified as NPAs. 
From an operational perspective, there can be two types of restructured accounts: the first 
type of accounts are those which are restructured and classified as NPAs; the second type 
are those which are restructured but asset classification is retained as standard. 
15. 
In the first case, regulatory concerns are few and limited to the issue of upgrading 
the account to the standard category. In general, a NPA account, can be upgraded when the 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  loan  are  fulfilled  by  the  borrower.  In  the  case  of  restructured 
accounts, however, the original terms and conditions are changed. Hence, the issue of the 
conditions  under  which  the  account  can  be  considered  as  standard  or  upgraded  to  the 
standard  category  become  pertinent.  Regulatory  guidelines  attempt  to  lay  down  the  broad 
parameters under which restructured accounts can be treated as standard. The second type 
of restructured accounts, however, attract greater regulatory attention, due to the associated 
moral  hazard  problems  –  that  of  the  potential  of  an  account  being  restructured,  at  times 
repeatedly, to avoid classification as an NPA. This give rise to the need for regulatory and/or 
prudential  guidance.  Hence,  the  role  of  the  regulator  in  case  of  restructuring  of  accounts 
arises with regard to the issue of prudential guidelines for determining the asset classification 
of account at the time of restructuring and the time frame for upgradation of restructured NPA 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
accounts.  The  regulator  also  comes  into  the  picture for  the  purpose  of granting  regulatory 
forbearance with respect to asset classification under exceptional circumstances. 
Trends in restructuring 
16. 
As  I mentioned  at  the  outset,  CDR,  has  come  under  the  attention  because  of  the 
extraordinary  rise  in  the  number  and  volume  of  advances  being  restructured  under  the 
scheme  in  recent  times.  The  guidelines  on  restructuring  have  generally  been  used  to  the 
advantage  of  both  the  borrowers  and  the  banks  in  situations  of  economic  downturns  and 
temporary cash flow problems. However, due to extraordinary rise in the cases referred to 
and  restructured  under  CDR  mechanism  during  the  current  and  previous  fiscal  years, 
questions are being raised as to whether this indicates a general downturn or gross misuse 
of the CDR Mechanism by banks and corporate borrowers. 
17. 
Slowdown in the country amidst overall global slowdown is generally being cited as 
the reason for the recent increase in restructured accounts. In fact, an analysis of the data 
and  trends  in  restructured  accounts,  especially  standard  restructured  accounts,  seem  to 
suggest differently. The reason for choosing the data on standard restructured accounts is 
that  possibilities  of  unviable  accounts  getting  restructured  is  greater  when  some  kind  of 
regulatory forbearance is available on asset quality and provisioning. 
18. 
The  increase  in  resorting  to  restructuring  can  be  partially  attributed  to  excessive 
leveraging by some borrowers during boom period. An analysis of the trends in leverage of 
the larger borrowers in the country during the first decade of this century certainly seems to 
suggest  this.  Again,  there  are  deficiencies  in  the  manner  in  which  project  appraisal  is 
conducted  especially  with  regard  to  cash  flow  analysis  and  determination  of  the  date  of 
completion of projects. When commercial operations are delayed, a host of factors including 
the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  project  are  cited  as  the  reason.  But,  when  there  are 
uncertainties, these have to be accounted for during the appraisal of the project and a proper 
cushion needs to be built to take care of these uncertainties. Instead, the effort is to appraise 
a project keeping in view an aggressive repayment schedule resulting in a very short term 
focus of borrowers, banks and financial analysts who appraise the project. This short term 
focus, in many cases, is the reason for the need for successive restructuring. 
Table 1 
Trends in restructuring 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
19. 
Let  us  look  at  some  of  statistical  trends  in  restructured  advances  in  the  last  few 
years. From the data available with RBI (Table 1), it is observed that between March 2009 
and  March  2012,  while  total  gross  advances  of  the  banking  system  grew  at  a  compound 
annual growth rate of less than 20 per cent, restructured standard advances grew by over 
40 per cent. Resultantly, the proportion of Restructured Standard Advances to Gross Total 
Advances increased from 3.45 per cent in March 2011 to 4.68 per cent in March 2012. 
20. 
A further analysis of data suggests distinct trends in restructured accounts in public 
sector banks and in private sector and foreign banks. Restructured accounts have growth at 
a compound annual growth rate of 47.86 per cent in public sector banks as against a growth 
rate  of  credit  of  19.57  per  cent.  The  corresponding  figures  for  private  sector  and  foreign 
banks are 8.12 per cent (restructured advances) and 19.88 per cent (credit growth) and (-) 
25.48  per  cent  (restructured  advances)  and  10.96  per  cent  (credit  growth)  respectively. 
Further,  as  on  March  2012,  the  ratio  of  Restructured  Standard  Advances  to  Total  Gross 
Advances is highest for PSBs at 5.73 per cent, while the ratio is significantly lower for private 
and foreign banks at 1.61 per cent and 0.22 per cent, respectively (Tables 2 and 3). 
Table 2 
Trends in restructuring across bank groups 
growth rates in % 
Table 3 
Ratio of restructured standard advances to gross advances (%)  
across bank groups 
   
21. 
A  further  granular  breakup  of  the  data  on  restructuring  over  the  last  few  years 
indicates  that  the  ratio  of  restructured  accounts  to  gross  advances  is  the  highest  for  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Industries  sector  at  8.24  per  cent  (with  medium  and  large  industries  sector  being  at 
9.34 per cent). The ratio for agriculture stood at 1.45 per cent, while that for services stood at 
3.99 per cent (with micro and small services being 0.94 per cent). While the ratio stood at 
2.24  per  cent  for  priority  sector  advances,  it  stood  at  5.83  per  cent  for  non-priority  sector 
loans. The data clearly highlights the fact that restructuring is resorted to liberally in case of 
industrial  sector  (particularly  large  industries),  while  smaller  borrower  accounts  such  as 
agriculture and micro and small enterprises see less of restructuring (Tables 4 and 5). 
Table 4 
Trends in restructuring across sectors 
growth rates in % 
Table 5 
Ratio of restructured standard advances to gross advances (%)  
across sectors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
Trends in restructuring – regulatory concerns 
22. 
The above trends clearly underscore the reasons for the regulatory discomfort with 
the  manner  in  which  the  extant  restructuring  guidelines  and  the  associated  regulatory 
forbearance  are  being  used.  While  clearly  there  is  cause  for  concern  given  the  pace  and 
quantum  of restructuring  over  the  last  few  years,  the  concerns  are  aggravated  by  the  fact 
that  the  restructuring  is  neither  being  permitted  in  a  transparent  and  objective  manner  by 
banks nor is it being resorted to in a non-discriminatory manner. 
23. 
It  is  clearly  observed  that  public  sector  banks  share  a  disproportionate  burden  of 
such accounts. If the reason for the recent increase in restructured accounts is indeed the 
economic downturn, then it should have been reflected across all bank groups and not just 
public sector banks. The trends are arguably a reflection of the fact that public sector banks 
have not been as judicious in the use of restructuring as a credit management tool as the 
private sector and foreign banks. Recently announced Q1 results for 2012–13 also indicate 
that private sector banks have managed their credit portfolio in a better way than the PSBs. 
The data on restructuring also throws up an important question as to whether the 
24. 
small and marginal borrowers are discriminated against by the banks for restructuring of their 
accounts, even if found viable. Again, if the economic downturn were the sole reason for the 
increase  in  restructured accounts  of  late, then the  downturn  should  logically  have  affected 
the  weaker  segments  of  the  economy  more,  leading  to  a  higher  share  of  restructured 
accounts in the SME and priority sectors, which is not the case. The data on restructuring, on 
the  contrary,  seems  to  suggest  that,  when  it  comes  to  restructuring,  our  banks  have  a 
substantial  bias  towards  more  privileged  borrowers  vis-à-vis  small  borrowers.  It  seems  to 
suggest that restructuring of accounts is being resorted to avoid classification of accounts as 
NPA. 
CDR – an Instrument of misuse / abuse? 
25. 
This brings me to the issue of misuse/abuse of CDR Mechanism by banks as well 
as corporates. We may note that even the best of intentions gets defeated when a system is 
not  used  judiciously.  The  CDR  Mechanism  was  devised  as  there  was  a  need  for  an 
institutional mechanism to support the large, viable accounts facing temporary problems as 
also to preserve the values of large exposures of banks. As previously stated, restructuring 
has  been  a  prominent  central  banking  tool  in  the  times  of  crisis  across  most  jurisdictions 
despite  its  moral  hazard  aspects. It  is  also  accompanied  by  the regulatory forbearance  on 
asset  classification,  provisioning  and  capital  adequacy  in  order  to  provide  the  banks  and 
corporates  the  much  needed  leeway  to  rejuvenate  their  productive  assets  during  times  of 
crisis. 
Regulatory  forbearance  on  asset  classification  in  India,  however,  has  become  a 
26. 
standing  feature  irrespective  of  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  financial  crisis/economic 
downturn. Rather, it has been observed lately that even at the slightest sign of slowing down 
of the economy or any particular sector of the economy, banks as well as corporates start 
demanding even further relaxations in the regulatory forbearance on restructuring. It may be 
recalled  here  that  CDR  Mechanism  has  been  given  some  special  dispensation  regarding 
asset classification on repeated restructuring which is not available to non-CDR restructuring. 
27. 
In  view  of  the  foregoing  observations,  I  am  compelled  to  infer  that,  perhaps,  the 
availability  of  standing  regulatory  forbearance  to  CDR  Mechanism  has  prompted  banks  to 
avoid using other means of credit management judiciously, i.e., proper due-diligence before 
sanctioning  a  credit  facility,  regular  and  proper  monitoring  of  accounts  after  disbursal  and 
taking  prompt  corrective  action  on  the  first  signs  of  weakness  in  the  accounts.  While 
establishing viability of the account before restructuring the same is a mandatory condition, it 
seems that proper due-diligence is not carried out on this front in a number of cases. In order 
to ensure the highest levels of integrity and diligence, the Reserve Bank’s guidelines on CDR 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mechanism have delegated the authority to evolve policies and guidelines on corporate debt 
restructuring  to  CDR  Standing  Forum,  consisting  of  Chairman  level  representation  from 
banks; and the authority to approve individual cases of corporate debt restructuring to CDR 
Empowered  Group,  consisting  of  ED  level  representation  from  banks.  Despite  these 
safeguards, it appears that, in the recent past, many unviable accounts were restructured by 
establishing viability only with some kind of financial engineering. 
28. 
Our  guidelines  on  CDR  Mechanism  have  evolved  in  the  context  of  international 
experience.  Most  of  the  countries  have  based  their  framework  for  corporate  debt 
restructuring  on  the  UK’s  London  Approach,  wherein,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  UK  banks  developed  a  set  of  informal  guidelines  on  a  collective  process  for 
voluntary workouts to restructure debts of corporates in distress, while maximizing their value 
as  going  concerns.  They  also  took  into  account  the  international  federation  of  insolvency 
practitioners  (INSOL  International)’s  “Statement  of  Principles  for  a  Global  Approach  to 
Multi-Creditor Workouts”. 
29. 
An informal out of court system like CDR Mechanism is always a preferable way for 
loan resolution, if used prudently and ethically. In this regard, I would like to quote from the 
“World Bank Principles and Guidelines for Effective Insolvency and Creditor Rights Systems” 
which states that “A country’s financial sector (possibly with the informal endorsement and 
assistance of the central bank or finance ministry) should promote the development of a code 
of conduct or an informal out-of-court process for dealing with cases of corporate financial 
difficulty  in  which  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have  a  significant  exposure, 
especially in markets where enterprise insolvency has reached systemic levels. An informal 
process  is  far  more  likely  to  be  sustained  where  there  are  adequate  creditor  remedy  and 
insolvency laws. The informal process may produce a formal rescue, which should be able to 
quickly process a packaged plan produced by the informal process. The formal process may 
work better if it enables creditors and debtors to use informal techniques.” 
However, issues of moral hazard are also likely to emerge from such informal out of 
30. 
court  systems.  Internationally,  corporate  debt  restructurings  can  also  be  viewed  in  the 
continuum  between  an  excessive  creditor  oriented  approach  and  an  excessive  debtor 
oriented approach. An excessive debtor oriented approach gives rise to the aspect of moral 
hazard  as  it  may  encourage  the  debtor  to  take  excessive  risks  in  the  knowledge  that  the 
burden of any losses will fall disproportionally on creditors. 
31. 
RBI’s CDR guidelines attempt to strike a balance between these two approaches by 
requiring both the debtors and creditors to make sacrifices and by requiring the promoters to 
increase  their  stake  in  the  form  of  guarantee  or  equity.  However,  these  norms  have  been 
circumvented  to  some  extent.  While  the  debtors  and  creditors  avail  the  benefits  of  asset 
classification, provisioning and capital adequacy on restructuring, they have tried to avoid the 
painful sacrifices in terms of provisioning on diminution in fair value and promoters’ sacrifice. 
Such circumvention of norms not only camouflage the weakness of credit portfolio of banks 
but also weaken their defence against expected losses. The inherent credit weaknesses of 
such accounts are further aggravated due to lower stake of the promoters in the restructured 
business. Taken together, both these aspects decrease the efficiency of the financial system 
and increase its vulnerability to external shocks. 
Working group to review the existing guidelines on restructuring of advances 
32. 
The need for one more review of our guidelines on restructuring arose in the light of 
the  above  discussed  issues.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  constituted  a  Working  Group 
(WG) to review the existing guidelines on restructuring of advances. The WG has examined 
the issues confronting the restructuring of advances by banks both under CDR and non-CDR 
mechanisms.  Its  recommendations  are  in  the  right  direction  and  forward  looking.  It  has 
recommended 
forbearance  on  asset  classification  on 
restructuring; but considering the current domestic macroeconomic situation as also global 
the  withdrawal  of  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
situation, this step is suggested, say, after a period of two years. During the interregnum, it 
has  recommended  increasing  the  provision  on  accounts  which  get  the  asset  classification 
benefit on restructuring. These are right steps towards discouraging the banks from taking up 
the cases of unviable accounts as they will be compelled to use their resources judiciously 
and only for viable accounts. In remaining cases, deleveraging should be the correct option. 
33. 
The  Working  Group  has  also  made  its  recommendations  for  putting  a  cap  on 
conversion  of  debt  into  preference  shares;  increasing  the  promoters’  stake  in  restructured 
accounts; making the “right of recompense” mandatory, bringing more clarity in calculation of 
diminution 
information,  etc.  These 
recommendations,  once  accepted,  will  remove  the  incentives  for  “adverse  selection  and 
moral hazard”. Regulatory forbearance and Government incentives will not be available on 
“tap” but only in cases of a severe economic crisis. 
fair  value,  disclosure  of  only 
“material” 
in 
The way forward 
34. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  what  I  believe  is  the  way  forward  with  respect  to restructured 
accounts.  I  have,  over  the  last  few  minutes,  outlined  a  series  of  trends  in  restructured 
accounts,  which  are  from  a  public  policy  standpoint  and  from  a  broader  economic  and 
societal perspective, disquieting. Does this mean that restructuring should not be allowed? 
The answer to that is “no” and as I have mentioned earlier restructuring can play a valuable 
role for both the borrowers and the banks in situations of economic downturns and temporary 
cash flow problems. 
However, restructuring should be considered only under certain specific conditions. 
35. 
First, the need for restructuring should arise only due to circumstances beyond the control of 
the  borrowers  and  not  generally  for  errors  /  mismanagement  by  them.  In  any  case,  the 
restructuring proposals should be considered from a purely commercial angle albeit with bias 
towards giving benefit of doubt to customer. Also, a uniform approach needs to be adopted 
for both Standard and NPA accounts while examining the restructuring proposals. Further, 
the viability of the project should be established and only after that should any restructuring 
proposal  be  considered.  For  this,  it  is  important  that  project  appraisal  standards  are 
significantly  enhanced.  Finance  professionals  such  as  those  working  in  Centrum  have  an 
important role to play in this regard. 
36. 
Important in the context of evaluation the project is the need to examine the effective 
levels of leveraging in the project. Higher leveraging raises the risks of a project especially in 
an uncertain environment. There have been many instances of even the promoter’s equity 
component being financed out of debt. There have also been instances of debt flows being 
structured  as  equity  and  of  the  “private”  component  of  Public  Private  Partnership  projects 
being debt finance. Borrowing from another bank is not equity and adds to the burden of debt 
servicing. It is thus important to ensure, at the time of restructuring that projects are not over 
leveraged. 
It would also be important to establish that the borrowers are sincere about the project, in 
particular,  that  the  borrowers,  or  at  least  the  senior  management  of  the  borrowing 
companies, are willing to tighten their belt and share the burden of restructuring. 
37. 
Also,  lenders  must  ascertain  the  amount  of  the  sacrifice  required  to  be  made  on 
their part. Restructuring proposals could be considered much more favourably if there is no 
sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  lender  except  postponement  of  the  repayment  date  of  the 
principal. Banks would do well to adopt the money lender principle of greater concern in the 
interest income in such situations if the borrower is servicing the loan regularly. Even where 
the banks has to make some sacrifice by sanctioning the restructuring proposal, there must 
be  some  provision  for  re-compensation  when  the  borrower/  borrowing  unit  comes  out  of 
trouble. Of course, there are prudential provisions which have to be built up to protect the 
lender in case of the failure of the restructured unit. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
38. 
Further,  our  entire  approach  to  restructuring  has  to  be  reoriented  to  show  more 
compassion  to  the  small  customers.  SMEs  and  priority  sector  advances  are  an  important 
segment  of  the  economy  and  viable  accounts  facing  temporary  problems  in  such  sectors 
must  not  be  discriminated  against  when  they  request  for  restructuring.  Nurturing  of  viable 
accounts  is  in  the  long  term  interest  of  both  the  lenders  and  the  borrowers.  This  will  not 
happen  automatically.  There  is  a  need  for  a  structured  mechanism  for  considering 
restructuring  of  retail,  SME  and  agricultural  loans  just  as there  is  the CDR  for  considering 
restructuring proposals for larger accounts. This structure will need to be built in at various 
levels – at the state, the district, the region and the bank level. The functionaries at various 
levels  will  need  to  be  empowered  to  assess  and  approve  viable  restructuring  proposals. 
Without  such  delegation,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  the  benefits  of  restructuring  to 
percolate to the smaller accounts. 
39. 
Again, for restructuring proposals to be successful in assisting the borrower to tide 
over temporary difficulties, it is critical that the assessment of the proposal and its approval 
are completed within a specific time frame, say 90 days. Time is very often the very essence 
in  ensuring  the  turnaround  of  projects  and  an  elongated  process  of  assessment  of  the 
restructuring proposal could itself erode the viability of the project. 
Conclusion 
40. 
Before concluding, I would like to emphasise that resources of the banking sector 
are precious and limited and they cannot be allowed to be used in an imprudent way. CDR is 
a necessity especially when economic upturn and downturn are a way of life and part and 
parcel of business cycles for individual companies. Corporate Debt Restructuring has been in 
existence  for more than  a  decade  in  India,  and  this  system  has fulfilled  its  objectives  to a 
large extent. It is a mechanism evolved for preserving the economic values of banks’ assets 
should  not  be  used  against  its  noble  objectives.  Similarly,  regulatory  forbearances  are 
discretionary tools which should be used only in the most demanding times. It goes without 
saying  that  its  future  success  and  failure  will  depend  upon  the  ethics  and  integrity  of  its 
members and the professionals involved in the restructuring process. 
The restructuring process is a tool for assisting distressed sections of the economy 
41. 
to tide over difficulties which are temporary in nature and due to circumstances beyond their 
control.  For  us to justify  that restructuring  is for  the  larger  benefit  of the  economy  and  the 
society, it is imperative that it is available to all classes of borrowers and is made available in 
a timely and non-discriminate manner. This will be possible only if we develop the necessary 
structures, systems and processes to adhere to the above objectives. A viable time bound 
action plan for implementing all of this is critical and I hope the finance professionals will play 
a major role in doing this. 
I wish the deliberations in the Seminar all success. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
