K C Chakrabarty: Financial literacy and consumer protection 
Remarks by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in a panel 
discussion on “Financial literacy and consumer protection”, Washington DC, 22 April 2012. 
  Globally,  the  triad  of  Financial  Inclusion,  Financial  Literacy  and  Consumer  Protection  has 
been  recognized  as  intertwining  threads  in  pursuit  of  Financial  Stability.  For  any  kind  of 
stability,  whether  financial,  economic,  political  or  social,  inclusive  growth  is  an  essential 
prerequisite. Inclusive growth, in turn, is largely driven by financial inclusion and an inclusive 
financial system. 
Financial inclusion and literacy 
Financial  Inclusion  and  financial  literacy  are  complementary  to  each  other.  For  emerging 
market  economies,  ensuring  adequate  access  to  financial  products  and  services  is  more 
important at this stage but financial literacy creates demand for these products/services. In 
advanced economies, the access is not that important an issue. Thus, it is a global problem 
with global dimensions. 
India’s strong financial inclusion / literacy architecture 
The institutional structure for India’s Financial Inclusion/ Literacy programme is unique as it 
has an apex body in the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC), headed by the 
Finance Minister of Government of India, mandated, inter alia, to focus on attaining financial 
inclusion/ literacy goals. With heads of all financial sector regulatory authorities being part of 
the FSDC, it seeks to ensure inter-regulatory co-operation for attaining the stated goals. 
Our approach to financial inclusion 
(a) Structured, planned approach 
We  have  a  structured  and  planned  approach  to  financial  inclusion  wherein  all  banks  have 
prepared  Board  approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  (FIPs)  with  a  three  year  horizon 
extending up to 2013. The initial goal of providing access to banking services to all villages 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with population more than 2000 by March 2012 has been successfully met and we are on our 
way to ensure the same for all villages in a time bound  manner. The focus is also on the 
volume of transactions in new accounts opened as a part of the financial inclusion drive. 
(b) Bank led model 
In India, we have adopted a bank-led model for financial inclusion which seeks to leverage 
on technology. The FI initiatives would have to be ICT based and would ride on new delivery 
models  that  would  need  to  be  developed  by  the  market  participants  to  best  suit  their 
requirements.  
Our  experience  shows  that  the  goal  of  financial  inclusion  is  better  served  through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  suite  of  products 
required to bring in effective/meaningful financial inclusion. 
Other players such as mobile companies have been allowed to partner with banks in offering 
services collaboratively. 
(c) Minimum bouquet of products and services 
To  meet  the  criterion  of  availability  of  banking  services,  a  minimum  of  four  basic  products 
must be offered to customers: 
 
 
 
 
a check-in account with emergency credit facility 
payment services and remittance facility 
a pure savings product such as a recurring deposit 
facility of entrepreneurial credit to deserving people 
(d) Technology driven – but technology platform neutral 
The  task  of  Financial  Inclusion  is  gigantic  and  cannot  be  done  without  actively  leveraging 
technology and without involvement of society as a whole. The Financial Inclusion strategies 
and delivery models being developed by banks are primarily technology driven. However, we 
have consciously ensured that the models adopted by banks are technology neutral, which 
facilitates easy up-scaling and customization, as per individual requirements. 
(e) Combination of branch and BC structure to deliver financial inclusion 
A combination of Brick and Mortar structure with Click and Mouse technology will be helpful 
in extending financial inclusion especially in geographically dispersed areas. Banks need to 
make effective use of technology to provide banking services in remote areas through the 
Business  Correspondent  (BC)  model.  The  BC  model  allows  banks  to  provide  doorstep 
delivery of services, especially cash transactions. To ensure increased banking penetration, 
and  control  over  operations  of  BC,  more  Brick  and  Mortar  branches  are  needed.  In 
April 2011, banks have been mandated to allocate at least 25 per cent of all new branches to 
unbanked  rural  areas.  Banks  have  also  been  mandated  to  open  intermediary  brick  and 
mortar structure between the base branch & customer locations, which will lead to efficiency 
in  cash  management,  documentation,  redressal  of  customer  grievances  and  close 
supervision of BC operations. 
Where do non-mainstream institutions fit in? 
As the penetration of mainstream institutions in limited, other players, which can reach the 
excluded segments of the society, are needed. These institutions will contribute to financial 
deepening  and  furthering  the  inclusion  agenda  by  acting  as  a  link  between  the  hitherto 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unbanked population and the mainstream institutional players. They will also help in filling the 
void  till  the  formal  financial  sector  develops  adequate  reach  and  penetration  to  directly 
service these segments. 
In sum, two basic issues need to be understood while implementing financial inclusion: 
 
Financial  Inclusion  programmes  should  be  implemented  on  commercial  lines  and 
not  on  a  charity  basis.  It  is  important  that  banking  with  the  poor  is  perceived  and 
pursued as a sustainable and viable business model. 
While  poor  need  not  be  subsidized,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  they  are  not 
exploited. The need is to ensure that poor people who deserve credit are provided 
access to timely and adequate credit in a non-exploitative manner. 
 Financial literacy 
As a complement to Financial Inclusion, Financial Literacy aims to build peoples capability to 
use the financial products and services. As the first stage of literacy is to create demand, all 
institutions  involved  in  delivery  of  financial  products  and  services  are  contributing  to  our 
financial  literacy  agenda.  This  entails  devising  appropriate  products  and  services,  pricing 
them reasonably, understanding the risk, communicating it to customers and protecting the 
customers. 
Multi-agency Central Bank led approach 
The Central Bank has taken a lead role in spreading financial inclusion and financial literacy. 
Both in terms of creating an enabling policy environment and providing institutional support, 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  actively  contributing  towards  the  goal  of  universal  financial 
inclusion in the country. FSDC has constituted a Sub-Committee to focus solely on Financial 
Inclusion and Literacy. 
It is well recognized that to be effective financial literacy initiatives should ideally commence 
at  school  level  although  even  at  a  later  stage  adult  education  would  provide  substantial 
benefits. Realizing this, in India, we have engaged the curriculum setting bodies like National 
Council  of  Educational  Research  and  Training  (NCERT),  Education  Boards  like  Central 
Board  for  Secondary  Education  (CBSE),  Central  and  State  Governments,  in  the  FSDC 
sub-Committee on FI and FL. 
A  large  number  of  other  players  are  involved.  All  other  financial  sector  regulators,  banks, 
insurance  companies,  pension  funds,  NABARD,  corporates,  industry  associations,  NGOs 
and other members of the civil society are actively engaged in this process. Thus, our basic 
approach could be described as a central bank led multi-agency approach. 
National financial literacy strategy 
One of the important tasks that the FSDC Sub-committee is undertaking is to formulate our 
National  Financial  Literacy  Strategy  document.  It  is  being  finalized  with  the  following 
objectives: 
 
Create  awareness  and  educate  consumers  on  access  to  financial  services, 
availability of various types of products and their features.  
Change attitudes to translate knowledge into behaviour. 
Make consumers understand their rights and responsibilities as clients of financial 
services. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Who should be imparted financial literacy? 
Contrary  to  popular  perception,  financial  literacy  has  to  be  imparted  to  everyone  in  the 
economy viz. users and providers. In the Indian context, the users are broadly the financially 
excluded resource-poor, the lower and middle income groups and high net worth individuals. 
Equally  important,  banks,  financial  institutions  and  other  market  players  too  need  to  be 
literate  about  their  risks  and  returns  framework.  Last,  but  not  the  least,  policy  makers 
including  the  financial  sector  regulators  must  have  financial  literacy  to  comprehend  and 
gauge the requirement of the population and financial institutions to drive the agenda. But, 
naturally,  the  message  to  be  conveyed,  the  method  of  communication,  the  language  of 
communication, the complexity of subjects etc. would have to be tailored to suit the target 
audience. Illustratively, what are the basic/simple messages that we are trying to get across. 
What are the basic messages that we are trying to convey? 
Some of the questions that we seek to address through our FL initiatives are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why open a bank account? 
Why should one save? 
Why save regularly and consistently? 
What is the difference between money and credit? 
Why borrow responsibly? 
Why borrow for income generating purposes? 
Why repay loans in time? Repayment ethics. 
Why do you need insurance? 
What are the benefits of being part of payment and settlement system 
Why you will need regular stream of income post working life – pension ? 
Why you should keep money aside regularly and consistently during your earning 
life for pension in old age 
What is interest? How moneylenders charge very high interest rates? 
 Risk return framework 
The basic underlying message that is to be conveyed through financial literacy initiatives is 
that where returns are more, risk will invariably be higher. One should not take the risk one 
does not understand.  
Consumer protection – in whose interest? 
To  protect consumers  is  in  the  interest  of service  providers  also.  They  need  to  appreciate 
that  for  their  business  to  survive,  their  customers  must  survive  and  for  that  they  need  to 
understand  the  appropriateness  of  the  products  themselves.  We  are  encouraging  simple 
plain vanilla products where pricing and other parameters are easy to comprehend and are 
not  too  complex.  However,  as  markets  mature  and  more  complex  products  become 
available, the need for financial literacy would become even more paramount. 
Pricing of product and services to protect the customer 
The  most  important  area  for  consumer  protection  is  pricing  of  products  and  services. 
Regulation has to ensure that pricing is transparent, non-discriminatory and non-exploiting. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Also, it should be ensured that pricing is affordable too. For the most vulnerable sections of 
society  who  do  not  have  much  idea  about  pricing,  regulation  should  ensure  formulation  of 
standardized products and services by all market players. For other category of customers, 
market forces should determine the price. 
Steps taken by RBI in promoting financial literacy 
One of the objectives of the Financial Inclusion/Literacy agenda is to ensure that the sections 
of  the  society  that  are  hitherto  undeserving  of  credit  facilities  are  made  credit  worthy. 
Initiatives  such  as  setting  up  Rural  Development  and  Self-Employment  Training  Institutes 
(RUDSETIs)  and  Financial  Literacy  and  Credit  Counselling  Centres  (FLCCs)  by  different 
banks are aimed at ensuring this. 
Some of the other steps taken by RBI to promote financial literacy are as under: 
 
Outreach visits by Top Executives of Reserve Bank of India to remote villages on a 
continuous basis – to spread the message of financial awareness and literacy.  
RBI website – A link on Financial Education in the RBI website for the common man, 
containing material in 13 Indian languages which includes comic books on money 
and banking for children, essay competition etc.  
Awareness  –  by  distributing  pamphlets,  comic  books,  enacting  plays  and  skits, 
arranging  stalls  in  local  fairs,  exhibitions,  participation  in  information  /  literacy 
programmes organized by Press 
Inclusion  of  Financial  Education  material  in  school  curriculum  by  various  State 
Governments  
Use of mobile Financial Literacy vans by banks in the North Eastern States  
Weekly Radio programmes on FL in some States by banks & similar programmes in 
Tribal districts by NABARD  
Awareness  programmes  on  various  Government  Sponsored  self  employment 
schemes involving bank loans & subsidy by Government agencies like KVIC,DICs, 
SC/ST corporations  
Mass  media  campaigns  tie  ups  with  educational  institutes,  financial  awareness 
workshops/ help lines, books, pamphlets and publications on FL by NGOs, Financial 
market players etc.  
National  &  State  level  rural  livelihood  missions  have  large  number  of  field 
functionaries for proper handholding support to large number of Self Help Groups 
Large number of other websites/portals of banks/ /State Level Bankers Committees 
disseminating information on banking services 
Conduct  of  training  programmes  for  farmers  club,  NGOs  &  SHG  members  by 
NABARD 
         Banking ombudsman – quick and cheap forum of grievance redressal 
In India, we do have a law for Consumer Protection though not specifically for the financial 
sector consumers. In regard to bank customers, we have the Banking Codes & Standards 
Board  of  India  (BCSBI)  which  is  the  standards  setting  body  for  banking  services.  The 
self-regulatory  organization  of  the  banking  industry  viz.,  Indian  Banks  Association  has 
evolved a fair practices code to be adopted by its members.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
To ensure that consumers are protected even in case of plain vanilla products, the Reserve 
Bank  of  India  has  instituted  the  Banking  Ombudsman,  an  alternate  dispute  resolution 
mechanism. We are examining the possibility of enacting a comprehensive financial sector 
consumer protection legislation. 
  What has been achieved so far? 
The progress in some of the key parameters from March 2010 to March 2012 are as follows: 
Banking  connectivity  to  more  than  1,  47,534  villages  has  been  achieved  by 
 
March 2012 from 54,258 in 2010. 
All villages with population of more than 2000 persons have been connected with 
Banks. Total number of such villages given bank connectivity is around 74,000. 
Number of barefoot bankers increased to nearly 97,000 from 33,000. 
More  than  50  million  basic  banking  accounts  have  been  opened  to  take  the  total 
number of such accounts to more than 100 million. 
About 7 million people/families have been credit linked. 
 
Nearly 22 million families have been given the benefit of electronic benefits transfer. 
 
Though these figures in isolation seem very impressive, yet, if one considers the gargantuan 
nature of the task ahead to provide access to 1.2 billion people in the country and to reach 
600  thousand  villages,  it’s  a  long  way  forward.  It  requires  concerted  efforts  at  all  levels 
involving all stakeholders. 
Gaining from international experiences 
Financial Inclusion as a concept is still evolving. The delivery models are still being perfected 
by  the  market  participants.  While  excellent  work  is  being  done  in  some  pockets,  in  many 
other  areas  the  progress  is  not  satisfactory  and  there  is  a  need  to  broad  base  the 
achievements.  International  conferences  such  as  this  help  in  sharing  cross-country 
experiences  and  in  fine  tuning  our  strategies  based  on  learnings  of  our  peers  across 
jurisdictions and adopting international best practices. 
Conclusion 
The task of achieving universal financial inclusion is a global one and has huge dimensions. 
The issue of financial stability and that of financial inclusion, literacy and consumer protection 
are  intertwined.  While  each  jurisdiction  will  perhaps  evolve  their  own  different  delivery 
models,  we  need  to  learn  from  each  other  and  implement  what  is  suitable  in  our  context. 
Some progress has been achieved but a lot needs to be done. I am sure that with the active 
involvement of all stakeholders we would be able to take financial inclusion from principles to 
action. 
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
