Jörg Asmussen: Exchange of views on the economic and social crisis in 
Greece 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  to  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the 
European Parliament, Brussels, 27 March 2012. 
 Responses to written questions on the economic and social crisis in Greece by several political groups within the 
European Parliament can be found on the ECB’s website. 
Dear Chairwomen, 
Honourable Members of the European Parliament, 
The organisation of this hearing once again illustrates to what extent the launch of the euro 
has brought about economic interconnectedness: in view of the strong implications for the 
stability of the euro area as a whole, putting Greece back on its feet is in the very interest of 
all of us. Political interconnectedness could also hardly be better demonstrated than today. 
Domestic policies have become European – which fully justifies to discuss them at European 
level, both in executive and parliamentary fora. 
Why the Greek adjustment programme is unavoidable 
The  Greek  economic  adjustment  and  its  social  implications  are  painful:  there  is  no  doubt 
about  this.  The  question,  however,  is:  how  did  Greece  get  in  such  a  situation  and  does  it 
have  any  alternative?  The  major  effort  of  adjustment  reflects  the  severity  of  the 
macroeconomic  imbalances  that  have  accumulated  over  years  in  Greece.  Misguided 
economic  and  fiscal  policies,  lack  of  structural  reforms:  all  these  policies  undermined  the 
sustainability  of  public  debt  and  created  a  very  large  competitiveness  gap.  It  is  not  the 
adjustment programme which is causing the recent decline in GDP. The current economic 
depression is an unavoidable correction of the substantial positive output gap that has built 
up until 2009.  
Is there any alternative to the current adjustment? We do not help Greece by creating false 
expectations.  Calls  for  loosening  the  fiscal  stance  are  illusory.  Greece  could  hardly  face 
larger financial constraints than at the moment: it has lost market access and can only draw 
on  a  fixed  envelope  for  official  support.  There  is  only  one  way  forward:  restoring  fiscal 
sustainability  and  competitiveness,  which  will,  in  turn,  bring  back  sustained  growth.  This 
requires  perseverance:  perseverance  in  carrying  out  fiscal  consolidation;  perseverance  in 
implementing  comprehensive  structural  reforms;  and  perseverance  in  addressing  the 
weaknesses of the Greek banking sector.  
The efforts undertaken by the Greek government and the sacrifices the Greek public endured 
so far have been substantial. But there is still a long way to go. 
It is no secret that the programme is subject to exceptionally high implementation risks. The 
debt  exchange  operation  has  been  successful,  official  financing  has  been  scaled  up.  This 
has  improved  debt  sustainability  prospects:  the  estimated  debt-to-GDP  ratio  could  be 
brought  to  about  116½%  in  2020.  But  this  all  depends  on  one  key  condition,  namely  that 
Greece  fully  implements  the  programme.  Debt  dynamics  are  extremely  sensitive  to 
implementation  slippages.  Delayed  fiscal  consolidation,  lower  privatisation  proceeds  or 
slower structural reforms: such scenarios would translate into weaker economic growth and 
worsen  again  debt  sustainability.  Without  a  regime-change  in  policy  implementation  and  a 
much broader political consensus in favour of painful, but necessary reforms, there is a high 
risk that the programme derails. Therefore, political courage is more needed than ever. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let  me  now  comment  in  some  more  detail  on  three  key  areas:  fiscal  adjustment, 
competitiveness gains and financial sector issues. 
Fiscal adjustment 
The  Greek  authorities  and  the  Greek  people  deserve  recognition  for  the  significant  fiscal 
adjustment  they  have  achieved  over  the  last  two  years:  despite  the  deep  recession,  the 
general government deficit was reduced by around 6½% of GDP since 2009 (from 15¾% to 
9¼%). This broadly corresponds to the deficit reduction that was initially envisaged under the 
programme,  i.e.  before  the  2009  deficit  outcome  was  revised  upwards  (by  2.2%  of  GDP). 
This is a remarkable achievement. 
Nevertheless, the size of the government is still too large compared to Greece’s capacity to 
generate and collect fiscal revenues. 
Moreover,  the  quality  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  was  mixed.  On  the  one  hand,  important 
reforms have started to address Greece’s high level of public wages and employment and 
the previously unsustainable pension system. On the other hand, fiscal adjustment has so far 
excessively relied on an increase in tax rates and across-the-board expenditure cuts.  
Looking ahead, further progress in fiscal consolidation requires the implementation of difficult 
structural  fiscal  reforms.  Closing  the  large  fiscal  gap  for  2013–14  (5½%  of  GDP)  will  be  a 
litmus  test  for  the  government’s  commitment  to  the  programme:  without  the  government’s 
willingness and ability to design and implement the difficult structural fiscal reforms, such a 
large adjustment cannot be achieved.  
I call on Greece’s political class to push through these difficult reforms by confronting vested 
interests.  Otherwise  the  critical  mass  of  structural  fiscal  reforms  necessary  to  close  the 
medium-term fiscal gap may not be reached. 
Finally,  how  can  we  make  sure  that  the  economic  adjustment  burden  is  being  fairly 
distributed?  I  know  that  this  is  an  important  concern  of  the  European  Parliament.  One 
essential  avenue  is  the  tax  administration  reform.  Progress  in  this  regard  has  been  rather 
disappointing so far: in many cases, wealthy Greeks still contribute less than possible to the 
overall  adjustment  effort,  partly  on  account  of  tax  evasion.  Strengthening  revenue 
administration  and  fighting  tax  evasion  are  crucial.  Not  only  are  they  needed  to  increase 
revenue; they could also improve the social acceptability of the adjustment programme. 
Competitiveness 
There has been some improvement in competitiveness under the first programme, but it fell 
short of what is needed: Greece still faces a substantial competitiveness gap. This largely 
reflects delays in the implementation of labour market and other structural reforms. Closing 
this  gap,  while  remaining  in  the  euro  area,  will  require  a  more  pronounced  internal 
devaluation.  How  can  it  be  achieved?  How  can  we  reverse  the  dramatic  increase  in 
unemployment?  Reducing  minimum  wages  in  the  private  sector,  removing  rigidities  in  the 
wage-setting  system:  these  are  key  elements  of  the  strategy  for  accelerating  the  internal 
devaluation. They may not be popular, but there is no way around it if we want to create the 
basis for renewed competitiveness and employment growth.  
This is not the only area where decisive action is needed. Labour market reforms must be 
complemented  by  a  liberalisation  of  product  and  services  markets,  for  example  in  closed 
professions.  Political  willingness  is  a  key  ingredient  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  vested 
interests in these areas.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bank recapitalisation 
Last  but  not  least,  Greece  needs  to  address  the  situation  of  its  banking  sector.  As  a 
consequence  of  the  debt  exchange,  most  Greek  banks  are  heavily  undercapitalised.  The 
programme envisages that banks deemed viable by the Bank of Greece will be recapitalised. 
Banks  that  are  unable  to  raise  capital  in  the  market  will  be  recapitalised  with  programme 
resources through the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF). In contrast, banks that are 
deemed  non-viable  will  be  resolved.  It  is  crucial  that  the  €25  billion  earmarked  for  these 
purpose as part of the first disbursement be used for the swift injection of capital into Greek 
banks (the overall envelope for bank recapitalisation and resolution amounts to €50 billion). 
The  recapitalisation  strategy  was  designed  to  maximise  private  sector  participation,  while 
preserving  the  State’s  interests.  The  banks’  shares  acquired  by  the  State  in  the 
recapitalisation process will have limited voting rights, but may still allow for upside returns to 
be  shared  between  the  State  and  private  shareholders.  Whenever  possible,  the  private 
management of banks will be safeguarded. 
The governance structure of the recapitalisation and resolution processes will be significantly 
enhanced. This became necessary owing to the very substantial amount of official financing 
that  will  be  channelled 
the 
Hellenic Financial Stability Fund. 
the  existing  Greek 
in  particular 
institutions, 
through 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a message of hope. Yes, the medicine is bitter, but the patient can and 
will  recover  if  he  follows  the  prescription.  Looking  at  successful  past  experiences  of  fiscal 
adjustment  in  other  European  countries  shows  that  this  is  not  a  lost  battle.  However,  an 
absolute prerequisite for the adjustment to succeed is strong political ownership. The Greek 
people  are  not  reforming  their  economy  and  their  state  to  please  the  troika;  they  are  not 
carrying out sacrifices to please country X or Y in the euro area. They are going through this 
adjustment  process  for  their  own  good.  Maximum  political  ownership  should  therefore  be 
expected and is key.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
