Kiyohiko G. Nishimura: Market intelligence, market information and 
statistics in central banking 
Keynote Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the 
6th  Irving  Fisher  Committee  Conference,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel, 
29 August 2012. 
 Introduction: statistics, market information and Irving Fisher 
1. 
It is a privilege for me to address this keynote speech before the distinguished members  of 
the  Irving  Fisher  Committee.  I  am  particularly  thrilled,  since  the  name  Irving  Fisher 
strikes  a  chord  in  my  heart. Irving  Fisher  is  an  iconic  figure  at  Yale University, where I 
earned my doctorate. In fact, he received the first Ph.D. in economics  ever  granted  by  Yale, 
in  the  year  1891. I  vividly  remember  his  life-size portrait hung above the mantelpiece of the 
19th century mansion house, gazing solemnly at faculty members and graduate students. 
No  new  words  are  needed  to  attest  to  his  monumental  contributions  to  microeconomics, 
macroeconomics  and  monetary  theory. He  was  also  influential  in laying the foundations of 
economic statistics, as exemplified in his popular The Making of Index Numbers. In fact he 
was not content with just theory: he went on to found by himself the Index Number Institute 
that  engaged  in  computing  commodity  price  indices,  and  thus  became  one  of  the  most 
popular providers of market information at the time. 
Unfortunately,  however,  he  failed  to  recognize  the  significance  of  the  Stock Market  Crash 
of  1929.  Just  three  days  before  the  crash,  he  wrote  that  stock  prices  were  at  a 
permanently high plateau. And even after the crash, he continued to assure investors that a 
recovery was just around the corner. This might testify to his failure in “market  intelligence”, 
in  detecting  the  signs  of  a  fundamental  change  in  the  market place. 
In  his  latter  days,  though  not  immediately  appreciated  by  the  public  and  the profession, 
he  presented  a  remarkable  theory  of  debt  deflation  as  an  explanation  of  the  Great 
Depression.  In  fact,  this  masterful  piece  of  work  is  the  precursor  of  the  vast  literature 
concerning  financial  stability,  which  is  especially  relevant  in  economic  policy making in the 
aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008. 
What then can we central bank statisticians learn from these dramatic ups and downs  in  the 
life  of  Irving  Fisher? In  fact,  this  is  the  subject  of  this  speech. In particular, I argue that, 
although reliable macroeconomic statistics are of course necessary for  policy  making,  even 
good statistics are sometimes grossly insufficient to guide economic policy, especially when 
a seismic change occurs in the market and the economy. The  recent  financial  crisis  is  an 
example  of  such  change.  Thus,  central  bankers  should  incorporate  “market  intelligence”, 
which  I  will  explain  later,  and  non-statistical  market  information,  into  their  arsenal  of 
statistics.  So  a  central  bank  statistician  should  be  more  than  simply  a  compiler  of 
well-defined statistics: they should become  a  sort  of  sleuth  or  intelligence  agent,  detecting 
signs of future developments that may change the world. 
I  proceed  as  follows.  Section  2  outlines  the  value  of  economic  information  from  the 
perspective of policy decision making. A key theme here is “market intelligence”, which is the 
active  gathering  and  analysis  of  market  information  through  central  banking  activities.  To 
understand  the  importance of market intelligence,  I present three examples, with respect to 
the past, the present, and the future. Section 3 presents  a  lesson from  the  past. I  examine 
the  so-called  Paribas  Shock  of  2007,  and  argue  for  the  absolute  necessity  of  “proactive” 
market  intelligence  to  avoid  this  type  of  financial  crisis.  Section  4  describes  the  current 
achievements  of  market  intelligence  in  an  area  of  pressing  importance:  property  price 
statistics.  I  show  that  it  is  possible  to  get  reliable,  unbiased  information  by  combining 
various  existing  market  information sources, even though individually they may have their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
own biases. Section 5 concerns the future: detecting problems in shadow banking. Shadow 
banking involves a complicated structure, so it is necessary to grasp its “interconnectedness” 
to  gauge  the  magnitude  of  potential  problems.  As  an  example,  I  explain  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s attempt  to  reveal  the  interconnectedness  of  the  Tokyo  money  markets. Section 
6 contains some concluding remarks on market intelligence and central bank statistics. 
faces 
related 
two  major  challenges;  one 
Economic information and policy making 
2. 
Contemporary  central  banking 
accountability, and the other to effective communication. 
First,  central  banks  should  be  accountable  for  their  policies. This  is  all  the more  important 
for  those  central  banks  that  have  independence  in  determining  their  monetary  policy. 
Accountability  means  policy  should  be  evidence-based,  that  is,  based  on  clear  reasoning 
relying on substantiated data. 
Second,  central  banks  should  be  effective  communicators.  Markets  and  economies  have 
become 
in  economic  agents’  expectations.  To 
ensure  that  policy  is  effective,  central  banks  must  communicate  with  the  public 
in  a 
persuasive  manner. Here  again, data  supporting policy  decisions become important. Thus, 
for accountability and effective communication, “numbers” or statistics become increasingly 
important. Moreover, data here means not only quantitative data; qualitative data are equally 
as important. 
increasingly  susceptible 
to  changes 
to 
Knowns and unknowns in Central Bank policy 
To  understand  the  nature  of  the  economic  information  central  banks  want  to  know,  the 
following three-way classification may be helpful. 
The  first  type  of  information  concerns  “known  knowns”.  Here  “knowns”  are  whatever 
happened  in  the  past. Thus,  known  knowns  are  information  about  what happened,  and 
typical  known  knowns  are  contained  in  statistics. The  second  type  is “known  unknowns”. 
Here  unknowns  are  those  things  that  are  happening  at  present  or  that  will  emerge  in  the 
future. They  are known  unknowns,  since  we  already  know that they  are  happening  or  will 
happen. You may have  come  across  the word  “now-cast”, which is an “estimate” of what is 
happening now, used in contrast with a “forecast” which predicts  future  events. A  “now-cast” 
is  a  typical  example  of  a  “known  unknown”.  Finally,  there  is  the  third  type,  called 
“unknown  unknowns”,  things  previously  unknown  but  potentially  having  a  significant  effect 
on the economy. Here I quote Donald Rumsfeld,  the  former  U.S.  Secretary  of  Defense, 
whose  enigmatic  statement  gives perhaps some indication of their nature: 
“But there are also unknown unknowns – the ones we don’t know we don’t know. 
And if one looks throughout the history of our country and other free countries, it 
is the latter category that tend to be the difficult ones.” 
Keeping in mind this three-way categorization, let me ask the following question: What kind of 
information  does  a  central  bank  policy  maker  want  to  know  when  he  or  she  decides  on 
policy? And, in what way is it related to the three-way categorization? 
First of all, in contemplating appropriate aggregate demand management policy, the  central 
bank  policy  maker  wants  to  know  the  momentum  of  activity  in  the  economy and  financial 
markets. However, this is not in itself sufficient. The experience of the recent  financial  crisis 
has  shown  that  the  central  bank  policy  maker  should  also  be  aware  of  the  signs  of 
previously  unknown  factors,  unknown  but  potentially  significant  changes  in  the  economy 
and financial markets. 
In  fact,  with  respect  to  the  former,  i.e.  macroeconomic  momentum,  we  have  made 
significant  progress.  There  have  been  improvements  in  the  comprehensiveness,  accuracy 
and  timeliness  of  macroeconomic  statistics  related  to  aggregate  demand management. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  now  have  a  rich  array  of  data,  both  quantitative  as  in  GDP  and  CPI  figures,  and 
qualitative as in business surveys. Not only public but also private institutions  produce  and 
disseminate  their  own  data. These  are  either  known  knowns (type 1), or known unknowns 
(type 2). 
Statistics  provide  valuable  information  about  known  knowns,  and  they  become  the 
foundation for estimating known unknowns. However, statistics are grossly insufficient  when 
it  comes  to  detecting  unknown  unknowns  (type  3).  Central-bank  policy  makers  are 
frequently frustrated by deficiencies in the statistics available,  which they find inadequate in 
helping them detect potential problems in the economy. 
Perceived  deficiency  is  especially  keen  in  financial  information.  It  should  be  noted  that 
financial  stability  is  now  seen  as  a  prerequisite  for  economic  stability.  Moreover,  policy 
makers  are  alarmed  by  the  increasingly  strong  negative  feedback  seen  in  recent  years 
between  financial  malaise  and  economic  stagnation.  The  rapid  development  of  financial 
factors  confounds  the  problem  of  detecting  malign  symptoms.  Thus,  guarding  against 
previously  unknown  but  potentially  devastating 
factors  has  become  one  of  the  most 
important issues for policy makers. 
Thus, in November 2009, the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors requested 
statisticians to fill the so-called data gaps. Twenty recommendations  were  submitted  in  the 
G20  Data  Gaps  Initiative  (DGI)  in  order  to  establish  timely  reporting  schemes  for 
detecting  both known  unknowns  (type  2),  and unknown unknowns (type 3) . 
The key to guarding against unknown unknowns 
A central bank’s  intelligence  activities  are the key to guarding  against unknown unknowns. 
These consist of two parts. The first is so-called “market intelligence”: the central bank’s daily 
transactions  with  financial  institutions,  which  provide  various  kinds  of  information  about 
market  participants,  developments  in  financial  products,  as  well  as  other  “news”.  These 
pieces of market information are valuable in creating a timely and accurate view of particular 
institutions and the market as a whole. The gathering and analyzing of this information is the 
core of “market intelligence”. 
The  second  part  of  the  central  bank’s  intelligence  activities  is  monitoring  and  feedback. 
Qualitative or supervisory information can be obtained from regular supervisory dialogue with 
regulated  entities. They  have  valuable  information,  and  by analyzing it thoroughly we get a 
grasp  of  the  details  of  market  information,  which  is  then  fed  back  to  these  institutions  if 
necessary. 
It  should  be  noted  here  that  information  coming  from  individual  financial  institutions  may 
include  subjective  or  in  some  cases  biased  content,  regardless  of whether  it  is  market 
information  or  information  acquired  through  regulatory  monitoring. We should  be  aware  of 
these biases, and good market intelligence is needed to gauge the extent of such bias and 
to compensate for it. 
Lessons from the past: necessity of proactive market intelligence 
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  three  examples  of  central  bank  intelligence. The  first example is its 
failure in the past. This is the so-called Paribas Shock of August 9, 2007, the precursor of the 
global financial crisis of 2008. 
On July 10, 2007, S&P and Moody’s announced that they would be reviewing the ratings of 
several  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  backed  by  subprime  housing  loan 
assets.  As  a  consequence,  the  AAA  ratings  of  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP) 
backed  by  these  RMBS  would  also  be  downgraded  accordingly.  This  looked  like  a  minor 
change in a marginal market of the US financial system. Unfortunately  however,  within  just 
one  year,  it  became  the  epicenter  of  a global financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  fund-raising  difficulties:  funds  under 
To understand the problem, we should be aware of the special role of money market funds 
(MMFs)  in  the  United  States.  US  MMFs  were  considered  to  be  extremely  safe  financial 
assets. One  of  the  primary  reasons  for  this  was  that  MMFs  were  only allowed to invest in 
AAA-rated  assets.  Therefore,  when  ratings  were  downgraded  for  ABCP,  MMFs  did  not 
reinvest  in  ABCP.  Then,  funds  that  originated  ABCP  and  used  it  to  raise  money  found 
themselves 
the  Bear  Stearns  umbrella  went 
bankrupt;  BNP  Paribas  moved  to  freeze  its  affiliated  funds’  new  applications  and 
redemptions. These  funds  were  the  structured  investment  vehicles (SIV) created by banks 
to  issue  ABCP. When  these  SIVs  were  unable  to  find funding sources,  their  parent  banks 
were forced to provide liquidity enhancement instead. At that time, nobody knew for certain 
which  banks’  SIVs  were  on  the  brink  of  extinction, and  which  banks  had  serious  liquidity 
problems.  Banks,  which  frequently  lend  each  other  money,  suddenly  became  aware  of 
counterparty risk, the risk that the other party in  a  transaction  might  suddenly  go  belly  up. 
They  began  to  worry  that  some  bank  somewhere  might  suddenly  be  unable  to  secure 
liquidity and fail. 
Indeed,  on  August  9,  a  liquidity  crisis  actually  occurred,  with  liquidity  drying  up quickly  in 
the 
facing  liquidity 
difficulties.  Chart  1  shows  an  unprecedented  spike  in  the  three  month  LIBOR-OIS 
spread,  showing  the  heightened  risk  premium  in 
the  European  interbank  market.  A 
liquidity crunch in interbank markets started, and it spread immediately to the United States 
(Chart  2).  Confronted  with  this  situation,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  promptly 
announced that it was prepared to supply massive  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the  short-term 
money  market. This  was  the  event that came to be known as the Paribas Shock. 
interbank  market.  Many  European  banks  were  among 
those 
Lesson: necessity of proactive market intelligence 
The  circumstances  surrounding  the  Paribas  Shock  naturally  beg  the  question:  Was  this 
event avoidable? Or at least, was there any telling sign that this type of event was just around 
the corner? 
As  the  description  of  the  event  shows,  there  are  four  important  pieces  of information 
that  the  policy  makers  should  have  known  and  which  would  have  helped  prevent  this 
event. The first is the asset position of the MMFs: their composition and quality. MMFs held 
a large amount of  AAA-rated ABCPs of  SIVs whose parents were European as well as US 
banks. These ABCPs were backed by US subprime loans, so that if the subprime loans were 
downgraded then these ABCPs would also be downgraded. The second vital information is 
possible side effects of the legal constraints  upon  the  MMFs. MMFs  could  hold  only  AAA-
rated  assets  so  that,  if  US subprime  loans  were  downgraded,  MMFs  could  not  reinvest 
in  ABCPs  of  the  SIVs. The  third  and  most  crucial  information  policy  makers  should  have 
had  is  knowledge  of  banks’  involvement  in  their  SIVs.  To  what  extent  were  those  banks 
obliged to support their  SIVs  with  liquidity  injections? Here  it  was  not  only  a  question  of 
contractual  arrangements,  but  reputations  were  also  at  stake.  The  fourth  piece  of  vital 
information  is  knowledge  about  the  inter-connectedness  among  banks  in  the  interbank 
market. 
It  is  clear  that  existing  statistics  and  routine  market  intelligence  were  grossly insufficient to 
gather  the  above  four  pieces  of  vital  information.  To  my  knowledge,  few,  if  any,  market 
participants  flagged  the  alarms  that  should  have  been  raised  by  any  of these four points. 
No statistics ever pointed out the danger. 
However, there were several, though obscure, signs flagging a possible problem, so  that a 
market intelligence unit alarmed by these signs might have detected the  problem  and  could 
have  helped  policy  makers  avoid  the  disaster. In  particular, there was a telling sign in the 
statistics  about  US  MMFs.  Chart  3  shows  an  upward  trend  in  the  total  assets  of  the  US 
MMFs  in  the  first  half  of  2007.  The  growth  rate  of  MMFs  was  fast,  though  it  did  not  look 
extraordinary. However, if you look at the share  of  “safe  assets”,  it  actually  declined  from 
the  start  of  the  year.  So,  this  chart  shows  that  by  looking  into  these  figures,  one  might 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have found some sign of abnormal risk taking in non-safe assets, including ABCP. Thus, if in 
addition,  the  market  intelligence  unit  had  detected  the  heavy  involvement  of  banks  in 
their  SIVs  issuing these  ABCP,  the  unit  might  have  sensed  a  possible  danger  of  liquidity 
crisis  in  the interbank  market,  and  might  have  been  able  to  help  the  authorities  prevent 
the crisis. In fact, after the Paribas Shock, the safe asset share jumped considerably and the 
total assets also skyrocketed, showing the strong flight to safety that devastated the ABCP 
market, and the ABS market in general. 
To  sum  up,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  liquidity  crisis  in  the  summer  of  2007 could have 
been avoided. However, proactive market intelligence, that is, detection of possible problems 
in  the  market  based  on  careful  monitoring  of  market  developments and  thorough  analysis 
of  market  statistics,  might  have  helped  contain  if  not  avoid  the  turmoil  in  the  interbank 
market, and thus might have ultimately lessened if  not negated the severity of the financial 
crisis of the following year. 
Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  Fed  and  other  central  banks,  as  well  as  private institutions, 
have  begun  to  collect  and  compile  a  wide  range  of  statistics  that  capture securitization. In 
particular, Chart 4 shows details of the asset composition of US MMFs. The chart indicates 
that MMFs may have already increased investment in commercial papers in 2006, the year 
before the Paribas Shock. 
Present achievement: best use of existing market information 
4. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  example,  which  is  the  present  achievement  of  market 
intelligence. This  is  about  property  prices,  and  the  issue  is  the  timing  of  the availability of 
market information. 
The financial crisis of 2008 was triggered by the bubble and subsequent bust in US house 
prices. There is a wealth of evidence detailing the close relationship between property price 
bubbles  and  financial  crises.  International  panel  studies  show  more  than  two-thirds  of 
46 systemic banking crises were preceded by house price boom-bust patterns, while 35 out 
of  51  house  price-bust  episodes  were  followed  by  a  crisis.1  However,  we  have  not  had 
access  to  good  property  price  indexes,  based  on  sound  economic  foundations  and 
comparable between countries and jurisdictions. Frustrated by this deficiency, in November 
2009, the G20 Ministers and Central Governors designated property price indexes as one of 
the most important data gaps to be filled. 
To  rectify  the  problem,  several  conferences  were  held  under  the  leadership  of  Eurostat, 
which gathered a wide range of experts on property prices from theory to data compilation. 
Based  on 
the  Handbook  on  Residential 
Property  Price  Indices  has  been  drafted,  and  the  finalized  version  of  the Handbook will be 
published very soon. Moreover, many countries and jurisdictions are now preparing their own 
property price indexes in accordance with the recommendations  of  the  Handbook. In  fact,  I 
have  learned  that  Japan’s  Ministry  of  Land,  Infrastructure,  Transport  and  Tourism  has 
almost  completed  the  development  of  a  new  series  of  residential  property  price  indexes 
using  the  procedure  recommended  in the  Handbook,  and  the  Ministry  is  about  to  start 
publishing  new  statistics  just  this morning. 
these  conferences  and  public  comments, 
                                                
1  Claessens,  Stijn,  M.  Ayhan  Kose,  and  Marco  E.  Terrones,  (2008),  “What  Happens  During  Recessions, 
Crunches and Busts?” IMF Working Paper 08/274 (Washington: International Monetary Fund) and Claessens, 
Stijn,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia,  Deniz  Igan,  and  Luc  Laeven,  (2010),  “Cross-Country  Experiences  and  Policy 
Implications from the Global Financial Crisis”, Economic Policy, Volume 25, pp. 267–293. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Issue of timeliness 
This  is  a  great  leap  forward  indeed  towards  having  reliable  and  accurate property price 
information.  However,  from  the  policy  maker’s  viewpoint,  the  situation  is  still  far  from 
satisfactory. It  should  be  emphasized  that,  for  a  policy  maker,  timely information  is  as 
important  as,  or  in  some  cases  more  important  than,  reliable  and accurate  information. 
According  to this  criterion,  many  property  price  indexes  are  not helpful in immediate policy 
making, since they inevitably lag behind market movements. 
To  see  why,  let  me  give  you  the  example  of  a  typical  Japanese  property transaction. 
Property  transactions  follow  a  series  of  stages  several  weeks  apart  from each  other,  and 
each  stage  usually  entails  different  prices,  namely:  the  initial  asking price, P1; the offered 
price, P2; the contract price, P3; and the price that is filed with the land registry office, P4. My 
collaborators and I have been able to get a unique data set of  a  large  number  of  property 
transactions  in  Greater  Tokyo  which  illustrates  these  four  stages.  Here  I  will  present  the 
results based on this data set.2 
Chart  5  depicts  the  timeline  graphically. From  P1  to  P2  takes  on average ten weeks, form 
P2 to P3 five and a half weeks, and finally from P3 to P4 fifteen and a half weeks. Thus, from 
P1 to P4 takes almost thirty one weeks, more than a half year. We  should  also  take  into 
account  the  time  taken  to  collect  and  compile  the information, which is itself  likely to be 
substantial,  as  in  the  case  of  GDP  and  CPI  data.  Thus,  if  the  authorities  use  the  most 
reliable  transaction  price  data  of  P4,  it  will  probably  take  almost  a  year.  From  the  policy 
maker’s viewpoint, this is often too late. 
To get the timeliest information about property market conditions, earlier reporting of P1, the 
initial asking price, is preferable. However, this is the asking price, not  the  transaction  price. 
There might  be a substantial bias in this asking price data because a seller wants to sell at 
a higher price, even though it may take much longer to strike  a  deal  or  he  is  never  able  to 
sell. In  fact,  Chart  6  shows  the  price distribution of P1, P2, P3 and P4. As expected, the 
initial asking price P1 has a higher average  than  the  price  P4  at  the  registry  office  (though 
there  is  the  caveat  that  the sample  population  of  P1  is  not  exactly  the  same  as  that  of 
P4). Thus,  we  face  an apparent trade-off: if you want timely information then you use P1, but 
it has non-negligible  bias. If  you  want  accurate  information,  then  you  use  P4,  but  it  has 
already become somewhat stale information by the time it is available. 
Best use of market information 
There  is,  however,  an  important  way  around  this  dilemma.  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
Handbook  recommends  hedonic  quality  adjustment  in  property  price  indexes  based  on 
detailed  micro  and  macro  market  information. There  are  various  ways  to conduct hedonic 
quality adjustment, among which a hedonic quantile regression approach is one of the most 
sophisticated and robust. Remarkably, after applying this quality adjustment to both P1 and 
P4 of our data set, we find the quality-adjusted price distribution based on P1 is very close 
to, and almost indistinguishable from, the quality-adjusted price distribution based on P4. 
Let us look at Chart 7, the quantile-quantile plots of two distributions. In the quantile-quantile 
graph,  if  two  distributions  are  identical  then  the  plotted  line  is  on  the  45  degree  line.  The 
upper chart illustrates the result of raw or unadjusted data of P1 (initial asking price) and P4 
(registered transaction price). This chart clearly shows the  upward  bias  in  the  initial  asking 
price  relative  to  the  registered  transaction  price. However, when quality is adjusted using a 
hedonic quantile regression method, the bias seems almost to have vanished, as shown in 
the lower chart. 
                                                
2  Shimizu, C., K. G. Nishimura, and T. Watanabe (2011) “House Prices at Different Stages of the Buying/Selling 
Process”,  Working  Paper  no.  69,  Research  Center  for  Price  Dynamics,  Institute  of  Economic  Research, 
Hitotsubashi University. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In a nut-shell, the result of this study shows that the initial asking price data, the timeliest  of 
all  price  information,  can  be  used  as  reliable  information  about  property prices,  so  long 
as quality is appropriately adjusted using a hedonic quantile regression method. So  we  can 
benefit  from  the  best  use  of  market  information,  with  respect  to  both  reliability  and 
timeliness. 
5. 
Guarding  against  future  problems:  shadow  banking  and  basic  information 
Gathering 
So  far,  we  have  examined  the  importance  of  market  intelligence  and  the  best  use  of 
market  information  in  the  past  and  the  present. I  am  now  looking  towards  the future, and 
considering  what  is  needed  to  guard  against  future  problems.  The  pressing  problem  that 
comes  first  to  mind  is  that  of  shadow  banking,  a  problem  in  the  past,  but still  a  potential 
problem  in  the future. Since  regulations  on  banks  are  to  be  tightened further, new types of 
shadow banking may appear,  little known  at present but  potentially threatening  to financial 
stability in the future. 
Modern  shadow  banking  activities  are  largely  based  on  financial  markets,  and  hence  are 
likely to create innovation there. They change themselves rapidly in response to changes in 
market  conditions  and  regulations.  Moreover,  they  have  broad  interconnectedness  with 
banks and other financial institutions. Given this situation, in what  way should central banks 
gather  valid  and  vital  information  about  them? Here again, I believe that the key is to utilize 
various sources of market intelligence alongside other sources of information. Furthermore, I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  intelligence  work  should  be  properly  followed  by  the 
establishment of new statistics about shadow banking. 
Various approaches of market intelligence 
Let  me  explain  the  efforts  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  this  respect.  The  Bank  monitors 
shadow  banking  entities  and  activities  through  various  channels. The  nature and  scope of 
the Bank’s monitoring are depicted in Chart 8. Amongst these channels,  direct  monitoring  of 
major  shadow  banking  entities  is  of  course  the  most  significant.  Thus,  the  bank  has 
increased the number of staff directly monitoring major securities  companies. However,  it  is 
practically  impossible  to  conduct  dialogues  with  all  financial  institutions  of  a  shadow 
banking  nature,  and  moreover,  shadow  banking  activities  tend  to  change  rapidly  with 
developments  in  financial  markets.  It  should  be  noted  that  shadow  banking  entities  are 
deeply  involved  in  funding  and  investment  with  various  financial  institutions.  So  indirect 
monitoring  through  banks,  monitoring  through  the  payments  and  settlements  system,  and 
market  intelligence  through  market  participants  all  become  important.  The  Bank  also 
closely  watches  shadow  banking activities in securitization, securities lending and repos. 
For instance, we have started direct monitoring of hedge funds and investment trusts  as  well 
using  market 
than  before. 
Furthermore,  although  we  do  not  directly  monitor  finance  companies,  since large  finance 
companies  are  owned  by  banks,  we  monitor  them  by  monitoring  the banks. 
It is then crucial to cross-check the information gathered. Chart 9 illustrates the point. In this 
regard, it is important to monitor banks as counterparties of shadow  banking entities. This  is 
because  bank  activities  are 
interconnected  with  shadow  banking  activities.  Market 
information in the financial markets is also particularly valuable. Central banks  are especially 
well-positioned  to  collect  valuable information  on  the  activities  of  participants  in  financial 
markets,  since  they  not  only  gather  information  relevant  to  monetary  policy,  but  they 
also  operate  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Information  on  market  practices  and 
financial  innovations  can often  provide  early  warning  of  risks,  and  hence  are  especially 
important  among  the various kinds of market intelligence. 
through  market  participants  much  more 
intelligence 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The case in point is found in the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States. Securitized 
products  were  originated  with  financial  engineering  and  distributed  without appropriate  risk 
assessment. This  was  partly  due  to  an  overly  optimistic  assessment of  risk  diversification. 
However,  this  risk  became  increasingly  visible  in  the  market  as the market evolved into a 
new phase. 
Feedback of market intelligence 
Another important role of market intelligence is to feed information back to the market, and 
thus to find potential information gaps to be filled. For example, based on market intelligence, 
the Bank of Japan designs and compiles the “Tokyo Money Market Survey”, which provides 
an overall quantitative assessment of the money markets.3 
The  survey  depicts,  among  other  things,  the  current  interconnectedness  among  financial 
institutions  through  repo  transactions,  as  is  shown  in  Chart  10.  This  chart  shows  that 
securities  companies  borrow  specific  JGBs  through  SC repos  mainly  to  cover  their  short 
position  in  bond  trading.  Most  of  their  short-term  money  is  funded  through  GC  repos 
from  trust  banks,  while  some  funds  come  from banks and money market dealers. 
This  kind  of  quantitative  understanding  provides  both  new  perspectives  for central  bank 
business  and  wider  grounds 
institutions  and  market 
participants.  In  fact,  the  result  of  these  dialogues  will  be  examined  and  used  by  financial 
institutions  to  develop  more  sound  business  practices.  Also,  the  feedback  of any  relevant 
information  will  be  reflected  in  the  next  survey  data.  Starting  this  year,  we  will  begin  to 
conduct this survey regularly. 
Overall, market intelligence is absolutely crucial for central banks in maintaining the  stability 
of  the  financial  system. I  believe  that  this  flexible  system  of  monitoring shadow  banking 
entities  and  activities,  based  on  market  intelligence,  can  provide  a  good  pilot  study for 
other central banks to consider when they want to identify emerging risks and vulnerabilities 
in their own countries and jurisdictions. 
for  dialogue  with 
financial 
Concluding remarks 
6. 
Let  me  now  come  to  my  conclusion. As  we  all  know  and  feel,  central  banks around  the 
world have faced serious challenges, especially since the financial crisis of 2008. Financial 
stability is now clearly marked as an essential prerequisite for economic  stability,  and  it  is 
thus  the  responsibility  of  central  banks  to  maintain  this stability.  Moreover,  the financial 
turmoil following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and still  lingering  somewhat  in  the global 
market,  has  clearly  proved  that  existing  statistics  are  not  sufficient  for  policy  making,  in 
particular policy making involving financial markets. Financial  markets  are  fast  moving  and 
“mutate”  in  many  ways  in  a  relatively short  period  of  time. Therefore,  I  have  argued  in 
this  speech  that  gathering  and  thoroughly  analyzing  market  information,  which  is  often 
described  as  market  intelligence,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  and  should  be  utilized 
proactively alongside conventional economic statistics. 
The  reason  I  have  stressed  market  intelligence,  or  more  specifically,  central  bank 
intelligence, is that central banks have a clear comparative advantage in extracting valuable 
and  vital  information,  especially  from  financial  markets.  Central  banks  are  the  unique 
organization that transacts with the widest range of financial market participants. 
I  have  explained  how  this  market  intelligence  works  in  the  case  of  shadow  banking  in 
Japan.  The  most  important  point  is  to  extend  these  intelligence  activities  to  new 
financial institutions and products to detect possible problems. The existing framework at  the 
                                                
3  Bank  of  Japan,  Financial  Markets  Department  (2009, 2010),  “The  Development and  Challenges  of Japan’s 
Money Markets: Tokyo Money Market Survey” (available only in Japanese). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank  of  Japan  is  versatile  and  can  incorporate  new  elements  relatively  easily. However, 
problems  remain  about  the  depth  or  intensity  of  these  intelligence  activities:  that  is,  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  information  currently  available  may  not  be  sufficient  for  detecting 
possible risks. Thus, we are only at the starting line, and there is still a long way to go. 
Finally,  I  should  emphasize  that  market  intelligence  has  significantly  improved  central 
banks’ economic  statistics,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future. We  have learned from 
the  failures  in  the  summer  of  2007,  that  we  must  extend  the  coverage  and  improve  the 
quality  of  statistics  concerning  non-depository  financial  institutions.  We  can  also  take 
advantage  of  new  methods  and  new  information  sources  to  get  the  best  use  of  market 
information  in  constructing  timely  statistics,  as  shown  in  the  case  of property prices. 
In closing, I would like to emphasize again the point I stated in the Introduction, the point that 
I  would  most  like  to  convey  to  you.  Central  bank  statisticians  should  be  more  than  good 
statisticians,  simply  maintaining  the  quality  of  existing  statistics. They should also be good 
sleuths or intelligence agents, detecting signs of future developments that may change those 
statistics, and thus may change our world. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
