Mojmír Hampl: The euro – the case of the European monetary integration 
project and its former hegemon 
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Mont Pelerin 
Society Annual Conference, Prague, 4 September 2012. 
 Many thanks to the organizers for their kind invitation – I’m really honoured to speak on such 
a distinguished panel. 
But excuse me first for making a small detour: the organizers forgot to mention in my CV that 
I also had the honour – together with a group of distinguished colleagues (some of whom are 
here today) – to help launch Laissez Faire here 14 years ago. This is a magazine devoted to 
the  promotion  of  liberal/libertarian  ideas  in  the  Czech  public  domain  (“liberal”  not  in  the 
American sense of this word). Such libertarianism is rather unusual intellectual equipment for 
a poor central banker, especially in the current times. However, I very much believe it is an 
advantage, and many of the ideas mentioned in Laissez Faire are very much missing from 
normal European policy debates. What a shame. 
But back to the topic:  
What is the euro? As Barry Eichengreen demonstrated, it is a really unique animal, a unique 
monetary arrangement. I do not buy into many of Barry Eichengreen’s ideas, but I do agree 
with this particular statement. Why? Here is my definition of the euro. 
It is a “currency without a state”, in which a group of fiscally sovereign countries shares a 
single currency and a single central bank issuing fiat paper money, yet evidently lacks a clear 
monetary hegemon.  
So the euro is not just a different version of the gold standard, as Balczerowicz, de Soto and 
many others argue. Not least because of the fact that unlike any commodity standard, the 
euro lacks anything resembling an ultimate numéraire. 
And more importantly, within the eurozone Germany is not a monetary hegemon anymore. 
Yes,  the  German  mark  and  the  Bundesbank  were  clear  monetary  hegemons  in  Western 
Europe in the pre-euro era. And remember, it was argued that the euro would become “the 
German mark for the whole of Europe” in the many public debates that went on in Germany 
prior to its introduction. 
Yet it is evident that it could not and cannot function in this way. Yes, monetary unification in 
Europe does not make much sense without Germany. This is still true. But my definition of a 
clear  hegemon  is:  it  should  have  the  right  to  set  the  rules  and  to  force  others  to  behave 
accordingly, the right to enforce the rules. And it has to have the right even to breach the 
rules itself and still not allow the others to breach the very same rules. 
But this is not true for Germany after the introduction of the euro. To put it simply, eurozone 
membership turned Germany from a hegemon into just one important player in rule making 
and  practical  policy  making.  If  I  use  a  simple  analogy  from  the  world  of  motoring,  in  the 
German  mark  era  Germany  controlled  the  steering  wheel,  pedals  and  gearstick  of  the 
monetary vehicle, whereas in the euro era – and especially since the crisis broke out – it has 
had a firm foot only on the brake. And only sometimes, one must add. 
Why is that? Well, in a euro-style monetary union, many important issues are put to a vote 
(or complicated negotiations), and votes and negotiations typically have different outcomes 
than dictates or decisions of a hegemon. If there had ever been a notion that the euro could 
be  as  depoliticised  as  the  former  mark,  it  simply  had  to  fail.  In  reality  it  had  to  be  more 
politicised  by  definition.  The  euro  could  not  be  a  depoliticised  German  mark,  because  in 
many key decisions and respects it had to be a rather more politicised French franc, Italian 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
lira or Spanish peseta. Otherwise, it seems to me, it could not have come into being in the 
existing set-up in the first place. 
A bitter remark: Allan Meltzer once said the ECB’s biggest advantage over the US Federal 
Reserve System is that it doesn’t have a government standing against it. This, he believes, is 
the best safeguard of the ECB’s independence. But the opposite and rather bitter argument 
can  also  be  made.  The  ECB  at  times  has  to  stand  against  all  17  governments  of  the 
eurozone member states. 
I do not want to talk about nominal and real convergence, about rigidities, OCA arguments 
etc.  Rather,  let’s  take  one  example.  Many  complain  that  it  is  so  hard  to  make  real 
macroeconomic adjustments within the current eurozone, among its individual states. But if I 
understand monetary history correctly, the eurozone was created partly to make standard 
adjustments more complicated. The fear of constant “humiliating devaluations” was one of 
the reasons why some countries wanted so much to have a single currency with Germany 
and wanted a transfusion of credibility for their own economies. So the desire to free ride on 
the credibility of the former hegemon was a part of the very basic idea of some, monetary 
weaker, countries. 
We are  so  happy  to  have  got  rid  of  humiliating  devaluations,  but  we  have  not  offered  any 
better adjustment mechanism instead. When market forces appear on a different front – say, 
the bond market – many in the EU want to destroy or bypass these forces again and not to 
adjust the economies that have imbalances. 
The funny thing is that many are happy that the supposed tragedy of devaluations is over, 
but  what  we  are  now  requiring  of  the  southern  axis  of  the  eurozone  is  a  competitive 
devaluation. But in a harder-to-achieve form: a so-called internal devaluation. So we have 
got rid of the politically unpleasant adjustment mechanism and have very little instead. 
Yes, the enlightened founding fathers (such as Otmar Issing) knew many of these things in 
advance and tried to minimize the free-riding by setting certain safeguards against it. Despite 
that, I believe many must be bitterly disappointed or shocked that many of these good rules 
proved to be so time-inconsistent, or dynamically inconsistent. 
Yes, many good rules have already been breached or are close to being breached (some of 
the Golden Rules of European law, one should add): 
• 
• 
• 
the no bail-out clause  
flirting with monetary financing of sovereign debts  
consideration  of  something  like  potentially  permanent  public  support  for  financial 
institutions operating on the single market  
I believe that these rules are especially dear to this audience. So one has to ask: What are 
the prospects of the project when to keep it going you need first to breach some fundamental 
rules that should have created a solid and long-lasting basis for it? 
It is by definition hard to enforce rules among sovereigns, even when those rules are more 
important than fiscal or monetary ones – look at the United Nations, for instance. So the only 
thing  that  remains  rather  difficult  to  understand  is  the  former  hegemon’s  efforts  to  resolve 
what is, for it, the awkward situation of non-compliance with and infringement of the rules of 
the club (including its own infringements) by creating new and ostensibly better rules for the 
same club with the same members. 
Yes, Otmar Issing, for instance, rightly warns against Eurobonds and simple fiscal unification, 
but with the European Stability Mechanism and the planned banking union we are effectively 
creating  something  like  common  fiscal  liabilities  and  common  bonds,  just  with  less 
transparency. 
Arguably, the German mark was – from a monetary point of view – a rather well administered 
pan-European public good. After the euro, this public good became overconsumed. Philipp 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bagus,  sitting  today  here  in  this  room,  argues  that  the  euro  is  a  classical  example  of  a 
“tragedy of the commons” from the start, and that the smaller and weaker countries therefore 
inevitably ended up racing to make maximum use of the commons for their own benefit at the 
expense of the rest, thereby destroying this shared asset. The German mark can indeed be 
viewed as a sort of public good that became the subject of decisions made outside the public 
sphere in Germany and hence was fundamentally transformed. 
The  average  quality  of  the  public  good  called  monetary  stability  and  good  currency  in  the 
eurozone  will  very  probably  go  down  with  the  ultimate  demise  of  the  former  European 
monetary hegemon. Let that be a warning to those countries which have not yet signed up to 
the monetary integration project. The fall of the former hegemon is relevant not only for the 
current crisis, but also for the future of the monetary order in Europe. And here I do not see 
any positive perspectives, I must bitterly admit. I am not saying that the euro has to collapse, 
but  I  am  pretty  sure  that  if  it  prevails,  it  will  be  a  completely  different  currency  implying 
completely different monetary conditions from what the Germans in particular hoped for. 
And Germany faces a tough choice – further integration or a perfect monetary order. This 
question is rather new and painful. The answer to it will influence all of us, I believe. So let’s 
wish them good luck. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
