Vítor Constâncio: How fit are statistics for use in macro-prudential 
oversight? 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Sixth 
ECB Statistics Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 17 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Macro-prudential analysis and oversight are not new tasks for central banks. In broad terms, 
the objective of macro-prudential analysis and oversight is to identify and prevent systemic 
risk, so as to minimise the costs that financial instability can impose on the real economy. 
Pursuing  this  objective  calls  for  the  definition  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  intermediate 
goals, which can pose considerable analytical and informational challenges.  
Over the past few years, the financial crisis has clearly illustrated just how devastating the 
materialisation of systemic risk can be for the financial sector and the broader economy. In 
particular, the financial crisis has demonstrated the need for a coherent and well-articulated 
macro-prudential policy framework at the national, European and global level. In this respect, 
it  exposed  deficiencies  in  the  information  base  on  which  macro-prudential  oversight 
was being conducted. It is on this latter topic that I will focus my presentation today. 
In assessing the question as to how fit statistics are for use in macro-prudential oversight, I 
will  outline  the  data  needed  for  macro-prudential  analysis,  touching  upon  the  ECB’s 
responsibilities  in  the  field  of  macro-prudential  oversight.  I  will  then  move  on  to  reflect  on 
what  has  been  achieved  so  far,  paying  particular  attention  to  the  macro  and  micro-
dimensions  of  data  requirements.  Finally,  I  will  highlight  what  is  missing  and  mention  a 
number of important ongoing initiatives that could help to overcoming the key challenges in 
terms data that we still need to deal with. 
to 
identify  plausible  and  (systemically) 
The macro-prudential oversight function and the role of the ECB 
2. 
Let me start by reflecting on the macro-prudential oversight function. There are three main 
components  in  the  macro-prudential  oversight  process.  The  first  concerns  the  surveillance 
important  sources  of  risks  and 
needed 
vulnerabilities  on  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  the  individual  and  collective  strength  and 
robustness  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the  financial  system  –  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructures. The second involves the assessment of the potential costs and the ability of 
the financial system to cope with these costs should some combination of the identified 
risks and vulnerabilities materialise. This requires the ability to measure (and model) the 
potential costs and to calibrate the plausibility and importance of the various risks. The third 
component is the possible policy response that needs to be clearly justified and interlinked 
with  systemic  risk  assessments.  In  particular,  it  should  inform  policy  decisions  on  the 
appropriate timing of interventions and the selection of tools.  
The  role  that  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  EU  Member  States  play  in 
contributing to financial stability is set out in the Treaty on European Union. In the wording 
of the Treaty, the ECB is requested to contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities with respect to the prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability of the financial system. Furthermore, the ECB’s financial stability function is 
also related to its responsibility for overseeing financial market infrastructures. The legal 
framework under which the ECB collects statistical data has in fact recently been extended to 
expressly recognise its powers to collect data for this purpose. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  2011  the  EU  institutional  framework  was  revised  to  explicitly  address  both  macro  and 
micro-prudential  supervision.  This  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  European  System  of 
Financial  Supervision,  the  three  new  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The ECB is in charge of providing analytical 
and statistical support to the ESRB, notably by collecting and processing information that 
feeds into discussions within the ESRB.1 
What has been achieved so far? 
3. 
In  recognition  of  an  increasingly  interconnected  financial  system,  considerable  progress  is 
being made in the enhancement and development of new statistics at the euro area, EU and 
global level. 
At  the  euro  area  level,  improvements  in  ECB  statistics  are  notable  with  regard  to,  in 
particular, the development of enhanced statistics relating to monetary financial institutions 
(MFIs)  and  to  shadow  banking  (e.g.  securitisation  vehicles).  The  Securities  Holdings 
Statistics  can  also  contribute  to  providing  a  better  picture  of  interconnectedness  at  the 
financial system level and for sectors of the euro area economy. In the same vein, the 
new Centralised Securities Database of the European System of Central Banks that holds 
complete and consistent reference information on individual securities is a major step in the 
direction  of  a  better  understanding  of  the  map  of  cross-exposures  through  securities 
holdings. 
Further  work  on  enhancing  statistical  sources  and  output  has  been  carried  out  in  recent 
years.  A  high  priority  has  been  given  to  the  development,  collection  and  maintenance  of 
conceptually sound and consistent granular data, and – by exploiting sources of micro data – 
to monitoring credit exposures, especially those of large financial groups. In addition, efforts 
have been made to obtain a consistent picture on securitisation and credit risk transfers in 
general.  At  the  same  time,  work  is  being  undertaken  in  cooperation  with  the  European 
Statistical System (Eurostat and National Statistical Institutes) to improve the availability of 
macroeconomic data, as well as financial and non-financial accounts statistics. 
In the context of the ESRB-related work, data-sharing agreements have been put in place 
to allow the regular provision by the ESAs of aggregated information to the ECB in support of 
the ESRB’s risk analysis. A number of data sets have already been, or are about to be, made 
available by the ESAs: 
 
banking  sector  data,  collected  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  on  a 
quarterly basis, relate to: supervisory data on solvency, credit risk and asset quality, 
earnings risk and balance sheet structure ( key risk indicators), as well as to data on 
large  exposures,  broken  down  by  instrument  and  by  sectoral  and  geographic 
counterpart, for samples of EU large banking groups; 
insurance  sector  data  collected  by  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational 
Pension Funds Authority (EIOPA) on an annual basis and, possibly, at a higher 
frequency  relate  to  aggregate  solvency  and  profit-and-loss  data  for  large  EU 
insurance groups; 
quarterly  data  provided  by  the  European  Securities  Markets  Authority  (ESMA) 
refer to the number of shares admitted to trading in the European Economic Area 
(EEA), by country and by market, as well as to the list of EEA markets. 
                                                   
1   Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  1096/2010  of  17  November  2010  conferring  specific  tasks  upon  the  European 
Central  Bank  concerning  the  functioning  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (Official  Journal  of  the 
European Union, L 331, 15.12.2010, pp. 162 ff.). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The ECB, in turn, is in the process of making datasets available to the ESRB and the ESAs 
that  meet  their  requirements.  These  cover,  in  particular,  monetary  and  financial  statistics, 
namely MFI balance sheet data, MFI interest rate statistics, investment funds statistics and 
statistics  on  securitisation,  as  well  as  consolidated  banking  data.  Information  from  market 
data  providers,  available  via  the  ECB’s  Market  Database,  as  well  as  from  international 
institutions such as the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Eurostat or the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), which is part of the datasets collected by the ECB, complements the 
set of information to support the ESRB’s analysis and deliberations. 
Cooperation is under way to ensure that the new legislative initiatives of the three ESAs 
incorporate  ESRB  requirements  to  the  extent  that  they  can  be  addressed  by  using 
supervisory data. Extensive work has already been carried out with the EBA and EIOPA on 
the  new  supervisory  templates  to  be  introduced  in  the  next  few  years.  Given  the  need  for 
agility  in  responding  to  new  data  to  cover  ESRB  requests  for  information,  work  on 
procedures to conduct ad hoc surveys has been carried out, ensuring that the confidentiality 
issues are duly resolved.  
All this work requires a very close and ongoing cooperation not only within the ESCB, but 
also with the ESAs and national supervisory authorities, within other collaboration fora and 
with  many  other  stakeholders,  in  particular  in  the  industries  concerned,  as  well  as  with 
international organisations in the context of the G20 initiatives. This cooperation is ensured 
through a Contact Group recently appointed by the ESRB Steering Committee at my request, 
and it has already proved to be very useful. Inter alia, this cooperation will allow longer-term 
data  requirements  of  the  ESRB  to  be  met.  In  the  future,  a  key  issue  in  connection  with 
minimising  the  reporting  burden  of  the  financial  sector  is  the  ability  to  exchange  relevant 
datasets. Procedures are in place to ensure that confidentiality is protected. At the moment, 
however, these procedures are unduly cumbersome. Appropriate ways to exchange the data 
and protect their confidentiality more efficiently will be considered. 
Against the background of increasing demand for rigour and quality in systemic risk analysis, 
it  was  to  be  expected  that  the  ECB’s  legal  powers  in  the  field  of  statistics  would  be 
activated in order to improve the information base that is available, with a focus on the euro 
area. To some extent, this has already been undertaken by developing enhanced statistics 
on  MFIs,  as  well  as  statistics  on  securities  holdings.  In  fact,  the  amendment  of  Council 
Regulation  2533/98,  governing  the  ECB’s  powers  to  collect  statistical  information,  in  2009 
enables the ECB to impose requirements on euro area banks and insurance companies to 
provide data, also for financial stability purposes.  
Macro and micro-dimensions of data requirements 
4. 
The use of the prefix “macro” and “micro” in the context of the new institutional environment 
may create some confusion on the nature of the work to support systemic risk analysis and 
related data inputs. There is no such thing like a clear separation of macro – or aggregated – 
data inputs that are used in macro-prudential analysis from micro-data, i.e. data at the level 
of  individual  firms,  used  in  micro-prudential  analysis.  As  mentioned  before,  a  range  of 
important  data  needed  for  macro-prudential  analysis  relate  to  firm-specific  data  on 
financial  firms.  Risk  assessment  tools  for  example,  such  as  stress  tests  to  assess  the 
relevance  of  specific  risk  scenarios,  are  labelled  macro-stress  tests  (as  opposed  to  the 
“micro”  tests  run  by  banks  individually  at  the  request  of  the  regulator).  Nevertheless,  the 
usefulness of  these  tools  depends on  the  quality  and  detail  of  the  bank-specific data.  The 
relevance  of  the  results  for  macro-prudential  purposes  is,  of  course,  to  be  found  in  the 
aggregated  figures  (the  impact  on  banking  sector  capital)  and  their  subsequently  interplay 
with the macro-financial environment, lending activities and overall growth. 
For stress testing tools, selected supervisory data are important for achieving reliable results. 
However,  for  other  types  of  analytical  tools  and  indicators,  the  use  of  publicly  available 
information  may  be  sufficient,  or  even  preferable  for  reasons  such  as  the  comparability  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
data  across  financial  firms  or  transparency.  In  official  financial  stability  publications,  for 
example,  it  is  often  considered  important  that  readers  and  market  analysts  are  able  to 
replicate analyses with information in the public domain. 
Generally speaking, while it is essential that supervisory data are well protected, there would 
be merit in distinguishing between different layers of confidentiality and, thereby, to facilitate 
that  selected  supervisory  information  is  made  available  for  macro-prudential  analysis. 
Furthermore, in view of the importance attached to publicly available data, there is a need for 
this  information  to  be  harmonised  and  provided  in  a  standardised  format  that  is  easy  to 
access.  As  in  any  other  policy  field,  the  higher  the  quality  of  the  input  data,  the  more 
reliable are the results of analytical work, and thus the policy decisions.  
In  addition,  there  is  the  definition  of  data  confidentiality.  Taking  an  extreme  view,  all 
information  that  has  not  been  published  could  be  labelled  “confidential”,  while  the  other 
extreme would be to make everything public. It would be fair to say that the “definition” used 
in Europe appears to be stricter than that in other jurisdictions. For example, some regulators 
such  as  the  US  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examinations  Council  publish  selected 
supervisory  information  on  banking  institutions  operating  in  the  US  market,  including  on 
subsidiaries of European banking groups, regularly (on a quarterly basis). Parts of these data 
are “confidential” in Europe, but this is not so on the other side of the Atlantic. As mentioned 
earlier, a change in attitude by EU financial regulators would greatly benefit the quality of the 
risk-monitoring and risk-evaluation work undertaken by macro-prudential bodies. In addition, 
it would provide a concrete signal of increased transparency to market analysts and financial 
market participants. In turn, it would help significantly to minimise the reporting burden of the 
industry. 
Let me try to illustrate my point with some examples.  
 
The  breakdowns  of  banks’  credit  exposures  by  type  of  collateral  or 
counterparty  sector  (e.g.  central  government,  non-financial  institutions,  financial 
institutions,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  residential  mortgages  or 
commercial property) are reported to supervisory authorities, but these breakdowns 
are  not  part  of  regular  harmonised  public  financial  reporting.  Hence,  surveillance 
indicators  and  assessment  exercises  based  on  publicly  available  credit  exposure 
data may by impaired by the high level of aggregation of the information disclosed. 
For example, if early warning signals were to point to risks emerging in commercial 
property or the SME sector, it would be important to assess the relevance of banks’ 
exposures to this particular asset class in a systematic way. This is not possible if all 
credit exposures are disclosed in aggregate. Furthermore, the breakdown of credit 
exposures can be rather important for monitoring banks’ risk profiles in the macro-
prudential context. In risk assessment work, the quality of  top-down stress testing 
results may be compromised if the distribution of credit exposures by bank across 
the  main  exposure  classes  needs  to  be  approximated.  Likewise,  information  on 
credit risk parameters, notably on incurred losses by type of exposure, would need 
to be consistently disclosed by banks, or to be made available to macro-prudential 
authorities from supervisory sources. In turn, owing to the importance of such credit 
exposure  data,  I  much  welcome  the  efforts  being  undertaken  to  harmonise  the 
datasets in existing credit registers, subject also to an improved coverage, even if 
this can only complement extensive supervisory reports. 
The analysis of financial institutions’ sovereign debt exposures constitutes another 
example where (regular) publicly available information has proved to be insufficient 
to carry out a reliable macro-prudential analysis. On the eruption of the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  market  participants  reacted  abruptly  to  any  news  concerning  those 
exposures. Analysis on the basis of aggregated data on banks’ consolidated foreign 
claims  vis-à-vis  the  public  sector  in  several  countries  proved  to  be  too  imprecise. 
When  the  individual  exposures  to  sovereign  debt  of  the  largest  players  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4 
  European banking system were released by the EBA in the context of the stress test 
exercise  in  July  2011,  spillover  effects  diminished  and  markets  started  to 
differentiate  across  the  banks.  In  this  case,  enhanced  transparency  proved  to  be 
helpful in influencing markets and market participants’ behaviour.  
Examples  of  indicators  where  individual  bank  data  would  sharpen  macro-
prudential analysis are numerous. In the context of the analysis and assessment 
of  funding  vulnerabilities,  reporting  on  banks’  reliance  on  retail  and  wholesale 
funding  has  ample  scope  for  improvement.  Details  of  banks’  deposits,  interbank, 
senior and subordinated debt are poorly disclosed, and the analysis based on loan-
to-deposit ratios, currently the best proxy for maturity mismatches, can provide an 
only incomplete picture of possibly emerging imbalances. A critical area is also that 
of asset quality indicators, the comparability of which is very poor across banks in 
Europe  on  account  of  different  definitions  of  non-performing  assets  and  loan  loss 
provisions. A more granular disclosure of data could allow the construction of more 
meaningful  sets  of 
indicators  and  prevent  misleading  comparisons  across 
institutions. On the analysis of capital adequacy, uncertainly about the computation 
of risk-weighted assets is shifting the focus to indicators calculated on the basis of 
total assets or tangible assets, balance-sheet equity and leverage ratios.  
Clearly,  in  the  medium-term,  a  higher  quality  of  data  for  financial  stability  surveillance  and 
assessment  may  also  be  achieved  through  a  better  disclosure  policy  on  the  part  of 
financial institutions. Benefits would come also from timely and harmonised reporting. 
5. 
What is missing: remaining data gaps and other challenges confronting 
macro-prudential analysis 
While  data  gaps  can  never  be  closed  in  full  –  also  because  they  are  a  moving  target  – 
attempts to reduce these gaps are vital. 
With respect to macro-level data, efforts to improve the effective coverage of the so-called 
shadow  banking  sector  –  i.e.  of  credit  intermediation,  liquidity  and  maturity  transformation 
activities  that  take  place  outside  the  regulated  banking  system  –  need  to  be  continued. 
Important components of the shadow banking system include certain money market funds, 
structured investment vehicles, off-balance-sheet vehicles (reliant on banks’ credit lines) and 
securities lenders. Although some progress has been made, data gaps remain that render 
the  proper  monitoring  and  assessment  of  systemic  risks  arising  from  securities  financing 
transactions  (notable  via  repurchase  agreements  and  securities  lending)  unfeasible. 
Challenges  also  arise  from  the  activities  of  the  shadow  banking  system  that  go  beyond  a 
specific group of entities or types of business. Regular information on margins, on other risk 
management practices and on the use of the various types of collateral, as well as on the 
maturity and liquidity profiles, is important for assessing the risks associated with securities 
lending activities from a qualitative and quantitative point of view. Surveys on credit terms in 
securities  financing  and  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets,  as  have  been 
launched by a number of central banks (around the world) and, soon, by the ECB, are a step 
in the right direction. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) is also monitoring efforts to improve 
data on shadow banking and OTC transactions.  
Even in the case of the regulated sector, objectives have not yet been met. At present, most 
efforts  relate  to  harmonising,  increasing  the  frequency,  achieving  more  granularity  and 
extending the coverage of the data for financial sectors in the EU. 
Given  the  important  role  played  by  contagion  in  the  recent  crisis,  data  should  enable 
analyses of the interlinkages – notably across financial institutions, and between them and 
the shadow banking system. Information on interlinkages between important players in the 
financial  system,  including  counterparty  credit  exposures  in  different  forms,  funding 
exposures  of  individual  financial  firms,  as  well  as  detailed  information  on  their  maturity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
mismatches  and  leverage,  is  necessary.  This  is  because  vulnerabilities  can  stem,  for 
example,  from  common  exposures  in  lending  activities,  from  securities  transactions,  from 
positions in derivatives markets, from funding relationships, or from settlement and clearing 
functions.  More  data  on  the  granularity  of  balance-sheet  exposures  and  across  types  of 
financial  instruments  are  essential  inputs  for  evaluating  propagation  effects  with  contagion 
and spillover models. Recent initiatives in central bank statistics also address interlinkages 
beyond  the  sample  of  large  players  –  for  example,  by  means  of  so-called  “from  whom  to 
whom” information on deposits and loans from financial corporations, or through securities 
holding statistics with a view to also creating “who to whom” data for various sectors of the 
economy in the Euro Area Accounts. Dedicated ad hoc surveys, for example in the context of 
the ESRB’s work at an EU-wide level, should also contribute to shedding light on this topic. 
Sufficiently granular information would facilitate linking the regulated financial sector with the 
shadow banking sector.  
In  addition,  enhancing  information  on  financial  conglomerates  –  banking  groups  with 
substantial  activities  over  and  beyond  the  banking  sector  –  would  be  essential,  as  non-
banking  activities  may  be  systemically  important.  In  the  case  of  financial  conglomerates, 
contagion  and  concentration  risks  can  be  exacerbated  by  the  increased  intra-group 
complexity and potential conflicts of interest.  
At the micro-level, improvements to data for characterising interconnectedness are being 
pushed forward by several initiatives with different objectives and time lines. Let me mention 
three: (i) the revision of the reporting framework for large exposures by the EBA (for micro-
prudential supervision), (ii) the FSB’s common template (limited to a small number of globally 
systemic institutions) to improve data on global banking interlinkages and (iii) a UK exercise 
to collect interbank data on recovery and resolution plans (with very detailed instrument and 
maturity breakdowns). While these initiatives address primarily micro-prudential data needs 
for  the  time  being,  their  use  for  macro-purposes  could  be  envisaged,  provided  that  data 
confidentiality  is  preserved  and  that  requests  are  duly  justified.  For  macro-prudential 
oversight,  the  importance  of  reducing  gaps  in  the  data  on  credit  and  funding  exposures 
beyond jurisdictions and the sample of global players, appears particularly relevant. As the 
crisis has illustrated, the structure of bank liabilities and the way in which assets are funded 
are of utmost importance for understanding maturity mismatches and interlinkages.  
Related  to  funding,  data  gaps  also  arise  from  limited  information  on  the  degree  of  asset 
encumbrance  stemming  from  secured  funding,  as  well  as  from  inadequate  data  on  the 
levels  and  characteristics  of  innovative  sources  of  funding  used  by  banks.  At  present, 
these  elements  are  essential  for  analysing  fragilities  in  the  funding  models  of  banks 
established  in  the  EU.  Uncertainty  about  the  level  of  banks’  asset  encumbrance  is  also 
hampering market participants’ capacity to assess banks’ creditworthiness, thereby reducing 
the availability and increasing the costs of unsecured funding. Risks to financial stability can 
also stem from novel sources of funding such as exchange traded funds (ETFs) or liquidity 
swaps.  There  is  no  consistent framework  at  the  EU  level  for  collecting  data  on  the  use  of 
these instruments, but attempts to limit information gaps on this topic in the EU are under 
way, possibly by means of ad hoc surveys under the aegis of the ESRB. 
Concluding remarks 
6. 
As mentioned earlier in my remarks today, data challenges would be far more modest, and 
the need for supervisory information reduced, if the level of public disclosure, the quality 
and the accessibility of, and consistency in, financial public reporting were more satisfactory. 
This would also benefit market participants at large – notably by reducing uncertainty with 
respect  to  counterparties.  Further  encouragement  and  guidance  by  national  authorities  (in 
addition to another FSB initiative on disclosure) could be provided to improve the financial 
reporting of institutions and to enhance the quality of disclosures.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On another front, the establishment of a common legal entity identifier (LEI) that is applied 
universally should contribute greatly to the quality of macro-prudential analysis. It would, for 
example,  facilitate  the  aggregation  of  the  single-name  counterparty  risk  at  the  level  of  the 
system and can, for example, help in the identification of the building-up of concentrations 
towards single counterparties. Unique identification codes at the EU level will be valuable 
for  meaningful  data  aggregations,  and  would  allow  the  use  of  this  information  for  macro-
prudential purposes. In fact, the demand for micro-prudential datasets for macro-prudential 
analysis  also  results  from  the  fact  that  the  form  in  which  existing  aggregated  data  can  be 
disseminated  is  often  of  poor  quality,  is  not  sufficiently  granular  and  is  not  suited  for 
analytical purposes.  
Ahead of reaping the benefits from the various initiatives that are under way at the global, EU 
and  euro  area  level  to  limit  data  gaps,  there  is  a  need  for  close  cross  institutional 
cooperation  between  supervisory  authorities  and  macro-prudential  bodies,  at  the  national 
and supra-national level. This calls for more interaction and data-sharing between the ECB 
(also  when  acting  on  behalf  of  the  ESRB)  and  the  ESAs  that  have  access  to  supervisory 
reporting  data  and  can  collect  ad  hoc  data  more  easily  upon  request.  Procedures  for  the 
secure  transfer  of  information  and  appropriate  legal  provisions  need  to  be  in  place  to 
safeguard confidentiality.  
More broadly, it is important that the pace at which efforts are being made to address current 
information needs – at the macro- and micro-levels – does not slow down. At the same time, 
improvements in datasets already in use for macro-prudential analysis should continue to be 
given priority. This needs to be done in an innovative way, reusing existing information where 
possible, so as to minimise the reporting burden, whilst serving the increased demands of 
users. Furthermore, challenges in ensuring that the appropriate statistical basis is available 
for  macro-prudential  oversight  cannot,  by  definition,  be  addressed  in  full  as  data  sets  are 
dynamic,  in  the  same  way  that  the  risks  they  capture  evolve  over  time.  Agility  in  the 
collection of statistics will therefore continue to be essential so as to accompany innovation in 
the financial industry and the associated vulnerabilities.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
