Benoît Cœuré: Short-term crisis management and long-term vision 
– how Europe responds to the crisis 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at CEMLA’s 60th Anniversary Commemorative Conference “Central Bank cooperation at the 
beginning of the 21st century”, Mexico City, 20 July 2012. 
 I wish to thank Jonathan Yiangou for his contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this session on central bank cooperation in 
times of crises. From the euro area perspective, central bank cooperation has worked very 
well during the crisis. We have had continuous dialogue since the early stages of the crisis in 
2007,  which  continues  to  the  present  day.  Our  network  of  currency  swap  lines  with  the 
Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and 
Bank  of  Canada  have  helped  ensure  foreign  liquidity  for  the  euro  area  and  euro  liquidity 
abroad. There has also been successful international cooperation through the IMF. Overall, 
these measures have played an important role in easing strains in financial markets. 
As the success of this cooperation is broadly recognized, I would like to use my intervention 
today to discuss a different and more contested issue: the management of the crisis by the 
euro  area  authorities.  When  I  travel  outside  of  Europe,  I  am  often  struck  by  the  level  of 
misunderstanding of the euro area’s approach. The euro area is widely perceived as lacking 
a coherent strategy to calm markets and stabilise economic activity. It is also seen as the 
prime  source  of  shocks  affecting  the  global  economy.  Indeed,  I  sometimes  have  the 
impression that global volatility is solely attributed to the shortcomings of Europe, and that 
challenges to the sustainability of growth in other large economic regions are conveniently 
downplayed. 
At present, three critical views are particularly prevalent. 
• 
• 
• 
While I acknowledge the reasoning behind these views, you will not be surprised to learn that 
I fundamentally disagree with them. In all three areas the reality is more complex. Looking 
only  at  the  outcomes  of  the  European  Council  and  Euro  Summit  on  28–29  June,  these 
critiques  do  not  hold  up.  Europe  is  making  more  progress  than  many  external  observers 
acknowledge. 
The first is that Europe does not have the right tools to fix the crisis. 
The second is that Europe focuses only on fiscal consolidation and not on growth. 
The third is that the euro cannot overcome its design flaws. 
Instruments of crisis management 
1. 
Let me begin with the first criticism: that Europe lacks appropriate instruments to deal with 
the crisis. To start with, one needs an appropriate sense of perspective. It is unrealistic to 
expect  the  euro  area  to  have  the  reaction-function  of  a  nation-state  like  the  U.S.  The 
U.S. has  spent  more  than  200  years  establishing  institutions  to  run  a  vast  and  diverse 
economic area and to manage crises. Even then, its political system sometimes struggles to 
take difficult decisions. The euro area, on the other hand, has existed for just 13 years. The 
strengthening of its institutions began only two years ago. Against that background, what has 
been achieved through the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility and European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Stability Mechanism, the entry into force of the “Six-Pack” legislation and the agreement on 
the Fiscal Compact, is already very significant. 
On 29 June, the Euro Summit took a further series of steps to strengthen crisis management. 
They  agreed  that  loans  to  Spain  as  part  of  its  bank  recapitalisation  programme  would  not 
have a senior status, removing a key concern for investors about the programme and their 
continued  purchases  of Spanish  government  debt. They  committed  themselves  to  use  the 
full  range  of  EFSF  and  ESM  instruments  in  a  flexible  and  efficient  manner.  And  most 
importantly, they decided that the ESM should have the ability to recapitalise banks directly, 
once  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  in  place  involving  the  ECB.  These  are  all  very 
significant developments. Let me elaborate. 
First, the possibility for direct bank recapitalisation by the ESM is crucial to break the vicious 
circle between banks and their sovereigns that is at the heart of the crisis. It would allow for 
banks to  be  stabilised  without  increasing the  debt  level  of  the  sovereign,  thereby  avoiding 
further damage to sovereign debt markets and banks’ balance sheets. This would move the 
euro  area  closer  to  the  type  of  financial  union  we  see  in  federations  like  the  U.S.  or 
Switzerland, where banking sector problems are dealt with at the federal level and have no 
implications on the finances of the federated units. Of course, this must be accompanied by 
appropriate  incentives  for  banks  to  limit  moral  hazard.  Policy  conditionality  should  include 
restructuring  plans  in  line  with  EU  state-aid  rules,  and  principles  for  orderly  resolution  of 
non-viable institutions and for limiting the use of public money.  
Second,  the  commitment  to  establish  a  single  supervisor  is  critical  insofar  as  it  facilitates 
direct  recapitalisation.  But  it  also  has  positive  effects  in  its  own  right.  Given  appropriate 
powers, a single supervisor would produce greater transparency in national banking sectors 
and reduce regulatory capture, thereby increasing investor confidence. In addition, it would 
support  financial  integration  by  “Europeanising”  supervisory  priorities.  For  example,  some 
supervisory  actions  we  have  seen  during  the  crisis  that  have  caused  the  single  market  to 
fragment, like requiring banks to match domestic assets and liabilities, would no longer be 
anticipated. In terms of design, this supervisory mechanism should have a clear euro area 
dimension, while remaining fully compatible with the single market and EU-wide supervisory 
harmonisation. The ECB stands ready to play a role, provided that there is no contamination 
between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Of  course,  extending  the  remit  of  the 
ECB should come with higher standards of democratic accountability. 
Third, the decisions to waive seniority and make full use of the EFSF and ESM instruments 
send  an  important  signal  to  markets.  That  signal  is:  policymakers  have  understood  the 
complexity  of  the  crisis  and  are  prepared  to  exploit  the  flexibility  of  the  rescue  funds  to 
address  it.  This  is  also  evident  in  the  decision  by  the  Euro  Summit  to  allow  EFSF/ESM 
assistance for countries respecting their fiscal and structural reform programmes, reducing 
the stigma of requesting support. The ECB will  play its part too by acting as agent for the 
EFSF and ESM to facilitate effective market operations. 
Overall, it is difficult to uphold the caricature that Europe does not have the tools to handle 
the crisis. If anyone had known, in 2010, that within two years there would be a firewall of 
700  billion  euro  usable for  loans  to  sovereigns, bond  purchases  and  bank recapitalisation, 
the euro area would have been called ahead-of-the-curve. Now that this exists, it is criticised 
for  being  insufficient.  This  is  simply  the  nature  of  evolving  expectations.  But  it  should  not 
distract  us  from  the  steps  that  have  been  taken.  They  are  impressive  both  in  historical 
comparison and in their own right. 
Fiscal consolidation and growth 
2. 
The  second  current  criticism  of  the  euro  area  is  that  its  focus  on  fiscal  consolidation  is 
destroying  growth  prospects.  The  argument  goes  that  in  a  weak  economy  experiencing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
private sector deleveraging, an active public sector is essential to maintain demand. Budget 
cuts will only lead to lower growth, higher unemployment and larger deficits. 
I see no contradiction between fiscal consolidation and sustainable growth. In fact, the one is 
a  pre-condition  for  the  other.  I  do  not  deny  that  there  are  negative  demand  effects  in  the 
short-term.  But  for  the  longer-term,  sound  fiscal  policies  are  essential  to  lower  borrowing 
costs  and  encourage  investment.  Moreover,  in  those  countries  experiencing  severe 
sovereign debt tensions, fiscal consolidation is unavoidable to maintain market access. 
That said, there is clearly a need to take measures to strengthen the growth potential of the 
euro area’s economies. These measures also need to have effect in the short-term so as to 
soften the short-term impact of fiscal consolidation. Recognising this, the European Council 
on 28–29 June agreed on a “Compact for Growth and Jobs”. This Compact aims to free up to 
120 billion euro for growth and investment, representing roughly 1% of euro area GDP. This 
comprises  a  60  billion  euro  increase  in  the  lending  capacity  of  the  European  Investment 
Bank; 55 billion through the reallocation of structural funds to growth-enhancing measures; 
and 4.5 billion of investment financing through a “project bond” pilot phase.  
On top of that, the European Council took a number of measures to improve the functioning 
of the  Single  Market  and facilitate  adjustment  within  monetary  union. The  single market  in 
services  will  be  completed,  which  is  expected  to  yield  economic  gains  of  up  to 
330 billion euro. To improve labour mobility within Europe, an EU-wide recruitment tool will 
be  developed  and  measures  taken  to  strengthen  the  portability  of  pension  rights  and  the 
recognition of professional qualifications.  
This strategy confirms an important evolution in the thinking of European policymakers. They 
are acknowledging that the smooth operation of the single currency requires flexible markets 
for goods, services, and labour. They are aiming to maximise the gains of the world’s largest 
single market, rather than acting as 27 national markets. And they are exploiting EU funds as 
a  tool  to  support  aggregate  EU  growth,  rather  than  for  quid  pro  quos  between  Member 
States. Reaping the full gains from economic integration in Europe, combined with structural 
reforms at the national level, will help lay the foundations for more sustained growth going 
forward. 
Future of EMU 
3. 
Some observers, of course, question whether such a forward-looking perspective is relevant. 
This  is  due  to  the  third  criticism  I  outlined:  the  belief  that  economic  and  monetary  union 
cannot  work  due  to  institutional  flaws.  In  the  view  of  these  critics,  the  euro  area  is  too 
decentralised,  too  diverse  and  too  disunited  to  function  as  a  single  currency  area.  They 
conclude that its survival cannot be guaranteed. 
Clearly, there is an institutional gap in the euro area. In the aggregate, the euro area enjoys 
better fundamentals than the U.S. or Japan, and yet it is viewed as a much more risky place 
to invest. For instance, the IMF projects the aggregate euro area deficit for this year to be 
just over 3% of GDP, compared with around 8% in the U.S. and almost 10% in Japan. The 
equivalent figures for gross debt are around 90% of GDP in the euro area, compared with 
106% in the U.S. and 235% in Japan. 
The  right  response  to  this  discrepancy  between  fundamentals  and  perceptions  is  not 
defeatism. It is to fix the institutional flaws that facilitate it. Again, the European Council took 
an important step in this direction at the recent summit. Building on the report presented by 
the  Presidents  of  the  European  Council,  Commission,  Eurogroup  and  ECB,  it  called  for  a 
specific and time-bound roadmap for the achievement of a genuine Economic and Monetary 
Union. This roadmap will be presented by the end of 2012. 
This  is  a  very  important  development,  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  sends  a  clear  signal  of 
Member States’ commitment to the euro and to making EMU work. This should help remove 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
investor concerns about the future integrity of the euro area. Second, the report presented by 
the Four Presidents is far-reaching and comprehensive – it has been designed to address 
the key challenges facing EMU in all relevant policy areas. It therefore proposes work on four 
parallel tracks: 
1. 
The first is a financial union, with a single framework for supervising and resolving 
banks and for insuring customer deposits. This would build on the single supervisory 
mechanism now under development and ideally lead to a European version of the 
FDIC, financed by contributions from the private sector. 
The  second  building  block  is  a  fiscal  union,  with  powers  at  the  euro  area  level  to 
prevent unsustainable fiscal policies and to limit national debt issuance. With these 
powers in place, a path towards common debt issuance would also be possible, but 
only at the end of the process. 
The third building block is an economic union, which would help euro area members 
to  remain  fit  and  to  adjust  flexibly  within  monetary  union.  This  could  entail,  for 
example, moving from soft coordination of structural reforms in Member States to an 
enforceable framework at the euro area level. 
And  the  fourth  building  block  is  a  political  union,  which  aims  at  strengthening 
democratic participation. This final building block is equally important, as the other 
measures  cannot  be  effective  unless  they  are  legitimate.  This  requires  innovative 
thinking  as  regards  the  involvement  of  the  European  Parliament  and  national 
parliaments in decision-making on euro area issues.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Conclusion 
4. 
The roadmap towards a stronger EMU, seen together with the decisions on the ESM and the 
Compact for Growth and Jobs, represents a comprehensive response to the crisis. The euro 
area has clearly understood that the time of partial solutions and piecemeal reform is over. 
In  implementing  this  response,  there  are  sure  to  be  difficulties  along  the  way.  This  is  the 
reality of operating in a union of 17 democracies. But I would caution those who have doubts 
about the euro, that they underestimate the political commitment to it at their own risk. The 
euro  area  is  moving  towards  a  more  sustainable  equilibrium,  and  comparably  fast  in 
international comparison. The ambition to provide long-term foundations for EMU in less than 
a decade is a historical step of great significance. It is faithful to the objective laid down by 
the European Treaties to create an “ever closer union among the peoples of Europe”. The 
alternative would be the continuation of the current trend of market fragmentation, leading to 
protectionism and ultimately to populism.  
Some  of  the  proposals  will  imply  a  greater  sharing  of  sovereignty  among  Member  States. 
This is unavoidable to guarantee sufficient economic and financial convergence for EMU to 
function effectively. But it must be ensured that if sovereignty is elevated to the EU level, so 
is democratic control, and that steps are taken towards the emergence of a true European 
identity. 
As central bankers, we  all have an interest in global stability. I am confident that, with the 
measures  I  have  described,  the  euro  area  will  remain  a  cornerstone  of  the  international 
economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
