Deepak Mohanty: Statistics in the Reserve Bank of India 
Welcome remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
on the occasion of 6th Statistics Day Conference, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 17 July 
2012. 
 Governor Dr. Subbarao, Prof. R. Radhakrishna, Chairman, National Statistical Commission, 
Dr. Aurel Schubert, Director General, Statistics Department, European Central Bank (ECB), 
Deputy  Governor  Dr.  Subir  Gokarn;  other  distinguished  speakers  Prof.  J.R.  Varma, 
IIM Ahmedabad, Prof. Probal Chaudhuri, ISI Kolkata and Prof. Amit Bubna, ISB, Hyderabad; 
Deputy  Governors,  colleague  Executive  Directors,  distinguished  guests  from  the  financial 
sector  and  academia,  members  of  the  press,  Shri  A.  B.  Chakraborty,  Officer-in-Charge, 
DSIM and friends. I extend a warm welcome to you to this Statistics Day Conference. 
29th  June  is  celebrated  as  Statistics  Day  to  commemorate  the  sterling  contribution  of 
Prof. Prasanta  Chandra  Mahalanobis  to  statistics  and  the  Indian  statistical  system.  In 
addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  also  holds  an  annual  Statistics  Conference,  which  provides  a 
forum for interface of our statisticians with academia, external experts and with operational 
departments. These two annual events provide us an opportunity to review the progress of 
statistical work in the Reserve Bank and guide us in setting the agenda for further work. I am 
sure, today’s conference theme, Data Gaps and Central Banking, will reinforce that process. 
In evidence-based public policy and decision-making mechanism, statistics is a critical tool. 
At the same time, statistics is a public good. Over the years, there have been initiatives by 
the Government, the Reserve Bank and professional bodies like the Indian Association for 
Research in National Income and Wealth and the Indian Econometric Society for identifying 
data gaps in the Indian economy. The Report of the National Statistical Commission (2001) 
has helped in identifying major gaps in economic database on India. 
In 2010, the National Statistical Commission had set up a number of professional committees 
to  look  into  various  issues  relating  to  improvement  in  official  statistics.  The  Report  of  the 
Reserve Bank’s Working Group on Surveys (2009) has also highlighted important data gaps. 
Improving database is an ongoing process. While several initiatives have been taken at the 
national level to bridge data gaps, I will focus on the recent initiatives of the Reserve Bank. 
The Reserve Bank’s policy canvas is large and goes beyond the rubric of a traditional central 
bank. We have the primary responsibility of compilation of banking and financial statistics as 
well  as  balance  of  payments  statistics.  We  have  also  been  compiling  corporate  finance 
statistics.  We  have  been  keenly  aware  of  the  need  to  constantly  improve  the  statistics  in 
terms  of  coverage,  quality,  frequency  and  level  of  dissemination.  We  participate  and 
generally  conform to  the  various  international  standards  such  as  the  IMF’s  SDDS  and  the 
BIS  data  bank  programme.  We  have  been  a  part  of  the  G20  data  gap  initiative  that  has 
identified a number of new areas for data collection. Let me now turn to some of the recent 
initiatives. 
First, our banking statistics coverage extends beyond the standard monetary and regulatory 
attributes to cover socio-economic dimensions. We maintain a database of the vast branch 
network of commercial banks. We have recently provided on our website a facility of Bank 
Branch Locator which is a dynamic tool giving information on various characteristics of bank 
branches such as location and population group. 
Second, our recent efforts on data dissemination include: introduction of a user-friendly data 
warehouse interface with dashboards and time-series formatted reports; bringing out several 
regular statistical publications directly from the data warehouse, and updating them almost 
on a real-time basis; dissemination of information through web-publication as the initial point 
and its synchronisation with the data released on DBIE; and advances in integration of XBRL 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
data collection system directly with data warehouse to eventually replace all existing stand-
alone data compilation systems. 
Third, a significant recent achievement on external accounts statistics was our contribution to 
the Co-ordinated Direct Investment Survey (CDIS) of the IMF. This large database provides 
information  on  country-wise  inward  and  outward  direct  investment.  On  the  Balance  of 
Payments (BoP) statistics, we have implemented the Sixth edition of IMF’s Manual, ahead of 
many advanced economies. 
Fourth, the Reserve Bank conducts several quarterly forward-looking sample surveys in the 
areas of industrial outlook, consumer confidence and inflation expectations to aid monetary 
policy  making.  The  results  of  these  surveys  are  now  disseminated  in  public  domain 
simultaneously  with  our  quarterly  report  on  Macroeconomic  and  Monetary  Developments 
accompanying the monetary policy statement. 
Fifth, we have expanded the coverage of our house price index (HPI) based on transaction 
prices  obtained  from  housing  registration  authorities  to  nine  cities  from  seven  cities.  We 
expect  to  add  four  more  cities  this  year.  In  parallel,  we  are  developing  an  Asset  Price 
Monitoring  System  (APMS)  for  tracking  movements  in  house  prices  based  on  housing 
finance data available with banks and housing finance companies. 
Finally,  given  the  increasing  analytical  requirements,  the  Department  of  Statistics  and 
Information  Management  (DSIM)  was  re-organised  with  added  emphasis  on  research.  A 
structured research agenda was developed to align institutional requirements with individual 
capabilities. In 2011, 23 research papers were published in various national and international 
journals with another seven papers published in RBI working paper series. 
While these achievements are significant, let me highlight some broad areas where we need 
to focus to further refine the statistics generation process in the Reserve Bank. 
First, it is important to further improve our database of banking infrastructure in the country in 
order  to  gauge  the  extent  of  financial  inclusion  and  assess  the  efficacy  of  various  policy 
actions taken in this regard. Efforts should be made to make available all granular banking 
data, including those collected through the basic statistical returns (BSRs), on our website 
through the Database on the Indian Economy (DBIE). 
Second,  there  is  need  for  close  co-ordination  between  statisticians  and  bank  supervisors, 
both in the commercial and cooperative banking space, to identify and mitigate data gaps in 
the  supervisory  review  process  and  also  to  facilitate  appropriate  risk  assessment  for  the 
banking system. 
Third, the data reporting system needs to be geared towards automated data capture from 
the  source  systems.  It  is  imperative  to  scrutinise  and  validate  the  data  used  for  analysis 
through  application  of  data  filters,  so  as  not  to  accept  data  at  the  face  value  and  also  to 
identify  and  reduce  the  noise  element  inherent  in  large  data  sets.  This  will  make  macro-
financial data more useable. In keeping with the Reserve Bank’s IT Vision, the efforts should 
be to automate data flow from the reporting entities through adoption of appropriate straight-
through-processing  systems.  The  use  of  data  warehouse  for  processing  should  be 
strengthened for improving quality, integrity and delivery of data. 
Fourth, “inflation expectation” has come to occupy a central place in our monetary analysis. 
In  this  regard,  the  quarterly  forward-looking  inflation  expectations  survey  for  households 
(IESH)  provides  vital  inputs  in  the  monetary  policy  formulation  process.  But,  it  is  urban-
centric as the coverage is limited to 12 cities at present. There is, therefore, a need to further 
broad-base the coverage for better encapsulation of the heterogeneity of expectations in our 
system. 
Finally, forecasting of key macroeconomic variables has become difficult in the aftermath of 
the  global  financial  crisis  as  the  feedback  loops  between  the  global  and  the  domestic 
economy, on the one hand, and between the financial and real sectors, on the other, have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
become  more  complex.  In  this  context,  it  has  become  difficult  to  make  reasonable  impact 
assessment of macro-policies. Moreover, the capability of standard models in the armoury of 
central banks in predicting growth and inflation is being questioned. Primary assumptions of 
basic DSGE models have come under attack both from policymakers and academia. There 
is, therefore, a need to revisit the modelling strategy in the light of the increased uncertainty, 
leverage and global linkages. It is important to harness appropriate statistical tools to capture 
the underlying dynamics of economic-financial framework. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  fortunate  to  have  amidst  us  luminaries  who  are  not  only 
accomplished statisticians but some of them are at the helm of statistical administration. I am 
confident that the deliberations today will not only guide us in setting our statistical agenda in 
the Reserve Bank but also will go a long way in strengthening the Indian statistical system, 
for which Prof. Mahalonobis worked tirelessly. 
I  once  again  extend  a  hearty  welcome  to  all  our  speakers  and  all  our  invitees,  and  look 
forward to the intellectual fare ahead. 
Thank you. 
 
 
  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
