Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Internationalisation of Islamic finance – bridging 
economies 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Global Islamic Finance Forum 2012, Kuala Lumpur, 19 September 2012. 
 This  is  a  decade  of  profound  change  in  the  global  financial  landscape.  The  world  is  also 
being  confronted  by  the  repercussions  of  the  ongoing  global  financial  crisis.  Despite  this 
more challenging global financial and economic environment, Islamic finance has continued 
to remain on its growth trajectory. For Islamic finance, it has been a defining period. Its rapid 
growth and the intensification of its internationalisation in this decade is now enhancing its 
role in strengthening international economic linkages between different parts of the world. 
It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you this morning to this third Global Islamic 
Finance  Forum  (GIFF)  2012.  First  of  all,  let  me  express  our  gratitude  to  the  Honourable 
Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  His  Excellency  Mr.  Ali  Babacan  for 
accepting  our  invitation  to  deliver  the  Public  Lecture  at  our  gathering  here  today.  We  are 
most honoured by your presence and we immensely look forward to your address. 
Islamic finance: fostering global linkages 
In  this  new  era,  in  which  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  has  gained 
significance, Islamic finance has continued to demonstrate its viability and competitiveness in 
this more liberalised and globalised financial environment. The total Islamic financial assets 
size now has surpassed US$1 trillion – following unabated growth from the mid-1990s. There 
are  now  more  than  600  Islamic  financial  institutions  operating  in  more  than  75  countries. 
Increasingly,  existing  Islamic  banking  institutions  are  expanding  their  operations  with 
presence  in  new  jurisdictions.  This  is  resulting  in  increased  cross  border  financial  flows. 
There has also been increased international participation in Islamic financial markets. 
Since the late 1990s the Sukuk market has emerged as an important form of intermediation 
in  Islamic  finance.  It  has  been  instrumental  in  the  financing  structures  for  infrastructure 
projects, investments in the utilities sectors, in particular for water and power projects, and in 
the services sector, in education, healthcare and transportation. Islamic finance essentially 
offers  clear  value  propositions  to  both  global  issuers  and  investors.  For  issuers,  there  is 
access to new sources of funds and liquidity. And in introducing a new asset class, investors 
gain  from  portfolio  diversification  and  new  investment  opportunities  that  are  aligned  to 
productive investment activities. 
Internationalisation of Islamic finance: mutually-reinforcing benefits 
Islamic  finance  draws  its  strength  from  serving  the  real  economy.  An  important  feature  of 
Islamic  finance  is  that  it  involves  financial  transactions  that  must  be  accompanied  by  an 
underlying economic transaction. And when it is cross border, it will facilitate financial flows 
that will support international trade and investment flows. It will contribute towards bridging 
economies and enhancing our economic connectivity with each other. 
In  this  current  global  environment  in  which  emerging  economies  are  demonstrating  their 
resilience with the ability to sustain growth despite the moderation in global expansion, there 
is 
increased  economic 
connectivity. Trade among the expanding emerging economies now account for more than 
half  of  the  world  trade.  This  growing  demand  in  emerging  economies  is  also  generating 
investment opportunities. In this environment, Islamic finance has an important potential to 
facilitate trade and investment flows that will be mutually reinforcing. In evolving Malaysia as 
for  mutually  reinforcing  growth 
tremendous  prospects 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
an  Islamic  financial  hub,  our  aspiration  is  to  be  a  hub  that  is  linked  to  a  network  of  other 
financial  hubs.  In  so  doing,  it  will  enhance  our  economic  linkages  with  other  parts  of  the 
world. 
The  increased  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  would  thus  influence  the  patterns  of 
global financial  and  economic  integration,  and  in  particular facilitate the  revival  of financial 
and economic integration between the countries along the old silk road from Asia to Turkey 
and the Middle East, and Africa and to the more established financial markets and developed 
economies. The start of this decade has already witnessed the shifting of trade activities to 
the emerging economies, which now account for 63 percent or US$37 trillion of world trade 
as at end-2011, an increase of 17 percent from a decade ago. 
While the Islamic banking sector has been important in intermediating cross border financial 
flows, the sukuk market has become an important segment of Islamic finance that offers a 
distinct platform upon which international inter-linkages are fostered. The sukuk market has 
demonstrated its ability to effectively intermediate funds across borders, contributing towards 
the efficient allocation of funds in the global financial system. The sukuk epitomises a truly 
global product for international fund raising and investment activities. An increasing number 
of  multilateral  agencies,  sovereigns,  Government  agencies  and  corporations,  including 
multinational corporations have relied on the sukuk market as a source of financing. And the 
diverse composition of the sukuk investors across continents has added further depth to the 
international dimension of the sukuk market. In Malaysia, the sukuk market has evolved into 
a multi-currency denominated sukuk market with pioneering sukuk issuances in U.S dollars, 
Singapore dollar and the Renminbi. 
Internationalisation of Islamic finance: key success factors 
The  new  horizon  that  is  emerging  is  the  rapid  internationalisation  in  Islamic  finance  which 
needs to be strongly underpinned by three key factors to ensure its sustainability. Firstly, the 
wide range of global supply of high-quality Islamic financial products and services that are 
able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  international  businesses.  In  this  phase  of  growing 
international  transactions,  Islamic  finance  needs  to  be  dynamic  and  innovative,  with  an 
emphasis on the development of diversified and comprehensive Shariah-compliant financial 
solutions to meet the differentiated needs of various businesses, including the requirements 
of international businesses and thus facilitate cross-border investments. 
Secondly, is having diverse and dynamic intermediaries and market participants that have a 
global  focus.  This  includes  having  Islamic  banking,  takaful  and  capital  market  players  that 
venture  beyond  domestic  boundaries  to  tap  global  opportunities.  Global  ancillary  services 
that  are  proficient  in  the  Shariah,  also  have  an  important  role  in  providing  supportive 
professional  services  for  such  intermediaries  and  market  players  to  effectively  embark  on 
such cross-border activities. 
In addition, having the required talent is another imperative in steering the Islamic financial 
sector  towards  increased  internationalisation.  The  new  financial  landscape  will  require 
world-class  business  talent  and  boards  with  knowledge  of  the  risks  associated  with 
internationalisation.  Greater  collaboration  between  the  industry  and  education  service 
providers  will  be  important  in  supporting  the  talent  requirements  of  the  industry  in  its  new 
phase of development. Today, we will witness the signing of a Memorandum of Agreement 
between an industry player and an academic institution for the establishment of an Islamic 
wealth  management  research  centre.  This  commendable  effort  is  dedicated  to  producing 
applied  research  in  the  area  of  Islamic  wealth  management.  It  is  envisaged  to  spur 
innovation that will bring with it global benefits and that would also contribute towards setting 
industry standards in this key component of the Islamic financial industry. 
Thirdly, effective linkages and connections between global financial markets will be facilitated 
by business enablers, particularly in the area of legislation, taxation and regulation. The new 
global landscape of growing cross-border financial flows between regions that have national 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  cultural  differences  also  underscores  the  need  for  enhanced  recognition  and 
understanding of practices in the different jurisdictions. This imperative translates into high 
demands  on  the  use  of  standardised  documents  and  agreements  among  financial  market 
players,  so  as  to  increase  market  efficiency,  transparency  and  uniformity,  as  well  as  to 
reduce  the  cost  of  transactions  as  we  strive  towards  seamless  global  inter-linkages. 
Standardised  documentation  and  practices  for  a  number  of  products  have  already  been 
adopted  between  jurisdictions  through  bilateral  and  multilateral  agreements.  This  has 
facilitated issuance of financial market instruments, contributing towards enhanced liquidity in 
Islamic  financial  markets  and  greater  inter-market  linkages.  Greater  understanding  and 
clarity  on  Shariah  matters,  will  also  contribute  towards  convergence  and  harmonisation  of 
such  interpretations  across  jurisdictions  and  thus  contribute  towards  the  development  of 
Islamic financial products and services. 
Realising cross-border potentials and bridging economies 
With  its  international  outreach  and  ability  to  provide  comprehensive  financial  solutions, 
Islamic finance beckons us with a new frontier that presents new opportunities. As we enter 
into a more uncertain global environment, it also promptsus to revisit strategies to enhance 
the resilience of Islamic finance. 
The theme of this year’s Global Islamic Finance Forum 2012, “Internationalisation of Islamic 
Finance: Bridging Economies” focuses on the international prospects surrounding the Islamic 
finance  industry  and  its  tremendous  potential  role  in  strengthening  cross-border  economic 
linkages.  More  than  500  participants  from  over  50  countries  across  the  continents  gather 
today  in  this  Forum  to  explore  this  prospect.  In  its  featured  plenary  and  multi-track 
programmes which include the Regulators Forum, the International Shariah Scholars Forum, 
the  Global  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Conference  and  the  Global  Islamic  Finance 
Taxation Forum, a new highlight is the Bridging Economies Forum that aims to discuss the 
Islamic finance prospects and opportunities across regions, and to explore possible market 
linkages that can be generated through Islamic finance. Several important signings of MoUs 
will  also  be  taking  place  during  this  Forum,  highlighting  increased  commitment  and 
international cooperation. 
Let  me  now  conclude  with  an  extension  of  our  appreciation  to  the  panel  of  distinguished 
speakers  for  their  contribution  to  GIFF  2012.  I  would  also  like  to  once  again,  express  our 
gratitude to the Honourable Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey, His Excellency 
Mr. Ali Babacan for being with us today to speak at this event. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
