Alan Bollard: Could we be better off than we think? 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and Ms Rochelle 
Barrow, to the Trans-Tasman Business Circle, Auckland, 17 February 2012. 
 The authors are grateful for the helpful comments and suggestions received from Michael Reddell, Phil Briggs, 
Bernard Hodgetts, Yuong Ha and Tim Ng. Any remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. 
Executive Summary 
Quality  macroeconomic  statistics  help  us  understand  developments  in  our  economy,  and 
especially  about  the  way  economic  activity  and  related  measures  are  changing  over  time. 
Time  series  data  play  a  critical  role  for  us  in  monetary  policy.  However,  macroeconomic 
statistics also play another important role; they are used by analysts and the media to judge 
how well New Zealand is doing relative to other countries, and they also play a part in how 
positive we feel about ourselves.  
International  comparisons  of  macroeconomic  statistics  can  be  fraught  with  difficulties. 
Differing definitions, measurement, currencies and price levels are just some of the factors 
that can cloud the picture.  
Our view is that in New Zealand, some conservative statistical interpretations and particular 
characteristics  of  our  economy  have  resulted  in  the  understatement  of  New  Zealand’s 
economic performance. In international league tables New Zealand is in some ways better 
off  than  is  often  thought.  Though  better,  more  comparable  statistics,  do  not  make  any 
individual  New  Zealanders  any  better  off  in  an  absolute  sense,  they  do  affect  the 
interpretation of New Zealand’s relative economic performance over the decades and they 
impact individual decisions. 
In this paper we discuss some of these statistical issues and provide some rough estimates 
of their possible impact on GDP per capita – which is the most widely quoted, if not always 
the  most  useful,  indicator  of  an  economy’s  performance.  Our  list  is  not  exhaustive,  but 
surprisingly  all  of  the  treatments  covered  result  in  an  underestimation  of  New  Zealand’s 
GDP. Could New Zealand’s GDP be higher relative to other OECD countries? Could it be 
around 10 percent higher relative to Australia? And what might that mean for thinking about 
the New Zealand economy and its changing fortunes?  
As  this  paper  outlines,  Statistics  New  Zealand,  like  other  countries  including  Australia, 
regularly  changes  its  measurements.  A  number  of  examples  of  change  Statistics  NZ  has 
made  and  the  difference  to  the  resulting  statistics  is  provided  in  my  paper.  Statistics  New 
Zealand was given additional funding in last year's budget to undertake a major multi-year 
change programme. This enables it to accelerate its ability to change statistics to keep up 
with the evolving requirements. 
Why statistics matter 
At  a  central  bank,  macroeconomic  data  and  statistics  play  a  crucial  role  in  policy 
deliberations.  Our  analysts  consume  a  vast  quantity  of  data  looking  for  insights  into  the 
performance  of  New  Zealand’s  economy  and  financial  sector.  These  analysts  become 
familiar with data sources, their strengths and weaknesses, and the methodologies employed 
to produce statistics. Knowing how a statistic is compiled is an essential part of ensuring that 
it is interpreted correctly.  
Of particular interest to the Reserve Bank are macroeconomic statistics. They summarise a 
significant volume of detailed and sophisticated interactions that occur in an economy, often 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in one headline number like gross domestic product (GDP), the unemployment rate, and the 
consumers price index (CPI). 
In  New  Zealand,  we  have  adequate,  but  certainly  improvable,  official  and  private 
macroeconomic  statistics  and  indicators  for  the  purposes  of  monetary  policy  formulation  – 
where  the  focus  is  mostly  on  cyclical  developments;  the  shorter-term  swings  in  how 
economic activity is performing.  
However,  statistics  on  economic  performance  also  play  a  role  in  shaping  national 
conversations about how our economy has performed over time, and especially relative to 
economic performance in other advanced economies. As far as possible, policymakers and 
private  analysts  need  good  comparable  national  and  international  data  to  enable  those 
comparisons, and the consequent policy recommendations and debate to be as well-founded 
as possible.  
Even  if  there  are  weaknesses  in  the  data,  analysts  and  journalists  will  use  whatever  is 
available.  Even  when  caveats  are  given  that  information  may  be  overlooked.  In  recent 
decades,  a  large  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  developing  internationally  comparable 
statistics  –  not  just  so  that  the  same  things  are  measured  the  same  way  in  different 
countries, but also to enable useful cross-country comparisons of levels of economic activity, 
in the face of things like big swings in market exchange rates. Organisations like the UN and 
IMF  produce  conceptual  frameworks,  like  the  system  of  national  accounts  (SNA),  to  aid 
statisticians  when  producing  macroeconomic  statistics.  However,  while  these  frameworks 
provide guidance, they are not completely formulaic.  
How  a  country  implements  framework  recommendations  depends  on  a  number  of  factors, 
including  the  nature  of  their  economy,  what  data  sources  are  available,  and  the  level  of 
resource they have. Given how complex and large some of these frameworks are, and that 
they  are  often  updated,  countries  may  also  be  at  different  stages  of  adopting  the  latest 
version of the framework. 
There are many different ways of estimating statistics and the measurement decisions taken 
by statisticians make a difference. Different data and methods can deliver different results. 
We believe that some of the statistical methods used to measure the New Zealand economy 
currently  result  in  an  understatement  of  New  Zealand’s  economic  performance  when 
compared to other countries. 
This  paper  discusses  some  of  these  statistical  methods  and  attempts  to  estimate  the 
possible impact on New Zealand’s GDP. This paper is not intended as a criticism of Statistics 
NZ with its statistical challenges and limited resources. Its purpose is to raise awareness of 
these  factors,  increase  the  priority  placed  on  improving  the  quality  of  New  Zealand’s 
macroeconomic  statistics  and  to  make  people  aware  of  the  issues  regarding  international 
comparisons. In some cases, plans are already in place to remedy statistical weaknesses. 
What is required for successful comparisons? 
Most people when assessing whether the New Zealand economy is performing well will ask, 
relative to what? One way of posing the question is to ask how the economy is performing 
relative  to  its  own  past  history.  For  those  sorts  of  comparisons,  consistently  compiled  (or 
revised) data through time is important. Another important way of posing the question is to 
look at how New Zealand is doing relative to other advanced economies. In New Zealand we 
often compare ourselves with Australia, our nearest neighbour, and a labour market to which 
New Zealanders have quite ready access. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However,  comparing  statistics  can  be  fraught  with  difficulties  unless  certain  conditions  are 
met1: 
 
 
The definition is the same; conceptually are the statistics covering the same things. 
The  measurement  is  the  same  or  similar;  are  the  methods  used  to  estimate 
consistent. 
Appropriate adjustment is made for the influence of exchange rates, price levels and 
consumption tastes across countries. 
 When  these  conditions  are  not  met,  those  performing  the  comparison  may  attempt  to 
“standardise”  the  data  themselves.  The  nature  of  these  adjustments  and  their  levels  of 
transparency  can  add  further  confusion  to  international  comparisons2.  For  example,  New 
Zealand does not currently produce all of the key macroeconomic statistics that most other 
advanced economies do3. As a result organisations such as the OECD sometimes attempt to 
estimate these in order to include New Zealand in international comparisons.  
Definitions 
1. 
Over the last 30 years there has been a large push towards the development of integrated 
international conceptual frameworks for producing statistics to aid international comparisons. 
These  frameworks  help  to  ensure  the  quality  and  integrity  of  statistics  by  providing  a 
theoretical  background  to  what  is  being  measured  and  definitions.  For  example  the  SNA 
mentioned  earlier  defines  what  is  included  and  what  is  excluded  from  GDP.  There  is  no 
entirely right or wrong answer as to what should be included in GDP – what really matters is 
consistent transparent treatment, including where possible consistency across countries. 
The frameworks are reviewed and  updated periodically as  the economy evolves.  This can 
result  in  new  definitions  of  concepts  such  as  GDP,  investment  and  consumption,  often 
involving a significant amount of work in backdating data to ensure consistency through time. 
Measurement 
2. 
frameworks  are  often  accompanied  by  compilation  guides,  which  guide 
Statistical 
statisticians  in  how  best  to  measure  the  theoretical  concepts.  They  often  present  a  best 
practice  method,  and  if  data  sources  and  resources  are  not  available  to  implement  that 
method,  other  less  desirable  measurement  options  are  presented.  The  measurement 
decisions made by statisticians can have a significant impact on the end result. 
Currency unit and price level 
3. 
Statistics must be expressed in a common unit for comparison. A simple way to achieve this 
is to convert individual currencies to a base currency using exchange rates. However, this 
type of conversion can distort comparisons because of the impact of such things as short-
term currency fluctuations on exchange rates. This is why a lot of international comparisons 
are  now  performed  using  purchasing  power  parity  (PPP).  PPP  conversions  are  currency 
conversion rates that both convert to a common currency and equalise the purchasing power 
of different currencies.  
                                                 
1   OECD (2006). 
2   While  not  stated  as  an  explicit  condition  for  international  comparisons,  the  statistics  themselves  must  have 
integrity in order to compare with other countries. The past statistical issues in Greece are a well documented 
example of statistics which lacked integrity and which made it difficult to draw meaningful comparisons with 
other countries. 
3   See Barrow (2010) and RBNZ (2007). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  income  gaps  between  countries  are  typically  smaller  on  a  PPP  basis  than  they  are  if 
simply converted into a common currency as over time, prices of tradable goods tend to be 
much the same across countries, but the real cost of labour-intensive services tends to be 
much lower in poor countries than in rich ones. 
However,  PPP  adjustments  have  their  limitations.  Probably  the  most  significant  is  the 
representativeness  of  the  products  used  in  the  calculation.  PPP  comparisons  are  most 
accurate  in  comparing  incomes  or  consumption  in  pairs  of  very  similar  countries,  where 
similar products and consumption tastes exist. The more the differences between countries 
the more important it is to do the corrections, but the more approximate the comparisons are.  
Thoughtful  observers  typically  caution  against  putting  much  weight  on  differences  in  PPP 
income measures of less than perhaps 5–10 percent, even if all the countries recorded their 
GDP data in exactly the same way. 
What is the impact of statistical treatments on our GDP? 
This  next  section  explores  in  more  detail  some  of  the  differences  in  measurement  in  New 
Zealand relative to the rest of the world, in particular Australia. We attempt to quantify the 
impact of these measurement differences on estimates of the level of New Zealand’s GDP. 
For the 2010 year, net national income per capita PPP league tables produced by the OECD 
currently have Australia 35 percent higher than New Zealand. 
Statisticians around the world use the SNA to guide measurement of their economies4. The 
SNA is a comprehensive and systematic set of accounts, similar to a business accounting 
framework, but for a nation. The framework captures a considerable amount of detail about 
how an economy works and how economic agents behave.  
As noted earlier, statisticians can chose to implement the SNA in a variety of ways, bearing 
in mind the constraints (both on data and resources) that they face. It is these constraints 
and  decisions  taken  which  need  to  be  recognised  and  understood  when  comparing 
macroeconomic statistics across countries. 
Measuring the unobserved economy 
1. 
In order to produce a comprehensive consistent estimate of GDP, all economic production 
(defined by the SNA production boundary) in an economy should be measured, whether that 
production  is  “observable”  or  not.  The  unobserved,  or  not  directly  measurable,  economy 
includes  some  activities  that  are  illegal,  underground  (cash  jobs),  or  undertaken  by 
households for their final use (growing their own vegetables).  
While the inclusion of estimates for illegal activities such as drug dealing are not common, 
almost all countries that prepare GDP statistics include estimates for some other unobserved 
activity. A 2008 UN report suggests that for most countries, tax-based measures of income, 
like  those  used  in  New  Zealand,  tend  to  understate  actual  levels  of  income.  This tends  to 
affect  initial  estimates  of  the  income  measure  of  GDP;  and  in  most  countries  these  are 
adjusted up.  
                                                 
4   The  SNA  defines  key  macroeconomic  statistics  like  GDP,  saving,  investment,  consumption  and  wealth.  It 
enables the analysis of incomes generated by production, and the redistribution of income within the economy 
(via tax and welfare payments). The system also identifies capital and financial flows, and provides information 
about the level of an economy’s productive assets and the wealth of its inhabitants. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
According to the report and a survey of country practices, of the 45 countries surveyed, New 
Zealand and Japan were the only countries that made no explicit estimates of unobserved 
activities in the estimation of GDP5.  
The importance of the unobserved economy is of course quite different across countries, so 
under reporting will vary for this reason. However, the issue for international comparison is 
that New Zealand does not currently include any estimate of this production in its GDP. 
Taking Australia as a benchmark, where explicit estimates are not made for illegal activity, 
but are made for the underground economy and household backyard production, we believe 
GDP  in  New  Zealand  could  be  underestimated  by  2  percent6.  Given  it  is  the  household 
sector which is mainly engaged in this activity, household income and therefore saving could 
also be underreported. 
Of course, it is worth noting that most estimates are that the underground economy in New 
Zealand  is  somewhat  small.  As  with  other  countries,  our  comprehensive  GST  system 
reduces opportunities for tax avoidance, as does our relatively comprehensive broad-based 
income tax system. We encourage further research in this area.  
Measuring the value of financial services  
2. 
Banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  earn  income  not  only  through  explicit  fees  and 
charges but also on the margin between the interest they pay to depositors and the interest 
they charge borrowers. Because of the margin, the financial services that we consume do 
not necessarily have an explicit price, unlike most goods and services in an economy. For 
the purposes of the SNA the services provided, through the use of the margin, are known as 
Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured or FISIM. 
Calculating the value of a service without a price is complex7. However, the SNA provides 
guidelines  on  how  this  can  be  achieved  through  the  use  of  a  relevant  reference  rate.  In 
addition to how the value of FISIM is calculated, what is important for GDP estimates is how 
those financial services are allocated to their end users. 
Within the SNA framework, goods and services consumed by businesses in order to produce 
other  goods  and  services,  are  treated  as  intermediate  consumption  (or  an  expense)  and 
subtracted from GDP. However, the use of goods and services by household, government 
and the foreign sector are treated as final demand and these add to GDP. 
Most  countries  treat  FISIM  in  a  way  that  increases  GDP  by  allocating  the  service  to  the 
sector that uses or consumes it8. In New Zealand all financial services are assumed to be 
used by businesses in the production of other goods and services. 
There  is  considerable  international  debate  on  the  measurement  of  FISIM  as  a  result  of 
volatility  during  the  Global  Financial  Crisis9.  However,  it  is  the  allocation  method  which 
                                                 
5   UN (2008). 
6  
In  Australia  a  1.3  percent  adjustment  to  GDP  is  made  for  the  underground  economy  and  a  2.0  percent 
adjustment is made to household income. 
7   For more information see IMF et al (2008). 
8   The method used in New Zealand is the SNA 1968 recommendation, which is presented as an option in SNA 
1993, when data sources available do not allow the best practice alternative. The method is to allocate all of 
FISIM to a notional industry in the production measure of GDP (often referred to as the bank service charge). 
This  ignores  any  consumption  of  services  by  households,  government  and  foreigners.  Best  practice  is  to 
estimate each industry’s expenditure on financial services and subtract it from the value added of that industry 
(rather than simply off total GDP). Then household, government and foreign consumption of financial services 
is  estimated  and  this  is  added  to  final  consumption  estimates.  The  impact  of  this  allocation  method  is  an 
increase in GDP, because less is subtracted from the production based measure of GDP and more is added 
to the expenditure based measure of GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
impacts negatively on New Zealand in international comparisons. We estimate the impact of 
this at approximately 2 percent of GDP, although we acknowledge there are other estimates. 
The  failure  to  allocate  some  of  FISIM  to  the  household  sector  has  resulted  in  a  growing 
understatement  of  income  measures  over  the  last  20  years,  a  period  when  the  household 
sector has borrowed more, and hence consumed more financial services. 
Box – Case study – Household saving rate10 
Measurement is difficult in times of change. In the early 2000s there was a rapid increase in 
the number of New Zealand households using trusts to manage household finances. The 
use  of  trusts  impacted  quite  significantly  on  the  data  sources  used  to  estimate  New 
Zealand’s household saving rate.  
In the mid 2000s New Zealand’s household saving rate was considered an outlier relative to 
other  countries.  At  the  time,  unlike  other  countries,  New  Zealand  did  not  produce  other 
sectoral  saving  estimates  (other  than  government)  that  could  be  used  to  validate  the 
household saving rate either. 
Due  to  the  concerns  raised  about  the  quality  of  the  estimates  and  the  important  policy 
decisions  being  made  at  the  time,  Statistics  NZ  reviewed  the  measurement  of  the 
household saving rate and in 2010 a number of methodological improvements were made. 
In 2005 the household saving rate was first estimated at –15 percent. The current estimate 
for 2005 is now –6 percent.  
                                                                                                                                                       
9   There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  debate  internationally  regarding  how  value  added  is  calculated  for  the 
Finance  industry.  At  present  measures  do  not  adjust  for  the  level  of  risk  taken  on  by  the  industry.  Some 
statisticians  argue  that  value  added  should  be  risk  adjusted  and  that  this  would  significantly  reduce  the 
contribution of the finance industry to GDP in some countries. Given the nature of the financial sector in New 
Zealand, we do not believe risk adjusting value added estimates would result in significant change. 
10   Note that revisions made to the household saving rate did not result in corresponding major revisions to the 
national  saving  rate.  At  the  time  New  Zealand  did  not  produce  a  full  set  of  sectoral  income  and  outlay 
accounts, so the household sector rate could not be validated. Quality adjustment is also common practice in 
other countries. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Other Services 
3. 
The increasing importance of service industries could also be influencing our GDP estimates. 
In  particular,  government  administration,  health  and  education  services  are  particularly 
difficult  to  measure.  Of  course  these  measurement  difficulties  are  experienced  by  many 
countries. A number of different estimation techniques are used overseas. 
In  the  absence  of  good  output  measures  in  New  Zealand,  the  output  of  some  service 
industries, particularly in the government sector where prices may not exist, is assumed to be 
directly proportional to industry inputs. This measurement assumes no productivity growth in 
the industry, and will likely result in an understatement of GDP and productivity.  
This will have had a reducing impact on GDP levels, though we cannot estimate by exactly 
how much. 
Measuring the value provided by residential buildings 
4. 
In  an  economy,  residential  buildings  provide  services  to  those  who  inhabit  them  and  are 
included  in  the  calculation  of  a  country’s  GDP.  An  imputed  rental  derived  from  occupying 
your home is included in the calculation so that GDP is not affected by home ownership rates 
over time, or across countries.  
The contribution of residential building, whether they are occupied by the owner or rented, to 
GDP is significant. In New Zealand and Australia different methods are used to estimate this 
contribution. The most significant difference for comparability is that in Australia the output of 
residential buildings is quality adjusted; that is the measurement method used allows for an 
increase in the quality of properties over time11. The types of quality improvement allowed for 
includes  size  and  location.  In  New  Zealand  the  measurement  method  assumes  no  quality 
improvement.  Output  purely  reflects  the  number  of  properties.  We  note  there  are  some 
complex issues around the use of constant or current prices here. 
The lack of quality adjustment leads to an understatement of GDP. If we assume a similar 
growth  path  to  Australia  for  New  Zealand,  we  estimate  the  approximate  ballpark  for  GDP 
could be 1.5 percent higher.  
New standards for measuring the economy 
5. 
Statistical  frameworks,  like  the  SNA,  must  be  updated  and  revised  to  ensure  that  the 
statistics produced remain relevant and fit for use by policy and decision makers. However, 
with change comes a comparison issue, as countries progressively move to new standards. 
The  international  standard  for  SNA  was  revised  in  2008  and  a  number  of  conceptual 
changes were introduced. One of these changes was the move to capitalise research and 
development,  which  had  previously  been  treated  as  an  expense.  This  change  means  that 
research and development activity now counts as investment and adds to GDP, rather than 
subtracts from it. 
 
                                                 
11   Quality adjustment is also common practice in other countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  In  2009  Australia  implemented  a  number  of  new  standards  and  classifications  into  its 
production of macroeconomic statistics, including the 2008 version of SNA. In this, Australia 
made  changes  earlier  than  any  other  country  did.  These  changes  resulted  in  significant 
revisions to national accounts and balance of payments statistics. The table below quantifies 
the revisions made to nominal GDP estimates. In the year ended June 2008 GDP estimated 
using  the  new  version  of  SNA  (and  making  adjustments  to  employment  income)  was 
4.4 percent, or $50b AUD higher, than the older version. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
The revision upwards of Australian GDP results in an even wider gap between New Zealand 
and  Australia  GDP  per  capita  measures.  However,  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  while  still 
producing GDP estimates, are now producing these statistics on a different conceptual basis. 
They are no longer directly comparable. 
Statistics NZ plan to introduce SNA 2008 in 2013–14. This is similar timing to other countries 
around  the  world.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  impact  that  new  international  standards  will 
have on New Zealand’s national accounts and GDP. We estimate approximately a 3 percent 
increase in GDP. 
Reconciling different measures of GDP 
6. 
A  country’s  GDP  can  be  estimated  three  ways,  using  the  production  method,  the  income 
method, or the expenditure method. Conceptually the three measures provide equal results. 
However,  in  practice,  due  to  differing  data  sources  and  imperfect  methodologies,  this  is 
rarely the case.  
Statisticians  use  a  process  called  supply  and  use  balancing  to  make  the  three  measures 
equal. This essentially forces all goods and services produced in an economy to be used by 
an  economic  agent.  In  New  Zealand  supply  and  use  balancing  is  performed  annually  and 
only in nominal terms, or current prices. These estimates are released with approximately a 
two year lag. 
Many analysts are more interested in timelier, more frequent (quarterly) and price adjusted 
(real) GDP estimates. However, for this a trade-off is made. Timely, quarterly estimates of 
real GDP are derived using incomplete data sources and in New Zealand, the two measures 
of GDP produced – production and expenditure – are not forced to equal. Given that current 
price GDP estimates are balanced, the discrepancy in real GDP estimates is the result of an 
error in either estimating volume growth (real GDP) or prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
In recent years the quarterly measures of real GDP have presented quite different views and 
diverging on the New Zealand economy. The headline measure preferred by Statistics NZ is 
the  production  measure,  primarily  because  it  exhibits  less  volatility  than  the  expenditure 
measure on a quarterly basis. This measure implies that the recession in New Zealand was 
deeper and more prolonged than the expenditure measure. 
However, since 2007 a relatively large gap between annual real GDP estimates has opened 
up.  Production  GDP  estimates  have  undershot  expenditure  GDP  estimates  for  five  years 
running.  When  expressed  in  1995/96  dollars  the  gap  in  the  March  2011  year  is  $5.9b  or 
4.3 percent of GDP12. 
Given that the discrepancy will likely be revised away in future years, which is most reliable 
measure  of  New  Zealand’s  economic  growth?  Will  production  based  estimates  be  revised 
upwards or expenditure based estimates be revised downwards? Will these revisions have 
implications for the level of New Zealand’s GDP? 
In  Australia,  all  three  GDP  measures  are  available  on  a  quarterly  basis,  and  instead  of 
elevating  one  measure  over  another,  the  quarterly  GDP  movement  is  calculated  by 
averaging the movements of the three measures. This by nature decreases volatility in the 
headline GDP estimate. Using the average measure of Australian GDP, Australia avoided a 
technical  recession,  apparently  the  only  OECD  country  to  do  so.  However,  based  on  the 
production measure of GDP, the headline measure in New Zealand, Australia experienced a 
technical recession in the March 2009 quarter. 
 
 
                                                  
12   These  discrepancies  can  be  expected  to  decrease  in  size  in  June  2012  when  Statistics  NZ  update  annual 
constant price national accounts estimates. This process will result in significant revisions to New Zealand’s 
real GDP. However it is not known which measure will be revised and to what extent. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Alternative national accounts series 
Much of this discussion has focused on GDP comparisons, since GDP is the most widely-
cited  national  accounts  measure  of  aggregate  economic  performance.  But  there  is  a  wide 
variety  of  other  national  accounts  measures.  For  example,  Gross  National  Income  (GNI) 
adjusts the value of output in New Zealand for the income generated here that accrues to 
foreigners, and income generated abroad accruing to New Zealanders. For most advanced 
economies the difference is not large, but in New Zealand GNI is about 7 per cent lower than 
GDP.  
In  addition,  GDP  measures  the  value-added  in  New  Zealand.  However,  in  drawing  cross-
country  comparisons  it  might  not  be  the  value-added  here  that  matters,  but  the  level  of 
household  consumption  (whether  of  things  purchased  directly  by  households,  or  services 
provided to households directly by the government).  
In a similar vein, comparisons of income per head can usefully take account of how much 
depreciation takes place each year: GDP and GNI are gross measures, while Net DP and 
NNI adjust for depreciation, to give a sense of how much of the economy’s production is left 
available  for  consumption.  The  difference  affects  New  Zealand  and  Australia  comparisons 
quite materially: Australian GDP per capita is significantly higher than that in New Zealand, 
no matter what adjustments one does, but because the Australian resources sector is very 
capital  intensive,  much  of  the  income  is  needed  simply  to  cover  the  depreciation  on  the 
capital  stock.  In  purchasing  power  parity  terms,  even  with  current  national  accounts 
measurement,  actual  individual  consumption  per  capita  is  only  about  20  percent  higher  in 
Australia than in New Zealand. This incidentally supports our view that New Zealand’s GDP 
is currently being understated. 
It is also worth noting that common living standard comparisons use GDP or GNI per head of 
population. Those  comparisons  are  useful  for  some  purposes,  but  they  do  not  shed  much 
light on the productivity performance of the economy. For example, although New Zealand’s 
GDP per capita lags much of the OECD, that performance is achieved only with relatively 
high working hours per capita.  
These differences do not matter very much from year to year but need to be borne in mind in 
assessing the overall performance of the economy and resources available for consumption, 
both now and in the future. 
Alternative measures of well being 
GDP  per  capita  (and  the  other  associated  national  accounts  measures)  has  often  been 
criticised as an incomplete statistic of economic well being. Over recent years a number of 
new  indicators  have  been  developed  which  usually  supplement  GDP  estimates  with  other 
characteristics  of  an  economy,  such  as  the  level  of  educational  attainment  or  long  term 
unemployment rate. The OECD better life indicator is an example, and New Zealand rates 
very highly on this comparison. (The UN’s Human Development Index, another attempt at a 
composite  measure  of  living  standards,  also  scores  New  Zealand  consistently  highly, 
although still a little lower than either Australia or the United States). 
Based  on  11  topics  the  OECD  has  identified  as  essential,  in  the  areas  of  material  living 
conditions  and  quality  of  life,  New  Zealand  ranks  fourth  in  the  OECD13.  The  graph  below, 
sourced from The Economist, illustrates the point well. New Zealand appears as an outlier.  
                                                 
13   The  11  topics  are  housing,  income,  jobs,  community,  education,  environment,  governance,  health,  life 
satisfaction, safety and work-life balance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 insight 
What does this mean for international comparisons? 
International  comparison  of  macroeconomic  statistics  is  fraught  with  difficulties.  Differing 
methodologies  and  data  sources  means  that,  in  some  cases,  statistics  are  not  directly 
comparable, despite data being labelled the same. Analysts and policymakers are wise not 
to  make  much  of  smallish  differences  –  and  short-term  changes  in  differences  in  incomes 
across  countries,  which  can  be  substantially  affected  by  the  different  shocks  each  country 
faces in the short-term. 
This  paper  has  given  some 
impact  measurement  can  have  on 
macroeconomic  statistics.  We  estimate  that  measurement  of  parts  of  the  unobserved 
economy could add 2 percent to New Zealand’s GDP and the allocation of FISIM another 
2 percent.  Quality  adjusting  for  residential  buildings  in  New  Zealand  could  add  a  further 
1.5 percent.  Improving  the  estimation  of  value-added  by  service  industries  could  also 
improve New Zealand’s GDP. While more difficult to estimate due to its complex nature, the 
move to SNA2008 could add an additional 3 percent to GDP (and reduce the gap to Australia 
to that extent). 
It  is  almost  certain  that  consistent  measurement  conventions  used  in  New  Zealand  and 
Australia would narrow the reported income gap with Australia (differences would be smaller 
with  some  other  OECD  countries).  We  cannot  be  precise  about  this,  but  the  (mainly 
Australian) conventions noted above could add something very approximately in the broad 
ball-park of 10 percent to New Zealand’s official GDP. These are not definitive, we accept 
there are counter-arguments to these numbers. 
into 
the 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 But  what  does  this  mean  for  New  Zealanders?  Of  course,  revising  GDP  does  not  lift  the 
actual  incomes  (wages  and  salaries)  and  purchasing  power  of  individual  New  Zealanders, 
and does not raise the tax base for the government either. We cannot make ourselves better 
off directly just by measuring things differently. And the steady outflow of New Zealanders to 
live in Australia – one of the largest relative outflows of a country’s citizens seen anywhere in 
the  OECD  –  will  not  principally  be  because  of  GDP  statistics,  but  because  of  individuals’ 
actual and perceived sense of the opportunities for themselves and their families.  
But reducing measurement differences is important for many other reasons:  
 
Households  may  not  make  optimal  decisions  regarding  employment,  training, 
migration,  saving  and  investment  if  they  believe  that  our  GDP  per  capita  is 
significantly lower than it actually is, and that they might be better off elsewhere. 
Financial markets need accurate measures of New Zealand’s ability to borrow and 
repay  debt.  This  impacts  our  financial  institutions  and  our  sovereign  borrowing. 
Measuring New Zealand’s GDP properly is a key concern of credit rating agencies. 
We  need  well-focused  informed  economic  and  social  policy.  Clearly  it  is  more 
difficult  to  know  whether  these  are  working  if  there  are  doubts  about  the  level  of 
GDP  per  capita,  and  whether  our  measure  is  truly  comparable  with  that  of  other 
countries, including that of our large trans-Tasman neighbour. 
  New Zealanders rightly worry about the extent to which New Zealand incomes have drifted 
below the world’s highest in the last 40 years, but how large is that drift, and how have the 
gaps  changed  in  more  recent  times?  For  helping  answer  those  questions,  good  and 
economically comparable data are vital. This paper does not answer the question “are we 
closing the trans-Tasman gap”? However it does argue that the gap is not as wide as most 
people think. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
that, 
integration, 
to  promote 
further  reform  and  economic 
At  the  2012  annual  leader’s  meeting,  the  Prime  Ministers  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand 
agreed 
the  Productivity 
Commissions of each country would conduct a joint study on the options for further reforms 
that would enhance increased economic integration and improve economic outcomes. Given 
this aim, a useful contribution could be to improve harmonisation of statistical measurement 
in Australia and New Zealand, where appropriate, to improve data comparability.  
While this has not been an exhaustive exploration of the issues we hope that the information 
presented  here  helps  people  to  better  understand  some  of  the  pitfalls  of  international 
comparisons and perhaps why New Zealand is often seen as an outlier. 
In the meantime we observe that where there is scope for technical interpretations to differ, 
Australia  has  tended  to  take  the  optimistic  alternative  and  New  Zealand  the  conservative 
one. Could this be a reflection on our national characters? 
As usual, the devil is in the detail. Compare with care. 
References 
Barrow,  R  (2010),  “Current  issues  with  New  Zealand’s  Macroeconomic  Statistics  –  A  user 
perspective”, paper to the Advisory Committee on Economic Statistics.  
RBNZ (2007), “Supporting Paper A10: Possible improvements to macroeconomic statistics”, 
submission  to  the  Finance  and  Expenditure  Select  Committee  Inquiry  into  the  Future 
Monetary Policy Framework, http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monpol/about/3074316.html. 
OECD  (2006)  “Eurostat-OECD  Methodological  Manual  on  Purchasing  Power  Parities”, 
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/59/10/37984252.pdf.  
IMF et al (1993), “System of National Accounts 1993”, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/ 
longres.cfm?sk=575.0. 
IMF  et  al  (2008),  “System  of  National  Accounts  1993”,  http://unstats.un.org/unsd/ 
nationalaccount/sna2008.asp. 
UN  (2008),  “Non-observed  economy  in  national  accounts  –  Survey  of  country  practices”, 
http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/stats/publications/NOE2008.pdf. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
