G Padmanabhan: Issues in IT governance 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
College of Agricultural Banking, Pune, 16 July 2012. 
 Assistance provided by S/Shri P K Chopla, A Madhavan and D Nandi gratefully acknowledged. 
Smt.  Meena  Hemchandra,  Principal  CAB,  members  of  CAB  faculty  and  participants;  wish 
you all a very good morning. I thank the Principal for the privilege given to me to address this 
gathering  of  CTOs  and  CIOs  of  banks,  who  are  responsible  for  managing  information,  the 
most valuable resource for banks today. It is indeed appreciable and thoughtful of the CAB to 
organize a programme with a theme which has great contemporary relevance. 
Emergence of corporate governance 
Let me start by briefly discussing about the general concept of Corporate Governance. As is 
commonly known, Corporate Governance is a process by which an institution is governed to 
achieve  the  set  goals,  resolving  conflict  of  interest  between  different  stakeholders,  both 
internal and external. So, governance is primarily a Board level function, managing the affairs 
of  the  company,  driven  top-down,  based  on  the  principle  of  fiduciary  duty,  centered  on 
oversight  of  management  functioning,  to  ensure  ethical,  legal  and  regulatory  compliance. 
However,  the  philosophy  of  corporate  governance  has  been  a  bit  nuanced  in  the 
geographical  sphere.  If  the  American  model  predominantly  centered  around  shareholders 
interest and compulsory disclosures, the European-Japanese model encapsulated interest of 
the  employees,  managers,  suppliers,  community  etc.  In  India,  Securities  and  Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI) defined corporate governance as the "acceptance by management of 
the inalienable rights of shareholders as the true owners of the corporation and of their own 
role as trustees on behalf of the shareholders. It is about commitment to values, about ethical 
business conduct and about making a distinction between personal & corporate funds in the 
management  of  a  company."1  This  scope  has  however  undergone  changes  over  time  to 
include  ethical  conduct  by  the  organization  and  its  functionaries,  rather  than  just  ensuring 
strict  compliance  with  laws  and  precise  regulation.  The  changed  interpretation  about 
Governance and role of the Board has gained greater currency in the wake of some big ticket 
events like collapse of Enron, WorldCom, HIH and in the aftermath of recent crisis, where a 
large part of the blame was attributed, inter alia, to unethical conduct of various entities and 
market  participants.  As  we  all  know,  we  are  yet  to  hear  the  last  word  about  the  recent 
controversies ranging from the activities of a well known management "Guru" to the issue of 
"fixing" of LIBOR and the role of banking community. 
IT governance  
From the foregoing, what clearly emerges is that, Governance is being re-emphasized as an 
oversight function through which organizations ensure compliance with laws and regulations, 
not only  in letter but in spirit as well,  with adequate, effective safeguards for interests of all 
stakeholders  and  society.  When  we  look  at  things  in  this  context,  the  first  thing  to  be 
safeguarded  in  an  organization  would  be  its  assets  and  the  resources  that  secure  them.  If 
the level of attention required to secure each asset is in proportion to its value and criticality, 
 1 
"Report  of  the  SEBI  Committee  on  Corporate  Governance,  February  2003".  SEBI  Committee  on  Corporate 
Governance. http://www.sebi.gov.in/commreport/corpgov.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
then certainly, IT management would qualify to receive top most and special attention as part 
of the overall corporate governance process. 
Information  Technology,  as  we  all  know,  has  perhaps,  impacted  the  banking  and  financial 
service industry more than any other sector. Almost all the business activities of this industry 
have  undergone  a  kind  of  metamorphosis  over  recent  times  due  to  various  factors,  with 
Information Technology being amongst the most significant. The industry products, services, 
processes, channels, delivery modes and deliverables themselves have moved from physical 
to  electronic,  whether  it  is  deposits,  loans,  assets,  liabilities  or  specific  business  /product 
domains  like  G-sec,  Forex  etc.  So,  we  have  come  to  a  stage  in  banking,  where  IT  is  the 
enabler,  the  most  important  driver  and  a  crucial  component  of  the  business  process  itself. 
Further,  the  regulators  and  the  stakeholders  who  are  outside  the  organization  as  also  the 
customers are highly concerned on the usage of IT and the risks associated with it So, it is 
imperative that all the related aspects are discussed and debated.  
Mandating governance  
IT  governance.  The 
The first major state intervention on the corporate governance practices was the enactment 
in the United States of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX). Correspondingly, UK adopted 
the  Combined  Code,  and  OECD  the  Governance  Principles.  In  all  these  enactments, 
compliance is mandatory, rather than “comply or explain”. After the promulgation of the SOX, 
the  US  standards  setting  bodies,  such  as,  Security  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the, 
American  Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  (AICPA),  the  US  and  Public  Company 
Accounting  Oversight  Board  (PCAOB)  etc  made  significant  efforts  to  enforce  the  SOX  Act. 
Among  the  regulations  and  guidelines,  Auditing  Standard  No.  2  has  the  most  significant 
impact  on 
IT  general 
controls,(ii) checking  IT  process  element  at  the  time  of  each  period-end  financial  reporting 
(iii)  examining  the  IT  process  flow  control  of  actual  transactions  and  (iv)  measuring  the 
effectiveness  of  IT  general  controls  over  financial  reporting.  Thus,  SOX  had  effectively 
mandated IT governance over financial reporting and operational control. The Basel accords, 
Basel  II  and  Basel  III,  factored  operational  risk  controls  in  aligning  capital  adequacy 
requirement and hence, IT governance in banks was a direct fall out of these accords. In the 
Indian context, we have elaborate clauses relating to corporate governance under the Indian 
Companies  Act  with  the  Companies  Bill  2004,  various  regulatory  guidelines  from  the 
regulators. Recently, the Reserve Bank appointed the Gopalakrishna Committee to look into 
various aspects of IT in the financial sector. The recommendations of the Committee – The 
Report of the Working Group on Electronic Banking – had exhaustively covered the issue of 
IT governance in banks  
IT  governance  requires 
testing  of  (i) 
What do we mean by IT governance? 
All the governance principles and practices are generally top down and the IT governance is 
no  exception  to  this  hierarchical  initiative  and  responsibility.  IT  governance,  as  a  subset  of 
corporate  governance,  also  requires  to  be  driven  from  the  board  level.  The  core  of  the  IT 
governance  is  to  create  IT  strategy  that  forms  part  of  the  effective  corporate  strategic 
planning process and thus ensuring alignment of IT design and its controls with the business 
goals. The basic objectives of the IT governance can be summarized as follows:  
Aligning IT strategy with Business Strategy  
IT as strategic resource to deliver value  
IT risk management  
IT resource and financial management  
IT performance management  
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 IT Policies and Procedures  
Before  we  begin  to  discuss  some  specific  issues  of  the  IT  governance,  let  me  caution  that 
sometimes  IT  governance  is  confused  with  IT  controls  and  operations.  It  needs  to  be 
appreciated  that  while  IT  governance  is  a  strategy  initiative,  IT  implementation,  operations 
and control mechanisms are the means to ends. 
Alignment of IT strategy with business strategy 
It is imperative that the business strategy and IT strategy should go hand in hand, else the 
means would not lead to logical and planned ends. It is the business strategy which should 
necessitate  and  seek  appropriate  IT  requirements  and  therefore,  should  clearly  define  how 
the IT should support the enterprise business strategy. 
Further,  the  governance  oversight  also  should  ensure  putting  in  place  processes  by  which 
proper  coordination  is  established  at  organisational  level  between  CIO/CTO  and  CEO  with 
members across the business units so that the IT deployment strategy synchronises with the 
business  strategy  in  order  to  harness  the  full  capability  of  the  IT  systems.  Notwithstanding 
the timelines – be it short term or long term – it is the turnaround time of the IT strategy and 
its implementation that would be critical to the success of any business strategy. Therefore, 
at  the  board  level  it  would  be  imperative  to  ensure  that  the  business  and  IT  units  are  not 
driven in silos. 
the 
Some  of 
this  context  are:  Who  decides 
IT resource/asset requirement? Is it by IT team or by Business team? Or is it Board driven? 
Investment in IT is a strategic decision which will have large long term impact on the bank. 
important  questions 
that  arise 
in 
It  is  proven  fact  that  the  IT  strategy  of  the  firm  and  its  declaration  of  IT  investment  plan 
impact  the  value  of  the  firm.2  IT  strategy  can  be  deployed  differently  in  different 
circumstances and include: 
    Automate  – 
processes 
i.e.  substituting  manual 
intervention  with  automated  business 
Provide  information,  at  the  asking,  for  decision  making  –  i.e.  provide  correct 
information about business activities to senior management on time for taking right 
decision and also provide information about business activities to employees across 
the firm 
Transform  –  fundamentally  redefine  business  and 
relationships 
industry  processes  and 
Combination of the above – While under normal circumstances automation could 
evolve over a period of time, in an incremental manner, typically in Kaizen mode, the 
sudden  challenge  of  the  quickly  changing  business  environment  may  need 
sweeping transformation, in the Kaikaku mode. 
It is important for any bank to be certain about what strategy they are following. When banks 
took  upon  the  Core  Banking  implementation  challenge,  what  was  actually  targeted? Was  it 
100%  branches  coverage  or  effective  managerial  control  over  the  banking  assets  and 
liabilities  or  MIS  or  merely  regulatory  compliance  and  in  the  process  harnessing  residual 
benefits? Was  it  “Automate”  strategy  or  simple  “mechanisation”?  Or  was  it  the  “Transform” 
strategy?  Even  after  many  years  of  CBS  implementation  banks  are  struggling  to  provide 
information  required  for  decision  making  or  not  able  to  automate  the  regulatory  report 
 2 
“The  Value  Relevance  of  Announcement  of  Transformational  Information  Technology  Investment”  –  Bruce 
Dehning, Veron J. Richardson and Robert W Amud 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
requirements out of CBS. This raises the question whether the required alignment between 
business  and  IT  strategies  as  also  the  involvement  of  business  team  in  the  automation 
process was there. To my mind it appears that in the initial stages banks were too keen to 
first automate the branch banking into core banking, relegating other important benefits that 
the full-scale automation could have provided. Perhaps on this score, the late entrants to the 
banking business started fresh on the IT front and reaped better benefits. 
IT as strategic resource to add value 
Do we validate or assess whether IT is delivering value addition to the business by means of 
customer  service  and  satisfaction,  improvement  of  internal  processes,  better  controls  to 
avoid  fraud  and  better  MIS  for  Decision  Support  System  (DSS)?  If  the  answer  is  yes,  how 
many  banks  are  using  DSS  and  Business  Intelligence  (BI)?  If  technology  is  geographically 
neutral,  then  why  do  we  charge  for  account  services  from  branches  other  than  the  “home” 
branch?  In  the  name  of  the  risk  management,  do  we  drive  even  our  physically  challenged 
and differently abled persons to travel thousands of miles to the so called  “home” branch to 
just collect the renewed ATM card and in the process collect their ire? I think we could have 
implemented  CBS  in  our  banks  with  better  strategic  thinking,  of  making  IT  as  strategic 
resource to “Transform”. Let us at least now put in place a proper IT Governance structure so 
that the mistakes are not repeated and we ensure that IT adds value to business. How do we 
do that? The answer, to a large extent, is Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) which 
is  a  very  popular  term  but  hardly  practiced  concept.  Have  we  performed  BPR  while 
implementing CBS? Mostly the answer is No. Let me dwell a bit on the subject of BPR. 
BPR  is  the  mechanism  through  which  the  business  processes  are  analysed  by  the  subject 
matter  experts  with  the  knowledge  of  business  and  IT.  Each  and  every  existing  business 
processes are analysed and re-designed to meet the current or future objectives by ushering 
in processes that are more efficient, secure, simple and customer friendly. The key success 
factor of BPR is to take care of three important aspects as follows: 
   Evaluate  the  new  business/IT  requirement  or  review  existing  IT  infrastructure  to 
handle new business environment and ensure to put in place robust IT environment, 
preserving the  existing  investment  to  the  possible  extent. While  network is  the key 
element  to  be  taken  care  of  as  applications  are  generally  centralized,  ensure  that 
the DR systems and BCP related activities are in place. 
Involve  subject  matter  experts  and  operations  people  to  ensure  the  shared 
ownership of the system. If the business process change is owned by the operating 
staff, then the change management and implementation would be smooth. 
External  experts  can  be  associated  to  bring  in  rich  experience.  Brain  storming  by 
combination of business and IT teams with internal and external experts would add 
significant value while designing new systems. 
IT risk management 
It may  be  pertinent  to  mention  that  70%  of the  operation  risk  in  banking sector  arises from 
IT risk.  As  per  Basel  guidelines  banks  are  required  to  maintain  additional  capital  for 
operational risk and there are incentives to those who manage it by implementing Advanced 
Measurement  Approach  (AMA).  How  many  banks  have  moved  towards  AMA  approach 
model  for  operational  risk?  Very  few,  if  at  all.  Does  this  not  point  to  inadequacy  of  IT  risk 
management  frame  work  in  banks?  Good  IT  process  control  would  substantially  reduce 
operational  risk  (if  put  in  practice)  and  therefore,  the  risk  management  of  IT  resources 
themselves are the key for low operational risks. IT risk management  is the integral part of 
IT governance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  critical  elements  of IT  risk relate to,  Safety and  Security,  Availability,  Performance  and 
Compliance.  What  are  the  issues  that  need  to  be  taken  note  of  by  the  banks?  The 
IT systems  of  the  banks  are  often  web  enabled.  This  leads  to  better  customer  service  and 
new delivery channel and the same time exposes the banks to greater risks. Various studies 
reveal  that  the  incidence  of  malicious  attacks  are  increasing  and  the  nature  of  attacks  are 
very  dynamic  and  getting  sophisticated.  Are  all  the  employees  educated  about  IT  security 
threats? Whether all employees are aware of Information Security policy of the bank? Do we 
periodically  check  the  IT  security  incidence  reporting  and  review  the  IS  policy?  If  so  how 
frequently?  The  types  and  numbers  of  security  threats  range  from  IP  spoofing  to  Denial  of 
Service attacks (DOS, Trojan horses, spams to malwares, etc and are mind boggling. Social 
hacking adds another dimension to this threat. The awareness of various attacks and putting 
in  place  proper  IT  infrastructure  to  protect  the  IT  resources  are  very  critical  for  ensuring 
business continuity. So, implementation of data center and DR systems are to be integrated 
with  the  overall  BCP  of  the  bank  to  ensure  the  availability  of  the  business  in  extreme 
situations. 
IT resource management 
Let me flag some concerns. Do we put in place policies to review at Board level to monitor 
utilisation of infrastructure procured at a huge cost? Do we put in control measures that track 
the  entire  life  cycle  of  the  IT  resource  from  procurement  to  end-of-life?  Another  important 
element to IT resource management is human capital management. Do we have a separate 
policy for grooming HR resource towards IT? Do we have a proper outsourcing policy? Are 
we using the right type of technology? For instance, should we go in for Virtualisation, cloud 
computing? Are we making adequate efforts to implement green computing? Some of these 
are difficult questions for many banks but critical for the officials attending this seminar to get 
answers to perform their roles effectively. 
IT performance management 
IT performance assessment and management is equally vital to ensure efficient IT services. 
Do we periodically stress test our systems? How much maximum volume can it handle in a 
single  day?  If  for  instance,  all  the  NREGA  payments  are  made  as  Electronic  Benefit 
Transfers, do we have an idea about the possible daily volume? It could well be in millions. If 
all  Government  payments  are  made  in  electronic  format,  can the  current IT  systems  of the 
agency banks handle them? In other words, how scalable is the IT system? 
IT policies and procedures 
IT implementation being key to sustenance of successful business require critical policies to 
be driven from the board level. These include: 
     IT Administration policy and Procedures  
IT Asset management policy and Procedures  
IT Security Policy and Disaster Recovery Procedures  
IT Training and Support  
IT Project Management guidelines and procedures  
Having  discussed  about  the  importance  of  IT  in  the  world  of  business  and  banking,  let  us 
look at a related issue- the project management scenario. While IT has added great value to 
businesses there are innumerable examples of large IT project failures, time and budget over 
runs. Let me cite a few to emphasise the need for greater attention to be paid to this area. A 
project, named "Shield", aimed at providing live camera links from police cars and other fixed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
locations  to  a  central  command  location  in  the  US  failed  to  achieve  the  desired  results. 
Equipment  failures,  poor  planning  and  poor  training  meant  that  as  an  integrated  system,  it 
was  worthless.  Staff was unfamiliar with how to  use the system, the data collected through 
the  system  was  of  questionable  value  and  failure  to  understand  operating  environment  in 
which  the  system  would  function  resulted  in  equipment  that  failed  under  the  extreme 
temperatures that were not uncommon in those areas. Contributing factors as reported in the 
press were: lack of oversight, faulty equipment, poor training, underestimation of complexity 
and ineffective procurement practices. 
Rollout of the Care Records Service component of the UK’s National Program for IT ground 
to  a  halt  after  pilot  sites  reported  significant  problems.  Already four  years  behind  schedule, 
the  initial  pilot  released  in  London  was  branded  as  shambles,  as  failure  to  address  the 
culture change issues, coupled with “technical faults” to produce weeks of chaos at hospitals. 
After  several  months  of  working  on  the  problems,  the  rollout  was  placed  on  hold  and  in 
Sep 2010,  Department  of  Health  announced  that  efforts  to  centralize  health  records  were 
abandoned. Over the years many studies have shown high failure rates in the IT sector. As 
per  a  2008  study  by  US  Government  Accounting  Office  (GAO),  of  840  federally  funded 
projects  49%  of  were  poorly  planned,  poorly  performing  or  both  .  A  2008  study  by  the 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association that found that 43% of 400 respondents 
admitted that their organization had a recent project failure. (Source – The Story Behind the 
High Failure Rates in the IT Sector). 
A 2002 Gartner survey found that 20 percent of all expenditures on IT is wasted – a finding 
that  represents,  on  a  global  basis,  an  annual  destruction  of  value  totaling  about 
US $600 billion.  A  2004  IBM  survey  of  Fortune  1000  CIOs  found  that,  on  average,  CIOs 
believe  that  40  percent  of  all  IT  spending  brought  no  return  to  their  organizations.  A  2006 
study  conducted  by  The  Standish  Group  found  that  only  35  percent  of  all  IT  projects 
succeeded while the remainder (65 percent) were either challenged or failed. Many surveys 
have consistently revealed that 20 to 70 percent of large‐scale investments in IT‐enabled 
change are wasted. 
Indian context 
Before coming to some conclusions from the above incidents and survey reports let us come 
to  the  Indian  context,  where  banking  has  traversed  a  long  journey  from  the  days  of 
mechanization, followed by word processing on standalone PCs onto IT based applications. 
As  things  stand  today  the  customer  related  functions  in  banks  are  all  run  on  IT  enabled 
systems.  It  is  the  reach  and  capacity  of  Information  Technology  that  has  enabled  banks  to 
overcome the constraints of geographical reach, enormously increasing transaction volumes 
and,  to  an  extent,  availability  of  human  resources.  Banks  are  gearing  up  to  cater  to  fast 
increasing  customer  needs  through IT  based  payment  systems,  internet based  access  and 
technology enabled service delivery modes. While banks keep churning out new projects, an 
important  key  to  the  success  of  any  project/software  is  exception  handling.  While  routine 
transactions generally go well executed, it is the exception handling that makes or breaks the 
software. While testing the software, adequate efforts should be made to prepare exhaustive 
test  scenarios  of  exception  and  how  the  system  handles  them.  That  brings  us  to  the  most 
important software success factor – rigorous user acceptance testing. Assessing whether the 
current  staff  could  professionally  handle  exception  testing  or  they  need  the  association  of 
experts in testing is an important decision to be made every time a new project is taken up. 
The more rigorous the testing and exception handling, the higher would be the probability of 
success of the project. 
Another area of significant  importance to the managements, regulators and shareholders is 
the  quality  and  efficiency  of  reporting.  Indian  banking,  even  today,  has  housekeeping,  MIS 
and  reporting  processes  which  are  largely  interspersed  with  manual  intervention.  This  has 
implications for the quality, consistency and timeliness of data; subjective interpretation, even 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
manipulation and delays. In cases where the information collection and submission process 
are largely IT based, process design itself has to be aligned to reporting requirements. The 
risk remains that the management, board, regulators or the shareholders and customers may 
not get correct or timely information and disclosures due to inadvertent or deliberate action 
on  the  part  of  those  compiling  or  submitting  information.  There  have  been  instances  of 
process  design  facilitating  manipulation  of  data  for  monitoring  and  regulatory  compliance, 
with  serious  implications.  Automated  data  flow  initiative  by  RBI  is  a  step  in  the  direction  of 
effectively  addressing  these  issues.  Benefits  for  banks  in  such  implementation  are  many. 
First of all this will result in cutting down the number of procedures and sub-processes in the 
MIS  and  regulatory  reporting  processes  with  lesser  human  resource  deployment,  having 
positive  impact  on  cost  and  time  parameters.  Further,  internal  monitoring,  review  and 
decision making shall also be facilitated to become more efficient and effective, as the scope 
for misreporting is curtailed. 
Have you ever debated in a group on further investments and support from IT in compliance 
with  the  tighter  regulatory  regime  of  the  future?  Banking  regulation  across  the  globe  is 
undergoing tremendous change in the wake of recent financial crisis. Basel III requirements 
have enhanced the need for continuous monitoring of data on several parameters to ensure 
continuing  rather  than  point  of  time  compliance.  There  are  new  regulatory  provisioning 
requirements  which  can  be  complied  only  by  proper  data  collection,  compilation,  analysis 
and  reporting.  It  is  mandated  that  business  decision  making  and  regulatory  reporting 
processes  use  the  same  data  and  information.  Any  lacuna  in  the  integrity  of  data  is 
increasingly  being  viewed  adversely  by  the  markets,  customers,  shareholders  and 
regulators. It would be highly inefficient for banks to collect, compile and report on the basis 
of  voluminous  data  on  diverse  parameters  through  processes  having  manual  interventions. 
The  time  criticality  is  further  heightened  by  the  need  to  act  and  react  fast  in  a  highly 
competitive  market  environment  where  growth  and  survival  require  quick  information 
dissemination  and  decision  making.  Risks  and  opportunities  have  to  be  spotted  quickly, 
followed  by  swift  action.  So,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  stakeholders  that  a  single  view  of 
information and data in the banks with automated/ straight through processing is ensured for 
internal and external reporting. 
Our  banks  have  come  a  long  way  by  using  the  prowess  of  IT,  but,  IT  deployment  is  still 
evolving and a lot  more is yet  to be done. So,  what does it mean for the CTOs and CIOs? 
Well, an obviously increasing importance of role and enhancement in budgets; which come 
along  with  much  higher  responsibilities  for  design,  execution,  management  of  more,  bigger 
IT projects and enhanced requirements for efficient, effective service delivery. Leanings from 
all the incidents and surveys can come in handy in decision making. There are a number of 
IT  project  failures,  but  reasons  may  be  diverse  and  unique  in  each  case.  As  rightly  stated, 
“Decision-centric complexity is the essence of an IT project. While it’s easy to get lured into a 
false sense of security because a Gantt chart can make an IT project look relatively simply, 
the  underlying  web  of  interrelated  decisions  is  the  dimension  that  makes  managing 
IT projects  so  hard  to  do.  By  recognizing  that  dimension  and  understanding  the  many  and 
varied  factors  that  affect  the  way  individuals,  teams  and  organizations  make  decisions, 
organizations can start on the long road towards developing the levels of expertise needed to 
be able to improve their chances of success”.( R. Goatham)  
Having  discussed  about  IT  governance,  where  do  the  CTOs  and  CIOs  come  in?  Well, 
everywhere,  as  far  as  the  IT  management  and  Governance  space  is  concerned.  I  recently 
came across a blog on Archeology Institute site , where one opinion read, everyone knows 
that an IT manager's job is "to do the thing right and do the right thing". But as we know the 
original  quote  by  Peter  Drucker  was  “Efficiency  is  doing  things  right;  effectiveness  is  doing 
the  right  things”.  For  IT  managers,  –  "do  the  things  right"  means  deliver  to  the  business 
quality  systems,  on  time  and  on  budget  –  "  do  the  right  thing"  means  to  partner  with  the 
business in view to innovate.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
In  conclusion,  I  would  say  that  expectation  from  CTOs  and  CIOs  is  to  advocate 
IT Governance evolution, support it on continuing basis and utilize the structures to perform 
better  in  IT  project  implementation  and  enhance  service  delivery  for  value  addition  to  their 
respective organization. 
Thank you for your patience. Wish you all two very enriching days of fruitful deliberations. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
