Gill Marcus: Headwinds from the global crisis – the need for proactive 
responses 
Address by  Ms Gill  Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the ORT SA 
Fundraising Dinner, Sandton, 31 July 2012. 
 This evening is a celebration of the work that ORT does in promoting education and training 
in  South Africa. The focus  could  not  be more  appropriate: education  and training  is key to 
giving  each  and  every  South  African  a  real  chance  in  life,  the  ability  to  break  cycles  of 
poverty, and is an imperative for long term economic growth in this country, which faces huge 
legacy  challenges  in  the  education  system.  Sadly,  despite  significant  resources  being 
allocated to education, many parts of the system remain dysfunctional. A literate and skilled 
labour  force  is  necessary  to  ensure  domestic  growth,  employment  opportunities,  social 
stability and cohesion, and the ability to compete globally. 
Unfortunately the global environment in which we find ourselves is extremely difficult and is 
likely to remain so for a good number of years. The challenges facing Europe are of a long 
term  nature,  so  even  if  appropriate  steps  are  taken  at  this  stage  to  deal  with  some  of  the 
issues that are making the headlines, the best case scenario will still be one of slow growth 
for some time to come before the required structural reforms can take place and take effect. 
This is supposed to be a light-hearted evening where we can relax, share jokes and enjoy 
ourselves.  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  ignore  what  is  happening  in  the  world  around  us, 
recognising  that  behind  the  numbers,  often  in  the  hundreds  of  billions,  that  are  frequently 
referred to stand tens of millions of people whose lives, hopes and dreams have been altered 
forever. 
Central bankers have the reputation of being the party poopers, the ones who take away the 
punch bowl as the party really gets started, as our function is often to guard against excesses 
of  various  kinds.  Tonight  my  role  will  be  no  different.  We  are  living  through  extremely 
challenging times, and unless we recognise the gravity of the situation, we will not take the 
required  steps  in  time  to  create  a  buffer  against  the  risks  that  we  face.  At  the  root  of  the 
problem  is  the  global  economy,  but  underlying  problems  and  the  structure  of  our  own 
economy and society will shape how the global downturn will impact on us. 
The recent data coming out of the world economy makes depressing reading. In the last two 
weeks or so alone we learned the following: the UK economy contracted by 0,7 per cent in 
the  second  quarter  (an  annualised  rate  of  –2,8  per  cent),  far  more  than  expected,  and 
remains  in  recession;  the  US  economy  grew  at  an  annualised  rate  of  1,5  per  cent  in  the 
second quarter, about half its potential growth rate, and is in danger of falling over its self- 
induced fiscal cliff; German business confidence declined for the third successive month, far 
more than expected, to its lowest level in two years; Eurozone business declined to a three 
year  low  in  July,  while  almost  half  of  the  members  countries  are  experiencing  negative 
growth; unemployment in the Eurozone reached new euro-era highs at 11,1 per cent in May, 
with youth unemployment in excess of 22 per cent; spreads on Spanish and Italian sovereign 
debt have reached new and unsustainable highs; the global PMI is now indicating a global 
contraction; and systemically important emerging markets, until recently the main ray of hope 
in a dismal world, are also slowing markedly, particularly China, India and Brazil. The litany is 
almost endless. 
If you were hoping for some countervailing good news, it has been hard to find. Perhaps we 
can point to remarks by the ECB Chairman,  Mario  Draghi, that the ECB  would “do  what  it 
takes” to safeguard the euro generated a relief rally in global financial markets late last week. 
But we would be fooling ourselves if we think that the problems are over. Verbal intervention 
by central banks can have an impact, but the sustainability of these effects will be dependent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
on  evidence  that  their  words  can  be  backed  up  with  deeds.  Until  the  substance  of  such 
assurances  materialise,  we  are  likely  to  see  continued  volatility  as  markets  react  to  good 
news,  more  in  hope  than  anything  else,  only  to  be  disappointed  and  to  revise  their 
assessment soon after.  The ECB is a central part of the solution, but it cannot act unilaterally 
to extend its mandate, and getting agreement on these issues at a political level is far more 
complex. 
Perhaps  some  other  relatively  good  news  is  that  the  downward  revisions  in  July  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) to its global growth forecasts were relatively modest- by 
0,1 and 0,2 for this year and next year respectively. But we can take cold comfort from the 
size of the revision. Of concern is that the downside risks are seen to “loom large”, as the 
forecasts are predicated on a number of conditions, one of which seems unlikely to be met 
very  soon:  namely  that  “there  is  sufficient  policy  action  to  allow  financial  conditions  in  the 
euro area to ease ...” According to the IMF, the situation in the Eurozone will “likely remain 
precarious until all policy action needed for a resolution of the crisis has been taken”. 
There seems to be no near-term or easy solution in sight, as the problems are multifaceted, 
and there is no agreement within the euro area as to how to go forward. Indeed there is no 
agreement among economists either. And as the situation worsens, negative feedback loops 
intensify.  The  underlying  problems  involve  three  distinct  but  interrelated  problems:  a 
sovereign debt crisis, a systemic banking crisis and a growth crisis, which have combined in 
a  way  that  has  significantly  increased  unemployment.  But  while  everyone  will  agree  that 
there is a growth crisis, analysts differ as to the causes and therefore the cures for this. 
Much  of  the focus  is  on  the  fiscal  side,  with  many  seeing  the  solution  being  one  of  fiscal 
austerity all round. However, as Paul Krugman and Richard Layard have recently argued in 
their  “manifesto  for  common  sense”,  the  crisis  did  not  originate  in  the  public  sector,  but 
rather,  expanding  public  sector  deficits  were  a  consequence  of  the  bursting  of  the 
unsustainable  private  sector  expenditure  bubbles  which  then  contributed  to  reductions  in 
output  and  tax  revenues.  They  argue  that  the  crisis,  which  originated  in  the  advanced 
economies,  was  fundamentally  one  of  excessive  private  sector  expenditure,  driven  by 
excessive borrowing and lending and over-leveraging by banks. When the bubble burst, the 
public sector had to fill the expenditure gap. With the private sector still deleveraging, fiscal 
austerity will only intensify the downward growth spiral. 
This can be clearly seen from the data of public sector deficits before and after the crisis. In 
2007, the  overall gross debt/GDP ratio of the  euro area was  66,4  per  cent. In  2011 it  had 
risen to 87,4 per cent. If we look at some of the countries that have come under the spotlight 
recently,  we  see  pre-crisis  debt  ratios  at  relatively  modest  levels  in  some  cases,  but 
accelerating significantly thereafter. For example in 2007 the Spanish debt ratio was 36,3 per 
cent  but  in  2011  had  grown  to  68,5  per  cent;  the  debt  ratio  of  Portugal  increased  from 
68,3 per cent to 107,8 per cent; that of Ireland from 24,8 per cent to 108,2 per cent; that of 
Greece from 107,4 per cent to 165,3 per cent and the Italian ratio increased from 103,1 per 
cent to 120,1 per cent.  
These data illustrate three important points: first, that sovereign debt crises in some countries 
did  not  originate  in  the  public  sector;  that  debt  ratios  can  accelerate  very  quickly  from 
seemingly benign and sustainable levels; and that any given level of debt may be seen to be 
sustainable, but if the bond markets change their view on this, spreads rise to the extent that 
the costs  of  servicing  these deficits  can  rapidly  turn sustainable deficits into  unsustainable 
ones.  
These debt ratios have increased because of widening current fiscal deficits in response to 
the crisis, and not necessarily because of previous excessively large deficits. For example, in 
2007 Ireland and Spain had fiscal surpluses and the deficit/GDP ratio in Portugal and Italy 
were  3,1  per  cent  and 1,6  per  cent  respectively.  Greece on the other  hand  already  had  a 
deficit of 6,5 per cent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At a time of continued private sector and bank deleveraging, excessively deep public sector 
austerity is  likely to generate and reinforce negative  growth  and debt dynamics: as growth 
falls, the debt to GDP ratio increases, and if  debt  is reduced too fast, growth  will fall even 
more. 
There is no doubt that some countries have excessive fiscal burdens and unsustainable fiscal 
positions. Those countries have to adjust, and take the pain, but a key question is over what 
time horizon. Nor does it mean that all countries should be following austerity measures. If 
they do, and the austerity measures proposed are excessive, it will only reinforce the global 
downturn.  The  pace  of  fiscal  consolidation  has  to  be  more  measured,  and  it  is  for 
governments  and  the  central  banks  to  ensure  that  their  interventions  keep  the  markets  in 
check. As Krugman and Layard have argued, “at a time when the private sector is engaged 
in a collective effort to spend less, public policy should act as a stabilising force, attempting to 
sustain spending. At the very least, we should not be making things worse with big cuts in 
government spending or big increases in tax rates on ordinary people”. 
This does not mean that governments should go on a spending spree. More focus should be 
placed  on  the  efficiency  of  government  expenditure,  to  ensure  that  it  is of  the  type  that  is 
likely to generate growth,  and  not  simply be  an  irreversible  increase  of  social  expenditure. 
Furthermore, expenditure that is likely to crowd in private sector investment would be even 
more appropriate. But the focus does not need to be only on expenditure. Tax reductions or 
tax  incentives,  appropriately  focused  on  growth-generating  activities,  for  example  on  small 
businesses, would have a similar effect. 
The sovereign debt crisis is intertwined with the banking crisis. Banks are major holders of 
sovereign debt, and they have seen the value of their holdings declining. At the same time, 
many  banks  had  excessive  exposures  and  leverage  to  the  property  market,  particularly  in 
Spain, and the property market bubble has since burst. In addition, the stricter global banking 
regulations, commonly referred to as Basel III, have imposed higher capital adequacy ratios 
on banks, and they are trying to achieve these by selling assets and reducing lending. The 
Spanish banking system in particular is under stress and requires a bail-out, which in turn will 
put further  pressure on the Spanish fiscal position,  as was the case in Ireland. One of the 
currently  intractable  issues  in  the  Eurozone  is  whether  the  ECB  can  bail  out  these  banks 
directly. 
Fiscal austerity and bank deleveraging, while contributing to the negative growth outlook in 
Europe,  are  not  the  only  growth  constraints.  There  is  no  doubt  there  is  also  a  structural 
element  to  the  Eurozone  crisis,  in  part  a  result  of  very  different  structural  features  in  the 
member  states.  After  unification,  the  German  economy  underwent  an  extended  period  of 
restructuring.  The  economy  became  more  efficient,  more  productive  and  competitive, 
particularly  relative  to  many  of  its  Eurozone  partners.  In  the  face  of  labour  and  product 
market  inflexibility  and  higher  wage  growth  in  many  of  these  countries,  current  account 
deficits were widening and were readily financed at low Eurozone rates of interest, given the 
prevailing assumption that all euro area sovereign bonds were the same. As we have seen, 
this assumption no longer holds, but the divergences in competitiveness remain. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  most  of  the  peripheral  European  economies  have  lost 
competitiveness relative to Germany in the order of magnitude of between 20 to 30 per cent 
since the introduction of the euro. This is a longer term structural issue that is likely to take a 
while  to  reverse.  But  it  is  debatable  whether  the  required  increases  in  productivity,  with 
associated  significant  wage  and  price  declines  and  increased  unemployment  can  occur 
without causing major social upheaval and this at a time when government safety nets are 
being  cut  back  on.  The  adjustment  will  be  that  much  more  severe  given  the  lack  of  an 
exchange rate policy lever. 
An  early  resolution  to  the  crisis  is  unlikely  because  there  is  a  lack  of  trust  at  a  number  of 
levels. There is a lack  of trust  in the leadership of the Eurozone to take difficult  decisions; 
there is a lack of trust between countries; there is a lack of trust of the banking system, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  recent  revelations  concerning  Libor  fixing  and  money  laundering  reinforce  that  lack  of 
trust; and there is a lack of trust between banks, as evidenced in the dysfunctional nature of 
the interbank system in Europe. And as austerity measures bite ever deeper, there are limits 
to  how  much  the  electorate  can  take.  Ultimately,  the  situation  becomes  increasingly 
economically and politically untenable. 
As  the  Eurozone  crisis  impacts  increasingly  on  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  again  raises  the 
question that was asked at the beginning of the crisis: can the emerging market economies 
decouple from the advanced economies? While there seems to be little doubt that the centre 
of gravity of the global economy is shifting eastwards, and the Asian economies as a bloc 
may  be  better  able  to  withstand  a  renewed  global  downturn  given  increased  intraregional 
trade, a complete decoupling is unlikely. Already a number of institutions have downgraded 
their  emerging  market  growth  forecasts  and  we  have  seen  slowdowns  in  Asia  and  Latin 
America, including China, India and Brazil. In 2010 Brazil recorded an annual growth rate of 
7,5 per cent. In 2011 this had moderated to 2,7 per cent, and in the first two quarters of this 
year, annualised growth rates of 0,8 per cent were recorded. While Chinese growth of 7,6 per 
cent may seem extremely fast to us, we must bear in mind that it is significantly slower than 
the  levels  previously  achieved,  and  further  moderation  is  expected.  A  recent  IMF  Survey 
viewed  the  slowdown  in  China  as  having  been  initially  self-induced,  to  correct  overheating 
asset markets, but more recently is due to the effects of the global slowdown. 
The  channels  of  contagion  to  emerging  markets  from  the  slowdown  in  the  advanced 
economies  are  likely  to  be  similar  to  those  experienced  in  2008.  We  have  already  seen 
declining emerging market exports and weaker commodity prices, although what happens in 
China will be an important determinant of the outlook for commodity prices. In general it will 
be difficult to sustain growth in many emerging markets, particularly those that are non-food 
commodity exporters, as well as those that have strong manufactured export markets in the 
advanced economies. There is also some evidence that tightness in bank lending in Europe 
may  be  impacting  on  the  cost  and  availability  of  trade  financing  as  well,  putting  further 
pressure on trade. 
Emerging markets are also being affected by the volatile risk perceptions in global financial 
markets and associated capital flows. In 2009/10, emerging markets were faced with strong 
capital 
the 
intensification  of  the  Eurozone  crisis  in  August  2011,  the  so-called  risk-off  scenarios  have 
become  dominant.  During  bouts  of  risk  aversion,  the  overriding  concern  becomes  security 
rather than yield, and investors are prepared to pay for such security as seen in the recent 
negative  bond  yields  in  Germany  and  the  negative  interest  rates  on  bank  accounts  in 
Switzerland. As capital has moved to safe havens, a number of emerging market currencies, 
including those of Mexico and Brazil,  have depreciated significantly. This will not provide a 
strong stimulus to export growth if the demand is not forthcoming, but may have inflationary 
consequences,  which  may  limit  monetary  policy  flexibility.  For  this  reason  some  emerging 
market economies have intervened to prevent excessive depreciations. 
Increased intraregional trade has been an important contributor to the resilience of the Asian 
economies. The recent emergence of sub-Saharan Africa as a significant growth region, with 
growth rates in excess of  5 per  cent  in the past 3 years,  has been instrumental in helping 
cushion South African exports from the global crisis. In 2007, 36 per cent of South Africa’s 
manufactured exports went to Europe, while 24 per cent went to Africa. In 2011, 29 per cent 
went  to  Europe  and  34  per  cent  to  Africa.  Apart  from  direct  trade,  there  has  also  been 
increased  penetration  of  Africa  by  South  African  companies,  particularly  in  the  retail, 
construction  and  banking  sectors,  facilitated  in  part  by  more  generous  exchange  control 
allowances for investment into the continent. 
Some  of  the  reasons  for  the  recent  resilience  of  regional  growth,  highlighted  by  the  IMF, 
include the fact that financial systems in Africa are relatively insulated from global financial 
developments with banks obtaining funds from domestic deposit bases rather than external 
in  search  of  yield.  However,  since 
from  advanced  economies 
inflows 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sources; increased infrastructural expenditure; improved macroeconomic policy frameworks 
during  the  2000s;  fiscal  policies  generally  being  supportive  of  growth  since  2009,  with 
average  fiscal  deficits  increasing  by  three  percentage  points  in  that  year,  with  some 
consolidation (about 0,5 percentage points) since then; variations in monetary policy stances, 
depending on inflationary pressures; and until recently, relatively strong commodity prices. 
However,  although  there  is  good  news  coming  out  of  Africa,  the  continent  will  also  be 
impacted  by  a  global  downturn,  although  as  was  the  case  in  2008/09,  it  may  be  relatively 
more insulated than other regions. But we cannot be complacent about it. Although growth in 
sub-Saharan Africa is faster than the global average, it is still lower than the pre-crisis level of 
around  6,5  per  cent.  According to  the  latest  IMF  Regional  Economic  Outlook  (April  2012), 
growth in the region is expected to average 5,4 per cent in 2012 and 5,3 per cent in 2013. 
However, it is mainly the oil-exporting countries that are expected to have higher growth this 
year (7,1 per cent up from 6,0 per cent in 2011), as non-oil exporting middle income country 
growth  is  expected  to  decline  from  4,3  per  cent  to  3,4  per  cent  in  2012,  and  low  income 
countries more or less unchanged. Overall, the risks are seen to be on the downside due to 
global developments and their possible impact on commodity prices. 
Natural  resources  and  commodity  exports  remain  the  main  growth  driver  for  sub-Saharan 
Africa,  and  the  region  is  therefore  vulnerable  to the  global  downturn  through  this  channel. 
The  recent  increase  in global  food  prices  should,  however,  benefit  African  food  exporters. 
Just under half of the 45 countries in sub-Saharan Africa are viewed as significant exporters 
of  natural  resources,  and  most  of  the  remainder  are  dependent  on  agricultural  commodity 
exports. About half of the region’s exports are non-renewable natural resources, but seven 
countries  are  oil  exporters  and  account  for  more  than  half  the  natural  resource  exports. 
Thirteen  others  have  at  least  a  quarter  of  their  export  proceeds  coming  from  mining. 
Resource exports as a percent of non-resource GDP is 110 per cent in Angola; 68 per cent in 
DR Congo; 116 per cent in Gabon; 54 per cent in Nigeria; 38 per cent in Botswana; 52 per 
cent in Zambia and 8,6 per cent in South Africa. 
The  impact  of  the  global  downturn  on  South  Africa  is  already  evident.  Growth  has  been 
below potential and moderating, with a progressive downward revision of growth forecasts. In 
the  middle  of  2011,  the  Bank  was  forecasting  a  growth  rate  of  3,9  per  cent  for  2012  and 
4,4 per  cent  for  2013.  The  most  recent  forecasts  now  show  forecasts  of  2,7  per  cent  and 
3,8 per cent for these two years, and the MPC viewed the risks to these forecasts to be on 
the  downside.  The  value  of  merchandise  exports  contracted  by  2,4  per  cent  in  the  first 
quarter of 2012and the terms of trade have deteriorated for two consecutive quarters. The 
resulting  current  account  deficit  contributed  to  a  weakening  of  the  exchange  rate.  Capital 
flows have been highly volatile in response to changing global investor risk perceptions which 
in  turn  have  impacted  on  the  exchange  rate.  Since  August  2011,  the  exchange  rate  has 
depreciated  by  around  23  per  cent  against  the US  dollar,  and  the  volatility  has  increased. 
Employment growth has been positive but sluggish, and we have yet to get back to pre-crisis 
employment levels. 
Growth has been driven primarily by consumption expenditure, but even this is expected to 
moderate, as seen in the sharp decline in the FNB/BER consumer confidence index in the 
second  quarter.  Investment  expenditure  has  also  lagged.  There  appeared  to  be  a  steady 
recovery during 2011, but private sector gross fixed capital formation grew by only 1,8 per 
cent in 2012. Fortunately some growth is being seen at the public sector level, but the private 
sector accounts for around 65 per cent of total fixed capital formation. 
In such an environment, South Africa’s policy options are constrained. However we cannot 
just  sit  back  and  hope  that  the  world  will  somehow  turn  around.  And  when  it  does  turn 
around, we should be well-positioned to take advantage of the improved situation. 
Macroeconomic policies can help to alleviate the cyclical elements of any possible downturn 
but  both monetary and fiscal policies  have  less  room for manoeuver than was  the  case  in 
2008.  The recent monetary policy easing should be seen in the context of alleviating some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of  the  strains  in  the  economy,  but  we  emphasised  that  monetary  policy  cannot  solve  the 
underlying problems of the economy, which will still exist even if the global economy recovers 
sooner than expected. We need to recognise the structural nature of the challenges facing 
the economy, and in addressing them we can reduce our vulnerability to global headwinds. 
These  include  addressing  the  structural  nature  of  unemployment,  and  require  concerted 
policy  coordination  across  government  departments,  and  between  government,  the  private 
sector  and  civil  society.  It  is  not  my  role  to  provide  a  comprehensive  plan  for  structural 
change  in  the  economy  but  allow  me  to  mention  briefly  what  I  think  are  a  few  of  the  top 
priorities. 
The continued focus on infrastructure is essential. This is investment in the future as opposed 
to current consumption. It is productive, it provides jobs, and it helps alleviate constraints to 
growth and to exports. Lack of infrastructure has been an impediment to the mining sector’s 
ability  to  get  the  ore  to  the  ports,  and  capacity  constraints  at  the  ports  are  also  well 
documented. 
Electricity supply remains a binding constraint on growth. While more capacity is being built, 
we need to ensure that further delays do not occur, and that planning for future capacity is 
not left till too late. 
Incentives need to be given to encourage the growth of small and medium enterprises, while 
competition policy should be enhanced to reduce the occurrence of monopolistic pricing and 
other anti-competitive pricing policies. 
We need to encourage regional trade and integration. The advantages of such diversification 
and  expansion  are  obvious.  But  we  must  also  heed  the  lessons  of  the  Eurozone  and  not 
focus on monetary union. The focus should be on trade, investment and infrastructure. 
Finally, we come full circle from where we began earlier. Skills development and education 
are  key.  Although  this  is  a  long  term  issue  where  formal  schooling  is  concerned,  skills 
development is not confined to the formal school or academic environment. We need skilled 
artisans,  yet  we  have  far  too  little  by  way  of  apprenticeship  training.  There  remain  a 
significant  number  of  vacancies  which,  if  they  were  filled,  could  contribute  to  economic 
growth and job creation. This is particularly true at the provincial and local government level 
where we have seen how the lack of technical skills has impacted on the ability to achieve an 
adequate level of service delivery in many instances. 
None of this is new. All of this has been said before and by many people. The problems of 
the global economy should be the impetus for action. We need to find ways to minimise the 
negative  impact  of  the  prevailing  crisis,  and  be  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  global 
recovery  when  it  comes.  As  we  emphasised  in  our  recent  monetary  policy  statement,  a 
sustained  increase  in  the  potential  output  of  the  economy  will  require  a  concerted  and 
coordinated  effort  from  both  government  and  the  private  sector.  Policy  consistency  and 
coordination  is  essential  if  we  are  to  achieve  a  growing  economy  and  significantly  reduce 
unemployment. 
All  of  you  who  are  here  tonight  have  significant  spheres  of  influence  and  a  role  to  play  in 
building cohesion in our society. The future will be what we, all of us, make of it. 
Thank you for inviting me to be here with you this evening, and congratulations to all of you 
who ensure that ORT touches and changes the lives of so many people. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
