Christian Noyer: Public and private debt – imbalances of global savings 
Introductory speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  Session  3  “Public  and 
private  debt  – 
imbalances  of  global  savings”,  Aix-en-Provence  Economic  Forum, 
Aix-en-Provence, 6 July 2012. 
 In introduction to this session, I would like to make seven remarks.  
My  first  remark  is  inspired  by  the  very  title  of  this  session.  In  advanced  countries,  the 
average public debt to GNP ratio is 100%. In emerging countries, the figure is 30%. This is a 
very wide gap, and it represents one of the global economy’s largest imbalances. And one of 
the  least  mentioned.  It also  represents  a  complete  reversal  of the situation  compared  with 
just over twenty years ago. At that time, I remember well, I was chairman of the Paris Club, 
and emerging countries came to ask for the rescheduling of their debt.  
Second remark, global demand  is  still  fairly  concentrated  on the  advanced  countries.  Not 
only is their debt higher, but their savings (as a ratio of GNP) are lower. The G7 countries 
alone still account for 56% of global consumption. The problem is clear. How can we hope to 
raise  our  level  of  consumption  if  we  need  to  reduce  our  level  of  debt  and  increase  our 
savings?  And  if  the  advanced  countries’  consumption  stops  growing,  what  will  happen  to 
global  economic  growth  and  particularly 
that  of  emerging  countries  with  entirely 
export-oriented economies?  
Which brings me to my third remark: we need the emerging countries to continue investing 
their  savings  in  advanced  countries.  We  therefore  need  properly  functioning  international 
financial markets. In a world where the savings and financing needs are so geographically 
dislocated,  properly  functioning  financial  markets  are  a  prerequisite  for  economic  growth. 
But, today the capital markets appear very unsettled and full of anomalies, and not just in 
Europe.  
• 
For  example,  certain  sovereigns  (the  USA  and  UK  for  example)  borrow  today  at 
historically very low nominal interest rates and at negative real interest rates despite 
the fact that their deficits are around 10% of GNP and that doubts exist regarding 
the future evolution of their debt levels.  
Another  anomaly:  large  corporations  have  accumulated  unprecedented  cash 
reserves  (several  trillions  of  dollars)  despite  numerous  highly  profitable  and 
unexploited  investment  opportunities  around  the  world,  unsatisfied  infrastructure 
needs and investment bottlenecks in commodities production.  
 Fourth remark. We can identify two reasons for this situation:  
• 
The first is the general and exceptional uncertainty weighing on the global economy. 
Uncertainty makes liquid and safe assets more attractive. It makes investment less 
attractive. It can therefore partly explain the phenomena that I have mentioned.  
The  second  reason 
financial 
intermediation  mechanisms.  There  are  doubts  about  the  solidity  of  banks  in 
numerous  countries.  Debt  markets  are  profoundly  disrupted  and  international 
movements of capital have been highly volatile over the last two years.  
is  more  structural:  a  malfunctioning  of  our 
 Fifth remark. The  intervention  capacities  of  central  banks  are  of  course  limited. They  can 
remedy  temporary  market  disruptions  and  situations  of  illiquidity  caused  by  uncertainty. 
Recently  they  have  intervened  to  an  unprecedented  extent,  as  reflected  in  their  balance 
sheets. But they cannot permanently substitute financial markets and banks when financial 
intermediation malfunctions. Likewise, low or zero interest rates can contribute to stabilising 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the economy in periods of crisis, but if maintained over a protracted period, they can create 
distortions, encourage the formation of bubbles and create risk for long-term investors.  
Indeed,  on  this  topic,  I  would  like  to  make  one  observation.  The  question  of  monetary 
financing of deficits was raised by David Thesmar. Such financing cannot in any way resolve 
the problem of the dislocation between savings and investment, either at the national level or 
at the global level. Some central banks have developed large-scale public debt acquisition 
programmes.  They  have  done  so  for  reasons  relating  to  immediate  macroeconomic 
stabilisation... to go beyond the zero-interest rate limit. The Eurosystem as well intervened on 
a much smaller scale when malfunctioning debt markets prevented the effective transmission 
of monetary policy impulses. There is not a single central bank that is seriously considering 
the monetisation of deficits with the more or less declared intention of reducing the weight of 
debt via inflation. In my view, this notion is nothing more than a financial analyst’s fantasy. In 
fact,  over  the  last  six  months,  we  have  seen  constant  confirmation  of  the  anti-inflationary 
stance  of  monetary  policy  with,  for  example,  the  FED  actually  establishing  a  quantitative 
definition  of  price  stability  for  the  first  time  (in  fact,  identical  to  the  one  used  by  the 
Eurosystem).  
Sixth remark. Our immediate priority is therefore to construct or reconstruct the mechanisms 
and structures of a sound and efficient financial intermediation framework. That is why, at the 
euro area level, the financial union project is fundamental. At the global level, the FSB’s role 
is crucial in developing a robust technical, regulatory and prudential architecture, adapted to 
the interconnection of our economies.  
Seventh and last remark: fiscal policy and debt management. Here, I would say that we are 
all guilty of a certain degree of ambiguity, both at the market level and at the political level:  
• 
on  the  one  hand  we  want  public  debt  markets  that  are  broad,  deep  and  liquid, 
because  they  form  the  base  on  which  our  entire  financial  system  is  built.  In 
particular, government bonds are the safest and the most liquid assets. They act as 
reserves  of  value  for  a  large  number  of  investors,  starting  with  the  central  banks 
themselves  which  hold  them  as  foreign  currency  reserves  or  as  monetary  policy 
collateral.  
And on the other hand we want solvent States, i.e. with perfectly controlled deficits 
and levels of public debt, which logically places limits on the growth of public debt 
markets.  
 This contradiction is known by economists as the “Triffin dilemma”. It was first identified in 
relation to the U.S. balance of payments deficits and the value of the dollar, but it can also be 
applied to fiscal equilibrium. The economy needs a growing volume of risk-free assets, but 
the more they are issued, the more risky they become.  
We cannot totally side-step this dilemma, but we can avoid making it worse. It is clearly not 
good for major developed countries to find themselves in a situation where their solvency is 
put into question, or to allow markets to think that under certain circumstances, they may be 
unable to honour all their commitments. But this is what we have done in Europe, against the 
better judgement of the ECB, by introducing the principle of private sector involvement. The 
idea  is  attractive  in  theory.  However,  its  consequences  for  financial  stability  are  extremely 
negative. There has never been any doubt about whether the United Kingdom or the United 
States  would  honour  their  debts.  Today  they  are  enjoying  very  favourable  interest  rates 
compared with Spain and Italy even though the latters’ fiscal fundamentals are better. I know 
that  some  attribute  this  difference  in  borrowing  conditions  to  the  actions  of  the  UK  and 
U.S. central banks. I do not agree. I believe that Europe has a major project ahead of it to 
recreate a broad, deep and liquid public debt market that is completely and unambiguously 
free from insolvency risk. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
