Ipumbu Shiimi: Enhancing financial inclusion in Namibia 
Welcome remarks by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the launch of 
the Namibia FinScope 2011, Windhoek, 8 March 2012. 
 Director of Ceremony  
Heads of Syndicate Member Institutions  
Ms Maya Makanjee, CEO of FinMark Trust  
Distinguished invited Guests  
Members of the Media  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning!  
I would like to welcome you all to this very important workshop, held at this very important 
time in the development journey of our country. These are important times because we are 
redefining  and  transforming  our  economy  for  the  better,  especially  for  those  who  had  not 
been able to participate meaningfully in the economy, so far.  
A special welcome goes to our important partners, the FinMark Trust Team. We appreciate 
your contribution with a view to enhancing financial inclusion in our country. Many of us here 
should by now be familiar with the name FinMark Trust as you have been in Namibia many 
times. Four (4) years ago, FinMark Trust came to share the results of FinScope 2007 with us, 
and they have also presented on several other issues in between.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have come to learn and agree with the proponents of the saying: “if 
you cannot measure it, you cannot manage it”. This cannot be more relevant to us, given our 
current efforts of wanting to address the socio-economic challenges facing our country. As a 
country,  Namibia  is  being  haunted  by  challenges  of  unemployment,  poverty,  financial 
exclusion amongst others. To be able to address these challenges better, we need to be able 
to  measure  the  depth  of  those  challenges.  Fortunately  for  us,  FinScope  is  one  of  the 
instruments that we are able to make use of for that purpose, in addition to other surveys 
undertaken  nationally.  The  usefulness  of  FinScope  has  been  demonstrated  during  the 
preparation  of  the  draft  Financial  Sector  Strategy  2011–  2021,  especially  the  chapter  on 
financial inclusion. Information from the FinScope 2007 served as a basis from which new 
targets had to be set. One would probably argue that out-dated information was used, but at 
least  planning  was  based  on  something.  A  scenario  of  no  basis  for  planning  would  have 
been unacceptable.  
As you might know, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Financial Sector Strategy advocates for the 
need  to  enhance  access  to  financial  products  and  services  for  the  low  income  and  less 
privileged segments of our population. We have therefore keenly awaited the results of the 
FinScope  2011  survey,  as  we  expect  them  to  help  us  to  measure  progress  towards  to 
financial inclusion in Namibia. This is because we will now know where we are and how far 
we  are  from  our  final  destination.  This  should  then  enable  us  to  plan  and  act  better  in 
implementing our financial sector development and inclusion agenda. In fact, this will put us 
on the right path to reach our intended objectives.  
What is particularly pleasing to know is the fact that FinScope 2011 has attempted to collect 
information on financial literacy. It is our hope that this would provide a view and give us a 
baseline with which we can work, going forward. Financial literacy is an important aspect in 
the process of ensuring financial inclusion. This is because consumers will only be able to 
effectively  make  use  of  available  products  and  services  if  they  are  aware  and  are  well 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
informed; not only of the availability of products and services but also of how they can make 
use of such and on what terms. 
Director of Ceremonies, the purpose of this gathering is for FinMark Trust to share with us 
the  outcome  of  the  Namibia  FinScope  2011  Survey.  Let  me  therefore  end  here  and  allow 
them enough time to do just that.  
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
