Richard W Fisher: A report on the Texas economy and a hawk(s)eye view 
on recent Fed pronouncements – what does it all mean? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Headliners Club, Austin, Texas, 2 February 2012. 
 Thank  you,  Patti  [Ohlendorf].  I  am  flattered  that  such  a  great  group  of  Austinites  has  turned  out  tonight.  I  am 
especially pleased that Alejandro and Rosa Laura Junco are here.  
Alejandro  is  CEO  of  the  print  media  company  Grupo  Reforma.  He  has  earned  a  sterling 
reputation for journalistic independence in a part of the world where independence is a rare 
and  sometimes  dangerous  thing.  Columbia  University,  the  University  of  Missouri  and 
Michigan  State  University  have  honored  him  for  his  journalistic  accomplishments,  and  the 
University of Texas at Austin has named him a Distinguished Alumnus.  
Alejandro’s company and its flagship paper in Mexico City take their name from La Reforma, 
a period of liberalizing reforms that transformed Mexico into a nation state in the mid-19th 
century, beginning with the overthrow of the man Texans know best and like least – Santa 
Anna – and ending with the ascension to power of a good general gone bad, Porfirio Diaz. 
As a child growing up in Mexico City, I was taught about La Reforma in school. To this day, I 
can probably tell you as much about Benito Juarez, journalist-turned-jurist-turned-president 
Jose Maria Iglesias and other Reformistas as I can about Houston or Lamar or Washington 
or Lincoln.1 Alejandro and Rosa Laura, seeing you tonight has revived school-day memories 
of some 53 years ago! It is a delight and honor to be with you. 
I will do two things tonight. First, I will give you an update on the performance of the Texas 
economy and what lies ahead. Second, I will give you my personal view of what the Federal 
Reserve’s Open Market Committee – the FOMC – announced after our meeting last week. 
Then, time permitting, I will be happy to avoid answering any questions you might have. 
An update on the Texas economy 
The  economic  performance  of  Texas  since  December  2007  –  the  beginning  of  the  U.S. 
recession,  according  to the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  –  can  be  summarized 
with the chart being projected on the screen denoting employment growth in the 12 Federal 
Reserve  districts.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  and  its  branches  in  Houston,  San 
Antonio  and  El  Paso  administer  the  business  of  the  Eleventh  District  (depicted  by  the  red 
line), which includes Texas, northern Louisiana and southern New Mexico; 96 percent of the 
economic  production  of  my  district  comes  from  the  25.7  million  people  of  Texas.  In  2011, 
Texas created 211,600 jobs. We now have more people at work than we had before we felt 
the  effects  of  the  Great  Recession  in  the  United  States.  We  have  now  surpassed  our 
previous peak employment levels. 
                                                 
1   For  non-Texans,  Sam  Houston  was  the  first  and  third  president  of  the  Republic  of  Texas  (1836–38  and  
1841–44); Mirabeau B. Lamar was the second president of the Republic of Texas (1838–41). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   Only  two  other  states  can  claim  they  surpassed  previous  peak  employment  levels:  Alaska 
and North Dakota. I do not wish to denigrate the good people of Alaska and North Dakota, 
but note that their combined population roughly equals that of Travis County. 
Readers of this speech abroad – say, in New York – might think our growth last year came 
only from the burgeoning oil and gas patch. They would be right to describe it as burgeoning: 
30,000 jobs were added in the oil and gas and related support sector last year, an increase 
of 15 percent. But other sectors outperformed oil and gas in the number of jobs created in 
Texas  in  2011:  58,000  jobs  were  added  in  the  professional  and  business  services  areas, 
nearly 46,000 in education and health services and over 41,000 in leisure and hospitality. All 
told, the private sector in Texas expanded by 266,400 jobs, while the public sector, driven 
primarily by fewer schoolteachers, contracted by 54,800 jobs. In sum, Texas payrolls grew 
2 percent, significantly above the national rate of 1.3 percent. 
This  performance  is  not  unique  to  last  year.  As  you  can  see  from  this  second  graph  of 
employment  growth  by  Federal  Reserve  district  going  back  to  January  1990,  the  Eleventh 
District has outperformed the nation on the job front for over two decades. Note the slope of 
the top line, which depicts job growth in the Eleventh District compared with all the rest and, 
importantly, relative to the black line – the seventh one down – the employment growth rate 
for the country as a whole. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Here is the point: Judging solely by the employment data, Texas went into recession seven 
months  after  the  nation,  in  September  2008,  and  came  out  three  months  earlier,  in 
December 2009.2 We have now recovered fully from the Great Recession and are back on 
pace in leading the nation in job growth. Yes, we have a very large number of people earning 
minimum  wage,  a  still-too-high  unemployment  rate  of  7.8  percent  and  many  other 
deficiencies, all of which were pointed out in high relief when a certain Texas governor was 
briefly in the hunt for his party’s nomination for the presidency. But I’ll bet you, those who 
love to point these things out and are given generally to Texas-bashing would give their right 
– or should I say, left-arms to have the record of job growth of the Eleventh Federal Reserve 
District  that  is  documented  by  these  charts.  So  good  citizens  of  Austin  and  of  Texas,  you 
have much to be proud of. 
As to projections, there is no reason to not expect continued job growth at the same pace in 
Texas. The budgetary constraints originally assumed for the state government have proven 
less severe than originally thought: Due to stronger-than-anticipated tax receipts, cutbacks in 
employment for schools and other state and local institutions may end up being less drastic. 
And  if  the  Dallas  Fed’s  Texas  Business  Outlook  Surveys  for  January,  released  this  past 
Monday  and  Tuesday,  are  reviewed,  job  expansion  looks  promising  and  expectations 
regarding future business conditions are at the highest level in almost 12 months. Our most 
recent employment indexes in those surveys signaled an increase in both employment levels 
and  in  hours  worked.3  Thus,  barring  some  unforeseeable  shock,  I  would  expect  Texas  to 
continue leading the nation in job creation.  
                                                 
2   According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the nation went into recession in December 2007 
and came out in June 2009. According to the Dallas Fed’s Texas Index of Coincident Indicators, Texas went 
into the recession in August 2008 and came out in December 2009. 
3   These surveys can be found on the Dallas Fed website at www.dallasfed.org/research/surveys/index.cfm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
An inconvenient truth 
Incidentally,  our  record  of  job  growth  and  the  fact  that  people  and  companies  have  been 
voting with their feet and relocating to Texas from other states illustrate what for some is an 
inconvenient truth. The citizens of Texas and the Eleventh Federal Reserve District operate 
under the same monetary policy as do the rest of our fellow Americans. We have the same 
mortgage rates, pay the same rate of interest on commercial and consumer loans, and earn 
returns and borrow at the same interest rates as do our brethren in the rest of the country. 
Which raises an important question: If monetary policy is the same here as everywhere else 
in the United States, why does Texas outperform the rest? 
The  answer  is  no  doubt  complicated  by  the  fact  that  we  are  blessed  with  a  comparatively 
great amount of nature’s gifts, a high concentration of military installations and other “unfair” 
advantages.  But  one  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  one  of  those  “unfair”  advantages  is 
that we have a Legislature, based here in Austin, that under both Democrat and Republican 
governors  has  over  time  crafted  laws  and  regulations  that  encourage  business  expansion 
and  job  creation.  They  have  conducted  the  fiscal  affairs  of  the  state  so  as  to  maintain 
confidence  in  the  future.  One  might  draw  two  lessons  here:  first,  that  Germany’s  finance 
minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, is right when he says, “If you want more private demand, you 
have to take people’s angst away” by having responsible and disciplined fiscal policy;4 and 
second, that fiscal policy either complements monetary policy or retards its effectiveness as 
a propellant for job creation. 
Herein  lies  the  tale  of  the  recent  long-term  policy  and  strategy  statement  issued  by  the 
FOMC at the conclusion of its meetings last week. 
The recent pronouncements of the FOMC 
Many  of  you  may  have  read  that  the  FOMC  did  three  things  after  its  two-day  meeting 
Tuesday and Wednesday a week ago. 
First,  the  committee  issued  the  usual  policy  statement,  stating  that  it  “currently  anticipates 
that economic conditions … are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds 
rate at least through late 2014.”5 
There  are  presently  17  participants  in  FOMC  meetings:  the  12  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
presidents and the five current governors. Ten out of the 17 people get to vote in any given 
year, with the governors and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York always having a vote. I 
voted last year, and you may recall that together with Mr. [Charles] Plosser of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  and  Mr.  [Narayana]  Kocherlakota  of  the  Minneapolis  Fed,  I 
resisted the notion of a need for a statement indicating that monetary accommodation be tied 
to a specific date, be it in mid-2013, late 2014 or any other. Instead, I feel that the key should 
be to calibrate monetary policy according to the state or condition of the economy. 
While most all of my colleagues value the state-contingent argument, at last week’s meeting 
the majority of this year’s voters felt that a combination of factors – including an expectation 
that “economic growth over coming quarters [will] be modest and … the unemployment rate 
will decline only gradually”; that the housing sector “remains depressed”; and that a “slowing 
in global growth” and other factors, combined with an anticipation “that over coming quarters, 
inflation  will  run  at  levels  at  or  below  those  consistent  with  the  Committee’s  dual  
                                                 
4   “Q&A: German Finance Minister Takes On Critics,” by Marcus Walker, William Boston and Andreas Kissler, 
Wall Street Journal, Jan. 29, 2012. 
5   See 
the  FOMC’s  statement,  Jan.  25,  2012,  www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary 
/20120125a.htm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mandate”  –  warranted  a  need  for  the  committee  to  indicate  it  would  likely  maintain  a 
significantly accommodative monetary stance for another three years. 
Second, the statement was accompanied by a first-ever release of the individual economic 
and interest-rate forecasts of all the policy meeting’s 17 participants. Mind you, these are not 
binding commitments. They are based on the assumption of “appropriate monetary  policy” 
and  are,  despite  the  best  of  intentions,  largely  guesswork,  especially  looking  out  over  a 
multiyear period. 
My predecessor at the helm of the Dallas Fed, Bob McTeer, used to say, “The first rule of 
forecasting should be “don’t do it.” The second rule, he would add is, “If you give a number, 
don’t give a date.” But given the assignment to venture a vision as to where the fed funds 
rate would be in each of the next three years and over “the longer run” to the nearest one-
quarter of one percent, the 17 intrepid souls of the FOMC, including yours truly, did so. Only 
three envisioned that the fed funds rate might rise from current levels by year-end 2012; six 
saw  it  doing  so  by  year-end  2013  and  11  by  year-end  2014.  Over  the  longer  term,  the 
17 members envisioned a funds rate of between 3¾ and 4½ percent. 
Bob  McTeer’s  admonishment  clearly  does  not  resonate  with  the  FOMC.  And  yet  I  would 
caution,  again,  that  at  best,  the  economic  forecasts  and  interest-rate  projections  of  the 
FOMC are ultimately pure guesses. I have yet to find a single economist on this planet who 
consistently  forecasts  the  economy  accurately,  let  alone  projects  with  any  precision  the 
interest rate on overnight funds one year out or far into the future. If you examine the record 
of  the  Blue  Chip  economists  or  even  of  our  superb  Federal  Reserve  staff,  you  will  find 
confirmation of a paucity of reliable economic forecasts.  
I  note  that  even  publicly  traded  companies  that  wrestle  with  the  relatively  easy  task  of 
providing  forward  guidance  on  revenue  and  earnings  find  that  exercise  especially  vexing; 
most won’t venture beyond forecasting the upcoming quarter – and that is after they already 
have  a  month’s  worth  of  the  quarter’s  data  in  hand!  In  this  morning’s  Financial  Times, 
Charles  Goodhart,  professor  emeritus  at  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  former 
member of the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee, claims to have examined the 
record of three central banks that have most prominently engaged in the practice of providing 
multiyear  rate  forecasts.  He  concludes:  “The  record  for  central  banks  in  New  Zealand, 
Sweden and Norway is not encouraging. In the short run, over the next three months and to 
a lesser extent over the subsequent quarter, these central banks do have additional (inside) 
information  about  their  own  future  actions.  Beyond  this,  however,  the  extra  informational 
content  of  those  central  bank  forecasts  is  zero.  Moreover,  the  market  knows  that  central 
bankers have no superhuman forecasting ability and will tend to view the supposed longer-
term  forecasts  as  a  version  of  jawboning,  attempts  to  persuade  the  market  to  change  its 
mind for immediate policy purposes. Again, there is little empirical evidence that the market 
responds to such jawboning, and why should it when the central bank is as ignorant of the 
longer-term future as they are?”6 
I don’t in any way consider my learned colleagues on the FOMC to be ignorant. But I draw 
upon my own experience in the corporate world and upon the insights offered by Goodhart to 
suggest that you simply take all this forward guidance and forecasting a year or  more out 
with a big grain of salt, bearing in mind that the policy statements and forecasts issued by the 
FOMC are tactical judgments of the moment, made within a broader strategic context. 
                                                 
6   “Longer-term Central Bank  Forecasts Are Step Backwards,” by Charles Goodhart, Financial Times, Feb. 2, 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The most important announcement 
Which leads me to what I consider the third and most important announcement we made last 
week:  the  statement  of  our  longer-range  goals  and  strategy.  For  the  first  time,  the  entire 
17-member committee stated that, given inflation over the longer term is primarily determined 
by monetary policy, we are able to specify that an inflation rate of 2 percent, as measured by 
the index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent with our mandate. At the 
same  time,  we  stated  that  we  cannot  specify  an  exact  goal  for  employment  because  “the 
maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the 
structure  and  dynamics  of  the  labor  market”  and  that  “change  over  time  and  may  not  be 
directly measurable.”7] 
In the aviary of monetary policy makers, I am considered a “hawk.” I respect the fact that the 
Congress of the United States has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate of conducting 
monetary policy so as to have full employment and simultaneously maintain stable prices. I 
believe  monetary  policy  is  the  principal  determinant  of  long-term  price  stability.  But  I  have 
long maintained that monetary policy is but one gear in the complicated gearbox that drives 
job creation. Education and other structural aspects of our economy condition the nation’s 
job-creating  capacity;  fiscal  and  regulatory  policy,  in  turn,  condition  both  the  structure  and 
dynamics of employment. I was delighted that the full committee recognized this and made it 
part of its official credo. 
In  a  world  driven  by  rapid  technological  change  and  globalization,  job-creating  capital  will 
flow  not  only  to  countries  that  conduct  sound  monetary  policy  but  to  places  with  the  most 
welcoming,  competitive  tax  and  regulatory  systems.  This  was  underscored  in  a  recent 
Harvard  Business  School  (HBS)  survey  authored  by  Jan  Rivkin  and  Michael  Porter,  two 
widely  admired  scholars  on  national  competitiveness  and  economic  development.  Their 
survey of HBS alumni found that the greatest impediments to investing in and creating jobs in 
the U.S. are our current tax code and regulatory burden and uncertainty, as well as lagging 
workforce  skills.  Absent  changes  on  these  fronts,  the  Rivkin/Porter  study  found  that  more 
than 70 percent of respondents expect U.S. competitiveness to decline over the next three 
years, and along with it, job-creating investment.8 
Thus  for  me,  explicitly  acknowledging  that  monetary  policy’s  impact  on  employment  is 
transitory and uncertain is a cardinal event. It signals to the markets that there are limits to 
the  ultimate  job-stoking  efficacy  of  Federal  Reserve  policy.  To  the  extent  that  inflation  is 
running below 2 percent, the Federal Reserve may have somewhat greater latitude to pursue 
accommodation. However, the past few years have demonstrated, yet again, that allowing 
inflation to rise by no means guarantees faster job growth. The message to our nation’s fiscal 
authorities is that they cannot expect monetary policy to substitute for the need to get their 
act  together,  stop  their  shameful  politicking,  get  on  with  putting  their  fiscal  and  regulatory 
house in order and do so in a manner that encourages rather than continually undermines 
job creation and economic expansion.  
Fiscal matters matter 
I  noted  how  Texas  has managed  under  the  same  monetary  policy  regime  to  more  quickly 
return  to  peak  employment  than  other  states.  I  attributed  this  in  significant  part  to  prudent 
fiscal  and  regulatory  policy,  underscoring  that  this  not  only  facilitates  job  and  overall 
economic expansion in Texas, but is the underpinning of confidence. I would suggest that 
                                                 
7   See 
/20120125c.htm. 
the  FOMC’s  statement,  Jan.  25,  2012,  www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary 
8   “Prosperity at Risk: Findings of Harvard Business School’s Survey on U.S. Competitiveness,” by Michael E. 
Porter and Jan W. Rivkin, Harvard University, January 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
now is the time for prudent fiscal policy to be enacted by a Congress that on both sides of the 
aisle  has  for  far  too  long,  under  both  Republican  and  Democratic  presidents,  been 
shamefully  negligent of its responsibility. Today  marks the 1,009th day without an agreed-
upon federal government budget. The Congress has found it easier to not agree on a budget 
than to go about correcting fiscal imbalances that drive the nation’s growing indebtedness. 
Our  political  leaders’  misfeasance  exacerbates  the  “angst”  that  inhibits  the  confidence  of 
consumers and job-creating businesses. 
My staff has found a wonderful sketch on YouTube that might best illustrate the behavior of 
Congress. Here it is: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Li0no7O9zmE. 
That sketch says it all. The Fed, the nation’s monetary authority, has clearly articulated its 
longer-run goal and policy strategy and has conducted itself with integrity by responding to 
the needs of the economy. In contrast, the fiscal authorities have conducted themselves with 
impunity: Their only long-term strategy is to pass the bill to our children and grandchildren. 
Reforma is needed 
I would suggest that Reforma is urgently needed in the conduct of fiscal affairs in our nation’s 
capital. 
And I will leave you with this thought: The power to make that happen is in your hands. You 
and your fellow citizens across this great country are the ones who elect the people who tax 
you and decide where to spend your money; you ultimately direct the nation’s fiscal future. 
And you share in the blame for it being such a mess. 
Accepting the status quo means you are acquiescing to encumbering your children and your 
children’s  children  with  mismanaged  fiscal  policy,  crippling  debt  and  a  dismal  economic 
future. 
Look  to  Alejandro  Junco  as  an  example.  He  has  taken  great  risk  with  his  person  and  his 
family’s treasure to take on the status quo. Like Alejandro did for journalism in Mexico, I hope 
you will step up to the plate, risk whatever personal benefits and comforts you derive from 
the  current  regime  and  use  your  talents  and  resources  to  force  a  course  correction  in  the 
fiscal  affairs  of  our  nation.  For  only  then  can  we  be  assured  of  a  bright  and  prosperous 
economic  future.  And  only  then  can  monetary  policy,  properly  conducted,  perform  with 
maximum  efficiency  and  minimal  risk  to  price  stability  to  restore  the  great  job-creation 
potential of America. 
Thank you.  
About the author 
Richard W. Fisher is president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
Notes 
The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal 
Reserve System. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
