Yaseen Anwar: Managing Systemically Important Financial Institutions 
(SIFIs) 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  second 
meeting  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  Regional  Consultative  Group  for  Asia, 
Kuala Lumpur, 14 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good evening. It is indeed a pleasure to be here in Kuala Lumpur again, and I am grateful to 
Governor Zeti for inviting me as a lead discussant on one of the key challenges of regulatory 
reform  agenda  –  “Managing  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions”.  In  these  few 
minutes,  I  will  cover  the  need  for  specific  regulations  for  SIFIs,  progress  made  so  far  in 
designing the policy framework, perspectives of emerging markets in general and Pakistan in 
particular,  regulatory  challenges  faced  by  supervisory  authorities,  and  what  remains  to  be 
done.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  2007–08,  the  entire  supervisory 
perspective towards financial institutions regulation has taken a U-turn. In the pre crisis era, 
supervisory authorities, mainly in advanced countries, chose to rely on market discipline and 
favored somewhat self regulation by the financial industry. The approach stemmed from the 
perception that financial institutions are in the best position to understand the market and risk 
associated  with  financial  products.  Overly  prescriptive  regulations  were  thought  to  stifle 
innovation  and  diversification  –  both  across  borders  and  across  activities.  The  prevailing 
version of international accord on capital and liquidity standards, Basel II, further reinforced 
this practice. Most frameworks relied on banks’ own assessment of risks. However the GFC, 
particularly  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  fall  of  2008,  triggered  problems 
throughout  the  financial  system  across  the  world  and  changed  supervisory  perspective 
towards  financial  industry  regulations,  particularly  the  so  called  “Systemically  Important 
Financial institutions (SIFIS1)”. The Lehman bankruptcy with ensuing financial instability and 
loss  of  real  output  brought  forth  several  shortcomings  of  the  international  financial 
architecture that exposed risks resulting from a lack of a policy framework for dealing with 
SIFIs.  In  the  pre-GFC  era  it  was  precisely  these  institutions  that  were  deemed  quite 
invincible. However, the huge costs of implicit government guarantees of not letting a SIFI to 
fail and their adverse impact on global financial stability, raised serious concerns on “Too Big 
to fail” (TBTF) status of SIFIs. Post crisis era witnesses increased discussion on changing 
TBTF status of SIFIs and for devising a resolution regime as well as safe exit mechanisms 
for  these  entities.  Resultantly,  immediately  after  the  Lehman  failure,  we  saw  international 
financial authorities placing financial sector reforms as their top priority agenda.  
Over the last few years, we have seen increased realization among financial authorities that 
diversification  may  be  beneficial  for  a  large  bank  against  idiosyncratic  risk,  but  similar 
patterns  of  diversification  by  many  global  banks  across  the  world  had  actually  contributed 
towards building up of systemic risk. Further, it has also been recognized that the prevailing 
regulatory  framework  and  polices  are  not  sufficient  to  address  the  “negative  externalities” 
that  large  financial  firms  create.  Supervisory  authorities  have  arrived  at  a  consensus  that 
                                                
1  SIFI  DEFINITION:  An  institution,  market  or  instrument  is  considered  systemically  important  if  its  failure  or 
malfunction causes widespread distress, either as a direct impact or as a trigger for broader contagion. The 
interpretation, however, is nuanced in that some authorities focus on the impact on the financial system, while 
others consider the ultimate impact on the real economy as key (Financial Stability Board (2009)). Negative 
externalities are associated with institutions as they are perceived not being allowed to fail due to their size, 
interconnectedness, complexity key criterion to identify SIFIs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
their 
focus  on  account  of 
require  enhanced  supervisory 
SIFIs 
relative  size, 
interconnectedness  with  market(s)  and  complexity.  To  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  of 
such  institution  and  minimize  the  risk  to  financial  stability  and  the  real  economy,  it  is 
imperative  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  framework  and  enhance  supervisory  capacity  for 
dealing with SIFIs. 
Before expressing my views on the regulatory framework for SIFIs, I would like to appreciate 
the commendable work done and progress made by the FSB, BCBS and other multilateral 
agencies  on  the  financial  reforms  agenda  over  the  last  few  years.  Enhanced  international 
accord  on  capital  and  liquidity  standards;  i.e.  BASEL  III,  has  set  forth  the  most  critical 
reforms agenda for improving the solvency and resilience of financial institutions. A number 
of other policy measures supplement Basel III, which among others, included framework for 
dealing  with  global  SIFIs  (G-SIFIs).  Starting from  initial  “Guidance  to  Assess  the  Systemic 
Importance of Financial Institutions, Markets and Instruments: Initial Considerations” issued 
in November, 2009 jointly by the IMF, FSB and BIS, substantial progress has been made in 
tackling the SIFIs challenge. A key development took place in November, 2011, when G-20 
leaders  at  the  Cannes  Summit  endorsed  the  policy  framework  on  systemically  important 
financial  institutions  (G-SIFIs).  A  multipronged  strategy  was  adopted  for  addressing  the 
G-SIFIs  comprising  of  a  new  international  standard  for  resolution  regimes,  more  intensive 
and effective supervision, and requirements for cross-border cooperation and recovery and 
resolution planning.  
One  of  the  key  issues  concerning  the  SIFIs  is  their  identification.  The  method  used  for 
identification of SIFIs varies widely – from complex models to simple indicators (see Box 1 
for discussion on methods to identify SIFIs). To facilitate the process, FSB and BCBS have 
been assigned to determine the G-SIFIs to which the resolution planning and additional loss 
absorption  requirements  will  apply  based  on  the  methodology  developed  by  the  BCBS. 
Accordingly,  FSB  and  BCBS  have  identified  29  systemically  important  banks  on  a  global 
level2  out  of  a  sample  of  73  banks.  These  include  25  banks  in  the  USA  and  Western 
European block, 3 in Japan and 1 in China. FSB will update the above list annually based on 
its assessment which will be publically disclosed.  
Box  1:  SIFIs  can  be  identified  either  using  model  based  approaches  such  as  contribution, 
participation  and  bottom  up  approach  or  using  a  set  of  simple  indicators  such  as  bank  size, 
interbank  lending,  interbank  borrowing.  A  BIS  article  “Systemic  Importance:  Some  Simple 
Indicators  (2011)”  empirically  tested  and  found  that  simple  indicators  are  reliable  proxies  for 
model-based  measures  of  systemic  importance.  Alternatively  FSB  has  proposed  three  key 
indicators for identifying SIFIs. These are size, interconnectedness and complexity. Whereas the 
five  indicators  used  for  designating  Global-SIFIs  by  FSB  are:  size,  interconnectedness, 
complexity, and substitutability and cross jurisdiction activity.  
To  address  the  greater  risk  posed  by  the  G-SIFIs,  intensive  regulatory  approach  is  being 
prescribed for them. They are required to meet the additional loss absorbency requirements 
ranging  from  1%  to  2.5%  of  Risk  Weighted  Assets  (RWA).  These  requirements  will  be 
applicable in phases starting January 2016 with full implementation by January 2019. As per 
FSB and BCBS assessment, long term economic benefits in terms of greater resilience of 
these  institutions  from  additional  loss  absorbency  requirements  far  exceed  the  modest 
temporary decline of GDP over the implementation horizon. 
Another positive development on this front is that some of the countries, notably Switzerland, 
United  Kingdom  and  Sweden  have  already  taken  action  to  implement  higher  capital 
requirements  for  banks  that  are  deemed  systemically  important  at  the  national  level. 
Recently, Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) in the USA proposed guidance on the 
                                                
2  See Annexure 1 for a list of G-SIFIs by FSB 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
process and the factors that it will use to designate Non-Bank Financial Institutions as SIFIs. 
Some jurisdictions have already adopted legislation to improve their resolution regimes like 
Germany,  where  supervisory  powers  have  been  significantly  extended  to  restructure  and 
resolve  banks.  On  the  other  hand,  many  institutions  have  actively  lobbied  against  being 
identified  as  a  SIFI,  because  of  the  additional  and  significant  regulatory  requirements  that 
SIFIs will endure. 
Emerging markets 
Emerging economies financial systems remained fairly resilient in the face of recent crisis. It 
was  possible  firstly  because  financial  systems  in  emerging  economies  have  primarily 
domestically active FIs. This argument can be supported by the fact that out of 29 designated 
G-SIFIs3 only one bank from Asia; “the Bank of China” could make it on the list. Secondly, 
financial  systems  in  emerging  economies  remain  relatively  conservative  –  activities  are 
mainly  centered  on  more  traditional  banking  businesses  while  capital  markets  and  other 
financial  institutions  remain  relatively  underdeveloped.  The  difference  between  financial 
structures  and  business  models  of  developed  and  emerging  economies  have  raised 
concerns regarding relevance of the reforms – which mainly addresses causes of GFC – for 
emerging  economies.  Moreover,  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997–98,  financial 
authorities  have  not  only  carried  out  extensive  reforms  but  are  very  keen  in  continuously 
monitoring and adapting to the changing market conditions. 
Nonetheless,  it  is  a  common  understanding  that  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world 
need to give special attention to SIFIs by focusing on the development of specific, relevant 
and appropriate regulatory standards. In this regard, Asian economies are quite well aware 
of the issues involving implementation of such a framework. Firstly, emerging Asia is now at 
the  center  of  global  economic  growth.  To  sustain  such  growth,  the  need  for  financial 
intermediation  is  also  likely  to  increase.  While  there  is  a  global  consensus  on  the  use  of 
public funds for resolution of SIFIs as a last resort, there can also be circumstances in which 
use  of  public  funds  may  be  less  costly  to  the  economy  than  excessively  “taxing”  of  the 
banking  system.  Asian  economies  must  weigh  the  cost  of  new  regulations  on  institutions, 
against  the  perceived  benefits  that  those  regulations  have  for  the  economy  and  society. 
Secondly,  international  standards  must  be  customized  according  to  Asian  economies 
business models. The regulatory and supervisory regime must target well-defined risks that 
could have systemic implications.  
Pakistan’s perspective on SIFIs 
Pakistan is a small, open economy, with domestically an active financial sector. In terms of 
banking  concentration,  top  5  banks  (all  locally  incorporated)  account  for  51%  of  industry 
assets;  while  foreign  assets  of  the  system  are  10.4%  of  total  assets.  Moreover  locally-
incorporated  banks  and  most  foreign  branches  don’t  have  significant  exposures  to  the 
complex financial assets that caused financial meltdown in the U.S. and Europe. Apart from 
the conservative financial structure, i.e. less risky assets on banks’ balance sheets, SBP has 
always required banks to meet higher capital and liquidity standards, exceeding international 
norms in several areas. More importantly, we have a strong legal framework, which has been 
tested for effectiveness during the last decade and a half. SBP has successfully restructured 
a  number  of  banks  successfully  demonstrating  the  problem  bank  resolution  regime.  We 
already practice enhanced supervision of the most significant financial institutions, identified 
                                                
3  17 are from Europe, 8 from US and in Asia 3 from Japan and 1 from China. The initial sample of 73 banks 
include  from  Australia,  Belgium,  Brazil,  Canada,  China,  France,  Germany,  India,  Italy,  Japan,  Korea,  the 
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
by size. The supervisory framework includes quarterly reviews of individual banks for off-site 
surveillance, periodical  and special on-site inspections and regular interactions with banks’ 
aimed at reducing the probability of failure of these institutions. The multi-pronged strategy 
has proved quite effective so far. SBP has ensured that adequate safeguards are in place to 
limit  the  direct  impact  of  externals  shocks.  Not  surprisingly,  Pakistan’s  financial  system 
withstood the global financial crisis reasonably well. 
SBP  is  vigilant  towards  the  changing  market  dynamics,  both  locally  and  abroad,  and  is 
already in the process of reviewing Pakistan’s banking industry vis-a-vis Basel III capital and 
liquidity standards. Regarding dealing with SIFIs, high-frequent monitoring and more in-depth 
supervision  are  our  main  tools  for  dealing  with  large  banks,  which  are  essentially  the 
so-called SIFIs for us. However, we are looking forward to the development of a framework 
to identify and deal with domestic SIFIs (D-SIFIs) by FBS, BIS, and IMF. Till such time the 
framework for global SIFIs may be a useful starting point for countries like ours for dealing 
with  domestic  SIFIs.  In  view  of  that,  we  have  already  initiated  an  assessment  process. 
Recently,  we  have  conducted  an  in-house  study  based  on  simple  indicators  approach  to 
assess possibility of domestic SIFIs in Pakistan; our initial assessment suggests that banks 
with the largest market share in terms of assets – are the most systemically important banks. 
These  findings  endorse  the  earlier  held  belief  regarding  the  significance  of  asset  size  in 
Pakistan’s banking industry. 
Regulatory challenges 
There  are  multiple  challenges faced  by  regulatory  authorities to  design and  implement  the 
framework for SIFIs identification, implementation and cross border resolution – to accelerate 
reforms  of  domestic  resolution  regimes  and  tools  and  of  frameworks  for  cross-border 
enforcement of resolution actions. One of the major issues highlighted by the crisis has been 
gaps  in  the  legal  framework  for  dealing  with  failing  financial  institutions.  Though  capital 
buffers will help build up the resilience, however, it cannot avoid failures. Therefore gaps in 
legal frameworks must be addressed so that SIFIs, too, must be able to exit the market in an 
orderly manner without exposing taxpayers to the risk of loss. 
Emerging  economies  need  to  be  cautious  while  adopting  the  regulatory  framework  being 
proposed for SIFIs. A detailed assessment on the possible legal, regulatory and economic 
implications is imperative before adopting and customizing the SIFI regulatory framework to 
one’s  own  financial  structure.  An  important  challenge  for  regulators  is  to  develop  a 
framework  that  allows  financial  sector  to  grow,  innovate,  and  support  the  needs  of  the 
economy, without compromising on the stability of the financial system.  
Nonetheless, an effective framework for dealing with SIFIs would include a combination of 
stronger  market  discipline;  capital  buffers;  comprehensive  recovery  and  resolution 
arrangements; and a strengthened market infrastructure to reduce probability of failure. 
Going forward 
In  the  near future  we  expect  to  see further  developments  in the  areas of managing  SIFIs, 
particularly  the  D-SIFIs.  As  highlighted  above,  FSB  is  already  working  with  the  Basel 
Committee  for  extending  the  framework  to  D-SIFIs.  The  selection  criteria  is  expected  to 
resemble that for the G-SIFIs, with institutions placed in different “buckets” according to their 
size,  interconnectedness,  and  lack  of  substitutability.  Once  the  framework  is  introduced  in 
November this year, we expect to have detailed deliberation on implementation of the new 
framework in emerging and developing economies. 
Development  of  a  resolution  regime  will  remain  a  key  element  of  the  D-SIFIs  framework, 
making sure that the critical functions of these financial institutions continue in the event of 
failure. Given that it will involve legislative processes, the move towards development of a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
resolution  regime  may  be  somewhat  slow.  Therefore,  emerging  markets  and  developing 
economies (EMDE), taking lead from the proposed framework for G-SIFIs, need to start work 
on  the  development  of  a  resolution  regime  now  rather  than  wait  for  a  final  D-SIFIs 
framework.  
Another important issue for the emerging market economies from a stability perspective is on 
account of the presence of foreign financial institutions. The regulators of emerging markets 
may  not  be  fully  equipped  to  understand  the  risk  profile  of  a  globally  active  institution 
operating in their countries. Risks also arise due to financial interlinkages between emerging 
and foreign financial markets. For the host emerging economy, an important issue is possible 
market  disruption  through  an  adverse  impact  on  local  lending  decisions  and  depositors 
safeguard as a result of problems at the parent institution level. Regulatory colleges should 
therefore  be  encouraged  by  the  home  regulators  across  the  regions.  The  practice  of 
conducting regulatory colleges for systemically important institutions would assist regulators 
in dealing with the global issues in a coordinated manner.  
I would like to point out that regulation and monitoring of SIFIs is just one of the aspects in 
overall macro-prudential regulations. In order to implement a complete reform agenda, SIFIs 
framework  needs  to  be  dovetailed  with  other  initiatives  of  financial  stability.  These  may 
include  an  elaborate  crisis  management  framework,  work  on  countercyclical  measures, 
framework for effective resolution of problem institutions, legal cover for enforcement etc. 
Increased  coordination  among  authorities  both  at  top  level  as  well  as  operational  level  is 
critical for successful implementation of a global financial agenda. For the purpose, there is a 
need  to  establish  working  committees  under  the  Regional  Consultative  Group  terms  of 
reference. I therefore propose the establishment of working level committees to be involved 
in  the  development  of  policy  level  documents  on  financial  stability  related  issues  from  the 
EMDEs perspective. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Annexure 1 
The list 29 G-SIFIs is as follows: 
U.S.  
Bank  of  America, Bank  of  New  York  Mellon,  Citigroup,  Goldman  Sachs, 
J.P. Morgan (JPM), Morgan Stanley, State Street and Wells Fargo 
Royal Bank of Scotland, Lloyds Banking Group, Barclays, HSBC Holdings; 
Credit Agricole, BNP Paribas, Banque Populaire, Societe Generale 
Deutsche Bank, Commerzbank 
Unicredit Group 
UBS, Credit Suisse 
Dexia 
ING Groep  
Banco Santander 
Nordea 
Mitsubishi, Mizuho, Sumitomo Mitsui 
Bank of China  
U.K.  
France:  
Germany:  
Italy:  
Switzerland:  
Belgium:  
Netherlands:  
Spain:  
Sweden:  
Japan:  
China:  
Instruments: 
Initial  Considerations” 
Chronology of developments regarding SIFIs, 30 April 2012 
The  report  and  background  paper  respond  to  a  request  made  by  the  G20  Leaders  in 
April 2009 to develop guidance for national authorities to assess the systemic importance of 
financial institutions, markets and instruments. 
IMF,  BIS,  FSB,  “Guidance  to  Assess  the  Systemic  Importance  of  Financial  Institutions, 
Markets  and 
(7  Nov  2009),  available  at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/othp07.htm 
FSB Recommendations and Time Lines 
FSB,  “Reducing  the  moral  hazard  posed  by  systemically  important  financial  institutions” 
(20 OCT 2010), available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_101111a.pdf 
A final framework issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision for the additional 
capital  required  of  G-SIFIs  that  are  banks,  or  G-SIBs.  The  framework  also  includes  the 
methodology for deciding which global banks will be considered G-SIBs. 
BCBS,  “Global  systemically  important  banks:  assessment  methodology  and  the  additional 
loss  absorbency  requirement  –  Rules  text  and  Cover  note”  (Nov.  2011),  available  at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs207.htm. 
A final policy framework for supervising SIFIs. 
FSB, “Intensity and Effectiveness of SIFI Supervision: Progress report on implementing the 
recommendations  on  enhanced  supervision” 
(27  October  2011),  available  at 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_111104ee.pdf. 
The list of the 29 global banking companies in the initial group of G-SIFIs. 
FSB,  “Annex  to  Policy  Measures  to  Address  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions” 
(4 Nov. 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/ 
r_111104bb.pdf. 
A  final  policy  framework  on  resolution  regimes  (“Key  Attributes”)  that  G20  countries  are 
required to implement in order to resolve SIFIs effectively. 
available 
2011), 
at 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
“Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes 
FSB, 
Institutions” 
(4 Nov. 2011), available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_111104cc.pdf. 
Extending the G-SIFI Framework to domestic systemically important banks. The framework 
is  still  in  development  stages  FSB,  A  Progress  Report  submitted  to  G-20  Ministers  and 
Governors 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/ 
r_120420b.pdf 
for  Financial 
16  April 
2012. 
on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
