Hidetoshi Kamezaki: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Hidetoshi Kamezaki, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of 
Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Fukuoka, 29 February 2012. 
I. 
Economic activity and prices 
 Overseas economies 
A. 
Tensions have heightened considerably in global financial markets since summer 2011 due 
to  concerns  about  the  European  debt  problem.  Uncertainty  about  the  fiscal  discipline  of 
peripheral  European  countries  gave  rise  to  doubts  about  the  financial  soundness  of 
European  financial  institutions  with  large  holdings  of  government  bonds  issued  by  these 
countries,  making  it  difficult  for  these  financial  institutions  to  procure  funds.  In  turn,  the 
lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  to  firms  and  households  deteriorated,  and  this 
negative sentiment among economic entities had a detrimental effect on economic activity, 
giving rise to an adverse feedback loop among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and 
economic  activity.  Furthermore,  the  effects  of  increased  risk  aversion  among  investors  as 
well  as  deleveraging  by  European  banks  are  evident  in  neighboring  Central  and  Eastern 
European countries and even in parts of Asia and other regions that have trade and financial 
ties with Europe. 
A key characteristic of the European debt problem is that the sovereign debt problems, which 
had been confined to some peripheral countries such as Greece and Portugal, have spread 
to  major  European  countries  such  as  Italy  and  Spain.  Consequently,  the  stock  prices  of 
banks with large holdings of European government bonds fell. Recently, however, tensions in 
financial  markets  have  abated  somewhat  due  to  the  provision  of  ample  funds  through  the 
36-month  longer-term  refinancing  operations  conducted  by  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB), the coordinated action being taken by six central banks – including the Bank of Japan 
– to provide U.S. dollar liquidity, and the recent agreement by euro area finance ministers on 
a second rescue package for Greece, worth 130 billion euros. 
These are, however, merely stop-gap measures to prevent further financial turmoil. Of more 
importance  is  prompt  action  in  the  following  areas  discussed  by  the  European  authorities: 
(1) fiscal reform in, and strengthening the competitiveness of, member states; (2) enhancing 
fiscal governance within the euro area; and (3) boosting the funds for a so-called firewall to 
contain disruptions in the financial system and financial markets. 
The objective of adopting the euro had been to create an economic zone free of currency 
rate  fluctuations  through  the  introduction  of  a  unified  single  currency,  with  member  states 
obliged  to  maintain  fiscal  discipline.  In  reality,  however,  taking  advantage  of  a  strong 
currency  and  low  interest  rate,  peripheral  countries  such  as  Greece  increased  private 
consumption, resulting in greater external imbalances. Furthermore, wages rose faster than 
productivity due to rigid labor markets, resulting in a decline in competitiveness. At the same 
time,  other  countries  such  as  Germany  were  able  to  raise  productivity,  mainly  in  the 
manufacturing  sector,  and  succeeded  in  strengthening  their  export  competitiveness.  As  a 
result,  disparities  in  competitiveness  and  economic  prosperity  among  member  states 
increased.  In  theory,  efforts  should  have  been  made  to  tighten  fiscal  discipline  and  raise 
competitiveness  before  the  disparities  could  give  rise  to  a  financial  crisis,  but  when  the 
economy remained strong, the impetus for such efforts was lacking. Thus, the financial crisis 
arose, exposing the structural flaws of the euro area. As a result, in order to achieve its initial 
objective,  Europe  is  now  faced  with  the  critical  issue  of  restoring  fiscal  prudence  and 
economic  competitiveness,  which  need  to  complement  the  currency  union.  Given  that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
political deliberations are shaped by public opinion in the member states, reaching decisions 
requires  considerable  time.  However,  because  the  crisis  could  potentially  have  a  large 
negative impact on financial markets and economies around the world, it is essential that a 
sufficiently large firewall is erected quickly and countries implement fundamental fiscal and 
structural reforms. 
Against  the  background  of  the  European  debt  problem,  the  pace  of  recovery  of  the  world 
economy  has  been  slowing.  The  annualized  growth  rate  of  overseas  economies  was 
6.5 percent during the January-March quarter of 2011, but fell to 3.0 percent in the April-June 
quarter before rising to 3.8 percent in the July-September quarter and then slowing again to 
0.9 percent in the October-December quarter. As for the outlook, it is likely to take a while for 
the  European  debt  problem  to  be  resolved,  while  in  the  United  States  the  household 
balance-sheet problem is weighing down on private consumption, reducing the likelihood of 
any buoyant recovery. For the balance-sheet problem to be overcome, it is necessary either 
for  housing  prices  to  bottom  out  and  start  rising,  which  would  resolve  the  negative  equity 
situation – where mortgage balances exceed the market value of a home – or for households 
to  regain  their  ability  to  repay  debt  through  improvements  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation. The correction of excess debt is a time-consuming process, however, as Japan’s 
post-bubble  experience  shows.  While  industrialized  countries  as  a  whole  struggle  to  grow, 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  likely  to  become  the  engines  of  global 
economic  growth.  Although  expectations  are  high  for  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies,  it  remains  to  be  seen  how  strong  an  engine  they  can  actually  be  given  the 
various uncertainties. 
The Japanese economy 
B. 
The  Japanese  economy  slowed  temporarily  following  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  in 
March 2011. Subsequently, strenuous efforts were made by firms to rebuild supply chains, 
helping  the  economy  to  recover  by  around  the  summer  of  2011  despite  constraints  to  the 
supply of electricity. Since autumn 2011, exports and production have been under pressure 
from a further negative shock in the form of the flooding in Thailand, adding to the European 
debt problem and the effects of the appreciation of the yen. Private consumption remained 
firm, due in part to a recovery in demand that had been restrained after the earthquake, while 
business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  aided  partly  by  the 
restoration of disaster-stricken facilities. As a result, the Japanese economy has been more 
or  less  flat, caught  between  both  negative  and  positive  factors.  Real  GDP  growth  in  fiscal 
2011 is likely to be slightly negative mainly due to the effects of the supply-side constraints 
caused by the disaster as well as the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation 
of the yen. 
Restoring the national finances is also one of the major issues Japan currently faces. The 
situation in Europe, where fiscal risks have materialized, cannot be considered merely a “fire 
on the other side of the river.” A look at Japan’s fiscal situation shows that its primary budget 
deficit is similar to those of Spain and Portugal, while its outstanding debt is extremely large, 
be it on a gross or a net basis, that is, offsetting financial assets held by the government. 
Some argue that there is little reason to worry as the share of Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs)  held  by  foreign  investors  is  low  compared  to  the  share  of  European  and 
U.S. government bonds held by foreign investors. And in fact, government bond prices are 
not  weak  –  long-term  interest  rates  are  not  rising  –  at  present.  However,  a  lesson  to  be 
learned from the European debt problem is that once trust in a country’s fiscal management 
wanes,  this  can  soon  lead  to  a  loss  of  confidence  in  government  bonds  as  a  safe  asset. 
Although to date there has been little difficulty in finding buyers for JGBs, this may not hold 
true in the future. Confidence in JGBs could change in a non-linear fashion and government 
calculations suggest that the fiscal situation in Japan is likely to remain severe. To ensure 
that confidence in Japan’s public finances is maintained, it is necessary to embark on a path 
to  fiscal  sustainability  that  gives  the  public  reasons  to  believe  that  the  government  can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
restore  fiscal  balance  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Steps  in  this  direction  include  a  growth 
strategy to lift the country’s growth rate as well as revisions to the social security and taxation 
systems. 
Turning to the balance of payments, Japan’s trade balance fell into a deficit of 1.6 trillion yen 
in  2011,  marking  the  first  deficit  since  1963,  that  is,  in  48  years.  There  are  three  main 
reasons for this. First, exports declined sharply due to the supply-side constraints caused by 
the  disaster,  while  imports  of  intermediate  goods  increased  to  make  up  for  shortages  in 
domestic supplies. Second, shutdowns of nuclear power plants led to an increase in imports 
of crude oil, liquefied natural gas, and other fossil fuels used for thermal power generation. 
And  third,  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  since 
autumn  2011,  as  well  as  the  flooding  in  Thailand,  weighed  down  exports.  Thus,  a 
combination  of  various  factors  was  behind  the  trade  deficit  for  2011.  The  supply-side 
constraints and the flooding in Thailand are, however, temporary factors and are unlikely to 
affect  exports  and  imports  hereafter.  The  trade  balance  in  January  2012  also  marked  a 
record  deficit.  According  to  preliminary  data,  the  deficit  was  1.5  trillion  yen,  the  largest 
monthly deficit ever since the compilation of comparable data started in 1979. The deficit in 
large part also reflects a special factor – namely, the decline in exports due to the fact that in 
2011 the Chinese New Year holidays took place in February. 
The current account balance, which consists of the balance of trade in goods and services, 
the  balance  of  income,  and  current  transfers,  remained  in  surplus  in  2011,  although  the 
surplus decreased substantially mainly due to the trade deficit. The services balance records 
the  receipts  and  payments  for  international  transactions  in  services,  while  the  income 
balance  records  the  international  receipts  and  payments  of  interest  and  dividends,  and 
current  transfers  record  contributions  to  international  organizations  as  well  as  the  flow  of 
government  food  and  financial  assistance.  The  current  account  was  in  surplus  owing  to  a 
large surplus in the income balance, which in turn was brought about by increases in interest 
and dividend payments from direct and portfolio investments. It is very likely that the income 
balance  will  remain  in  surplus  for  the  time  being  given  external  assets  amounting  to 
250 trillion yen. Therefore, unless the trade deficit continues to expand rapidly, the current 
account is likely to remain in surplus. 
Recent price developments 
C. 
Next,  I  will  move  on  to  price  developments.  International  commodity  prices  had  been 
increasing from around spring 2009 on the back of high growth in emerging economies, but 
weakened slightly around summer 2011 due to the instability in global financial markets and 
subsequently  remained  more  or  less  flat.  However,  most  recently  commodity  prices  have 
been rising again, mainly due to geopolitical risks. Import prices in Japan and the domestic 
corporate goods price index (CGPI) – which measures fluctuations in prices of goods traded 
between firms in Japan – have been more or less flat, reflecting movements in international 
commodity prices. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of decline in the consumer price index 
(CPI)  for  all  items  excluding  fresh  food,  or  the  core  CPI  –  which  measures  fluctuations  in 
prices  of  goods  and  services  purchased  by  households  –  has  slowed  consistently  since 
around  2009  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  gradually  improved,  and  the 
year-on-year rate of change is currently around 0 percent, reflecting developments in import 
prices and the CGPI. 
As for the outlook, in light of recent developments in the output gap, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the core CPI is expected to remain at around 0 percent – potentially falling into 
slightly  negative  territory  –  for  the  time  being,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations  reflecting 
movements in international commodity prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in  overseas  economies  picked  up, 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
D. 
The outlook I just presented is my own personal assessment. Let me now turn to the Outlook 
for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  known  as  the  Outlook  Report,  which  the  Bank  releases 
semiannually in April and October. The Outlook Report presents the Policy Board members’ 
assessments  of  economic  activity  and  prices  based  on  their  forecasts.  In  addition  to  the 
semiannual Outlook Report, the Bank releases interim assessments in January and July that 
present the Bank’s revised forecasts. 
In  the  most  recent  forecasts,  released  on  January  24,  2012,  Policy  Board  members 
considered it most likely that Japan’s economic activity would remain more or less flat for the 
time being, but thereafter the economy was likely to return to a moderate recovery path as 
the  pace  of  recovery 
led  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after the earthquake 
gradually materialized. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI is 
expected  to  remain  at  around  0  percent  for  the  time  being,  but  thereafter  is  expected  to 
record a clear year-on-year increase in fiscal 2013. 
This outlook, however, is subject to various uncertainties, among which future developments 
with regard to the European debt problem continue to represent the most significant risk to 
the  economy.  Its  effects  are  already  spreading  to  Japan’s  exports  and  production,  both 
directly and indirectly through international trade. Attention should therefore continue to be 
paid  to  the  possibility  that  the  European  debt  problem  could  lead  to  weaker  growth  in 
overseas economies – and consequently in Japan’s economy – mainly through its effects on 
global  financial  markets.  In  the  United  States,  strains  from  balance-sheet  repair,  as 
mentioned  earlier,  continue  to  weigh  on  the  economy  despite  some  firmness  observed  in 
household sentiment on the back of improvements in the employment and income situation. 
With regard to emerging and commodity-exporting economies, which are expected to drive 
global  economic  growth,  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  about  whether  these 
economies  –  including  China,  where  the  inflation  rate  has  been  declining  recently  –  can 
achieve price stability and economic growth at the same time. 
Regarding the outlook for prices, there is a possibility that the inflation rate will rise more than 
expected if international commodity prices increase due to geopolitical risks such as those 
associated  with  the  situation  surrounding  Iran,  while  there  is  also  a  risk  that  the  rate  of 
inflation  will  deviate  downward  from  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  due,  for  example,  to  a 
decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations resulting from a slowdown in economic 
activity. 
II. 
Measures taken by the bank 
A. 
Recent conduct of monetary policy toward a sustainable growth path with 
price stability 
With a view to overcoming deflation and returning Japan’s economy to a sustainable growth 
path with price stability, the Bank continues to consistently make contributions as the central 
bank, through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting 
of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing support 
to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
Pursuing powerful monetary easing 
1. 
The Bank decided the following three new measures at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
February 13 and 14, 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Introduction of “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
a. 
First, the Bank introduced “the price stability goal in the medium to long term,” which is the 
inflation rate that the Bank judges to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the 
medium  to  long  term.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  goal,  the  Bank’s  “understanding  of 
medium- to long-term price stability” (hereafter “understanding”) showed the range of inflation 
rates  that  each  Policy  Board  member  understood  as  price  stability  from  a  medium-  to 
long-term  viewpoint.  However,  at  the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  the  Policy  Board 
decided  to  replace  the  “understanding”  with  the  inflation  rate  that  the  Bank,  based  on  a 
consensus  among  all  Policy  Board  members,  judges  to  be  consistent  with  price  stability 
sustainable over the medium to long term and to refer to this as “the price stability goal in the 
medium to long term.” The Bank judges “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
to be in a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI and, more specifically, sets a goal of 1 percent for the time being.  
Clarification of determination to pursue monetary easing 
b. 
Second, the Bank showed its commitment to pursuing monetary easing through the so-called 
“policy  duration  effects.”  For  the  time  being,  the  Bank  will  aim  to  achieve  the  goal  of 
1 percent inflation in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit 
of  powerful  monetary  easing,  conducting  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  –  that  is, 
maintaining the target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate at “around 0 to 0.1 percent” 
– and implementing the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program) mainly through the 
purchase of financial assets. The Bank will continue with this powerful easing until it judges 
the  1  percent  goal  to  be  in  sight,  on  condition  that  it  identifies  no  significant  risk  to  the 
sustainability of economic growth, such as from the accumulation of financial imbalances. 
Expansion of the Program 
c. 
Third, the Bank increased the total size of the Program by about 10 trillion yen, from about 
55 trillion  yen  to  about  65  trillion  yen.  The  increase  in  the  Program  is  earmarked  for  the 
purchase  of  JGBs,  as  the  Bank  –  in  consideration  of  the  generally  smooth  corporate 
financing conditions observed recently – judged it appropriate to further enhance the spread 
of monetary easing effects throughout financial markets through the purchase of JGBs. By 
fully  implementing  the  Program,  including  the  additional  expansion  decided  at  the  latest 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  February  13  and  14  by  the  end  of  2012,  the  amount 
outstanding of the Program will be increased by about 22 trillion yen from the current level of 
around 43 trillion yen. 
The Program has been established with the aim to create additional monetary easing effects 
by  encouraging  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk 
premiums in a situation where there was little room for further declines in short-term interest 
rates. Through the Program, the Bank – in addition to the increased purchase of JGBs just 
mentioned  –  purchases  various 
financial  assets,  such  as  CP,  corporate  bonds, 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  and 
conducts fixed-rate funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral whereby funds with 
a maturity of three or six months are provided at an interest rate of 0.1 percent. 
As a result of the most recent increase in the Program, the Bank’s pace of purchasing JGBs 
will  accelerate  significantly  from  about  0.5  trillion  yen  per  month  to  about  1.5  trillion  yen. 
Adding up JGB purchases through the Program and the Bank’s regular JGB purchases to 
meet  the  trend  increase  in  banknote  demand,  conducted  at  a  pace  of  1.8  trillion  yen  per 
month, the Bank will be purchasing a large amount of JGBs until the end of 2012 at the pace 
of 3.3 trillion yen per month, or about 40 trillion yen for the year. It should be emphasized, 
however,  that  the  purpose  of  this  significant  scale  of  JGB  purchases  is  to  achieve 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability,  and  that  the  Bank  rigidly  maintains  its  policy  of  not 
conducting purchases of JGBs for the purpose of financing government debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Ensuring financial market stability 
2. 
The Bank has been showing its commitment to fully ensure financial market stability through 
implementing  a  variety  of  measures  including  the  utilization  of  various  funds-supplying 
operations.  When  uncertainty  began  to  spread  in  the  financial  markets  just  after  the 
earthquake,  the  Bank  provided  ample  funds  to  the  markets,  the  total  amount  of  which 
represented  a  historical  high.  The  Bank  has  also  taken  measures  to  provide  financial 
institutions with the confidence that they can obtain sufficient funds whenever necessary. 
In  May  2010,  in  response  to  the  reemergence  of  strains  in  U.S.  dollar  short-term  funding 
markets, the Bank – in coordination with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the ECB, 
the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank – reestablished the temporary U.S. dollar 
liquidity  swap  facility,  which  had  expired,  and  reintroduced  a  scheme  that  would  make  it 
possible  to  conduct  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operation.  Furthermore,  in  November 
2011, the aforementioned six central banks decided to enhance this facility by lowering the 
interest  rates  on  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  and  extending  the  effective 
period of such operations through to February 1, 2013, as well as expanding the currency 
swap agreements to include Canadian dollars, pounds sterling, euros, Swiss francs, and yen 
in addition to U.S. dollars.  
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
3. 
The Bank has also been encouraging initiatives by financial institutions and firms through the 
fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth. 
Specifically,  through  this  measure,  the  Bank  provides  long-term  funds,  with  a  maximum 
duration of four years at a low interest rate of 0.1 percent, to financial institutions up to the 
actual  amount  of  lending  and  investment  carried  out  by  each  financial  institution,  against 
pooled  collateral  such  as  JGBs.  Many  financial  institutions  nationwide  have  shown  an 
interest in the measure since it was implemented in June 2010, and by mid-2011 the total 
amount of loans disbursed by the Bank had reached the ceiling of 3 trillion yen. Areas eligible 
for  investments  and  loans  range,  for  example,  from  environment  and  energy  business, 
medical and nursing care business, and development of social infrastructure, to investment 
and business deployment in Asian countries. In addition, although the maximum duration of 
loans  provided  under  the  measure  is  four  years,  the  average  duration  of  actual  individual 
investments  and  loans  provided  by  financial  institutions  is more  than  six  and  a  half  years. 
Moreover,  following  the  introduction  of  the  measure,  financial  institutions  have  established 
new dedicated funds and lending schemes, and some of them in certain cases have set a 
higher ceiling on the total amount of investments and loans than the 150 billion yen ceiling for 
the total amount of loans that they could obtain from the Bank. As this shows, the measure 
has been fully serving its purpose to act as a catalyst.  
In June 2011, the Bank enhanced the measure with a view to supporting financial institutions’ 
efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth through the use of a wider range of 
financial techniques. More specifically, in order to support emerging and small firms in their 
efforts to solve the problems they face – risk money and a lack of real estate collateral – the 
Bank provides funds to financial institutions that undertake equity investments and offer the 
so-called  asset-based  lending,  or  ABL,  to  firms  with  growth  opportunities  up  to  the  actual 
amount of investment and lending carried out by each financial institution. The Bank hopes 
that this enhancement will stimulate further use of such financial techniques that have yet to 
achieve a sufficient level of familiarity, and thereby lead to the nurturing of firms with growth 
potential. The Bank believes that this, in turn, should help to raise Japan’s growth potential 
as well as financial institutions’ ability to find and support promising firms. Through this new 
line of credit, the Bank provided 38.1 billion yen in the first new loan disbursement conducted 
in September 2011, and 17.5 billion yen in the second new loan disbursement conducted in 
December  2011.  These  loans  were  provided  to  financial  institutions  against  collateral 
pledged  to  them,  consisting  mostly  of  equipment,  accounts  receivable,  and  products.  With 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regard  to  equipment,  there  were  cases  in  which  ships,  machine  tools,  and  construction 
machinery were used as collateral.  
The bank’s measures following the great east Japan earthquake 
B. 
In less than two weeks, one year will have passed since the Great East Japan Earthquake 
that struck in March 2011. Following the earthquake, the Bank swiftly implemented various 
measures from three perspectives: (1) maintaining the functioning of financial and settlement 
systems; (2) ensuring the stability of financial markets; and (3) supporting economic activity. 
First,  immediately  after  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  conducted  measures  including  the 
provision  of  cash  to  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas,  the  provision  of  ample  funds  in 
financial  markets,  and  the  further  enhancement  of  monetary  easing  by,  for  example, 
increasing the total size of the Program. In addition to these measures, since April 2011, the 
Bank  has  been  conducting  funds-supplying  operations  with  a  view  to  supporting  financial 
institutions in  disaster  areas  in their  initial  efforts  to  meet  demand  for  funds  for  restoration 
and rebuilding. In the same month, the Bank also decided to broaden the range of eligible 
collateral for money market operations with a view to securing sufficient financing capacity at 
the financial institutions in disaster areas, and this measure has been in place since then. 
III. 
Returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability 
I will now take a look at the Japanese economy from a longer-term perspective. While the 
Japanese economy has gone through a number of business cycles since the bursting of the 
bubble  in  the  early  1990s,  average  growth  has  been  poor  and  the  economy  has  failed  to 
extricate itself from deflation, resulting in the “two lost decades.” In order for the economy to 
escape  from  this  long  trend  of  low  growth  and  deflation  and  regain  its  strength,  it  is 
necessary to introduce fundamental measures designed for the revitalization of the Japanese 
economy. 
Causes for low economic growth 
A. 
During the 1960s, the average annual growth rate of the Japanese economy was more than 
10  percent,  and  even  during  the  period  of  stable  growth  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the 
economy  grew  at  average  annual  rates  of  4  to  5  percent.  In  the  1990s  average  annual 
growth  fell  sharply  to  around  1.5  percent,  and  in  the  2000s  the  economy  grew  at  only 
0.6 percent  per  year  on  average,  although  the  average  rises  to  1.5  percent  when  the  two 
years of negative growth due to the Lehman shock are excluded. Thus, in the 20 years since 
the  early  1990s,  the  Japanese  economy  on  average  has  grown  at  a  low  rate  of  around 
1.5 percent. 
How can this long-term downtrend in Japan’s growth be explained? In order to answer this 
question, if we examine the two factors that affect the growth trend – changes in the number 
of workers and changes in labor productivity per worker – we see that the decline in Japan’s 
economic  growth  rate  was  due  to  both  of  these  factors.  However,  compared  with  other 
countries, labor productivity in Japan is not particularly low and is more or less in line with 
that in the United States and the United Kingdom. Therefore, in order to raise Japan’s growth 
rate, efforts to increase the number of workers are particularly important, together with efforts 
to raise productivity growth. 
Revitalizing the Japanese economy 
B. 
Given the decline in the number of workers and in productivity growth, what steps should be 
taken to revitalize the Japanese economy?  
According  to  the  National  Institute  of  Population  and  Social  Security  Research,  Japan’s 
population  peaked  in  2010  and  is  forecast  to  decline  to  91.93  million  in  2055.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
working-age  population,  that  is,  those  aged  between  15  and  64,  has  already  started  to 
decrease, peaking at 87.17 million in 1995, and is forecast to fall to 47.06 million by 2055. 
The  share  of  the  working-age  population  in  the  total  population,  which  was  69  percent  in 
1995, is forecast to drop to 51 percent in 2055. By then, about 40 percent of the population is 
expected  to  be  65  and  over.  I  believe  that,  to  avoid  further  decreases  in  the  number  of 
workers, it is necessary to slow the aging of society by implementing measures to increase 
the birth rate, but unfortunately such measures do not produce immediate results. Therefore, 
it  is  essential  to  make  efforts  to  raise  the  number  of  workers  by  increasing  labor  market 
flexibility so as to (1) reduce labor market mismatch, that is, situations where those wanting 
to work cannot find a job; (2) promote employment of those aged 65 and over that have left 
the workforce; and (3) promote employment of women who left the labor market when getting 
married or giving birth but want to work again. Although some deregulation and investment in 
infrastructure  with  the  aim  of  improving  labor  market  conditions  has  already  been 
undertaken,  I  believe  that  more  effective  measures  than  those  implemented  to  date  are 
required. 
Next, what steps should be taken to improve labor productivity? Before the onset of the two 
lost decades, Japan enjoyed high growth in a favorable environment that, in addition to the 
increase in the labor force, included the following. First, Japan benefited from the latecomer 
advantage and was able to learn from the growth process of the advanced economies of the 
United States and Europe. And second, Japanese manufactured goods enjoyed a superior 
competitive edge in the absence of rivals other than the United States and Europe. However, 
since then, having caught up with the United States and Europe and finding itself pursued by 
emerging economies that have become rival producers of manufactured goods, Japan has 
been forced to transform its catch-up growth model. Going forward, Japan needs to adapt to 
changes in the environment and open up new growth markets in such a way as to enhance 
its  own  growth  potential.  On  this  basis,  the  question  arises  as  to  what  kind  of  measures 
should be taken. The government’s “Strategy for Rebirth of Japan” states that, as part of its 
efforts to further strengthen economic growth, emphasis should be placed on the following 
areas: (1) promoting economic partnerships and harnessing global growth; (2) creating new 
industries  and  new  markets  in  response  to  changes  in  the  environment;  (3)  revitalizing 
financial markets through new capital flows; (4) revitalizing the food, agriculture, forestry, and 
fisheries industries; and (5) promoting tourism. As there is insufficient time today to cover all 
of  these  areas,  I  will  focus  on  the  following  issues:  (1)  exploiting  business  opportunities 
arising from the aging of society; (2) adjusting the business environment to better adapt to 
globalization; and (3) increasing the number of foreign visitors to Japan. 
The  first  issue  concerns  business  opportunities  relating  to  the  aging  of  society.  Given  the 
declining birthrate and rapid aging of the population, the market for products and services for 
the elderly is certain to expand, providing one of the most promising growth areas with great 
potential  demand.  For  instance,  it  takes  little  to  foresee  a  vast  expansion  in  demand  for 
medical and nursing care. In order to cater for such demand, it is necessary to increase the 
supply of medical and nursing care services. To this end, along with further deregulation, the 
following  should  be  encouraged:  (1)  addressing  the  shortage  and  uneven  geographical 
distribution  of  doctors  and  nurses;  (2)  providing  a  wider  range  of  choices  for  patients  with 
regard  to  their  treatment,  including  highly  advanced  medical  treatments  not  covered  by 
health insurance; and (3) innovation with regard to new drugs and medical equipment. 
The  second  issue  relates  to  providing  the  proper  business  environment  in  a  globalized 
economy. While it is necessary to expand domestic demand, it is even more important to try 
to capture demand from rapidly growing overseas economies. Therefore, to fully benefit from 
globalization, it is essential to put in place the appropriate business environment. Yet, so far, 
Japan has entered only twelve Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) and Free Trade 
Agreements  (FTAs)  and  none  have  been  concluded  with  any  of  Japan’s  major  trading 
partners. It is extremely important to build a framework that will help integrate domestic and 
overseas markets through agreements such as EPAs and FTAs.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The third issue concerns increasing the number of foreign visitors to Japan. Looking at the 
number  of  foreign  tourists  for  2010,  Japan  was  well  behind  popular  international  tourist 
destinations. France was the most popular in the world, attracting 76.8 million foreign visitors, 
followed by the United States with 59.75 million. The number of tourists that visited Japan 
was 8.61 million, just above one-tenth that of France. Looking at other Asian destinations, 
Japan lagged far behind China, which received 55.67 million visitors, and was behind Hong 
Kong  (20.09  million),  Thailand  (15.84  million),  Singapore  (9.16  million),  and  South  Korea 
(8.8 million), which is just next door. Thus, the number of foreign visitors to Japan is not only 
extremely low compared to other advanced economies but is also lower compared to other 
Asian  economies.  Efforts  should  therefore  be  made  to  increase  the  number  of  foreign 
visitors, as this would raise derived demand for tourism-related industries. In addition, such 
efforts should not be confined to tourists; if Japan attracted more foreign visitors in the fields 
of health care, education, and culture and the arts, this not only would help to create new 
jobs but also could promote innovation through the fusion of skills that foreign workers would 
bring with them. 
Measures taken by the bank 
C. 
The  Bank  continues  to  consistently  make  contributions  as  the  central  bank  in  order  to 
overcome deflation and return the Japanese economy to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability. The Bank should always be ready to proactively implement the necessary policies to 
achieve its objectives.  
Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind that the challenges the economy faces today cannot 
be overcome by the Bank’s efforts alone. The Bank will continue to do its utmost to provide 
support  from  the  financial  side.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  is  extremely  important  for 
business  firms,  financial  institutions,  and  the  government  each  to  continue  exerting 
themselves in their respective roles. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
