Deepak Mohanty: The Second International Research Conference – 
concluding remarks 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Second  International  Research  Conference  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Mumbai, 
2 February 2012. 
 We have had one and half days of intellectually stimulating discussions on a range of critical 
central  banking  issues  revolving  around  the  New  Trilemma  that  has  been  defined  by  this 
Conference.  While  we  may  not  have  clear  solutions,  expectations  from  central  banks  are 
very high. The deliberations in this Conference, I believe, make some contributions in guiding 
policy and spurring further research. Given the time constraint, I have to be quite selective in 
summing up. 
Setting the tone for the conference, Dr. Subir Gokarn introduced the concept of the 
 
“new trilemma” and explained how challenges for central banks have magnified and become 
more  complex  since  the  global  crisis.  Now  central  banks,  particularly  in  advanced 
economies,  face  the  challenge  of  simultaneously  ensuring  price  stability,  financial  stability 
and  sovereign  debt  sustainability.  This  may  not  be  possible 
if  monetary  policy 
accommodates, on a sustained basis, the needs of the sovereigns and financial systems.  
Governor Dr. Subbarao characterized the “new trilemma” as a “holy trilemma” in his 
 
keynote address, and posed a number of important questions. How do the three objectives 
underlying the trilemma reinforce and conflict with each other? He recognised the return of 
fiscal dominance as a reality for central banks. But he viewed that fiscal responsibility is more 
than  a  question  of  monetary  policy  independence.  It  is  a  question  of  sustaining 
macroeconomic  stability.  Governments  and  central  banks  in  each  jurisdiction  will  have  to 
define  the  country  specific  arrangements,  subject  to  certain  broad  tenets.  One,  the 
fundamental  responsibility  of  central  banks  for  price  stability  should  not  be  compromised; 
two,  central  banks  should  have  a  lead,  but  not  an  exclusive  responsibility,  for  financial 
stability;  three,  central  bank  responsibility  for  sovereign  debt  sustainability  should  only  be 
restricted to protecting financial stability; four, in the matter of ensuring financial stability, the 
government must normally leave the responsibility to the regulators and assume an activist 
role only in times of crises. It is possible that the short-term policies aimed at price stability, 
financial  stability  and  sovereign  debt  sustainability  could,  at  times,  run  counter  to  policies 
required for promoting growth. But growth achieved at the cost of the objectives of the new 
trilemma cannot be sustained. He emphasized the role of communication in explaining the 
policy intent in addressing the trilemma.  
In the technical sessions, the First Session on “conducting monetary policy post-crisis: 
 
challenges  to  transmission  mechanism  and  operating  framework”  focused  on  whether  the 
framework of monetary policy needs to be re-designed in the light of lessons drawn from the 
crisis. 
Leading the discussion, Professor Benjamin Friedman drew attention to the interplay 
 
between  financial  stability  and  responsive  monetary  policy.  He  suggested  that  one  has  to 
look  into  the  three  building  blocks  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  policy-set,  in  order  to 
prevent  the  recurrence  of  crisis.  The  three  elements  of  the  policy-set  are:  one,  monetary 
policy centered on an active use of short-term interest rates; two, an intermediation system 
built on banks and other deposit-type institutions with significantly leveraged balance sheets 
and  three,  asset  markets  characterised  with  open  entry  and  free  trading.  Prof.  Friedman 
articulated that if these policy mix sow the seeds of the crisis, there is a need to change the 
policy mix. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Parthasarathy Shome suggested that the solution to the present economic crisis led 
Professor  Eswar  Prasad  argued  that  central  banks  need  not  be  constrained  by  the 
 
orthodox  one  instrument  one  target  framework  but  need  to  explicitly  address  the  financial 
stability concerns. He argued that under more realistic conditions of imperfect markets and 
credit  constrained  consumers,  flexible  headline  inflation  targeting  could  be  the  optimal 
monetary policy framework. 
In  the  Indian  context,  Mr.Deepak  Mohanty  provided  evidence  that  policy  rate 
 
increases  have  a  negative  effect  on  output  growth  with  a  lag  of  two  quarters  and  a 
moderating impact on inflation with a lag of three quarters and the overall impact on inflation 
persists through 8–10 quarters.  
Summarising the first session, Mr. H R Khan, Deputy Governor emphasized that the 
 
orthodoxy that central banks should restrict themselves just to setting interest rates and not 
regulate or supervise financial markets has come under question since the financial crisis. 
Dr. Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor highlighted three important messages from the session: 
one, monetary policy framework should not be locked into single target, two, more flexibility 
in  defining  objectives  and  instruments  is  necessary,  three,  boundary  conditions  for  policy 
environment  keep  changing,  but  transmission  within  the  boundary  conditions  is  what  a 
central bank could aim at. 
The Second Session was devoted to the theme, “Impact of Crisis on Sovereign Debt: 
 
Implications  for  Macro-economy  and  Inter-linkages  with  other  Policies”.  In  this  session, 
Frank  Smets  suggested  that  large  scale  asset  purchase  programs  can  lower  long  term 
interest rates. But there is a risk that the central bank could lose its hard earned credibility. 
 
Jorgen  Elmeskov  indicated  that  debt  beyond  a  threshold  level  can  adversely  affect 
growth. Hence, debt reductions should be aimed by improving primary balance and raising 
productivity growth. 
 
by European sovereign debt crisis lies in austerity through stronger IMF surveillance. 
Summing  up  the  proceedings  of  the  session,  Dr.  K.C.  Chakraborty,  Deputy  Governor, 
emphasized that more than quantum of debt, the purpose of debt, and the quality of assets 
created against the debt are important. Benjamin Friedman noted that with higher debt, if 
economic  growth  is  adversely  affected,  inflation  may  be  used  to  lower  debt-GDP  ratio  as 
there is not much growth sacrifice at moderate levels of inflation. 
The  third  session  was  devoted  to  the  financial  stability  issues.  In  this  session, 
 
Stephen G Cecchetti indicated that when private credit to GDP ratio exceeds a threshold of 
100 per cent, financial sector could be a drag on growth by reducing productivity growth.  
 
Bill  White  felt  that  leaning  against  economic  and  financial  excesses  during  boom 
makes more sense as cleaning up after the bust is impossible. The trilemma is less on the 
upswing, but magnifies in the downswing. 
 
Y.C.  Park  questioned  the  efficacy  of  macro-prudential  tools  in  containing  mortgage 
credit growth in Korea. The capital control tools are largely towards containing capital inflows 
but there are no effective tools to control capital outflows. 
While summing up the third session, Mr. Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor noted that 
 
the potential conflict between monetary policy and macro-prudential policies is overdone, and 
indicated  that  India  offers  an  example  that  macro  prudential  policy  has  been  less  reactive 
and more preventive. 
 
challenges discussed is still not in place as yet, and the expectations should recognize that. 
 
In the panel discussions, Governor Gudmundsson highlighted the importance of clarity 
on domains and tools and the difficulty of maintaining financial stability with flexible exchange 
rate movements. 
Naoyuki Shinohara noted that the international architecture to deal with some of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the 
importance  of 
fiscal  consolidation 
Governor Tombini emphasized that fiscal legacy has generated multiple equilibria for 
for  overall 
Governor  Khatiwada  underscored  the  need  to  consolidate  the  role  of  different 
 
regulators  to  achieve  policy  effectiveness  of  multiple  goals,  particularly  in  developing 
economies. 
 
Governor  Rehman  indicated  that,  given  the  chain  of  inter-linkages  among  Monetary 
Policy,  Debt  Management  and  Financial  Stability,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  a  meaningful 
separation  and  underscored  the  important  role  of  Government  in  promoting  global 
coordination to minimize spillover and to contain debt. 
 
central  banks  and  emphasized 
macroeconomic stability. 
 
Governor Subbarao underscored that the new trilemma is not only an economic issue 
but also an issue of institutional architecture. He emphasized on the need for explicit, though 
not exclusive, mandate for financial stability for RBI. 
 
Governor  Anwar  indicated  that  the  old  trilemma  continues  for  EDEs  because  of  the 
spillover effects and emphasized the importance of communication among the central banks 
in the region. 
 
Managing  Director  Mr.  Menon  emphasized  that  central  banks  should  try  to  be 
independent within the government rather than of the government and also highlighted the 
role of financial markets in addressing the trilemma. 
 
to enhance policy credibility. 
 
Martin Wolf emphasised that the global economy has changed with a series of shocks 
over the past 5 to 6 years, questioning the self-sustaining nature of financial markets. This 
underscores the increased role of public policy in the financial sector, greater responsibility 
for the central banks in the economy and enhanced global co-ordination. 
 
 
financial stability and price stability. 
 
Second,  interaction  between  sovereign  debt  and  monetary  policy  is  an  important 
determinant  of  market  confidence.  A  comprehensive  fiscal  exit  strategy  should  explicitly 
recognize the objective of a sustainable public debt ratio and policies that should underpin a 
fiscal adjustment path. 
 
Third, right balance between growth in the financial sector and real sector is important 
to prevent imbalances. Warning signals always flash before the crisis. Often imbalances are 
ignored,  even  if  identified  earlier.  Leaning  against  imbalances  could  be  less  costly  than 
cleaning up later. 
 
crisis is yet to be tested. These tools need to be fine-tuned. 
 
At the end, let me list out some of the major takeaways from this conference. 
First,  the  new  trilemma  is  a  reality,  and  fiscal  discipline  is  critically  important  for 
Fourth,  macro  prudential  measures  are  useful,  but  their  effectiveness  in  preventing 
Governor Najeeb underscored the independence of central banks, particularly in EDEs, 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
