Vítor Constâncio: Understanding the driving forces behind systemic 
financial crises 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 2011 
Bernácer  Prize  Award  Ceremony  in  honour  of  Mr  Lasse  Heje  Pedersen,  Madrid, 
28 June 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to address a few words to you in honour of this year’s winner of 
the  2011  Bernácer  Prize,  Professor  Lasse  Pedersen  from  New  York  University.  The 
developments on the global financial markets that we have been witnessing in the past years 
are unprecedented in nature and have raised a number of challenges for policy makers and 
central banks alike. In times like these it is more important than ever that we use the advice 
of the brightest and most talented scholars in order to find answers to complex questions and 
develop effective tools with real-world applicability in order to combat the potentially adverse 
effects of financial instability without jeopardizing our primary mandate of medium-term price 
stability.  Without  doubt,  Lasse  Pedersen  has  been  one  of  the  leading  minds  that  have 
re-shaped our thinking about financial markets, as his contributions during the past decade 
have  greatly  improved  our  understanding  of  the  driving  forces  behind  systemic  financial 
crises and the propagation of liquidity shocks across markets and throughout the economy.  
Naturally, academic research plays an important role for central banks in general because it 
provides  the  foundations  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  its  impact  on  the  real 
economy.  The  Eurosystem  is  no  exception  to  this  and  naturally  finds  itself  in  constant 
exchange  with  the  global  research  community  in  the  form  of  research  seminars  and 
conferences  as  well  as  regular  academic  visitors.  Moreover  the  ECB  regularly  funds 
policy-relevant academic research via the Lamfalussy Fellowship. In 2010, the Eurosystem 
launched  the  Macroprudential  Research  Network  MaRs  with  the  objective  to  develop  core 
conceptual  frameworks,  models  and  tools  that  would  provide  research  support  in  order  to 
improve macro-prudential supervision in the European Union.  
Lasse Pedersen’s research focuses on the role of liquidity in financial markets. While much 
of the classical theory of asset pricing assumes a frictionless world, his work departs from 
this idealisation and acknowledges that real-world features such as the institutional structure 
of  the  way  capital  is  invested  around  the  globe  have  profound  implications  for  both  the 
determination of asset prices as well as for the stability of the financial system itself. Today, 
most trade in financial markets – be it stocks, bonds, currencies, or derivatives – does not 
take place between individuals but rather financial institutions such as banks and investment 
firms.  This  has  important  implications  for  the  functioning  of  these  markets  because  it 
introduces several important types of frictions. 
As we have all witnessed in the past years, many of these entities are very large, at least in 
terms of their balance sheets. Besides giving rise to the too-big-to-fail problem that has been 
at the heart of the current financial crisis, the size of these financial institutions has profound 
implications  for  the  way  investment  portfolios  are  constructed  and  assets  are  traded, 
because  it makes  a  large  difference  whether  an  agent  wants  to  buy  or  sell  100  shares  or 
100,000 shares. For large investors, the impact of their actions on market prices is no longer 
negligible and they potentially incur large transaction costs due to “market impact”, such that 
fluctuations in market liquidity – the ease with which a security can be transformed into cash 
–  become  a  first-order  concern.  Based  on  this  real-world  insight,  Acharya  and  Pedersen 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
developed  the  liquidity  adjusted  Capital  Asset  Pricing  Model  (CAPM),1  which  shows  that 
investors  do  not  only  require  compensation  for  bearing  the  risk  associated  to  an  asset’s 
fundamentals  but  also  will  command  an  additional  premium  related  to  the  asset’s  liquidity 
risk.  Their  theory  is  strongly  supported  by  numerous  empirical  studies  and  can  explain 
real-world  phenomena  such  as  the  episodes  of  a  flight  to liquidity  that  we  have  witnessed 
more than once during the past years. 
Another  salient  feature  of  financial  institutions  that  has  featured  prominently  in  the  current 
financial crisis is leverage. In fact, most market participants do not finance their entire trading 
positions with equity but rather fund part of their investments by pledging the securities as 
collateral in repurchase agreements and asset-backed commercial paper. This implies that 
asset  prices  are  also  affected  by  funding  liquidity,  a  concept  that  refers  to  the  ease  with 
which a security can be used to raise outside capital. In the years preceding the 2007–2008 
financial crisis, leverage in the financial sector build up steadily fuelled by high demand for 
dollar-denominated  short-term  debt  in  conjunction  with  low  interest  rates.  When  the  first 
rumours of problems in the market for sub-prime mortgages began to spread, uncertainty of 
exposures to potential losses directly translated into funding liquidity problems. In an equally 
rigorous  and  elegant  contribution,  Pedersen  and  his  co-author  Markus  Brunnermeier 
–  Winner  of  the  2008  Bernácer  Prize  –  show  how  shocks  to  funding  liquidity  and  market 
liquidity  can  reinforce  each  other  and  culminate  in  a  downward  spiral  that  gives  rise  to 
financial  instability  and  systemic  risk.2  If  funding  conditions  worsen,  initial  losses  on 
leveraged  positions  may  lead  to  forced  selling,  and  this  temporary  excess  supply  of 
securities cannot absorbed by liquidity providers precisely because speculative capital has 
become  more  costly.  In  turn,  this  reduced  market  liquidity  leads  to  lower  prices  and 
increased volatility, thus creating a negative feedback effect as these developments imply a 
further tightening of funding liquidity, culminating in further fire sales and so on. 
The events around the collapse of the US housing market and the 2008 Lehman bankruptcy 
underline the central role of this vicious circle in the propagation of shocks across markets 
and market participants. Uncertainty about the exposures of potential counterparties lead to 
a temporary breakdown of the interbank market, thereby disrupting banks’ ability to manage 
their liquidity and additionally distorting the transmission of monetary policy. Because many 
investors, including hedge funds, heavily relied on bank funding, these problems ultimately 
spilled  over  to  many  other  asset  markets  as  liquidity  providers  were  forced  to  become 
liquidity  consumers,  which  lead  some  markets  to  virtually  cease  to  exist  while  others  saw 
repeated failures of the famous law of one price, that is instruments (nearly) identical cash 
flows traded at different prices.3 
Another 
the 
measurement  of  systemic  risk  with  development  of  indicators  like  the  Marginal  Expected 
Shortfall  (MES)  of  financial  institutions  which  jointly  with  Leverage  is  used  to  estimate 
Systemic Risk.4  
Fortunately,  Lasse  Pedersen’s  research  does  only  help  our  understanding  of  these 
phenomena but also provides exact prescriptions of what policy makers can do to improve 
market  stability  and  break  these  vicious  downward  spirals.  In  particular,  his  research 
important  contribution  of  Lasse  Pedersen  with  co-authors  relates 
to 
                                                 
1  Viral  Acharya  and  Lasse  H.  Pedersen  (2005)  “Asset  Pricing  with  Liquidity  Risk”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, 77, 375–410. 
2  Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, The Review of 
Financial Studies, 22, 2201–2238. 
3  Nicolae Garleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen (2011) “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the Law of 
One Price”, The Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 1980–2022 
4  Acharya, V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2011) “Measuring Systemic Risk”, in Acharya, V., 
T. Cooley, M. Richardson, I. Walter (editors), “ Regulating Wall Street” , John Wiley & Sons 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prescribes an intervention aimed at improving funding liquidity as a measure of breaking the 
mentioned  downward  spiral  and  restoring  market  liquidity,  thereby  avoiding  the  failure  of 
illiquid  but  solvent  financial  institutions.  Additionally,  he  shows  that  measures  such  as 
broadening  the  universe  of  acceptable  collateral  and  adjusting  margin  requirements  can 
serve  as  important  monetary  policy  tools  in  times  of  protracted  liquidity  and  are 
complementary to the interest rate policy. In line with this, the European Central Bank has, 
as  have  many  other  monetary  authorities  around  the  globe,  adopted  several  of  these 
non-standard measures in an effort to combat a potential market breakdown and I think it is 
fair to say that their success in unquestionable. 
While  considerable  progress  has  been  made  with  respect  to  our  understanding  of  the 
causes,  consequences  and  propagation  of  systemic  financial  crises,  our  knowledge  is  far 
from  sufficient.  Further  advances  are  particularly  needed  in  the  fields  of  macro-prudential 
policy  and  regulation,  and  the  Eurosystem  aims  to  continue  contributing  to  a  filling  of  this 
knowledge gap, in particular via its Macroprudential Research Network and its involvement 
with the European Systemic Risk Board. I am confident that Lasse Pedersen will continue 
making  extraordinary  contributions  in  the  coming  years  and  hereby  extend  my  very  best 
congratulations to him for winning the 2011 Bernácer Prize.  
I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
