Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Financing the Greater Mekong Subregion 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Euromoney Greater Mekong Subregion Investment Forum, Bangkok, 20 June 2012. 
 Excellencies, Honorable speakers 
Distinguished guests; Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is an honour to be a part of the Greater Mekong Investment Forum and a great pleasure to 
commemorate  the  20-year  anniversary  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Greater  Mekong 
Subregion (GMS) Economic Cooperation Program. I would like to thank the Euromoney for 
inviting me to speak today. 
The  shift  in  the  world’s  center  of gravity  towards  “rising  Asia”  has  been  widely  recognized 
and well documented. But within the Asian region lies the Mekong Subregion which the ADB 
has been financing and providing technical assistance for more than two decades. Today this 
region  is  getting  much  of  the  world’s  interest  and  attention.  The rich  human  and  natural 
resource endowments as well as the complementary diversity of the Greater Mekong 
Subregion have made it the new frontier of South East Asian economic growth. The 
GMS stands among the world’s fastest growing areas, registering a 10-year-average growth 
of around 8%, followed by the BRIC nations at 6.7% and Sub-Sahara Africa at 5.5%. 
The  global  attention  and  interest  on  this  region  means  prospects  for  increasing  trade  and 
investment. Financial services as we all know are derived demand from the needs of the real 
economy  for  trade  and  investment  opportunities.  Though  not  taking  a  driving  seat,  a 
financial system that is safe and sound has an important role to support growth and 
sustainable development. 
When it comes to finance, three issues come to my mind. First, what should be the 
strategy for meeting the financing needs of the Subregion. Second, what role should 
the Thai financial system play as an intermediary and as a member of the GMS. Third, 
what are the regulatory and institutional challenges to ensure financial stability and 
sustainable development. 
On the first issue of financing, we generally observe that trade and direct investment flows 
are largely influenced by proximity and endowment. Finance, on the other hand, knows no 
boundary. 
Given  the  broad-based  financing  needs  of  the  GMS  which  range  from  large  scale 
project  finance  to  commercial  banking  for  SME,  there  is  a  role  for  all  types  of 
institutions: local, regional and global. 
(1)  
For  local  financial  institutions,  their  knowledge  and  understanding  should 
give them a comparative advantage to support the traditional sectors that are 
the  mainstay  of  the  region,  namely  the  agricultural  sector,  household  and 
small entrepreneurs. In this way, they have a predominant role in promoting 
financial inclusion.  Non-bank  institutions  or  innovative  financial  services  such  as 
microfinance, mobile and e-banking and remittance services help promote financial 
access for households and enterprises. 
For  larger  corporate  or  infrastructural  projects  that  local  or  regional  banks 
might not have the financial capacity or know how, there is a role for global 
institutions to lead finance or underwrite. But global institutions would  need local 
guides to venture into new markets. Here there is a role for local or regional banks 
to partner with global banks. 
(2)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(3)  
(4)  
 As  to  who  should  be  borrowing,  given  the  public  goods  nature  of  the  long 
term infrastructural projects, the government should take the lead. Options for 
financing  include  direct  government  borrowing,  concessional  borrowing  from 
overseas development assistance, or through Public Private Partnership (PPP). 
Beyond banking, developments in the capital market and regional cooperation 
initiatives  provide  channel  to  intermediate  cross  border  savings  to  finance 
infrastructure investments. These  include  the  ASEAN  Infrastructure  Fund  (AIF), 
the Credit Guarantee Investment Facility (CGIF), and Asian Bond Market Initiative 
(ABMI). 
Going forward, the combination of the above arrangements should provide a 
division of task that is healthy and balanced for the region. 
Secondly, on the role of Thai financial intermediaries, I see the following prospects for the 
Subregion.  In  addition  to  our  strength  in  core  banking  business,  the  Thai  banking 
sector has been partnering with foreign entities to serve the broad-based demands of 
the  economy.  Thus,  we  can  play  a  meaningful  role  in  bridging  between  the  global 
financial players and the smaller local intermediaries. We can also contribute in terms 
of expertise and experiences. 
• 
So  what  is  Thailand’s  value  proposition?  Thai  banks  can  play  a  role  and 
compete in the business of financing small and medium enterprises. And with 
the  natural  trade  links  and  the  people-to-people  relations,  there  is  a  role  for  Thai 
banks  in  the  payments  and  remittance  services.  These  areas  may  not  be 
commercially  viable  for global  banks  if  the scale  of the  transaction  is  deemed  too 
small. But for Thailand, such basic services can help support the robust growth of 
cross border trade and investments which are important for rural development and 
income distribution. 
With the fundamental trend where Thai businesses start to diversify investment and 
production  base  to  neighboring  GMS  countries,  it  is  natural  for  Thai  financial 
institutions to follow their clients. Thai banks therefore have an important role in 
partnering  Thai  and  GMS  corporates.  Areas  such  as  project  evaluation, 
business-set up, cross-border financial transaction are areas where the local 
know how matter and where Thai banks can meaningfully contribute. Through 
the vertical integration of these corporate finance services, Thai financial institutions 
naturally become an intermediary between Thai business and our GMS counterpart. 
As clients organize themselves around a regional supply chain, Thai banks become 
a  natural  partner  to  bring  GMS  business  and  investment  to  Thailand.  Thai  banks 
and their GMS correspondent banks or joint venture partners have a niche market 
advantage. They have close business links, geographical advantage, and access to 
funding in local currencies which are the natural means of payment for intraregional 
trade. 
Thailand is therefore poised to assume the role of a connector – by acting as a 
link or point of reference for the entry of global banks into the subregion. This 
is  underpinned  by  our  established  financial  platform,  familiarity  with  the  local 
business practices, as well as close cultural ties among our people. 
Of equal importance is our own inherent understanding of the challenges of 
developments faced by GMS, through our own experience. This is particularly 
important in two aspects. 
First, Thai financial institutions are still focused on core financial intermediary 
functions  such  as  payments  services,  deposit,  and  loans  which  serve  the  basic 
needs  of  the  real  sector.  Thai  banks  are  inclined  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  real 
economy rather than in speculative types of businesses such as proprietary trading. 
For these reasons, Thai banks are also less complex, with good risk management 
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 and  strong  capital  base.  Regulators  in  Thailand  and  GMS  neighbours  can 
understand fairly  well  the  business  model  of  our  banks  and  their risk. We  believe 
that  given  the  lesson  of  the  current  global  crisis,  this  type  of  bank  model  makes 
good sense for home and host regulators. 
Secondly, both regulator and the banks in Thailand could well remember the bitter 
experience of our own economic and financial crisis in 1997. We understand that 
financial liberalization needs to be properly sequenced. We also understand 
that  financial  development  must  be  underpinned  by  a  solid  foundation 
suitable for each country’s economic, social, and political context. The speed 
of liberalization and change must not be too fast that it overtakes the fundamental 
preconditions such as strong financial laws, the ability to regulate and manage risk 
and  the  financial  literacy  of  people.  Failure  to  satisfy  these  prerequisites  risks 
creating imbalances in the macroeconomy that cause financial instability. With this 
awareness and the experience still fresh in our mind, I believe we are a natural and 
understanding  partner  in  the  development  process.  Our  banks  can  relate  to  and 
respect the local context in the GMS countries. They can adapt to it as well as share 
the experiences. Joint ventures, correspondent banking, as well as regulatory and 
supervisory  cooperation  are  ideal  for  capacity  building.  Indeed,  close  proximity  as 
well as common language and cultural heritage also help relay the experiences. 
Lastly,  the  task  of  financial  development  would  not  be  complete  without  the 
supporting  infrastructures,  institutional  set  up,  and  risk  management  system.  This 
entails but is not limited to  
(1)  
the  adoption  of  a  robust  regulatory  framework  to  ensure  prudent  conducts  of 
financial intermediaries that foster an open and competitive regime;  
appropriate  monitoring  and  policy  tools  to  detect  occasional  imbalances,  flag 
early warning signals and encourage quick remedial actions;  
talent  training  and  development 
advancement of the financial sector and; 
good  governance,  predictability  and  ease  of  doing  business.  Such  discipline 
would  bring  about  credibility  which  is  crucial  to  maintaining  the  attraction  of  the 
region and continued foreign investment. 
to  manage  risks  and  drive  continuous 
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
So far, much progress has been made and vast opportunities can be seen going forward. We 
are  well  aware  that  greater  benefits  are  achieved  from  synergies  and  coordination  rather 
than  autonomous  actions.  Further  efforts 
to  collectively  enhance 
Competitiveness and to promote a sense of Community – the 3C’s, must be pursued – 
both  in  trade  and  in  finance,  and  within  the  public  as  well  as  the  private  sector. 
Ultimately,  strengthening  the  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  would  be  our  best  contribution to 
reaching the goal of our ASEAN Economic Community. 
On this note, let me thank you for your attention and for your interest in our region. 
to  Connect, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
