William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Long  Island  Association,  Melville,  New  York, 
19 March 2012. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to be here on Long Island. It is always a pleasure to speak with 
the business community because of the leadership role you play in your communities and in 
shaping the economic landscape in the region. So, I thank you all for coming today.  
Over the past few years, I have been engaged in a series of outreach meetings all across my 
Federal Reserve District. For example, in 2010 I visited several upstate cities. Early last year 
I made visits to various parts of the city – Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens – and to Puerto Rico. 
In  August,  I  met  with  community  and  business  leaders  and  elected  officials  in  Newark, 
Patterson and Jersey City. In November, I went to West Point and the Capital region. 
I consider these visits just as important as my trips to Washington, D.C., to help formulate 
monetary  policy  or  to  Switzerland  to  help  shape  international  bank  regulation.  Each  visit 
within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. I believe 
that  the  understanding  of  issues  and  concerns  that  I  gain  today  will  help  ensure  that  the 
Fed’s policy decisions reflect the public interest in the broadest sense. 
Today, I want to talk with you first about the Fed – what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll 
provide some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. How the economy 
performs  is  important  in  many  ways.  At  the  personal  level,  for  example,  it  affects  your 
family’s finances and students’ job prospects at graduation time. Collectively, it affects the 
potential of our nation to confront and deal with the many challenges we face. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
What the New York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what the New York Fed does and what makes my 
job so interesting. 
I am vice chair of the FOMC, which meets eight times a year in Washington to set interest 
rates and make other decisions about monetary policy. The members of this committee all 
strive  to  set  policy  to  advance  the  mandate  given  to  us  by  Congress  to  promote  the 
maximum level of employment consistent with price stability. Sometimes we have different 
views  on  the  specific  policy  choice  at  hand,  and  you  should  view  this  as  completely 
appropriate: these are hard questions – particularly at times like this. In fact, I think we make 
better decisions as a committee because we don’t all think alike. But we are united in our 
commitment to our dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the 
public  interest,  because  it  allows  us  to  make  tough  decisions  insulated  from  short-term 
political pressures. 
At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region 
and  the  nation.  For  these  assessments,  we  consult  our  researchers  and  add  critical 
information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils 
and  community  leaders,  such  as  you  and  others  I’ll  meet  on  this  visit. This  trip  includes  a 
meeting  with  the  Long  Island  Housing  Partnership  –  and  a  visit  to  some  distressed 
neighborhoods,  a  tour  of  the  D’Addario  string  factory  and  lunch  with  its  workers;  and 
concludes with a tour and meeting at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
At the New York Fed, we continually track conditions in our District, and we have created a 
number  of  tools  for  that  purpose.  For  example,  my  staff  produces  monthly  indexes  of 
economic activity for New York City, the entire state of New York, and New Jersey. These 
indexes are essentially measures of local output – similar to gross domestic product, or GDP, 
at  the  national  level.  These  measures  provide  a  more  complete  gauge  of  activity  than  the 
employment  report,  which  is  another  important  metric  at  the  state  level.  We  have  also 
constructed a consumer credit panel to track local household credit conditions, including the 
amount and type of personal debt and whether payments are being made in a timely way. 
In addition, we have a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are an 
important  source  of  new  jobs.  We  are  just  launching  our  latest  survey  that  also  includes 
questions about the skill needs of small businesses and if the right kinds of skilled labor are 
available.  Almost  900  regional  businesses  responded  to  our  last  poll,  of  which  roughly 
5 percent were from Long Island. If you, as part of a small business, would like to participate 
in our current poll, please pass your card to my colleagues, who are in the audience, or see 
me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. 
In December, we hosted a workshop for small businesses in the New York City metro area to 
provide  information  about  how  they  can  export  their  products  and  services.  The  Export-
Import Bank, the Small Business Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce were 
on  hand  to  tell  participants  how  to  tap  demand  in  the  global  marketplace  and  what 
government  programs  are  available  to  enhance  credit  and  to  increase  lines  of  working 
capital. In 2012, we’re further developing our small business program. We hope to partner 
with many of you to support the small business sector. 
As you know, even states as wealthy as New York have large pockets of poverty. So, we 
target some key initiatives specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. Here on Long 
Island  there  are  pockets  that  suffered  greatly  in  the  recession.  In  Nassau  County, 
communities in Hempstead, Baldwin, Roosevelt and New Hyde Park have a foreclosure rate 
over four times the national average. The same holds true for parts of Brentwood, Central 
Islip and Patchogue, in Suffolk County. 
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates. Over the past 
three  years,  my  staff  has  come  to  Long  Island  to  meet  with  housing  counselors  and  legal 
services  practitioners.  We  have  provided  housing  advocates  with  the  latest  information  on 
mortgage  conditions,  via  mortgage  briefs,  roundtables,  presentations  and  newsletters.  We 
have now developed an online resource that shows delinquency and foreclosure conditions 
in neighborhoods each month. We believe that this site will be a useful complement, aiding 
the work of housing counselors and other parties seeking to help these communities. 
To  share  what  we  learn  about  our  diverse  District,  we  have  a  website,  with  detailed 
information  about  the  region.  I  invite  you  to  visit  newyorkfed.org  to  explore  our  highly 
localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing conditions and even 
the latest job openings at the New York Fed. 
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  at  other  agencies  to  help  put  the  nation’s  financial 
system on a firmer footing. Much has been done, yet much remains to be done and we are 
determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as 
usual – whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. 
National economic conditions 
The incoming data on the U.S. economy has been a bit more upbeat of late, suggesting that 
the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded at a 
3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first half of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2010.  The  average  monthly  gain  in  nonfarm  payroll  employment  moved  up  to  256,000  in 
January and February from 164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles 
rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 15.1 million in February, the highest since early 
2008. The ISM nonmanufacturing index rose for the third consecutive month in February and 
now  stands  at  its  highest  level  in  a  year.  Even  the  housing  starts  data  have  firmed 
somewhat, although from quite depressed levels. 
While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we 
are out of the woods. To begin with, the economic data looked brighter at this point in 2010 
and again in 2011, only to fade as we got into the second and third quarters of those years.1 
Moreover,  the  United  States  has  experienced  unusually  mild  weather  over  the  past  few 
months, with the number of heating degree days in January and February about 17 percent 
below  the  average  of  the  preceding  five  years.  While  this  reduces  the  amount  that 
households  and  businesses  must  spend  for  heating,  I  suspect  that  it  temporarily  boosts 
economic activity overall. For example, the mild weather is certainly conducive to higher than 
normal levels of construction activity, and we did see a surge in hours worked in that sector 
over the past few months. 
More importantly, real economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to 
make  a  big  dent  in  the  overall  amount  of  slack  in  the  U.S.  economy.  While  it  is  true  that 
growth  was  stronger  in  the  fourth  quarter,  most  of  that  growth  was  due  to  inventory 
accumulation. Growth of final sales was actually quite weak. Historically, a quarter in which 
inventory investment makes a significant growth contribution is typically followed by a quarter 
in  which  that  growth  contribution  is  modest  or  even  negative.  That  appears  to  be  what  is 
shaping up for the first quarter of this year. 
Based  on  available  data,  current  expectations  are  that  real  GDP  will  expand  at  around  a 
2 percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Despite the increase of light vehicle 
sales, overall consumer spending has been sluggish. While growth of retail sales in February 
was reasonably strong in nominal terms, it was considerably less impressive when the large 
increase of gasoline prices that occurred that month is taken into account. Based on data for 
the first half of March, gasoline prices are continuing to move higher which will further sap 
consumers’ real purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which was 
quite strong in the second and third quarters of 2011, entered the new year with little forward 
momentum. 
To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy’s long-run 
sustainable  growth  rate  (what  economists  call  the  potential  growth  rate)  is  around  a 
2 ¼ percent annual rate. We need sustained growth above that rate to absorb the substantial 
amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely keeping up 
with our potential. 
Although  the  sharp  decline  in  the  unemployment  from  9  percent  last  September  to 
8.3 percent in February suggests we are doing better than that, it is important to recognize 
that about half of that decline was due to a declining labor force participation rate. In fact, had 
the labor force participation rate not declined from around 66 percent in mid-2008 to under 
64 percent  in  February,  the  unemployment  rate  would  still  be  over  10  percent.  Also,  it 
appears  that  productivity  growth  has  slumped  recently.  Although  that  means  that  a  given 
amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, it certainly is not an unmitigated 
good development. 
Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and 
there are some meaningful downside risks. In the headwinds department, I would include the 
                                                 
1   This  recurring  pattern  has  led  some  economists  to  question  whether  the  depth  and  duration  of  the  Great 
Recession has distorted the usual patterns of seasonal adjustment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
run-up  in  gasoline  prices  mentioned  earlier  because  that  will  sap  purchasing  power,  the 
continued  impediments  to  a  strong  recovery  of  the  housing  sector,  and  fiscal  drag  at  the 
federal  and  state  and  local  levels.  In  terms  of  downside  risks,  these  include  the  risk  that 
growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions to the supply of oil and higher oil 
prices. 
On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 
12-month  change  of  the  consumer  price  index  slowed  to  2.9  percent  in  February  from  a 
recent  peak  of  3.9  percent  last  September.  Despite  the  recent  rise  of  gasoline  prices 
mentioned above that may interrupt this pattern, we expect this moderation in the growth rate 
of  consumer  prices  to  resume  later  this  year.  While  the  underlying  core  inflation  rate,  that 
strips out volatile food and energy prices, has been somewhat higher than expected a few 
months back, it appears that the annual rate of core inflation2 has peaked and we expect it to 
begin to decline later this year.3 Finally, inflation expectations, which play an important role in 
the inflation process, remain well anchored. By this I mean that people expect that the rate of 
inflation will continue to be relatively low for some time to come. 
Regional economic conditions 
So  how  is  the  recovery  proceeding  in  the  state  and  the  region?  As  I  mentioned,  the  New 
York  Fed  produces  indexes  that  help  us  track  economic  activity  in  the  region.  Based  on 
these measures, the economic recovery got underway in both New York State and New York 
City in late 2009, and economic activity has continued to expand through early 2012. 
The New York Fed also conducts the monthly Empire State Manufacturing Survey to monitor 
conditions for regional manufacturers. The most recent survey, for which a number of Long 
Island firms participated, points to continued expansion in manufacturing activity throughout 
the first quarter of 2012 and heightened optimism about the general business outlook. 
Recently released employment revisions indicate that the economic recovery has taken hold 
on Long Island. But there still is a long way to go. Employment on the island declined by a 
little over 4 percent in the downturn – a steep drop, to be sure, but only about two-thirds of 
the decline that occurred nationally. Since bottoming out in late 2009, employment here on 
the island has rebounded by almost 2 1/2 percent. So we’ve come a bit more than halfway 
back to the early 2008 peak. 
Moreover, these job gains have come despite ongoing job cuts in local government. While 
other  parts  of  the  region  sustained  job  losses  in  local  government  starting  in  2010,  Long 
Island’s  just  started  in  the  spring  of  last  year,  creating  a  drag  on  the labor  market  overall. 
Nevertheless,  the  private  sector  has  picked  up  the  slack.  This  is  most  pronounced  in 
professional  and  business  services,  finance, leisure  and  hospitality,  and  health  care.  Even 
the island’s manufacturing sector has added jobs over the past year. 
Another sign that a recovery is taking hold on Long Island is that banks that were created just 
before or just after the financial crisis – while only a small portion of the local market – are 
starting to show signs of growth. 
Long  Island’s  labor  market  has  also  been  aided  by  its  proximity  to  New  York  City.  With  a 
large portion of the island’s workforce commuting to New York City, especially from Nassau 
County,  the  brisk  job  creation  we’ve  seen  in  the  city  has  helped  matters  here  as  well. 
Unemployment  here  on  the  island  topped  out  at  7.6  percent  back  in late  2009,  and  it  has 
hovered around 7 percent for most of the past year – a high rate to be sure, but well below 
both the national and state levels. 
                                                 
2   As measured by the 12-month change in core CPI. 
3   See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month core CPI. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Turning  to  the  housing  market  –  there  matters  are  more  dreary.  After  more  than  doubling 
between 2000 and 2006, home prices on Long Island are down more than 20 percent from 
their peak and prices have yet to show any strong signs of bottoming out. This weakness is 
underscored  by  our  latest  quarterly  consumer  credit  panel  data.  This  dataset  shows  that 
mortgage delinquency rates on the island are much higher than in other parts of the state 
and continued to edge higher in the fourth quarter of last year.4 
The housing crisis also has also put pressure on local school finances. Historically, the island 
has been heavily dependent on local sources for its school funding, and the housing debacle 
has  generated  a  sharp  drop  in  local  property  tax  revenue.  State  aid  has  been  generally 
insufficient to make up for these losses and school administrators have been forced to cut 
both instructional and non-instructional spending. 
Despite  some  of  these  ongoing  problems,  I  believe  that  the  long-term  outlook  for  Long 
Island’s  economic  growth  is  quite  positive.  The  island’s  workforce  is  particularly  well 
educated, with well over a third of adults holding a college degree. It has a sizeable industrial 
base,  which  is  concentrated  in  high-tech  manufacturing.  Moreover,  Brookhaven  Labs  and 
Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  as  well  as  a  fine  array  of  academic  institutions,  provide  a 
strong foundation for the island’s tech sector and business sector more broadly. The recent 
move  to  create  stronger  ties  between  the  business  community,  research  labs  and  SUNY 
(State  University  of  New  York)  is  a  welcome  development.  It  has  the  potential  to  help 
leverage the island’s existing assets to enhance the prospects for economic development. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  incoming  data  on  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  a  bit  more  upbeat  of  late, 
suggesting  that  the  recovery  may  be  getting  better  established.  But,  while  these 
developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the 
woods in terms of generating a strong, sustainable recovery. On the inflation front, the year-
over-year  rate  of  consumer  price  inflation  has  slowed  in  recent  months,  and  despite  the 
recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012. 
Looking ahead, the key challenge for the Long Island economy will be to continue to prepare 
its  residents  for  the  best  jobs  being  created  here.  Expanding  educational  access  and 
opportunity and the skills that go along with it will go a long way to broadening participation in 
the economy to all residents and bolstering Long Island in the future. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
                                                 
4   For more information, see the New York Fed’s consumer credit panel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
