Ardian Fullani: Current development stage of the Albanian economy 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional meeting of the 
Bank of Albania, Fier District, 31 January 2012. 
 Dear guests,  
It is an honour and great privilege to be here with you today to share some reflections and 
ideas on the current development stage of the Albanian economy in general, and your region 
in  particular.  Regional  meetings  have  now  become  a  consolidated  tradition  in  our  public 
communication  philosophy.  We  believe  that  meetings  of  this  kind  serve  to  accomplish  the 
Bank of Albania’s objectives by ensuring a better explanation of the monetary policy-making. 
In addition to enhancing the transparency of our decision-making, this direct communication 
also  embodies  another  function,  that  of  public  education.  We  ultimately  believe  that  this 
communication  contributes  to  a  greater  efficiency  in  transmitting  the  monetary  policy 
decisions to the economy.  
I cannot, however, refrain myself from sharing some personal impressions I have made over 
the years on Fier and its people.  
Your  city  is  an  important  crossroad  connecting  the  lower  part  of  Albania  to  the  south, 
including the Ionian Riviera. I think this makes a strong point in favour of Fier, a comparative 
advantage relative to many other cities in Albania. And not just that.  
Fier opens wide into the Adriatic Sea, beginning from the embouchure of Seman River in the 
north to that of Vjosa River in the south. The whole territory is part of Myzeqe Lowlands, one 
of the most fertile lands in Albania, while worth noting is that this represents the oil-bearing 
region  in  our  country.  And  last,  and  probably  the  most  important,  the  people  of  Fier  have 
historically  been  distinguished  as  hard-working,  peace-loving  and  hospitable  people.  I  am 
truly happy to be here with you today.  
Dear guests,  
The  Albanian  economy  has  progressed  positively,  being  manifested  in  positive  economic 
growth, low inflation, stable national currency, and fiscal and financial sustainability.  
The  Albanian  financial  sector  –  dominated  by  the  banking  system  –  has  increased  its 
financial intermediation, materialized in the growth of deposits and lending to the economy. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  enjoys  full  financial  soundness,  expressed  primarily  in  terms  of  its 
capital adequacy, liquidity position and profit.  
During  all  this  time,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  monitored  closely  the  banking  system 
developments, and has carried out stress testing exercises, which show that all banks are 
resilient  to  shocks  in  extreme  adverse  scenarios  and  can  operate  normally.  On  the  other 
hand, the Bank of Albania has also been very attentive to the performance of the economy.  
As you may have heard, last week, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania cut the 
key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points. This was the third cut we made having a well-
defined  aim  to  support  and  boost  economic  activity  in  Albania  further.  Due  to  the 
unprecedented  financial  crisis  facing  the  global  economy  in  general,  and  the  euro  area 
economy  in  particular,  the  economic  growth  in  Albania  remains  below  its  long-term 
equilibrium. I refer here to the potential economic growth, or put into more simple words, to 
the level our economy would grow if it used all its production capacities.  
We  have  made  attempts  in  our  analyses  to  find  the  reasons  behind  this  performance,  the 
consequences and some of the measures that would help smooth out this concern. In the 
following, I would like to elaborate on some of our conclusions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I will begin the analysis of the economic and financial situation in Albania dwelling on what 
we have considered as the major cause and source of risks for the future: the severe global 
crisis.  The  situation  in  our  trading  partners  is  a  product  of  the  developments  in  global 
economy, which is facing a hard period in terms of the macroeconomic and financial stability. 
The high debt levels of governments and the individuals have curbed the capacity of many 
advanced economies to spend and make investments, thus affecting the economic activity 
and their capacity to pay off debt adversely.  
Many reputable representatives from the academia and the business attribute the cause of 
the crisis (debt-burdened balance sheets of the governments and individuals) to globalization 
and  the  competition  it  generates.  Due  to  the  rising  costs,  advanced  economies  have 
generally  lost  their  historical  advantages  in  producing  goods  and  services,  replacing  the 
absent income with debt, which now they have to pay off.  
Why are these developments important to the Albanian economy?  
 
First, it is necessary to understand that these advanced economies are our major 
trading partners. They are the main users of our exports and, at the same time, the 
source of imported consumer goods and fuels.  
Second, these economies are the major investors in the Albanian economy and the 
financial system.  
Third, these countries are hosting the Albanian migrants.  
Fourth,  we  believe  that  another  effect  relates  to  the  psychological  factor,  which 
emerges in the form of consumers’ and firms’ hesitation to consume and invest.  
   Subsequently, the difficulties facing our neighbouring partners are converted into difficulties 
for the Albanian economy. Any cuts in consumer and investment spending, be it private or 
public,  will  later  yield  cuts  in  these  countries’  investments  in  Albania,  lower  demand  for 
exports, lower remittances; in short, the fall in all aggregate demand components in Albania. 
This would generate the fall in output, the creation of spare capacities, the deterioration of 
firms’ and consumers’ balance sheets, and a number of other adverse phenomena.  
At present, the Albanian economy generates nearly as much as half of its potential growth. 
This  gap,  which  in  our  terminology  is  known  as  “output  gap”,  is  partly  explained  by  the 
difficulties facing our trading partners.  
In addition to the above-mentioned factors, the lower economic growth rate also attributes to 
the sluggish activity in some industries, which, until two years ago, generated a considerable 
portion of the economic growth.  
These  industries  operate  in  the  non-tradable  sector,  implying  that  the  created  product 
remains in the domestic economy, that is, it cannot be traded in the global markets. To be 
clearer, I refer to the construction sector and the entire chain of economic activities fuelling it.  
The  sluggish  economic  activity,  or  the  presence  of  the  negative  output  gap,  leads  to  the 
conclusion that there are spare production capacities in the economy. According to the latest 
analyses,  these  spare  capacities  have  led  to  lower  inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy. 
Against this background, the Bank of Albania has pursued an accommodative policy, trying 
to lower the financial intermediation costs (and affecting the cost of credit indirectly), in order 
to  boost  investment  and  consumption  and,  subsequently,  economic  activity.  We  have  also 
supplied  the  banking  system  and  the  Albanian  economy  with  the  necessary  monetary 
liquidity,  in  view  of  meeting  the  needs  of  commercial  and  economic  activity.  In  addition, 
through  our  successful  monetary  policy,  we  have  accomplished  our  low  inflation  objective 
and  have  guaranteed  a  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment.  This  stability, 
which  is  the  core  mission  of  a  modern  central  bank,  allows  households,  businesses  and 
financial  institutions  to  make  financial  decisions  and  take  business  initiatives  amid  higher 
future certainty.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  credibility  of  the  central  bank  and  our  monetary  policy  is  now  a  tangible  reality  for 
Albania. It is reflected in the trust of our economy in the national currency and its purchasing 
power in the future. The investment made by the Bank of Albania to earn the public trust has 
required  a  lot  of  efforts  to  be  made,  but  they get  rewarded  multiple  times  with  the  greater 
opportunities  we  have  now  to  stimulate  the  economy  without  prejudice  to  the  inflation 
outlook. Against this background, the Bank of Albania has provided the necessary economic 
stimulus, while there is still room for other additional monetary stimulus in the medium run. 
The  accommodative  policies  generally  aim  at  boosting  economic  activity  and  domestic 
demand,  in  order  to  keep  the  consumer  prices  within  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  in  the 
medium run.  
We  have  also  other  reasons  to  support  economic  growth.  We  believe  that  if  the  economy 
grows at its potential rate, there will be substantial impact on the improvement of public and 
private sectors’ and individuals’ financial balance sheets. Their capacity to pay off past-due 
financial liabilities will subsequently improve, and their creditworthiness will enhance.  
I  think  this  is  one  of  the  challenges  that,  on  one  hand,  would  restore  the  macroeconomic 
equilibrium  to  the  pre-crisis  level  and,  on  the  other  hand,  would  guarantee  the  financial 
sector’s stability in the long run.  
I would like to dwell now on another argument, which relates to the current crisis, but also 
has significant potential for development if identified and addressed in due time.  
In  addition  to  the  negative  effects,  the  global  crisis  provides  some  opportunities  which  I 
believe time is ripe to identify promptly and get the most benefit from them.  
Let me state a fact from last year, which I think illustrates my observation better. There is an 
observation that the Arab Spring is one of the factors that led to the increase of the re-export 
industry in Albania. Not only wasn’t it hit by the crisis, but it also grew its activity further. One 
could rightly say that the Arab Spring comes only once in a lifetime.  
This  is  true  but  what  I  see  as  a  comparative  advantage  of  our  economy  in  relation  to  the 
economies of many countries that traditionally make the active processing of the orderer’s 
materials  (re-export  industry)  is  the  cheap  labour  force.  Countries  like  China,  Turkey, 
Vietnam etc, have raised the labour cost, while it has to be admitted that they have a high 
level of productivity. Hence, what we need to do is to qualify the labour force of these sectors 
in order to increase productivity. I think that the qualification of the labour force, the increase 
of  human  capital  and  the  formulation  of  more  stimulating policies  to  support  these  sectors 
represent a resource and potential we have to rely on to create competitive advantages.  
The  absorption  of  higher  capital  for  the  country’s  development  is  another  opportunity  the 
global crisis provides us. It is a well-known fact now that technology and financial capital tend 
to move towards sectors, branches and countries that offer higher return on investment. In 
my  personal  opinion,  but  also  based  on  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  Albanian  economy, 
Albania is a great destination in this respect.  
There is undoubtedly a high perceived risk in the global markets, not only for Albania but also 
for  all  the  countries  in  the  region.  We  should,  however,  make  our  competitive  advantages 
clear to the global markets and continue to work on the structural reform in order to release 
more development potentials and energy.  
Another  lesson  drawn  from  the  crisis  is  that  consumption  should  be  re-oriented  from 
imported goods to domestic production. I have addressed it before too that the list of imports 
should  get  shorter  through  their  substitution  with  domestic  products,  which  has  to  be  the 
priority of the new economic growth model in Albania.  
To this purpose, time is ripe perhaps to give priority to the organization of financing schemes 
to  support  the  traded  sector.  In  more  concrete  terms,  I  refer  to  development  financial 
institutions  that  support  the  agriculture  sector,  agro-business  industry,  extracting  and 
processing  industry,  where  the  Albanian  economy  offers  competitive  advantages.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
economic benefits provided by these financial institutions to domestic production go beyond 
the low financing cost.  
These  are  specialized  institutions  and  they  are  very  well-acquainted  with  the  emerging 
economies  and  the  relevant  sectors.  In  addition  to  providing  financing,  they  are  equipped 
with and offer technical and financial expertise to enhance the efficiency, transparency and 
management,  and  increase  employment  in  the  sectors  they  support;  to  boost  domestic 
production;  to  increase  employment  and,  ultimately,  stimulate  the  balancing  of  external 
sector’s deficits.  
Re-orienting the free labour force, capital and the private and public interest towards these 
advantages  offers  a  simultaneous  solution  to  a  number  of  concerns  facing  the  Albanian 
economy. This re-orientation is the essence of the economic growth model and it should be 
the main objective of economic policies and stimulus at a local-level as well.  
The  economic  activity  of  Fier  region  is  a  perfect  example  proving  the  success  of  the 
orientation towards the traded sector. Fier has generally recorded growth above the average 
of the Albanian economy, and it is ranked the second (after Tirana prefecture) in terms of its 
contribution to real GDP growth and share in total GDP.  
At  the  same  time,  its  current  employment  rate  is  about  4%  higher  than  the  average 
employment in the Albanian economy. These economic indicators provide evidence for the 
direct outcome of the competitive advantages that Fier region offers compared to the other 
economic regions in Albania.  
This performance is grounded on a number of characteristics that guarantee the diversity in 
industry-level  production  at  high  tradability.  In  other  words,  Fier  offers  the  following 
competitive advantages:  
 
Favourable  geographical  location:  Fier  is  situated  in  the  western  part  of  the 
Republic of Albania. In the antiquity, the ancient city of Apollonia was the second 
largest  city  in  the  Illyrian  territory  and  the  starting  point  of  Via  Egnatia,  which 
connected Rome and Byzantium. This favourable geographical location has offered 
the  city  and  the  suburb  areas  a  priority  in  the  economic,  commercial  and  cultural 
development since the antiquity.  
Natural resources: Favoured by its geographical location in the Western Lowlands, 
Fier is rich in agriculture lands and natural resources, mainly oil and bitumen.  
Industrial concentration and diversity: Fier has always been and remains an area 
with  diversified  industrial  production  in  oil  extraction  and  processing,  construction, 
agriculture  and  processing  of  agricultural  products.  The  concentration  of  industrial 
and  agricultural  plants  has,  therefore,  led  to  the  concentration  of  human  and 
financial capital.  
  The district of Fier has generated about 6.1% of total deposits in the banking system, while 
the amount of loans received accounts for only 28% of total deposits at a district-level. This 
level of intermediation tells it all. It seems that the banking sector’s attention and support to 
this district is not in direct proportion to the capacities. This situation does not only attribute to 
the lack of attention by businesses but also by banks. It is imperative that businesses and 
banks sit together and discuss the opportunities for new ideas and projects of mutual benefit.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  bring  another  matter  of  concern  to  your  attention.  While 
preparing for this meeting, we faced difficulties in finding useful statistical information on the 
demographic  and  economic  activity  of  Fier  district.  Taking  into  account  the  opportunities  it 
has to offer, the reported statistics do not make this district distinguishable or comparable to 
the other regions inside or outside Albania.  
It  would  be  of  interest,  for  instance,  to  have  detailed  information  on  the  free  capacities  in 
agriculture and industry; average profitability; non-utilized labour market resources, the level 
of education and human capital; unit labour costs, and capital and final product cost per unit; 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prices of other factors of production, and so on. The lack of these indicators makes it hard, 
and even impossible, to evaluate and compare the business plans that may potentially be 
introduced to the financial institutions or other national or international partners.  
It should not be forgotten that in the global era, the real competition for Fier region does not 
stand in the other regions of Albania, but in those similar in the European economies and 
emerging countries. At present, we do not compete with these economies as we are not and 
won’t  be  able  to  be  part  of  the  global  market as  long  as we  are  not “quoted”  in real  time, 
using  the  same  methodology  and  figures  that  allow  the  comparison  of  costs  and 
opportunities.  
The  creation  of  these  indicators,  their  calculation  and  rating  in  the  relevant  markets  would 
create the conditions for the real assessment of the competitive advantages that this district 
has  to  offer.  The  help  that  the  local  authorities  can  give  in  identifying  the  competitive 
advantages  and  the  provision  of  local  statistics  are  perhaps  the  best  investment  they  can 
make for the regional and national development.  
Today,  more  than  ever  before,  all  the  attention  of  global  economy  is  oriented  towards  the 
markets, as the best estimators of the competitive advantages in the global economy. The 
developments  in  these  markets  are  bringing  about  the  reconfiguration  of  the  economic 
powers at a global level.  
The new commercial and financial trends appear to be in favour of the utilization of natural 
resources and competitive advantages, through investments in emerging economies, to later 
import them in the form of final products, ready for consumption. These are advantages for 
the Albanian economy, which, with the major structural reforms taking place (privatizations, 
natural  and  human  resources,  creativity  and  the  entrepreneurship  spirit),  enjoys  all  the 
opportunities and should play an active role in the regional market and beyond, in the global 
market. I am optimistic and I do believe in our economy and its potentials.  
Thanking you for your attention, I welcome any comments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
