Anand Sinha: Financial stability: 2007 to 2012 – five years on 
Special address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FIBAC  2012  on  “Sustainable  excellence 
through  customer  engagement,  employee 
engagement and right use of technology”, organized by the Federation of Indian Chambers 
of  Commerce  and  Industry  (FICCI)  and  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA),  Mumbai, 
6 September 2012. 
 Inputs provided by Ms. Dimple Bhandia are gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr.  D.  Sarkar,  CMD,  Union  Bank  of  India,  Mr. Pratip  Chaudhuri,  Chairman,  State  Bank  of 
India,  senior  members  of the  banking fraternity,  delegates to  the  Conference,  members  of 
the print and electronic media and other distinguished guests. It is my privilege to be here in 
FIBAC  2012  whose  theme  is  “Sustainable  excellence  through  customer  engagement, 
employee engagement and right use of technology”. FIBAC is an important forum for serious 
deliberations  on  banking  sector  issues.  This  year  an  impressive  range  of  topics  is  being 
covered in this Conference with an objective of achieving and sustaining excellence by the 
banking system. You will appreciate that for achieving these objectives, financial stability is 
an absolutely necessary backdrop. Therefore, I have chosen to speak on the evolution of the 
concept of financial stability in the post-crisis period and the regulatory framework around it. 
Financial  stability  is  a  shared  responsibility  and  therefore,  apart from the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India and the Government, banks also carry a significant responsibility in this regard. Banks 
have to ensure that their business models and conduct, promote financial stability. 
Let  me  step  back  a  little  and  briefly  touch  upon  the  background  which  prompted  financial 
stability to assume centre stage. Global financial markets froze abruptly following collapse of 
Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, and have never fully recovered since then. While 
there have emerged signs of hope, of “green shoots”, from time to time, they too have been 
quickly dashed. While it was the financial sector which triggered the instability at the outset, it 
is  now  the  high  debt  burden  in  advanced  economies  which  threatens  the  safety  of  the 
financial system and continues to be a drag on economies. The financial system is far from 
being sound as banks in several advanced economies, particularly in the Eurozone remain 
vulnerable.  Structural  imbalances,  predating  the  crisis,  persist.  The  room  for  fiscal  and 
monetary  manoeuvre  has  shrunk  drastically  due  to  the  burden  of  rescue  shared  by  these 
policies in the aftermath of the sub prime crisis of 2007. Central bank balance sheets across 
the world have grown in size and have almost doubled in the last decade and now amount to 
about 30 per cent of world GDP. Central banks have quickly emerged as the single largest 
creditors of governments, especially, in the beleaguered Eurozone. Interest rates too have 
been slashed in a bid to stimulate the sagging economies and the rates are either zero or 
nearly zero in advanced economies. The expanded balance sheets of the central banks and 
the  near  zero  policy  rates  have  raised  concerns  that  financial  imbalances  may  buildup  all 
over again. 
It is now five years since the outbreak of the global financial crisis. The developments during 
these  years  have  thrown  the  global  economy  off  balance  and  seriously  challenged  the 
intellectual  framework  and  traditionally  held  beliefs  about  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system, theory and practice of monetary policy and macro-economic modelling. In the new 
order of things, financial stability has come to the centre stage of policy making across the 
globe. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  will  speak  today  about  three  sets  of  developments.  First,  I  will 
present  a  brief  synopsis  of  the  regulatory  changes  which  have  been  effected  in  the  years 
since  the  financial  crisis  first  broke  out.  Second,  I  will  present  a  snapshot  of  the  attempts 
being made to assess and measure systemic risk, in its many facets. Third, I will discuss the 
institutional arrangements made to manage financial stability in different countries. I will then 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
present the Indian approach to financial stability and conclude with some of the challenges 
that  confront  us  in  the  days  to  come  as  we  strive  together to  put  in  place  a  healthier  and 
more resilient financial system. 
Financial stability – pre and post crisis 
II.  
The  global  financial  crisis  of  2007  was  caused  by  a  combination  of  macroeconomic  and, 
regulatory  and  supervisory  factors  and  their  interaction.  At  the  core  of  the  crisis  lay  an 
interplay between macro imbalances which had grown rapidly in the last ten years, and the 
financial  market  developments  and  innovations  which  accelerated  over  the  last  10  to 
15 years, partly under the stimulus of the macro imbalances1. In the years leading up to the 
financial  crisis,  policy  framework  for  the  financial  sector  globally  was  guided  by  a  few 
doctrines. One, monetary policy should focus only on price stability (the inflation targetting 
framework).  Second,  price  stability  ensures  financial  stability,  the  latter  being  pursued 
through micro prudential regulatory and supervisory framework. Third, the approach towards 
asset price bubbles, when they are building up, should be one of “benign” indifference and 
central banks should “mop the dust” when bubbles burst, with aggressive easing of monetary 
policy  –  the  now  infamous  Greenspan  orthodoxy.  Fourth,  light  touch  regulation  is  the  way 
forward in a “free market” environment where markets self correct in the larger interest and 
welfare  of the  economy.  Fifth,  a set  of  individual  financial  institutions  constitutes  a  healthy 
and robust financial system. 
The  overall  policy  framework,  prior  to  the  crisis,  reflected  these  doctrines.  The  policy 
approach  comprised  inflation  targetting  to  ensure  price  and  macroeconomic  stability  and 
prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  focussed  on  the  health  and  stability  of 
individual  institutions.  Systemic  concerns,  especially  contagion  risks,  were  sought  to  be 
contained through a robust financial infrastructure. 
In  this  scheme  of things,  liquidity  risk  did  not receive  the  serious  consideration  that  it  was 
entitled to and there was a glaring conceptual flaw inasmuch as there was no framework to 
address systemic risks. The experiences during the crisis drove home the fact that the risk of 
financial  system  disruptions  that  can  destabilize  the  macroeconomy  were  not  correctly 
understood and that the impact of interlinkages and common exposures across the financial 
system were not fully appreciated. The critical lesson which has emerged from the crisis is 
that financial stability needs to be pursued as an explicit policy objective, and the pre-crisis 
notion of mopping up the debris from financial bust is not a viable policy as it can have huge 
macroeconomic costs which we are witnessing today. 
The crisis also brought to the fore the role of the sovereign in financial stability – first as a 
lender of last resort in case of bankruptcy and then as the harbinger of financial instability. 
The  burden  of  past  fiscal  indiscretions  in  several  advanced  economies,  coupled  with  the 
stimulus  measures  taken  as  part  of  the  crisis  management  has  returned  to  haunt  policy 
makers. Global instability acquired a new “avatar” – that of a sovereign debt crisis. 
To address the deficiencies which led to the global crisis, the international standard setters – 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and Financial Stability Board (FSB) – have 
undertaken  a  massive  overhaul  of  the  regulatory  framework.  The  comprehensive  reform 
package  known  as  Basel  III  framework  is  designed  to  address  both  firm  specific  risk  and 
broader systemic risk. Basel III essentially enhances the regulatory framework introduced by 
Basel  II  at  the  level  of  individual  banks.  It  also  sets  up  a  macro-prudential  overlay  to  limit 
systemic risk. The measures relate to enhancing the quality and quantity of capital, liquidity 
risk management, valuation practices, dealing with procyclicality issues and with systemically 
important banks. It also encompasses resolution mechanism, compensation practices, stress 
                                                
1   The Turner Review (2009) – A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking Crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
testing, disclosures to enhance transparency and moving OTC derivatives to central clearing 
and settlement mechanisms for reducing the systemic risk in derivative markets. 
Systemic risk – the elephant in the room 
III.  
Measuring  and  analyzing  systemic  risk  is  at  the  core  of  ensuring  financial  stability.  It  is, 
therefore, important to understand what systemic risk is. While there is no single universally 
accepted definition of systemic risk, it is now commonly accepted that these are risks which 
affect large chunks of the financial system and which have the potential to adversely impact 
the real economy. A comprehensive definition of risk as defined by the IMF, FSB and BIS is 
“a risk of disruption to financial services that is caused by an impairment of all or parts of the 
financial system and has the potential to have serious negative consequences for the real 
economy.” There is also a broad agreement that there are two facets to systemic risk. In its 
first dimension, systemic risk evolves over time. This time dimension of systemic risk is also 
called procyclicality and it deals with the buildup of risks through financing imbalances. The 
imbalances  i.e.  high  leverage,  rapid  credit  growth  and  compressed  risk  premia  build  up 
during the expansionary phase of a business cycle due to the inherent procyclicality of the 
financial system and through the risk taking channel. These imbalances interact with macro 
economy  amplifying  the  booms  and  busts.  Larger  booms  lead  to  larger  busts  and  larger 
damage to macro economy. The second dimension, interconnectedness, relates to systemic 
risks  being  distributed  across  the  financial  system  at  any  given  point  in  time.  These  risks 
relate  to  common  exposures,  entangled  balance  sheets,  common  business  models  or 
profiles and interconnectedness amongst financial institutions. 
The set of policies which deal with managing the systemic risk is known as macro prudential 
policy.  Macro  prudential  policy  tools  are  essentially  micro  prudential  tools  i.e.  capital 
provisioning, Loan-to-Value ratios, debt to income ratios, etc. which are applied both at the 
institution level as well as at the system level as an overlay to micro prudential requirements 
in  a  countercyclical  way. These tools  are  used  to  limit  systemic risk  and  thereby  minimize 
disruptions in the provision of key financial services that can have serious consequences for 
the economy by (i) dampening the buildup of financial imbalances; (ii) building defenses that 
contain  the  speed  and  sharpness  of  subsequent  downswings  and  their  effects  on  the 
economies;  and  (iii)  identifying  and  addressing  common  exposures,  risk  concentrations, 
linkages and inter-dependencies that are sources of contagion and spillover risks that may 
jeopardize  the  functioning  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  While  the  third  objective  of  macro 
prudential  policy  [(iii)  above]  is  concerned  with  the  cross-sectional  dimension,  the  first  two 
objectives [(i) and (ii) above] are concerned with the procyclicality issues. Reserve Bank of 
India  has  been  using  macro  prudential  policies,  more  notably  the  countercyclical  policies, 
since 2004 as a toolkit for ensuring financial stability though it had used them sporadically 
even earlier. 
While there is credible evidence regarding the ability of countercyclical policies to enhance 
the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  the  evidence  regarding  their  ability  to  dampen  the 
buildup  of  financial  imbalances  is  not  unequivocal  and  credible.  RBI  had  countercyclically 
raised  risk  weights  and  provisioning  for  certain  sectors  during  the  expansionary  phase  of 
2004–08. While these policies could dampen the rapid credit growth of the Commercial Real 
Estate sector, they were not as effective for other sectors. Spain’s case is another example, 
which had pioneered dynamic provisioning, a countercyclical tool. Dynamic provisioning had 
significantly enhanced the resilience of the Spanish banking system but it could not dampen 
the credit boom in the housing sector. The inability of macro prudential policies to dampen 
the buildup of financial imbalances would leave the system still vulnerable despite building up 
the resilience. It is thus evident that macro prudential policies would need support from other 
policies,  more  notably  monetary  policy.  The  question  of  monetary  policy  having  a  role  in 
containing  the  buildup  of  financial  imbalances  by  leaning  against  the  wind  has  thus  got 
reopened.  There  is  still  a  lack  of  consensus  on  this  issue  but  increasingly  an  opinion  is 
gaining  ground  that  monetary  policy  should  complement  the  macro  prudential  policies  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
dampening  the  upswing  by  leaning  against  the  wind.  In  effect,  it  means  that  when  the 
financial  imbalances  are  building  up  in  the  system  threatening financial  stability,  the  policy 
rates could be raised above what would, otherwise, be warranted for achieving the inflation 
target  within  the  defined  time  horizon.  In  this  framework,  the  monetary  policy  response  to 
financial cycles would be more symmetric during the expansionary and recessionary phases 
unlike under the Greenspan doctrine which prevailed earlier. The coordination between the 
two policies and with other policies is important. Generally the two i.e. monetary policy and 
macro  prudential  policy  would  operate  in  the  same  direction.  However,  there  could  be 
situations where the two may be pulling in opposite directions and that is where the hierarchy 
of policy objectives will have to be determined and acted upon. 
Measuring systemic risk 
IV.  
Over the last five years, as our understanding of systemic risks has increased, so has our 
realization that assessment of such risks is far from straightforward. Systemic risks per se 
are typically complex, encompass multiple facets of the financial system, and are very often 
opaque. It became clear during the crisis that no single measure or tool would be sufficient to 
cover all the different aspects of systemic risks. Assessment of systemic risks necessitated 
development  of  diagnostic  tools  that  simultaneously  trace  the  changes  in  macro-financial 
conditions which pose risks to financial stability, identify “point in time” risk conditions, while 
also  assessing  the  potential  future  impact  of  all  these  risk  factors,  jointly,  on  systemic 
stability.  The tools,  thus,  needed  to  take  simultaneous  cognisance  of  various facets  of the 
financial system with their myriad correlations and intersections and also peep through the 
proverbial “crystal ball”2 into the future as to how these facets may evolve.  
These challenges have spurred a great deal of research within central banks, in academia, 
and  elsewhere  leading  to  the  development  of  a  host  of  new  quantitative  measures  of 
systemic  risk.  The  models  variously  attempt  to  measure  the  systemic  risk  in  the  financial 
system, quantify the contagion, capture distress dependencies amongst financial institutions, 
measure the systemic importance and the resilience of the financial system. Other class of 
models relates to stress tests while yet another class aims to develop coincident indicators of 
systemic  stress  and  attempt  to  develop  early  warning  indicators.  Let  me  discuss  some  of 
these emergent techniques. 
Measuring systemiticity and assessing resilience 
(i)  
The  first  set  of  quantitative  techniques,  which  I  am  going  to  touch  upon,  deals  with  the 
systemic importance of institutions. The experience during the global financial crisis brought 
to  the  forefront,  the  concept  of  “too  big  to  fail”  and  “too  connected  to  fail”  institutions  and 
raised a whole range of questions. Why are these entities important? How do they affect the 
risks of the overall financial system? How does distress in any financial firm and especially in 
a “too big to fail” financial institution, affect the rest of the financial system? There are, in fact, 
several  ways  in  which  this  can  happen  and  understanding  each  of  these,  is  the  key  to 
designing prudential policies to address such risks3.  
First  is  the  domino  effect  –  a  distressed  financial  institution  may  be  unable  to  meet  its 
liabilities  to  other  financial  institutions,  resulting,  in  turn,  in  these  counterpart  financial 
institutions failing to meet their liabilities to others. If the distressed firm is significantly large, 
the overall contagion impact of its failure can severely strain the financial system. 
                                                
2   “Systemic  Risk  Diagnostics,  Coincident  Indicators  and  Early  Warning  Signals”,  Bernd  Schwaab,  Siem  Jan 
Koopman and André Lucas, ECB WORKING PAPER SERIES, NO 1327 / APRIL 2011. 
3   “Regulating Systemic Risk”, Remarks by Daniel K. Tarullo, at the 2011 Credit Markets Symposium, Charlotte, 
North Carolina on March 31, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second is the potential market impact of the fire sale of assets, by the distressed financial 
institutions which may affect asset prices, margin calls and mark to market losses for other 
financial sector entities holding similar assets. These entities may, in turn, be forced to sell 
their  own  assets  to  meet  their  liquidity  requirements.  As  the  financial  crisis  showed,  the 
adverse impact of such collective sales by financial institutions could result in a significant 
dislocation of asset markets. 
Third, the impact of a “too big to fail” financial institution is further aggravated if the entity is 
also  a  provider  of  a  critical  service  in  financial  markets,  such  as  payment  and  settlement 
systems, as would typically be the case with most large financial institutions. 
Fourth, there is also the reputational impact that the failure of a financial institution has on 
other  financial  institutions,  especially  those  with  similar  business  profiles.  Failure  of  an 
institution  may  reinforce  and  magnify  the  adverse  feedback  loop  leading  to  a  chain  of 
failures.  This  contagion  impact  is,  however,  not  necessarily  a  function  of  the  size  of  the 
financial institution. Indeed, the failure of even a relatively small financial entity could cause 
widespread systemic concerns if it highlighted a hitherto unrealised source of risk. 
Given the potential of large or systemically important financial institutions to cause system-
wide  distress  in  the  event  of  their  failure,  there  have  been  concerted  efforts  to  develop 
models/ techniques for  the  measurement  of, first, the systemic risk  of the financial  system 
and,  second,  methodologies  through  which  such  systemic  risks  could  be  attributed  to 
individual financial institutions. These models attempt to quantify or assess the role that the 
bank’s/financial institution’s size, its risk profile, the degree of exposure to a risk factor, etc., 
play in determining the institution’s contribution to systemic risks. 
Traditional  attempts  to  measure  systemic  risk  have  focused  on  banks’  balance  sheet 
information, such as non-performing assets, earnings, liquidity and capital adequacy ratios. 
Post crisis, the focus has increasingly moved to market based measures both because of the 
availability of higher frequency data and the fact that such data is usually forward looking and 
reflects the market expectation of the future performance of the underlying institutions. 
Different sets of models have been developed using equity prices, CDS prices, CDO indices, 
LIBOR  spreads,  etc.,  as  proxies  for  systemic  risks,  employing  techniques  such  as 
econometric  analysis  including  Principal  Component  Analysis  to  derive  the  systemic  risk 
measure. Another set of techniques use the Merton model to estimate the asset portfolio of 
banks and to derive a systemic risk measure which is based on the probability of default of a 
given  proportion  of  banks  in  a  given  financial  system.  Another  set  of  measures  assesses 
systemic  risk  by  computing  the  multivariate  density  of  a  portfolio  of  banks.  For  example, 
these models  propose  a  set  of  banking  stability  measures  based  on  distress  dependence, 
which  is  estimated  by  the  Banking  System  Multivariate  Density  (BSMD).  Another  set  of 
systemic risk measures are based on the traditional risk management tools such as value-at-
risk (VaR) and expected shortfall (ES). 
Stress testing measures 
(ii)  
Stress  testing  has  assumed  great  importance  as  a  risk  management  tool,  particularly 
because  it  helps  in  overcoming  limitations  of  models  and  historical  data.  Stress  tests 
evaluate  the  potential  impact  of  an  extreme  event  on  a  financial  firm  or  financial  sector. 
Stress  testing  exercises,  especially  macro  stress  testing,  are  increasingly  becoming  an 
important component of a macro prudential policy framework. These tests provide a thorough 
assessment of what could happen if the identified risks materialise. 
A wide variety of stress tests are employed to assess the resilience of financial institutions 
and of the financial sector. The methodology employed varies from “top down” approaches 
(which  are  typically  implemented  by  regulators/  supervisors  by  applying  uniform  stress 
scenarios to the balance sheets of all financial institutions) to “bottom up” approaches (where 
the stress tests are conducted by individual institutions themselves, relying on a common set 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of  assumptions  and/or  scenarios  determined  by  regulators/  supervisors)  and  also  a 
combination of both. 
The  adverse  scenarios  that  underpin  the  stress  tests  typically  encompass  both  sensitivity 
tests and scenario analysis. In the first case, only a single key variable, e.g. interest rates or 
exchanges  rates,  is  shocked.  Such  single  factor  sensitivity  tests  are  typically  the  starting 
point  of  stress  testing  exercises  as  they  are  relatively  simpler  to  implement.  These  tests, 
however, lack plausibility as, in the event of the shock materialising, it is unlikely that only a 
single variable will be affected. 
In  contrast,  scenario  analysis  based  stress  tests  examine  the  impact  of  simultaneous 
changes  in  a  number  of  key  economic  variables.  These  tests,  based  on  historical  or 
hypothetical stress scenarios, lend greater plausibility to the stress testing exercise and also 
yield  a  more  accurate  assessment  of  total  losses  under  adverse  developments.  Not 
surprisingly,  they  are  relatively  more  difficult  to  implement  as  it  is  difficult  to  anticipate  the 
manner in which different macro variables would move together, especially under conditions 
of stress. 
Of late, there is an evidence of the increased use of macroeconomic models to design stress 
tests.  Economic  models  are  being  used  to  examine  the  linkages  between  the  health  of 
financial  institutions  and  underlying  driving  factors  (macro-financial  variables  or  latent 
factors). Often, these models also incorporate the feedback effect from the banking system 
to  the rest  of  the  economy.  Some  models  also  use  the  joint  vector  auto  regression  (VAR) 
systems  to  incorporate  financial  market  variables  into  a  framework  for  stress  testing  the 
stability  of  the  banking system. The  attempt  is  to  design  an  integrated micro-macro model 
that  takes  into  account  dynamic  linkages  between  the  health  of  the  financial  system  and 
macro-financial conditions4.  
Coordinated stress tests are, thus, being used to estimate the losses that a group of financial 
institutions,  typically  the  banking  system,  could  suffer  under  adverse  macroeconomic 
developments.  Such  stress  tests  offer  an  overall  assessment  of  the  vulnerability  of  the 
banking system over a defined time period. They are also important tools for the individual 
banks  themselves  and  for  their  micro  prudential  supervisors  e.g.  from  the  perspective  of 
capital planning and ensuring the resilience of individual financial institutions. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  Global  crisis,  financial  sector  regulators  initiated  various  types  of 
coordinated disclosures of bank exposures, stress test results and similar metrics to rebuild 
trust  in  the  financial  sector.  Prominent  examples  of  such  disclosures  are  the  2009 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in the United States, followed by the disclosure of 
the stress scenario projections of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review in 2012. 
Similarly, the European Banking Authority and its predecessor, the Committee of European 
Banking  Supervisors,  conducted  EU-wide  stress 
the 
disaggregated  results. The  stress  testing  exercises  focused  on  assessing  the  resilience  of 
both individual banks and the EU banking system as a whole to possible adverse economic 
developments, while the capital exercise estimated banks’ recapitalisation needs to meet a 
target capital ratio. These initiatives marked the beginning of disclosures of firm level data on 
stress tests in contrast to the disclosure of sectoral or aggregate data as has been the earlier 
practice.  The  aim  was  to  enhance  market  transparency  at  a  time  of  prevailing  uncertainty 
and to provide market participants with the necessary information to conduct their own risk 
assessments. 
from  2009,  disclosing 
tests 
                                                
4   “A Framework for Assessing the Systemic Risk of Major Financial Institutions” (Apr 2009), Xin Huang, Hao 
Zhou and Haibin Zhu, BIS Working Papers, No 281. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
total  credit, 
Developing early warning framework 
include  measures  such  as  GDP  growth,  growth 
(iii)  
The third set of models I will discuss today relates to the coincident stability indicators which 
are used to evaluate prevalent conditions of financial stability. These indicators assess the 
movements in a range of factors which could have a bearing on financial stability and aid in 
measuring how risks develop over time and in putting in place an early warning framework. 
Several  types  of  indicators  are  being  developed  in  this  context.  Macroeconomic  indicators 
are  typically  compiled  at  the  country  level  and  measure  changes  in  macroeconomic  data. 
These 
inflation, 
unemployment, measures of external sector balance such as the current account deficit and 
measures of fiscal imbalances. Another class of indicators uses aggregated data pertaining 
to  financial  institutions  representing  developments  in  the  financial  sector’s  assets  and 
earnings.  Banking  sector  indicators  examine  the  risks  emanating  from  the  banking  sector, 
given the typical importance of this sector for financial stability. These indicators examine the 
movements  in  financial  soundness  indicators  of  the  banking  system  to  assess  how  risks 
posed by the banking system are evolving. Another set of indicators examine conditions in 
financial markets. 
Five  years  on,  there  is  clearly  no  widely  accepted  single  indicator  or  model  capturing 
systemic  risks  and  instabilities  comprehensively.  Most  models/techniques  that  have  been 
developed  cover  one  or  a  few  specific  aspects  of  systemic  risk.  Each  measure  is  an 
approximation  and  each  has  its  own  strengths  and  weaknesses.  No  single  measure  is 
complete in all aspects in a macroprudential context and policy-makers need, therefore, to 
rely on a wide range of measures and tools, covering various segments of financial systems 
and various types of shocks and transmission mechanisms. The challenge remains one of 
constructing  a  comprehensive  systemic  risk  surveillance  and  assessment  system  which 
serves as an effective early warning system. 
Institutional and governance arrangements 
V.  
Institutional  and  governance  arrangements for ensuring financial  stability  is  another  critical 
issue. The overlap between macro prudential and monetary policies raises questions about 
the role of central banks in financial stability both in peace as well as crisis time. The broad 
consensus which has emerged is that central banks must be involved in the formulation and 
execution of financial stability policy, exclusively or as part of a collegial arrangement. 
Much work has been undertaken over the last two years on the design of financial stability 
policy  and  related  governance  arrangements  in  some  of  the  world’s  major  jurisdictions. 
Abstracting from details, the amendments to the regulatory and oversight architecture made 
in different jurisdictions have, inter alia, 
• 
• 
designated the central bank as the systemic regulator with accountability;  
placed central banks in charge of micro prudential regulation, where not already so 
responsible,  in  addition  to  macro  prudential  regulation,  especially  with  respect  to 
systemically important financial institutions;  
set  up  financial  stability  councils/commissions  to  provide  high  level  focus  on 
financial stability. 
 Let me recapitulate some of these changes. The reform of supervisory arrangements in the 
European Union (EU) drew largely upon the report of the de Larosière Group. In the second 
half of 2009, the European Commission presented two sets of legislative proposals that saw 
the creation of two new pan-European authorities for micro prudential and macro prudential 
supervision. For micro prudential supervision, the European System of Financial Supervisors 
(ESFS)  was  established  which  brings  together  the  national  supervisors  and  three  new 
independent  supranational  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  set  up  replacing  the 
former  European  committees  for  the  banking,  securities,  and  insurance  and  occupational 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
to 
the 
the  country’s 
identification  of  potential  risks 
pensions  sectors.  With  respect  to  macro  prudential  oversight,  a  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board  (ESRB)  was  created  and  tasked  with  detecting  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole. Though the ESRB has no formal directive power, it can issue recommendations and 
risk warnings to EC member states, to national supervisors and to the ESAs, all of which will 
be expected to comply or else explain. 
In Mexico, a Financial Stability Council (FSC) was established. The FSC comprises the Bank 
of Mexico, the Finance Ministry and the country’s other principal regulatory agencies and is 
tasked  with 
financial  stability, 
recommending  appropriate  policies  and  actions,  and  coordinating  their  implementation  by 
member agencies. 
The Bank of Korea Act was amended in August 2011. The amendment, inter alia, granted 
the Bank of Korea a financial stability mandate that calls on it to play a more proactive role in 
financial stability 
With the introduction of the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009, the 1958 version of the Act 
was repealed. The 2009 Act provides greater clarity on the Bank Negara Malaysia’s mandate 
for  financial  stability  and  granted  it  specific  powers  for  macro-prudential  financial  stability, 
including for crisis prevention, management and resolution. 
In the United Kingdom, the Banking Act 2009 introduced a new special resolution regime and 
entrusted the Bank of England with a statutory objective for financial stability. The financial 
sector  reforms  envisaged  replacing  the  United  Kingdom’s  current  tripartite  institutional 
framework by a new framework integrating macro- and micro prudential oversight within the 
Bank  of  England.  The  reforms  focus  on  three  key  institutional  changes:  Creation  of  a 
Financial Policy Committee within the Bank of England as a formal committee of its Court of 
Directors  and  tasked  with  responsibility  for  delivering  systemic  financial  stability  through 
macroprudential  regulation.  Second,  an  operationally  independent  subsidiary  of  the  Bank, 
the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), will be responsible for day to day supervision of 
financial  institutions  that  manage  significant  risk  on  their  balance  sheet.  Third,  a  new 
specialist regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which will have responsibility for 
conduct of business issues across the entire spectrum of financial services. 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 was passed by 
US  Congress  with  the  objective  of  promoting  financial  stability  by  improving  accountability 
and  transparency  in  the  financial  system,  ending  “too  big  to  fail”,  protecting  the  American 
taxpayer  by  ending  bailouts,  and  protecting  consumers  from  abusive  financial  services 
practices.  Under  the  Act,  the  extant  American  system  of  multiple  supervisors  continues. 
However, a new Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) under the chairmanship of the 
Treasury  Secretary  was  created  to  identify  systemic  risks  and  gaps  in  supervision,  and  to 
recommend  regulatory  enhancements.  Though  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  in  the  FSOC  is 
not apparently very prominent, it has become the primary regulator for systemically important 
entities, thus expanding its supervisory role beyond large bank holding companies. 
In India, the Financial Stability and Development Council has been set up but I will discuss 
this a little later. 
Financial  stability  would  require  governance  arrangements  to  ensure  independence  of  the 
macro prudential regulator, clarity of objectives and mandates and accountability. 
Financial stability: the Indian context 
VI.  
In India, prior to the crisis, no agency had explicit mandate for financial stability though the 
Reserve Bank acted as the implicit systemic regulator for the country. The Reserve Bank of 
India  Act,  1934  provides  a  broad  legal  mandate  to  the  Reserve  Bank  to  secure  monetary 
stability  and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit  system  of  the  country  to  its 
advantage. In practice, this meant the dual objective of growth and price stability, the relative 
emphasis  being  dependent  on  the  context.  In  2004,  the  Reserve  Bank  formally  added 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial stability as an additional objective in view of the growing size and importance of the 
Indian financial sector. The broad compulsions of financial stability had, however, underlined 
all major policy initiatives of the Reserve Bank especially since the balance of payment crisis 
of  the  early  1990s  –  much  ahead  of  the  articulation  of  financial  stability  as  an  objective. 
Manifestation of the focused attention of the Reserve Bank on financial stability is evidenced 
in its approach towards financial sector regulation over the last couple of decades. Let me 
touch upon some of these. 
The banking sector 
The gradual process of introducing structural reforms in the banking sector was undertaken 
with the key objective of strengthening the banking sector balance sheets and governance 
frameworks  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  The  reforms  were  carefully  sequenced  with 
prudential norms and supervisory strengthening introduced early in the reform cycle, followed 
by  interest  rate  deregulation  and  gradual  lowering  of  statutory  preemptions.  The  more 
complex  aspects  of  legal  and  accounting  measures  were  ushered  in  subsequently.  The 
regulatory framework has also focused on ensuring good governance through “fit and proper” 
owners, directors and senior managers of the banks. 
The non-banking financial sector 
India  is  unique  with  respect to the  non-banking financial  sector  being within  the regulatory 
perimeter, in sharp contrast to many jurisdictions which are grappling with the very complex 
issue  of  regulating  the  shadow  banking  sector.  Regulation  of  Non-Banking  Finance 
Companies in India was considered necessary as far back as the sixties as a corollary to the 
monetary  and  credit  policy  of  the  country  and  protection  of  depositors’  interest.  Statutory 
powers for the regulation of the segment were given to the Reserve Bank through the RBI 
(Amendment) Act in January 1997. The initial focus of the Reserve Bank was on depositor 
protection and stringent regulatory requirements were put in place for deposit taking entities. 
With the growth of the financial system, the focus shifted to non-deposit taking entities which 
could pose systemic risks on account of their interaction with the formal banking system and 
market based financing. A gradually calibrated regulatory framework was created for these 
entities. 
Large and complex financial institutions 
As liberalisation led to the emergence of financial conglomerates cutting across sectors and 
geographical  boundaries,  a  need  for  a  framework  for  monitoring  of  Systemically  Important 
Financial Intermediaries (SIFIs) or Financial Conglomerates was seriously felt. Accordingly, a 
Financial Conglomerates (FC) Monitoring Mechanism was put in place  in India since June 
2004 and is being continuously upgraded. 
Macroprudential regulation: addressing systemic risks 
The Reserve Bank has, over the years, attempted to address both aspects of systemic risks 
–  the  time  dimension  (which  essentially  refers  to  procyclicality)  and  the  cross  sectional 
dimension (which refers to interconnectedness) within a macro prudential framework, without 
christening  these  policies  as  macro  prudential  policies.  Operationally,  India  being  a  bank-
dominated  economy,  the  bank  credit  and  credit  growth  have  always  formed  important 
variables in the conduct of monetary and countercyclical policies. 
In addressing systemic risks in the time dimension, Reserve Bank’s countercyclical policies 
have aimed at increasing the resilience of the banking system. The instruments used have 
been time varying risk weights and provisioning norms on standard assets for certain specific 
sectors  wherein  excessive  credit  growth,  led  to  apprehension  about  potential  build-up  of 
systemic risk. A slew of regulatory measures, including prudential exposure limits, address 
systemic  risks  arising  out  of  inter-connectedness  among  banks  and  between  banks  and 
NBFCs and from common exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Financial markets 
The  development  of  financial  markets  was  pursued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  broader 
context  of  financial  stability.  A  calibrated  approach  to  financial  sector  development  was 
adopted  based  on  the  level  of  maturity  of  the  financial  system  and  the  needs  of  the  real 
economy. Delicate balance between fostering growth by encouraging financial innovation vis-
à-vis  the  impetrative  of  containing  excesses  that  could  lead  to  instability  was  meticulously 
observed. The approach was to ensure that finance remains firmly wedded to the real sector 
and  does  not  assume  dynamics  of  its  own.  New  products  were  permitted  after  due 
deliberations and wide consultations so as to take into account both the requirements of the 
participants as also the preparedness of the system for managing the risks. 
OTC derivative markets 
The regulatory stance is of a cautious approach to introduction of complex financial products. 
Structured  derivative  products  are  permitted  only  as  long  as  they  do  not  contain  any 
derivative which is not allowed on a standalone basis. In India, a CCP existed, even prior to 
the crisis, for the critical interest rate and foreign exchange markets. Reporting arrangements 
are in place for other OTC derivative products. This approach has been appreciated globally 
and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  was  recently  awarded  the  2012  Dufrenoy  Prize  for  its 
precautionary  approach  to  the  regulation  of  derivatives  market,  thus  facilitating  financial 
innovation in a responsible manner. 
Capital account management 
The approach of the Reserve Bank to the management of the capital account also evolved 
from the broader objective of maintaining financial and macroeconomic stability. The policy 
framework  included  an  explicitly  stated  active  capital  account  management  framework, 
based on the policy stance of encouraging non-debt creating and long-term capital inflows 
and  discouraging  debt  flows.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  significant  liberalization  of 
permissible avenues for outward investments for domestic entities. 
Organisational arrangements for financial stability 
Organisational developments within the Reserve Bank, over the last couple of decades, have 
also  reflected  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  maintaining  financial  stability.  Two  separate 
Committees of the Reserve Bank’s Central Board, viz., the Board for Financial Supervision 
(BFS)  and  the  Board  for  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS),  are  responsible  for 
focused  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  regulated  by  the  Reserve  Bank 
and the payment and settlement infrastructure, respectively. Towards ensuring a coordinated 
approach to the supervision of the financial system, a High Level Coordination Committee on 
Financial  Markets  (HLCCFM)  was  functional  since  1992  with  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve 
Bank  as  Chairman,  the  Finance  Secretary,  Government  of  India  and  the  heads  of  other 
regulatory  authorities  such  as  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI),  the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the Pension Funds Regulatory 
and  Development  Authority  (PFRDA)  as  members.  Post  crisis,  a  Financial  Stability  and 
Development Council (FSDC) has been set up to provide focussed attention to the pursuit of 
financial stability. The Council is chaired by the Finance Minister and has representation from 
all the financial sector regulators. However the oversight of systemic risk in normal times is 
with a Sub Committee of the FSDC (which replaced the HLCCFM) chaired by the Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India and having, as members, heads of other regulatory agencies as well 
as all the Deputy Governors of Reserve Bank of India and the Finance Secretary. 
In July 2008, the Reserve Bank set up a Financial Stability  Unit (FSU) with a mandate to, 
inter  alia,  conduct  effective  macro-prudential  surveillance  of  the  financial  system  on  an 
ongoing  basis  to  enable  early  detection  of  any  incipient  signs  of  instability.  With  the 
establishment  of  the  FSU,  the  Reserve  Bank  started  publication  of  half  yearly  Financial 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Stability Reports (FSRs) – which now forms a critical tool for the Reserve Bank in its attempt 
to communicate the potential systemic risks facing the financial system. 
the 
the 
from 
lesson 
the  global 
financial  crisis  about 
Financial stability analytics 
A number of initiatives have been taken to improve the financial stability analytics to take full 
account of the different sources of systemic risk. A series of indicators and indices have been 
developed to assess the health and resilience of the financial system on an ongoing basis. 
A Banking Stability Indicator is being used by the Reserve Bank to monitor the dimensional 
riskiness of the banking system in the country. It presents an overall assessment of changes 
in the underlying conditions and risk factors having a bearing on the stability of the banking 
sector based on the five dimensions of, soundness, asset quality, liquidity, profitability and 
efficiency.  A  Financial  Stress  Indicator  –  a  contemporaneous  indicator  of  conditions  in  the 
equity,  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  markets  and  in  the  banking  sector  –  has  been 
developed  to  assess  the  degree  of  stress  in  the  financial  system  and  to  forecast  market 
conditions in the near term. 
Imbibing 
importance  of 
interconnectedness in the financial system, a model of the bilateral exposures in the banking 
system  and  the  broader  financial  system  has  been  developed  with  a  view  to  assess  the 
degree of interconnectedness in the system and to analyse the possible contagion impact of 
the idiosyncratic failure of a bank. The model uses cutting edge techniques in analysing the 
network  of  the  Indian  financial  system  and  identifying,  on  a  real  time  basis,  buildup  of 
excesses and risk concentrations, if any. 
Advanced stress testing techniques are being used to assess the resilience of the financial 
sector.  A  series  of  Banking  Stability  Measures  (in  the  form  of  Banking  System’s  Portfolio 
Multivariate  Density),  including  a  “Toxicity  Index”,  a  “Vulnerability  Index”  and  “Cascade” 
effects  have  been  developed  for  the  purpose  of  assessing  the  systemic  importance  of 
individual banks5. Also, the impact of macroeconomic shocks on the stability of the banking 
system is being assessed based on the Vector Autoregression (VAR) approach.  
Thus, in the case of the Reserve Bank of India, the focus on financial stability from the policy 
perspective  attempts  to  put  in  place  a  prudential  framework  aimed  at  strengthening  the 
resilience of the financial sector while also ensuring that the financial sector development is 
designed to correspond to the level of maturity of the financial system and the needs of the 
real economy. Simultaneously, advanced tools and techniques are being employed to put in 
place an effective system of macroprudential surveillance of the financial system. 
In discharging its function towards maintaining financial stability, the Reserve Bank derives 
considerable systemic advantage from the its roles as the monetary authority, lender of last 
resort,  regulator  of  the  banking  and  non  banking  system  and  of  key  financial  markets  – 
money  market,  Government  securities  market,  forex  market  and  credit  market.  From  a 
financial  stability  perspective,  the  above  framework  has  proved  to  be  a  sound  model  as 
evidenced  by  the  resilience  of  the  Indian  financial  system  during  various  episodes  of 
systemic instability in the global economy. 
Challenges – going forward 
VII.  
It  would  perhaps  be  a  truism  to  state  that  the  last  five  years  have  been  challenging. 
Challenging  in  terms  of  the  continuing  instability  which  has  dogged  the  global  financial 
system with barely a respite. Challenging in terms of the sheer breath of regulatory changes 
                                                
5   “Central banking in a balance sheet recession”, Panel remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the 
BIS, at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2012 conference on "Central banking: before, 
during and after the crisis", Washington, 23–24 March 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
which have taken place over a relatively short span of time – changes which are far reaching, 
changes which encompass a wide span, changes which are historic. I strongly believe that 
the  next  five  years  will  be  equally  exciting  though,  I  hope,  less  stressful  for  the  global 
financial system. 
The last few years have also been defining moments in the history of central banking. The 
crisis has raised questions about the functioning of central banks leading up to the crisis and 
has presented tough challenges in steering the global financial system out of the crisis. For 
central banks, just as managing the crisis was difficult, managing the recovery is going to be 
equally, if not more, difficult. One of the most important challenges I see in the days to come 
is that of exit from accommodative policies adopted during the crisis management phase and 
to  ensure  that  the  financial  imbalances  which  led  to  crisis  do  not  build  up  again.  But  the 
policies  that  are  most  suited  to  crisis  management  are  not  necessarily  the  best  for  crisis 
resolution6.  In  recent  periods,  the  extraordinarily  easy  monetary  policies  in  advanced 
countries  have  provided  some  relief,  but,  sooner  or  later,  central  bank  balance  sheets  will 
have  to  be  repaired.  The  main  challenge  for  policy  makers  will  then  be  to  prevent  such 
balance sheet recession/repair from spilling over to protracted economic weakness.  
When  the  dust  from  this  crisis  has  settled,  the  biggest  challenge,  going  forward,  would 
remain preventing the buildup of financial instability when there would be stability, as risk is 
highest  in  the  system  when  the  perceived  risk  is  lowest.  Tough  decisions  are  difficult  to 
sustain and to implement, when memory recedes – and human memory is notoriously fickle. 
An impressive range of regulatory reforms have been set in motion in the five years since the 
crisis  first  unfolded.  But  there  are  formidable  implementation  challenges  ahead  which  will 
need  to  be  carefully  managed.  The  progress  in  certain  areas  of  reforms,  notably  OTC 
derivative market reforms and measures to put in place robust resolution regimes, has been 
slow. There are apprehensions about the impact of the Basel III capital measures on credit 
offtake as well as on investor interest in the banking system. There are also concerns about 
the  impact  of  the  Basel  III  liquidity  measures  on  the  functioning  of  the  markets  for  such 
securities.  The  potential  unintended  consequences  of  the  reform  measures,  especially  for 
emerging markets, will need to be carefully monitored and managed, should they emerge. 
The  years  ahead  will  also  be  very  exciting  in  terms  of  development  of  financial  stability 
analytics. While we have made progress, financial system modelling is still in its infancy and 
the critical lesson that the crisis has taught us is that understanding, preventing and reducing 
systemic risks, as we seek to preserve financial stability, deserve our full fledged attention. 
Let  me  conclude. There  is  a  downside  risk  to global  financial  stability.  In  India  though  the 
financial system remains robust, the downside risks to financial stability have increased due 
to  several  global  and  domestic  factors.  As  I  said  earlier,  financial  stability  is  a  shared 
responsibility  and  therefore,  Indian  banks  have  a  major  role  to  play  because  while  strong 
financial  institutions  need  not  necessarily  make  up  a  strong  financial  system,  for  a  strong 
financial system we would need strong banks. Indian banks are facing several challenges in 
the current scenario – implementation of Basel III and for some, implementation of Advanced 
Approaches of Basel II – in a situation where there is increasing pressure on asset quality. 
While the macro economic situation would certainly have an impact on NPAs, this can still be 
contained  by  substantially  upgrading  the  credit  management  systems  so  as  to  be  able  to 
contain slippages and improve recovery. Overall, improvement in risk management systems, 
upgradation  of  technological  platforms  and  building  up  of  specialized  skills  in  the  banking 
system are the challenges which will distinguish the more successful ones from the others. It 
is important and this is a lesson from the recent crisis that the competitive pressures are not 
                                                
6   “Central banking in a balance sheet recession”, Panel remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the 
BIS, at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2012 conference on "Central banking: before, 
during and after the crisis", Washington, 23–24 March 2012. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
allowed to override basic prudence. I am sure that our banking system will rise above the 
formidable  challenges  and  emerge  stronger  and  more  efficient.  I  wish  the  Conference  all 
success.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
