José Manuel González-Páramo: Future challenges for central bank 
statistics 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Sixth  ECB  Statistics  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
18 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
On behalf of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank (ECB), let me warmly thank 
you for your attendance at and valuable contributions to the sixth ECB Statistics Conference. 
Please allow me to make a few concluding remarks before the end of this successful event. 
This is the last time that I will be able to attend this conference as a member of the Executive 
Board of the ECB and I greatly appreciate this opportunity to address such a distinguished 
audience. 
As the media and the markets repeatedly remind us every day, there is much at stake as 
regards  the  future  of  the  European  project  today.  Indeed,  the  credibility  of  European 
integration  is  being  challenged  for  reasons  that  no  responsible  policy-maker  can  afford  to 
disregard. Although the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) has been successful in 
achieving its main objective, which is to maintain price stability, let us not forget that, under 
Article  3  of  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB  and  of  the  ECB,  the  ESCB  is  also  responsible  for 
contributing to the stability of the financial system. This is why I greatly appreciate the focus 
and title chosen for this conference, which reflect the contribution of central banking statistics 
to both the maintenance of price stability and the mitigation of systemic risks.  
The system and processes for producing statistics that are used directly for monetary policy 
purposes  are  well  advanced  in  terms  of  their  accuracy,  timeliness  and  coverage.  The 
compelling  question  is  therefore  whether  these  statistics  could  also  serve  the  needs  of 
financial  stability  policies  and  macro-prudential  supervision.  As  you  very  well  know,  the 
answer  to  this  question  is  “yes,  but  with  some  limitations”,  or  rather  “yes,  but  the  data 
currently  available  are  not  sufficient”.  Rather  than  being  discouraged  by  this,  I  would  call 
upon you to accept this shortcoming as a challenge to be taken up in your future work. 
But what exactly are the most pressing challenges that we face in this area?  
As you have already discussed in detail throughout the conference, monetary statistics tend 
to provide us with aggregated data. There are, of course, very good reasons why this is the 
case, but for the purposes of macro-prudential analysis, it would be more useful if the data 
were also consolidated at the level of individual banking groups. In addition, not only banks, 
but  also  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and  ideally  the  entire  financial  system, 
including the shadow banking sector, should be covered in order to effectively help policy-
makers  identify  potential  sources  of  systemic  risk.  Furthermore,  data  with  sufficient 
granularity are instrumental in macro-prudential analysis in order to take both averages and 
distributions into account. In turn, the microfoundations of aggregates must be explored. In 
seeking ways to overcome these shortcomings, I am impressed by the convincing and – in 
fact  converging  –  arguments,  proposals  and  suggestions  that  have  emerged  during  the 
discussions at this conference. 
When  considering  the  different  ways  in  which  we  can  try  to  close  the  existing  data  or 
information gaps, there are essentially three options: i) launch a new data collection effort; 
ii) make  better  use  of  existing  data;  and,  perhaps  most  importantly,  iii)  revisit  the  data 
collection  processes  that  are  currently  in  place.  We  are  fully  aware  that,  irrespective  of 
whether  the  first  or  second  options  are  adopted,  we  will  in  any  case  have  to  review  our 
existing data collection processes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  regards  the  collection  of  new  data,  it  is  widely  agreed  that  we  cannot  merely  impose 
additional reporting requirements on reporting agents – irrespective of the size of the data 
gaps that we need to fill – before having thoroughly considered all other possible alternative 
solutions. While an overall increase in the reporting burden may well be justified in individual 
cases, insofar as it is clearly supported by a cost-benefit analysis, this should only be the last 
resort after all other options have been exhausted.  
For instance, concerning the issue of how to make better use of the existing data, work is 
under  way  to  help  reduce  the  number  of  overlapping  data  collection  efforts.  A  prominent 
example  of  this  is  the  work  being  carried  out  under  the  auspices  of  the  ECB  and  the 
European Banking Authority (EBA) to reconcile credit institutions’ statistical and supervisory 
reporting requirements. In this context, I would like to recall that the second version of the 
classification system linking the requirements of the ECB’s monetary and financial statistics 
with the supervisory reporting templates (FINREP, COREP and Large Exposures) developed 
by the EBA was published last month on the websites of both the ECB and the EBA.  
I  welcome  and  encourage  all  initiatives  to  review  our  data  collection  processes  in  a 
comprehensive  way.  A  strategic  shift  towards  granular,  multi-purpose  data  collection  and 
more  integrated  data  production  processes  can  effectively  reduce  the  burden  on  reporting 
agents and, at the same time, deliver more information to data users. Indeed, in attempting 
to  collect  more  micro  data  (such  as  through  the  ongoing  Eurosystem  project  to  collect 
securities  holding  statistics  on  a  security-by-security  basis),  we  will  face  the  challenge  of 
finding  ways  to  adapt  more  flexibly  to  new  user  demands  without  imposing  additional 
reporting  requirements  on  data  reporting  agents.  These  efforts  should  be  reinforced  by 
establishing  harmonised  data  collection  frameworks  common  to  central  banks  and 
supervisory  authorities.  The  trade-off  between  the  reporting  burden  and  the  amount  of 
information available has to be tackled at its roots, owing to the ever-growing likelihood of 
additional, unforeseeable requests for data on an ad hoc or regular basis. Multi-purpose data 
collection offers a viable solution to this problem and, given the present scarcity of resources, 
there  is  virtually  no  alternative  avenue  to  enable  central  banking  statistics  to  successfully 
serve  both  Eurosystem  mandates.  Any  belief  to  the  contrary  will,  in  my  opinion,  inevitably 
meet with disappointment. 
This type of approach should not be pursued only by statisticians. The importance of having 
an  adequate  legal  framework  for  sharing  with  statisticians  confidential  data  collected  for 
supervisory  purposes  should  not  be  underestimated. 
framework 
empowering  the  ECB  to  collect  data  is  designed  to  allow  the  exchange  of  confidential 
information within the ESCB in order to compile statistics. Statisticians are well aware of the 
need  to  protect  data  confidentiality  and  have  strict  procedures  in  place  to  safeguard  the 
confidentiality of all types of information used in their statistical compilation processes. Legal 
obstacles, however, still remain in the case of data collected from reporting agents for other 
purposes,  such  as  supervisory  purposes.  Within  the  existing  European  supervisory 
architecture, confidential information is not only collected by the various competent national 
authorities that may share information with the European Supervisory Authorities but is also 
collected  and  exchanged  on  the  basis  of  a  wide  range  of  legal  acts,  each  with  their  own 
different characteristics. In practice, this framework does not facilitate the smooth exchange 
of confidential information. This is why I am very supportive of any change in the legislation 
which  is  aimed  at  facilitating  such  exchanges  but  which  at  the  same  time  ensures  strict 
protection procedures for confidential data. I cannot stress enough the importance of this. 
Confidentiality  issues  are  of  course  ever-present  in  these  discussions  and,  to  a  certain 
extent, hinder progress. This could partly be attributed to a European tradition which attaches 
great  importance  to  keeping  supervisory  information  confidential,  and  which  stands  in 
contrast to traditions on the other side of the Atlantic, such as those reflected in the practices 
of the US Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council, which publishes a wider range 
of  supervisory  information  on  banking  institutions  operating  in  the  US  market.  We  fully 
respect legitimate reasons for keeping certain information confidential, but would also call for 
Indeed, 
legal 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more transparency towards market analysts and financial market participants. In any event, 
such  a  call  for  more  transparency  does  not  obviate  the  importance  of  having  a  more 
sophisticated  legal  framework  and  practical  arrangements  for  sharing  confidential  data 
among the relevant authorities in order to support their respective tasks. The purpose of such 
a legal framework and arrangements must be to avoid duplication of data requests, to reduce 
the reporting burden, and to ensure that policy actions by decision-makers are not rendered 
ineffective owing to lack of access to information that has already been collected. Hence, I 
count  on  the  support  of  the  European  and  national  authorities,  as  well  as  the  industry,  to 
strive  for  this  common  goal  and  overcome  confidentiality  constraints  and  obstacles  to  the 
exchange of data to support the tasks of decision-makers.  
Concerning  economic  data,  we  have  seen  evidence  of  the  need  for  further  work  on  the 
development  of  these  statistics,  as  they  are  now  increasingly  coming  under  scrutiny  from 
policy-makers and financial market participants. The excessive deficit procedure mechanism 
and  the  new  alert  mechanism  put  in  place  by  the  European  Commission  to  detect  and 
correct macro-economic imbalances on the basis of a scoreboard of indicators are adding 
pressure on statisticians to deliver high quality data. In this context I would like to stress the 
importance of establishing good cooperation between central banks and national statistical 
institutes, both at the EU and the national level.  
I would like to conclude my remarks today by assuring you that the ESCB will further develop 
its  statistics  so  as  to  better  fulfil  the  mandates  given  to  the  ECB  and  to  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board.  
The sixth ECB Statistics Conference is coming to an end. The last session will take place 
after  lunch  at  which  Peter  Bull  will  present  his  book  on  ESCB  statistics  to  mark  the 
20th anniversary of the ESCB Statistics Committee 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  finish  by  thanking  the  chairs,  the  speakers,  the 
discussants and the many distinguished participants in this conference. You have provided 
excellent  contributions  and  reflections  on  strategic  issues  for  the  future  development  of 
ESCB  statistics.  It  has  been  a  very  good  opportunity  to  enhance  our  cooperation  and  to 
identify challenges to the supply of timely, relevant and reliable statistics for both monetary 
policy and financial stability purposes. I hope that our fruitful cooperation will continue in the 
future. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
