K C Chakrabarty: Crisis preparedness in interconnected markets – 
prevention is better than cure 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Programme on Crisis Preparedness in Interconnected Markets, jointly held by the Centre 
for Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL) and the Toronto Centre, Canada, 
Hyderabad, 16 January 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Dimple Bhandia in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mrs. Usha Thorat, Director, CAFRAL, learned faculty members of Toronto Centre, Canada, 
Chief Executives and Executive Directors of banks, Principal, Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of 
Development Banking, Hyderabad, participants, distinguished ladies and gentlemen. 
Over  the  last  five  years,  a  word  became  very  popular  around  the  world.  It  dominated 
discourses  amongst  policy  makers.  It  consumed  innumerable  hours  of  prime  time  on 
television.  It  spanned  across  meetings  in  offices,  dinner  table  conversations,  and  informal 
chit chat between friends. The word is “crisis”. It has become almost a norm for speeches 
and addresses such as this to start with a reference to the crisis. This address, and indeed 
the subject of this seminar, is no different. Yet the subject remains as topical today as it was 
five years back when the global financial crisis first came to light. 
The  subject  matter  of  this  seminar  –  “Crisis  Management  in  Interconnected  Markets”  –  is 
indeed  very  apt.  As  recent  experiences  have  shown,  financial  crises  occur,  albeit 
infrequently. When they do, the potential costs to all stakeholders – the financial system, the 
real economy, the governments and, above all, to the common man – are enormous. The 
recent crises have also driven home the fact that the world, as we know it, is shrinking, as we 
speak.  Globalization  is  here  to  stay  and  no  country  can  be  immune  from  developments 
elsewhere  in  the  world.  The  increasing  interconnectedness  of  global  markets,  economies 
and institutions have only added to the potential of a crisis anywhere in the world to trigger 
contagion  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  All  of  this  has  only  underscored  the  importance  of 
anticipating  such  low  probability  and  high  impact  events,  taking  pre-emptive  action  for 
preventing crises and responding effectively to such events, once they have set in – all key 
components of any effective framework for crisis management.  
I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  coverage  of  this  Seminar  extends  to  all  aspects  of  such  an 
effective  crisis  management  framework.  In  particular,  I  am  sure  that  the  crisis  simulation 
exercises which have been designed as part of the programme will provide participants to 
don different hats, experiment with different aspects of the crisis toolkit available with policy 
makers  and  appreciate  the  importance  of  coordination  between  different  authorities  in 
dealing with and attempting to minimize the systemic consequences of a crisis.  
reached  an  extremely  difficult  or  dangerous  point;  a 
Crises and their origin 
Let me begin first by attempting to define a crisis. The word crisis originates from the Greek 
word “krisis” – which means “decisive moment”. The Oxford dictionary defines a crisis as “a 
time of intense difficulty or danger” while the Cambridge dictionary describes it as “a situation 
that  has 
time  of  great 
disagreement, uncertainty or  suffering”.  The  term  financial  crisis,  to  be  more  specific,  is 
broadly  applied  to  a  range  of  situations  which  encompass  banking  panics,  disorderly 
functioning  of  markets,  stock  market  collapses,  bursting  of  asset  price  bubbles,  currency 
collapses, sovereign defaults, amongst others.  
Crises can happen anywhere, at any time, and often occur when they are least expected. 
History is peppered with crises that have varying origins – starting from the Tulips mania of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 17th century to the dot com bubble of the 2000s and to the 2007 sub-prime crisis and the 
latest brouhaha over the sovereign debt crisis.  
Origins  of  a  crisis  are  hard  to  pinpoint.  They  can  be  caused  by  an  act  of  nature  –  an 
earthquake or a tsunami (as seen recently in Japan), for instance, which, within a very short 
span of time, can cause untold damage to the real economy, which can, in turn, affect the 
financial  sector  and  governments.  The  origins  of  crises  can  also  play  out  over  a  relatively 
longer  period  of  building  up  of  systemic  risks  in  the  macrofinancial  system,  as  the  recent 
global financial crisis demonstrated, shattering belief in what are now believed to be “myths” 
– the “Great Moderation” and the “Goldilocks Economy”. 
As  central  bankers  and  policy  makers  tasked  with  fostering  financial  stability,  we  are 
interested in both kinds of crisis. Both have the potential to cause financial instability. Both 
will need swift action if the fallout has to be managed and the collateral damage contained. 
But what interests us most are the crises which are a result of build up of risks over time and 
which we can take policy initiatives to influence and, perhaps, avert. 
Each crisis has certain unique features and there is a tendency to consider each crisis as 
different. This illusion is furthered by the fact that each crisis originates in different markets, 
through  varied  products  and  is  propagated  through  different  sets  of  economic  agents.  But 
there are always similar strands which cut across these superficial differences. In any case, 
the cornerstone of any crisis is the same – aptly summed by Mahatma Gandhi who stated, 
albeit in a different context, that “There is enough in the world for everybody’s need, but not 
enough for anybody’s greed”. When “greed” takes over “need” and a group of “mischievous 
elements” are able to hold the “good” to ransom, the seeds of a crisis are sown.  
Each crisis is preceded by excesses e.g. excessive credit growth or excessive asset price 
spirals, for example. Each crisis leaves behind its own set of lessons. And as the dust settles 
on  each  crisis,  these  lessons  are  forgotten  by  all  concerned.  As  Hyman  Minsky  aptly 
remarked, “As a previous crisis recedes in time, it’s quite natural … to believe that a new era 
has  arrived.  Cassandra-like  warnings  that  nothing  has  changed,  that  there  is  a  financial 
breaking  point  that  will  lead  to  a  deep  depression,  are  naturally  ignored  in  these 
circumstances.” 
Crisis and interconnectedness  
This  global  financial  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore  the  importance  of  interconnections  – 
amongst the banking system, financial markets, and payment and settlement systems. It has 
underlined  the  fact  that  focussing  on  only  one  part  of  the  financial  system  can  obscure 
vulnerabilities that may prove very important from the perspective of systemic stability. 
Concomitant with the rapid financial globalization of the past three decades – reflected in the 
manifold  increase  in  the  external  assets  and  liabilities  of  nations  as  a  share  of  GDP,  has 
been  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  financial  interconnectedness.  According  to  BIS  data, 
consolidated banking assets have risen from US $13.2 trillion in 2002 to over US$ 30 trillion. 
Financial  linkages  between  countries  have  been  increasing  exponentially,  especially  since 
the  mid-1990s,  through  an  intricate  web  of  claims  and  obligations  which  link  the  balance 
sheets  of  sovereigns,  financial  institutions,  and  corporations.  The  trend  has  only  been 
reinforced  by  rapid  growth  in  cross  border  capital  flows.  In  the  last  decade  or  so,  the 
proliferation  of  sophisticated  financial  products  has  further  heightened  the  complexity  of 
these balance sheet connections. 
A highly interconnected world tends to increase both the probability and the impact of crisis. 
The potential for systemic risks increase, for example, due to potential build-up of leverage 
and  liquidity  mismatches  at  the  same  time  or  due  to  exposures  to  common  networks  of 
intermediaries.  This  leaves  the  financial  system  vulnerable  to  adverse  changes  in  the 
macrofinancial environment, on the one hand, while, on the other, pervasive interconnections 
can result in a rapid transmission of adverse shocks across the global financial system at an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
amplified speed. The system dynamics of a set of networked markets and institutions can, 
thus,  play  a  critical  role  in  the  amplification  as  well  as  the  propagation  mechanisms  of 
shocks.  
The  potential  of  interconnected  markets  to  render  more  severe  the  reach  and  impact  of 
financial crisis through contagion has been demonstrated time and again. In the case of the 
Mexican crisis, a number of other Latin American countries felt pressures and were forced to 
intervene and/or raise interest rates. This, despite the fact that they had virtually no trade and 
investment  links  with  Mexico.  In  East  Asia,  the  crisis  that  began  in  Thailand  spread 
throughout the region and reverberated as far away as South Africa, the Czech Republic and 
South America. The financial crisis of 2007–09 began in the sub-prime market in the US but 
had  soon  engulfed  the  global  economy  through  real,  trade  and  financial  channels.  The 
European debt crisis is proving to be no different. The crises in the 1990s originated in the 
emerging market economies but affected the advanced economies. In the 2000s, the crises 
originated in the developed economies but soon engulfed the developing world.  
Management of crises 
The recent financial crisis has emphatically demonstrated the potential impact of a crisis. The 
sub-prime crisis, which originated in the financial sector, left deep scars on the real economy 
affecting growth in advanced and emerging nations alike. The buck, not surprisingly, stopped 
at the common man, especially in emerging markets such as ours, who was left to bear the 
brunt of any crisis. The potentially devastating impact of financial crises gave rise to a felt 
need to manage such crises, in particular, to put in place a framework to manage crisis, if 
and when they arise.  
A  key  attribute  of  the  crisis  situation  is  that  it  calls  for  decision  and  action  with  a  view  to 
managing  and  containing  the  fallout  of  the  consequences  of  the  crisis.  Management  of 
financial crisis typically involves some basic phases, as discussed in the case of the 2007 
global  financial  crisis  in  a  Congressional  Research  Service  Report.1  Management  of  crisis 
would involve intervention to contain the contagion and restore confidence in the system in 
the first phase. The second phase would typically involve coping with the secondary effects 
of  the  crisis,  for  example,  recession,  if  any,  flight  of  capital,  etc.  The  third  phase  of  this 
process would involve affecting changes in the financial system to reduce risk and prevent 
future crises.  
Simultaneously,  the  other  key  features  of  a  crisis  situation,  viz.,  the  unpredictability 
associated  with  the  event,  the  speed  with  which  it  typically  unfolds  and  the  uncertain  but 
dangerous  outcomes  that  it  can  spawn,  suggest  that  it  is  necessary  to  lay  down  a 
comprehensive  contingency  plan  which  envisages,  in  a  given  context,  all  possible  crisis 
situations  of  varying  gravity  and  possible  decisions  and  actions  as  well  as  the  framework 
under which decisions can be taken and implemented.  
A crisis management framework 
Evolving events since August 2007 have put to test arrangements for crisis management and 
financial  stability  across  the  globe.  Swift  and  proactive  action  was  indeed  taken  once  the 
contours  of  the  crisis  started  becoming  clearer.  Once  the  crisis  broke,  central  banks, 
governments  and  other  regulators  across  the  globe,  including  in  India,  managed  to 
coordinate  effectively  to  improvise  solutions  to  the  problems  they  faced.  The  experience, 
however,  also  revealed  several  shortcomings  in  the  arrangements  in  place  to  manage  the 
crisis, ahead of the crisis. 
                                                 
1   The Global Financial Crisis: Analysis and Policy Implications, Dick K. Nanto, Coordinator, October 2, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Drawing  from  the  lessons  learnt  during  this  crisis,  let  me  lay  down  some  broad  attributes, 
which I believe, are key to the design of an effective crisis management framework. Let me 
confess at the very outset, however, that this list is far from exhaustive. Crisis management 
remains  an  inexact  science  and  I,  along  with  all  of  you  in  central  banks  and  other  policy 
making institutions, continue to learn.  
 
this  responsibility 
First,  there  should  be  a  clear  assignment  of  responsibility  for  financial  stability. 
Where 
is  shared  amongst  different  agencies,  roles  and 
responsibilities need to be clearly delineated and the protocol for coordination during 
crisis clearly spelt out. 
Crisis  management  plans  need  to  be  flexible.  The  characteristics  of  a  crisis  can 
always  differ  from  earlier  crises,  so  authorities  need  to  be  prepared  to  apply 
flexibility rather than working from a set framework. 
Effective  crisis  management  hinges  on  the  authorities  identifying  and  addressing 
problems  at  an  early  stage  implying  that  the  processes  that  enable  early 
identification of emerging systemic risks need to be strengthened.  
The  framework  for  crisis  management  needs  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance 
between  rules  and  judgment.  While  rules  foster  transparency  and  aid  in  avoiding 
moral hazard, use of judgment is critical as crises or crisis like situations differ from 
one another and warrant suitably “customised” solution.  
Availability  of  accurate,  relevant  and  timely  information  is  key  for  any  effective 
framework for financial stability. It is even more critical for crisis management where 
time is of the very essence. A framework for managing crises must, therefore, take 
cognisance  of  need  to  ensure  availability  of  timely  and  relevant  information  by 
addressing  legal  and  other  hurdles  to  information  collection  and  obstacles  to 
information-sharing among the agencies. 
A  crisis  management  framework  needs  to  be  dynamic  and  responsive  to  the 
evolving  macrofinancial  environment  and  developments  in  the  financial  markets. 
Most  importantly,  the  framework  should  be,  and  should  continue  to  remain, 
commensurate to the degree of complexity in the financial system.  
take  cognisance  of  global 
The  crisis  management 
interdependence  and 
to  be 
internationally  coordinated  and  without  adequate  preparation  and  groundwork, 
efforts  to  manage  crises  by  authorities  in  different  countries  could  become  a 
demonstration of the Prisoners’ Dilemma where each country looks out for itself. 
Above  all,  a  crisis  management  framework  must  enable  nimble  footed  decision 
making.  This  will  necessitate  the  creation  of  a  framework  which  involves  all  the 
agencies that will be involved in the decision making process, with clearly defined 
responsibilities and mechanism for information exchange and coordination. 
Also  critical  for  the  management  of  crises,  would  be  an  effective  strategy  for 
communication. Measured transparency, especially during a crisis, can help prevent 
panic and also add to credibility of policy initiatives.  
Finally,  the  framework  should  include  a  continuous  program  of  work  on  crisis 
preparation  including  ensuring  that  effective  coordination  and  information-sharing 
arrangements are in place and that crisis management tools remain up-to-date and 
are tested to meet any potential risks to financial stability.  
integration.  Certain  crisis  actions  may  need 
framework  needs 
to 
         There are two further points I would like to make in respect of some of the tools which form a 
critical part on any crisis management framework. The first is the lender of last resort function 
of the central bank and the second relates to the recovery and resolution planning of financial 
institutions in distress.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The first important tool at the disposal of crisis management is the role of the central banker 
as  a  lender  of  last  resort.  The  recent  financial  crisis,  during  which  central  banks  in  the 
advanced  economies  used  tools  through  a  series  of  conventional  and  unconventional 
measures underscored the importance of the lender of last resort function of the central bank 
for crisis management. Going forward, it would be important to clearly define principles for 
access to emergency liquidity assistance from the central bank. The principles will need to 
balance the imperatives of ensuing capacity to provide adequate liquidity support during the 
crisis while ensuring that perverse incentives for lax liquidity management are not built up in 
the  banking  system.  The  principles  may  also  need  to  address  issues  relating  to  collateral 
standards, given the experiences of recent crises. 
The spectre of “too big to fail” institutions raised its ugly head during the 2007 global financial 
crisis focusing attention on the lack of the necessary arrangements for orderly resolution of 
such  institutions.  A  crisis  management  framework  will  need  to  be  alive  and  open  to  the 
possibility  of  failure,  if  only  to  prevent  the  associated  moral  hazard  problems.  For  the  “no-
failure”  perception  to  be  altered,  robust  arrangements,  which  allow  orderly  resolution  and 
mitigate systemic consequences of such failures will need to be put in place, especially for 
the  resolution  of  cross  border  financial  firms.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  recently 
released  the  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes”  that  would  lay  down  the 
essential  features  and  tools  that  national  resolution  regimes  for  financial  institutions, 
including  non-bank  financial  institutions,  should  have.  For  the  large  and  complex  financial 
institutions,  ex  ante  resolution  plans,  or  “living  wills”  are  one  solution  being  contemplated 
internationally  in  this  regard.  Recent  initiatives  towards  introducing  contingent  capital 
instruments  may  also  potentially  play  an  important  role  in  banks’  recovery  and  resolution 
plans, going forward.  
Crisis prevention 
While  the  subject  of  this  seminar  is  Crisis  Management,  let  me  emphasize  that  the  most 
preferable approach to fostering financial stability is crisis prevention.  
A  series  of  reforms  to  the  regulatory  architecture  and  plethora  of  reforms  are  underway 
globally which seek to reduce the probability of a crisis occurring. The Basel III reforms aim 
at  increasing  the  resilience  of  banks  through  prescription  of  a  higher  quality,  quantity  and 
consistency and better risk coverage of capital. The set of reforms for Systemically Important 
Financial  Institutions  are  aimed  at  reducing  the  probability  of  failure  of  these  large  and 
complex financial institutions and at putting in place a robust resolution framework so that the 
institutions can be winded down in an orderly manner, should they fail. Regulatory perimeter 
issues  are  being  addressed  by  putting  in  place  a  regulatory  framework  for  the  shadow 
banking  system.  Another  set  of  reforms  are  aimed  at  addressing  issues  in  the  OTC 
derivatives markets by ensuring that the transactions in these markets are reported, centrally 
cleared  and,  where  possible,  settled  through  a  central  counterparty.  Compensation 
structures  are  being  streamlined  to  ensure  that  compensation  is  aligned  to  the  risks 
assumed.  Financial  market  infrastructures  are  being  strengthened  and  deposit  insurance 
systems reformed to take cognisance of the lessons of the crisis. A macroprudential overlay 
to  the  entire  regulatory  framework  is  being  proposed  to  address  issues  related  to 
procyclicality  and  the  cross  sectional  dimensions  of  systemic  risks.  Most  importantly, 
organized frameworks for pursuit of financial stability and crisis management, which promote 
inter agency cooperation, are being put in place both nationally and internationally.  
Notwithstanding  the  improvements  in  the  regulatory  framework,  putting  in  place  a  robust 
system  for  the  assessment  of  systemic  risks  which  enables  identification  of  emerging 
excesses and facilitates timely intervention to prevent such risks from materializing, is critical 
for an effective crisis prevention framework. In order words, putting in place a robust Early 
Warning System is a sine quo non for any effective crisis prevention framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Frameworks for systemic risk identification are taking place around the world as part of an 
overall framework for macroprudential framework even as there is a growing realization that 
systemic  risks  are  complex  and  measuring  them  with  precision  may  be  challenging  – 
exercise of judgment is hence critical. Notwithstanding the complexities, there is a need for 
the  framework  for  systemic  risk  assessment  to  be  comprehensive;  to  take  cognizance  of 
interconnectedness, risk concentrations and the channels for cross-sector and cross-border 
spillovers;  to  identify  key  risk  drivers;  and  to  conduct  periodic  stress  tests  to  check  the 
capacity of financial institutions to withstand severe shocks. 
Central  banks  around  the  world  are  engaged  in  developing  tools  and  techniques  to 
accurately assess such risks to the financial system. In India too, upgrading technologies and 
adding  to  its  existing  toolkit  for  identifying  and  measuring  systemic  risks  is  a  continuing 
endeavour.  
Concomitantly with the setting up of an Early Warning System, an Early Action System also 
needs to be put in place. There is, thus, a need for greater emphasis on remedial measures 
e.g.  through  pre-resolution  and  supervisory  intervention  to  ensure  that  identified  risks  are 
managed well before they reach their respective tipping points.  
A  number  of  countries  are  in  the  process  of  introducing  a  framework  for  such  early 
intervention, especially in case of financial institutions. Denmark, for instance, proposed to 
introduce  the  “Diamond  framework”  from  2013.  Under  this  framework,  a  set  of  five 
quantitative  indicators  relating  to,  inter  alia,  credit  growth,  lending  to  real  estate,  large 
exposures,  funding  ratio  and  liquidity  coverage,  have  been  defined  and  the  supervisor  will 
take  remedial  action  in  case  the  limits  are  breached  by  any  financial  institution.  The 
Canadian framework consists of five stages viz., a “normal” stage, an “early warning” stage, 
a “Risk to financial viability or solvency” stage, a “Future financial stability in serious doubt” 
stage  and  a  “Non-viability/insolvency  imminent”  stage.  Each  stage  is  identified  by  a  set  of 
conditions and a number of options for supervisory measures. In India, an early intervention 
system in the form of a Prompt Corrective Action based on three indicators – Capital to Risk 
weighted Assets, Non performing Advances and Return on Assets, has existed since 2002. 
Threshold  values  for  each  of  the  indicators  have  been  defined  along  with  associated 
structured and discretionary actions.  
Interconnectedness as a potential source of crisis was recognized in India much before the 
onset of the crisis and, as a result, in March 2007, RBI limited a bank’s Inter Bank Liabilities 
to  twice its net  worth. A  higher  IBL  limit  of  300  per  cent of  net  worth  is  allowed for  banks 
whose  CRAR  is  11.25  per  cent.  Further,  crisis  prevention  has  been  an  integral  part  of 
regulatory framework in India. 
More recently, we set up the Financial Stability Unit (FSU) within the Reserve Bank to inter-
alia  carry  out  macroprudential  surveillance.  Since  its  formation  in  2009,  the  FSU  has 
published  four  Financial  Stability  Reports  (FSRs)  on  a  biannual  basis.  In  the  most  recent 
report published in December 2011, we introduced the Financial Stability Indicator based on 
a  combination  of  Financial  Market  Stability,  Macroeconomic  Stability  and  Banking  Stability 
Indicators.  We  also  introduced  new  tools  for  risk  assessment  such  as  the  Systemic  Risk 
Survey  and  the  Systemic  Liquidity  indicator  in  addition  to  improving  the  coverage  of  the 
network model analysis introduced in the previous FSR. 
Most  people  are  aware  of  RBI’s  counter  cyclical  policies  that  won  us  accolades  in  our 
management  of  the  crisis.  However,  we  have  also  taken  several  measures  to  address 
systemic risk arising out of interconnectedness amongst financial institutions such as placing 
prudential  limits  on  call  borrowing  and  lending,  limits  on  banks  cross  holdings  of  bank’s 
ownership,  limits  on  exposure  to  single  and  group  borrowers,  etc.  The  further  use  and 
development  of  a  macro-prudential  policy  toolkit  to  manage  systemic  risk  is  actively  being 
pursued within the Bank.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding remarks 
Recent  experiences  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  resolving  a  financial  crisis  is  complex 
and  costly.  This  holds  true  regardless  of  what  caused  the  crisis,  and  regardless  of  the 
solution.  The  best  crisis  management  framework  is  one  that  prevents  crises.  Having  said 
this, no financial system can be completely immune from episodes of financial instability from 
time to time and there will be a need to manage crisis. As central bankers and regulators 
carrying  the  responsibility  of  fostering  financial  stability,  the  best  service  we  can  do  to  our 
objective, therefore, is to remain prepared to manage crisis. There are important lessons to 
be learnt from each crisis. Yet, we can count on each crisis to be sufficiently different from 
every  other  crisis  so  as  to  make  their  identification  a  challenge.  We  can  but  be  alert  and 
flexible  to  evolving  risks.  Let  me  conclude  with  an  extract  from  Carmen  M.  Reinhart  & 
Kenneth S. Rogoff’s book “This time is different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly“ 
“This time many seem different, but all too often a deeper look shows it is not. 
Encouragingly, history does point to warning signs that policy makers can look at 
to  assess  risk  –  if  only  they  do  not  become  too  drunk  with  their  credit  bubble-
fueled success and say, as their predecessors have for centuries, “This time is 
different”.” 
I wish you successful deliberations over the course of the next few days. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
