Joachim Nagel: Launching a trading desk in Tokyo 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at the  opening  of the  enlarged  office  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in Tokyo, 
Tokyo, 6 September 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Governor Shirakawa, 
Vice Minister Nakao, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to convey my sincerest gratitude to all those who have helped us to establish a 
trading desk in Tokyo, especially the Bank of Japan. I would also like to thank the Ministry of 
Finance and the Financial Services Agency very much for their support. 
Our decision to start trading operations in Tokyo has attracted some attention. I think it would 
therefore be useful to provide you with some background information on this matter. 
The Deutsche Bundesbank’s foreign reserves 
2. 
As trading operations in Tokyo form part of the management of foreign exchange reserves, 
let me first provide you with some basic information on the Bundesbank’s foreign reserves. 
Foreign reserves have three main components: foreign exchange, the position with the IMF 
and gold. Germany’s foreign exchange reserves amount to around EUR 31 bn., of which the 
majority is invested in US dollar, and also a share is invested in Japanese yen. For many 
years, the total volume of the foreign exchange reserves has been kept quite stable. Due to 
the  valuation  at  market  prices,  the  share  of  gold  within  the  Bundesbank’s  reserves  has 
increased significantly during recent years. The composition of the reserve assets is less the 
result of a portfolio optimisation strategy than, first and foremost, a response to gold transfers 
under the Bretton Woods System and to foreign exchange interventions prior to the launch of 
European monetary union. 
The management of the Bundesbank’s US dollar und Japanese yen portfolio is based on the 
principles of safety, cost efficiency and liquidity. The trading office in Tokyo will essentially be 
responsible for executing purchases and sales of Japanese government bonds during Tokyo 
trading  hours.  The  Bundesbank’s  Central  Office  in  Frankfurt  will  remain  responsible  for 
making strategic decisions and coordinating investment activities. 
On-site reserve management 
3. 
In April 2009 the Bundesbank started to use the premises of its Representative Office in New 
York  to  launch  a  trading  desk  for  reserve  management  operations  in  US  Treasuries  and 
money market instruments such as repos. So why do we also trade outside of Frankfurt? 
Trading activities create contacts with market partners and enable Bundesbank traders and 
analysts to increase their knowledge of financial market developments on site. Through their 
physical presence at financial centres, they gain access to additional market information and 
benefit  in  other  ways  through  having  local  contacts.  The  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Markets 
Department  condenses  this  information  and  makes  it  available  internally  through  its  daily 
market  reports  from  New  York.  The  Bundesbank  expects  the  trading  desk  to  strengthen 
contacts  with  local  banks  and  institutions.  A  physical  presence  on  site  and  a  network  of 
contacts  will  contribute  in  many  respects  to  a  better  understanding  of  financial  market 
developments  both  in  and  beyond  Japan.  The  Bundesbank  will  benefit  from  this,  not  only 
with  regard  to  the  management  of  its  foreign  reserves.  The  provision  of  regular  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reports and the establishment of contacts will also benefit the Bundesbank’s internal bodies. 
This will strengthen the Bundesbank’s hand when contributing its expertise to international 
committees (BIS, IMF, G7) and when fulfilling its role in the Eurosystem. 
In  addition  to  business  relationships  with  local  market  participants,  the  trade  contacts  will 
provide  a  “springboard” for making  new  contacts.  Experience  gained  operating  our trading 
desk  in  New  York  shows  that  a  physical  local  presence  intensifies  contacts  with  market 
participants for both the trading desk itself and the Representative Office. Particularly during 
the current crisis, the Bundesbank has benefited from an enhanced flow of information. 
Business case for an Asian trading desk in Tokyo 
4.  
Looking  at  the  time  difference,  it  is  clear  that  the  positive  experience  in  New  York  is  an 
equally  convincing  argument  for  an  office  in  Asia.  The  trading  day  in  Tokyo  ends  when 
European  trading  hours  begin.  There  was  no  doubt  over  which  location  would  be  most 
suitable  in  Asia,  as  the  Bundesbank  already  has  a  Representative  Office  in  Tokyo.  The 
enlargement  of  our  Tokyo  office  bears  witness  to  the  increasing  economic  and  political 
importance  of  Asia.  Maintaining  and  strengthening  contacts  with  Japanese  market  players 
and  the  Bank  of  Japan  –  the  central  bank  of  Asia’s  traditional  economic  centre  –  will 
strengthen the Bundesbank’s role in the Eurosystem and in international cooperation. One 
particular argument in favour of a local presence is the Japanese market, which has a high 
proportion of domestic investors and influences. 
The Bundesbank has now had an office in Tokyo for 25 years. Japan is one of the largest 
economies  in  the  world.  Germany  and  Japan  are  closely  connected.  Most  importantly,  the 
investment of foreign reserves in Japan has forged a strong link between the Bundesbank 
and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  The Japanese  yen  is  an  important reserve  currency  in  view  of  its 
relevance  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  where  it  is  has  the  third  largest  turnover  of  any 
currency after the US dollar and the euro. The USD/JPY currency pair is also one of the most 
frequently traded in the world, second to EUR/USD (BIS: Fx-Triennial Survey, 2010). 
Furthermore, on-site trading in Japan will permit us to deepen our contacts with the trade and 
settlement  sections  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  which  manages  accounts  and  safe  custody 
accounts  for  the  Bundesbank  within  the  context  of  foreign  reserve  management.  The 
Bundesbank  also  expects  this  closer  contact  to  yield  additional  knowledge  about  the 
functioning  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  monetary  policy.  Furthermore,  it  will  enable 
contacts with the Bank of Japan to be strengthened at a political level, too. 
The Bundesbank’s trading desk in Tokyo will allow it to conduct trading during those hours 
when Tokyo’s daily trading volumes are at their heaviest. Until now, the time difference has 
prevented the Bundesbank from trading during this market phase and it is therefore currently 
unable to directly respond to economic data or unexpected market events in Japan. In this 
respect, the opportunity to trade in Tokyo will minimise potential losses and help limit risks for 
investment committee and trading positions. Furthermore, trading during the Tokyo trading 
hours  will  create,  in  particular,  significant  scope  for  reducing  transaction  costs.  Compared 
with the European trading hours, the bid-ask spreads will decrease significantly owing to the 
greater trading volume and higher level of market liquidity. We are taking advantage of this 
by shifting a part of our trading activity to this time zone. 
Conclusion 
5.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  now  more  important  than  ever  for  us  to  gain  a  deeper 
understanding of Japan, Asia and the Pacific region. The Representative Office and the new 
trading desk will be our window to the Asia-Pacific region. Expanding our presence in Tokyo 
reflects  the  importance  of  the  Japanese  financial  market  and  the  growing  influence  of  the 
region in the global economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  new  trading  desk  will  be  a  great  enhancement  to  the  Bundesbank’s  Representative 
Office,  which  already  has  a  long  and  successful  history.  Today  we  want  to  celebrate  this 
launch with you. I hope you enjoy the reception. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
