Josef Bonnici: An alternative model for banking in Malta – a case for 
setting up a cooperative bank in Maltese economic realities 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Seminar 
on “Cooperative banking”, Valletta 27 September 2012. 
 Honourable Ministers, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
As the previous speakers have shown, cooperative banks, though not often in the news, in 
these times perhaps thankfully, have a considerable presence in most countries, particularly, 
but not only, in European countries. Indeed, data for 2010 show that in Europe cooperative 
banks  hold  a  market  share  of  over  20%  of  deposits  and  a  similar  market  share for  loans. 
Their presence is particularly marked in France, where the three cooperative banking groups 
(Credit  Agricole,  BPCE  and  Credit  Mutuel)  account  for  some  50%  of  the  market  share  for 
loans and 60% of that for deposits. There is also a significant presence in Italy, where they 
enjoy a market share of 34% of deposits and 30% for loans; in Germany, where they have a 
market share of 19% for deposits and 16% for loans; in the Netherlands, with a market share 
of  43%  of  deposits  and  30%  for  loans;  and  in  Finland,  with  a  market  share  of  34%  for 
deposits and 32% for loans. They include, apart from the well-known French banks already 
mentioned,  such  respected  names  as  Rabobank  in  Holland  and  the  Raiffeissen  banks  in 
Germany.  Cooperative  banks  also  have  a  significant  presence  in  South  Korea,  Japan, 
Canada, Morocco, Mexico and Brazil.  
So the question immediately arises: how come that no such institution has ever been set up 
in Malta? After all one would have thought that the idea of cooperation and solidarity, and the 
spirit  of  the  Seven  Basic  Principles  of  the  International  Cooperative  Alliance  (ICA)  would 
have  a  strong  appeal  in  Malta.  These  seven  principles  consist  of:  voluntary  and  open 
membership;  democratic  member  control;  member  economic  participation;  autonomy  and 
independence; education, training and information of members and employees; cooperation 
with other cooperatives; and, especially, concern for the community. Moreover, we do have 
cooperatives in other spheres of activity here, and these have been around for some time.  
Indeed, the start of the cooperative movement in Malta dates back to the later years of the 
19th  century  (around  1884),  and  the  first  form  of  legislation  regulating  cooperatives  here  
–  the  Cooperative  Societies  Ordinance  1946  – came  into  effect  on  12th December  of that 
year. Initially the movement took root in the agriculture and fisheries sector, which in those 
times  employed  a  significant  part  of  the  population.  But  later,  as  Malta  developed  socially 
and economically, the movement continued to flourish and to expand, and new cooperatives 
were  set  up  in  practically  every  sector  of  the  economy.  Indeed,  there  are  currently  some 
60 cooperatives in Malta, with over 5000 members, spread over a wide range of activities. 
These  include  the  traditional  agriculture  and  fisheries  sector,  transport  and  media, 
management and marketing consultancy services, wholesale, health, maritime, archaeology, 
restoration,  fair  trade,  tourism,  youth  services  and  community  care.  Our  cooperatives  are 
affiliated with the International Cooperatives Alliance (ICA), and so abide by the Seven Basic 
Principles established by the Alliance mentioned previously.  
Banks too have been with us for a long time. Indeed one can trace the origins of banking in 
Malta  to  the  times  of  the  Knights  of  St  John,  though  more  rapid  development  took  place 
under British rule, helped by the island’s strategic and central position in the British Empire. 
In 1826, the Anglo-Egyptian Bank started operations here, and through a series of mergers 
and acquisitions this later became Barclay’s Bank DCO (Dominion, Colonial and Overseas), 
which  soon  established  an  extensive  branch  network  on  the  island.  A  number  of  smaller 
Maltese-owned  banks  were  also  established,  and  some  of  these  eventually  merged  to 
become the National Bank of Malta, which also established a branch network. There followed 
a  period  when  these  two  major  banks  were  nationalised,  but  following  the  subsequent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
liberalisation of the economy they were again privatised, with the Government retaining only 
a 25% share in Bank of Valletta. More banks began to operate here after Malta joined the 
European  Union,  but  these  were  all  commercial,  joint  stock  banks.  No  one,  till  recently, 
seems to have thought of setting up a cooperative bank in Malta.  
The distinctive characteristic of cooperative banks, as previous speakers have explained, is 
that they are banking entities that, for the most part, are owned by their members. The latter 
are  both  owners  and  customers  of  their  bank.  But  this  is  not  their  only  characteristic. 
Generally,  cooperative  banks  are  deeply  rooted  in  their  regions  or  communities.  They  are 
very much involved in local development and contribute to the sustainable development of 
their communities, because their members and officers generally belong to the communities 
in which they operate. Their main concern is not to make spectacular short-term gains for a 
small group of shareholders, but the eradication of poverty and the long-term development of 
the regions where they operate. Hence they are retail, not wholesale banks, and they abide 
by  that  old  maxim  of  banking: know  your  customer. While  helping first time  buyers  to  buy 
their own homes by granting mortgages, for instance, they do not trade in mortgages.  
Perhaps it is precisely because our local banks share so many of these characteristics with 
the cooperative banks that the need to set up a cooperative bank proper has never so far 
been felt here. In fact, our established banks are also – almost of necessity, given Malta’s 
small size – deeply rooted in the local community, and are principally geared to contribute to 
the  sustainable  development  of  that  community.  They  too  are  predominantly  retail,  not 
wholesale banks, operating a very traditional business model, one that has largely shielded 
them from the problems of the international financial turmoil of these last years. They take 
deposits from (mainly) small local savers and make loans to (mainly) small or medium-sized 
local  businesses  and  help  people  buy  their  houses  by  providing  mortgages. Their  officers, 
like  those  of  the  cooperative  banks  elsewhere,  belong  to  the  community  in  which  they 
operate and generally know their customers and the local environment. In addition, one of 
them  is  involved  in  the  European  Investment  Fund’s  Jeremie  programme,  a  programme 
designed specifically to help small and medium sized enterprises. The bank in question has 
committed  over  EUR 5 million  over  a  period  of  three  years  to  some  280 local SME 
beneficiaries under the programme.  
Indeed, one could say that it is mainly in their ownership structure that the local commercial 
banks, which are joint stock (or “shareholder value”) banks, differ from cooperative banks. In 
all other respects they are not very different. So that leaves us with the question: is there or 
is there not scope for setting up a cooperative bank in Malta? Is there or isn’t there space for 
such an institution? Or is the local market too small, while our community is being adequately 
served by the banks already operating here?  
I think it is not for me to answer these questions. But the point has been made, and I think it 
is  a  valid  point,  that  competition  –  so  necessary  to  ensure  that  customers  get  the  best 
possible service at the least possible price – depends more heavily on the variety of business 
models rather than on having a large number of institutions giving roughly the same kind of 
services  in  more-or-less  the  same  way.  Increased  competition  does  not  result  from  just 
adding more firms with the same business model, but also, indeed perhaps more, by adding 
firms  with  different  business  models.  Where  there  is  more  diversity,  and  where  there  are 
more alternatives to choose from, competition is enhanced and its benefits increased.  
Perhaps  I  should  point  out  that  several  decades  ago  there  were  many  people,  including 
many of the local business community, who were afraid to approach a bank for a loan. They 
were prepared to give and receive credit directly to and from each other, believing they were 
neither  charging  nor  being  charged  interest,  but  not  to  borrow  from  a  bank  that  explicitly 
charged  interest  and  made  a  profit  “at  their  expense”.  Never  mind  that  the  implicit  rate  of 
interest in the credit being given and received in this way was probably higher than that being 
charged  by  the  banks.  I  should  not  be  at  all  surprised  if  there  were  still  people  around, 
potential entrepreneurs, who still reasoned that way, and who therefore may be “financially 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
excluded”  from  the  economy.  Might  this  perhaps  be  a  niche  which  a  cooperative  bank, 
setting up shop here, might be able to exploit?  
Furthermore, I think that perhaps I should modify an observation I made earlier: namely, that 
the  need  to  set  up  a  cooperative  bank  in  Malta  has  never  so  far  been  felt.  On  second 
thoughts,  perhaps,  this  is  not  entirely  true.  For  one  of  our  smaller  banks,  one  that,  not 
surprisingly, was founded by a Jesuit priest in 1910, actually did begin life as a cooperative 
society. It was originally called the Lega dell’ Apostolato della Preghiera, and its main aims 
were the setting up of a number of initiatives, all with an underlying social purpose. These 
included:  a  savings  bank,  intended  to  instil  habits  of  thrift  among  the  working  classes;  a 
mutual benefit society; a printing press; the publication of a Maltese language periodical; an 
evening school for the teaching of languages, music and crafts; an emigration bureau to help 
Maltese citizens wishing to settle in other countries; schemes for the free provision of food, 
medicines  and  medical  care  to  the  needy;  a  public  lotto  office;  and  a  recreational  club  for 
members.  It  –  or  at  least  the  savings  bank  part  of  its  operations  –  only  became  a  private 
limited company as recently as 1970, just before Malta’s first Banking Act was enacted. And 
this, perhaps, should give us a clue as to why we do not have a Maltese cooperative bank 
today. Perhaps it is not because there is no scope for one, because there is no niche to be 
exploited, but because our legislative framework, as it has evolved so far, doesn’t permit it!  
For the truth of the matter is that while we have laws governing banking activities and a law 
governing cooperatives in Malta, we do not have laws governing cooperative banks! In our 
current  legislative  framework,  the  latter  seem  to  fall  between  two  stools.  Our  Banking  Act 
envisages only joint stock banks, that is banks whose customers are not their owners, while 
the law governing cooperative societies in Malta, though it provides for the establishment of a 
fund  into  which  all  registered  cooperatives  are  obliged  to  deposit  5%  of  their  annual 
operating surplus to help pay for research and the education and training of their members 
and  the  general  development  of  the  cooperative  movement,  does  not  provide  for  the 
establishment of cooperative banks – that is institutions that are licensed to accept deposits 
and make loans. Clearly, for such a bank, or banks, to be able to be established here, either 
our  Banking  Act,  or  the  law  governing  Cooperative  Societies,  or  both,  will  have  to  be 
amended.  But this  is  precisely  what  Minister  Azzopardi  said  he  has  proposed  to  do  in  his 
introductory  speech:  to  amend  the  relevant  legislation.  Then,  once  the  amendments  being 
proposed by the Minister come into force, we will be in a better position to judge whether or 
not there is scope for setting up a cooperative bank in Malta. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
