Daniel K Tarullo: The Volcker Rule 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored 
Enterprises  and 
Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit, 
Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington  DC, 
18 January 2012. 
the  Subcommittee  on  Financial 
 Chairman  Capito,  Chairman  Garrett,  Ranking  Member  Maloney,  Ranking  Member  Waters, 
and  other  members  of  the  subcommittees,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  the 
interagency proposal to implement the requirements of section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall 
Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act),  commonly  known  as  the 
Volcker  Rule.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  some  of  the  issues  faced  in  developing  the 
interagency proposal. As I have previously noted in Congressional testimony, the goal of the 
Federal  Reserve  with  respect  to  this  and  all  other  provisions  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  is  to 
implement  the  statute  in  a  manner  that  is  faithful  to  the  language  of  the  statute  and  that 
maximizes  financial  stability  and  other  social  benefits  at  the  least  cost  to  credit  availability 
and economic growth.  
The  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (OCC),  the  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
(collectively,  the  “agencies”)  in  November  sought  public  comment  on  a  proposal  to 
implement the Volcker Rule. The Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) recently 
issued  its  substantially  similar  proposal  for  comment.  Because  of  the  importance  and 
complexity of the issues raised by the statutory provisions that make up the Volcker Rule, the 
agencies initially provided the public a 90-day opportunity to submit comments. We recently 
extended the comment period for an additional 30 days, until February 13, 2012. The Federal 
Reserve  welcomes  comments  on  Volcker  Rule  implementation  and  has  had  numerous 
meetings with members of the public on this subject. We continue to post on our website all 
the comments that we receive and a summary of all the meetings that the Federal Reserve 
has had with members of the public about the Volcker Rule and all other provisions of the 
Dodd-Frank Act.  
Summary of statute and proposal 
The  statutory  provisions  that  make  up  the  Volcker  Rule  generally  prohibit  banking  entities 
from engaging in two types of activities: 1) proprietary trading and 2) acquiring an ownership 
interest  in,  sponsoring,  or  having  certain  relationships  with  a  hedge  fund  or  private  equity 
fund  (each  a  covered  fund).  These  statutory  provisions  apply,  in  general,  to  insured 
depository institutions; companies that control an insured depository institution; and foreign 
banks  with  a  branch,  agency,  or  subsidiary  bank  in  the  United  States,  as  well  as  to  an 
affiliate of one of these entities.  
Under  the  statute,  proprietary  trading  is  defined  as  taking  a  position  as  principal  in  any 
security,  derivative,  option,  or  contract  for  sale  of  a  commodity  for  future  delivery  for  the 
purpose of selling that position in the near term or otherwise with the intent to resell to profit 
from short-term price movements. The statute applies only to positions taken by a banking 
entity as principal for the purpose of making short-term profits; it does not apply to positions 
taken  for  long-term  or  investment  purposes.  Moreover,  the  statute  contains  a  number  of 
exemptions,  including  for  underwriting,  market  making-related  activities,  and  risk-mitigating 
hedging activities. The implementing rule proposed by the agencies incorporates all of these 
statutory  definitions  and  exemptions.  The  statute  also  authorizes  the  relevant  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
agencies  to  permit  additional  activities  if  they  would  promote  and  protect  safety  and 
soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the United States.  
The  second  major  prohibition  in  the  statute  forbids  any  banking  entity  from  acquiring  or 
retaining an ownership interest in, or having certain relationships with, a covered fund. Again, 
the statute contains a number of exceptions, including for organizing and offering a covered 
fund,  making  limited  investments  in  a  covered  fund,  sponsoring  and  investing  in  loan 
securitizations,  and  risk-mitigating  hedging  activities.  The  statutory  definition  of  a  fund 
covered under the Volcker Rule is quite broad. The statute also quite broadly prohibits any 
banking entity that serves as the investment manager, adviser, or sponsor to a covered fund, 
or that organizes and offers a covered fund, from engaging in certain transactions with the 
fund, including lending to, or purchasing assets from, the fund.  
The statute also prohibits otherwise permissible trading and investment activities when there 
is a material conflict of interest with customers, clients, or counterparties, or when the activity 
results  in  an  exposure  to  high-risk  assets  or  trading  strategies.  These  are  significant 
provisions and the agencies have specifically solicited comment on disclosure requirements 
and other approaches to implementing these parts of the statute.  
Differentiating proprietary trading from market making 
One  of  the  more  difficult  tasks  in  implementing  the  statutory  prohibitions  is  distinguishing 
between  prohibited  proprietary  trading  activities  and  permissible  market-making  activities. 
This distinction is important because of the key role that market makers play in facilitating 
liquid markets in securities, derivatives, and other assets.  
At  the  ends  of  the  spectrum,  the  distinction  between  pure  proprietary  trading  and  market 
making is straightforward. At one end, for instance, trading activities that are organized within 
a discrete business unit, and that are conducted solely for the purpose of executing trading 
strategies that are expected to produce short-term profits without any connection to customer 
facilitation  or  intermediation,  are  not  difficult  to  identify.  These  “internal  hedge  fund” 
operations existed at many bank affiliates for quite some time before the Volcker Rule was 
enacted.  Firms  that  either  are  or  were  engaged  in  these  non-client-oriented,  purely 
proprietary  trading  businesses  can  readily  identify  and  wind  down  these  activities.  Indeed, 
some have already done so for a number of reasons, including anticipatory compliance with 
the Volcker Rule.  
At the other end of the spectrum, a textbook example would be a pure agency-based market 
maker  that  acts  as  an  intermediary,  instantaneously  matching  a  large  pool  of  buyers  and 
sellers of an underlying asset without ever having to take a position in the asset itself. Profits 
are earned either solely by charging buyers a higher price than is paid to sellers of the asset, 
or in some cases by charging a commission. Buyers and sellers willingly pay this “spread” 
fee or commission because the market maker is able to more quickly and efficiently match 
buyers with sellers than if they were left to find each other on their own.  
I refer to this as a textbook example because instances of such riskless market making in our 
trading  markets  are  rare.  In  actual  markets,  buyers  and  sellers  arrive  at  different  times,  in 
staggered  numbers  and  often  have  demands  for  similar  but  not  identical  assets.  Market 
makers hold inventory and manage exposures to the assets in which they make markets to 
ensure that they can continuously serve the needs of their customers.  
Accordingly,  in  the  broad  middle  that  exists  between  these  two  clear  examples,  the 
distinction  between  prohibited  proprietary  trading  and  permissible  market  making  can  be 
difficult  to  draw,  because  these  activities  share  several  important  characteristics.  In  both 
activities,  the  banking  entity  generally  acts  as  principal  in  trading  the  underlying  position, 
holds that position for only a relatively short period of time, and enjoys profits (and suffers 
losses) from any price variation in the position over the period the position is held. Thus, the 
purchase  or  sale  of  a  specific  block  of  securities  is  not  obviously  permissible  or  forbidden 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
based  solely  on  the  features  of  the  transaction  itself.  The  statute  instead  distinguishes 
between these activities by looking to the purpose of the trade and the intent of the trader. 
These  subjective  characteristics  can  be  difficult  to  discern  in  practice,  particularly  in  the 
context of complex global trading markets in which a firm may engage in thousands or more 
transactions per day. A similar challenge attaches to efforts to distinguish a hedging trade 
from a proprietary trade.  
Implementation framework 
The  agencies  have  proposed  a  framework  for  implementation  of  the  Volcker  Rule  that 
combines:  1)  an  explanation  of  the  factors  the  agencies  expect  to  use  to  differentiate 
prohibited  activities  from  permitted  activities,  2)  a  requirement  that  banking  entities  with 
significant  trading  activities  implement  a  program  to  monitor  their  activities  to  ensure 
compliance with the statute, and 3) data collection and reporting requirements, to facilitate 
both  compliance  monitoring  and  the  development  of  more  specific  guidance  over  time.  In 
addition,  the  agencies  will  use  their  supervisory  and  examination  processes  to  monitor 
compliance with the statute.  
The third element of the interagency proposal bears some additional comment. In order to 
help  differentiate  between  permitted  market-making  activities  and  prohibited  proprietary 
trading activities, the agencies have proposed to collect data from trading firms on a number 
of quantitative measurements. These metrics are designed to assist both the agencies and 
banking  entities  in  identifying  the  risks  and  characteristics  of  prohibited  proprietary  trading 
and exempt activities. The proposal makes clear that metrics would be used as a tool, but 
not as a dispositive factor for defining permissible activities. The agencies instead propose to 
use metrics to identify activity that merits special scrutiny by banking entities and examiners 
in  their  evaluation  of  the  activities  of  firms.  The  proposed  rule  does  not  include  specific 
thresholds to trigger further scrutiny for individual metrics, but requests comment on whether 
thresholds  would  be  useful,  and  notes  that  the  agencies  expect  to  propose  them  in  the 
future. The proposal also makes clear that the agencies expect to take a heuristic approach 
to metrics, revising and refining them over time as greater experience is gained in reviewing, 
analyzing,  and  applying  these  measurements  for  purposes  of  identifying  prohibited 
proprietary trading.  
Additionally,  since  some  banking  entities  engage  in  few  or  no  activities  covered  by  the 
statute, the proposal also includes a number of elements intended to reduce the burden of 
the proposed rule on smaller, less-complex banking entities. In particular, the agencies have 
proposed  very  limited  compliance  programs  and  have  reduced  or  eliminated  the  data 
collection requirements for these banking entities.  
Potential effects of the proposal 
The proprietary trading prohibition in the Volcker Rule statute itself will undoubtedly affect the 
trading  behavior  of  banking  entities.  Indeed,  that  is  what  Congress  intended  in  enacting 
these  provisions.  Congress  has  itself  made  the  judgment  that  this  prohibition  will enhance 
financial  stability  and  is  socially  desirable.  The  task  of  the  agencies  is  to  implement 
Congressional  intentions,  as  manifest  in  the  statute  itself,  as  efficiently  and  effectively  as 
possible.  
The approach taken in the proposed rulemaking is concededly not a simple one. But, at least 
to date, it has seemed the most feasible. Two alternative approaches have been suggested, 
and we considered each prior to issuing the proposed regulation. One considerably simpler 
approach  would  be  to  articulate  high-level  principles  for  differentiating  prohibited  and 
permitted activities and then leave it to the firms to self-report violations based on internal 
models or other devices, presumably with compliance and systems monitoring by regulatory 
agencies. While having the virtue of simplicity at the outset, this approach would provide little 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
clarity about whether an activity is permitted or prohibited. It seems quite likely that, either 
formally or informally, the regulatory agencies would regularly be asked to offer guidance or 
approve specific practices. Otherwise, this approach would essentially rely on self-policing by 
banking entities.  
A second alternative would be to establish definitive bright lines for determining whether an 
activity is permitted or prohibited. This approach would be very difficult in practice, at least 
with current information and data, because of the many asset classes, business models, and 
transaction types covered by the statutory provisions. Hard-and-fast rules would also run the 
risk  of  being  either  too  restrictive,  and  thus  inadvertently  classifying  legitimate,  customer-
driven  market-making  or  hedging  activity  as  prohibited,  or  too  narrow,  and  thus  failing 
adequately to capture the full range of activities that are prohibited under the statute.  
The more nuanced framework contained in our proposal was designed to realize some of the 
advantages of both of these approaches while minimizing their potential adverse effects. The 
Dodd-Frank Act provides a long conformance period for firms that are subject to the Volcker 
Rule. The agencies have proposed to use that conformance period to study the effects of the 
statutory  prohibitions  on  the  activities  of  banking  entities  before  the  Volcker  Rule  is  fully 
implemented. To assist in this undertaking, the agencies have proposed to begin collecting 
and reviewing trading data that should help firms subject to the statutory provisions, as well 
as the agencies in our efforts, to monitor and understand the contours of the activities that 
are prohibited, permitted, and affected by the statutory provisions that make up the Volcker 
Rule. As I mentioned earlier, we are hopeful that the data collection and reporting required in 
our proposal will eventually facilitate more specific guidance on market-making, hedging, and 
other exemptions from the general prohibition. After the Volcker Rule becomes fully effective, 
we would continue to monitor the effects of the rule and look for opportunities to refine it.  
Having  said  all  this,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  more  than  open  to  alternatives  that  would  be 
superior to the approach proposed. Indeed, the agencies requested comment on alternative 
approaches in the Federal Register notice.  
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
