Ravi Menon: Monetary Authority of Singapore’s Annual Report 2011/12 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Annual  Report  2011/12  Press 
Conference, Singapore, 25 July 2012. 
 Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ annual report press conference. 
I will focus on five key areas today. First, what is happening on the growth and inflation front; 
second,  what  does  it mean for  MAS’  monetary  policy;  third,  how  is  MAS  managing  risks  to 
our economic and financial stability; fourth, what MAS is doing to make our financial sector 
stronger; and fifth, how we are positioning Singapore’s financial centre for growth. 
Let me start with the economy. 
Growth and inflation 
Singapore economy remains on track to grow at 1–3% this year 
Singapore’s  GDP  growth  averaged  4.2%1  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  But  the  growth 
momentum is clearly slowing. The average growth in the second half of the year is likely to 
be slower than in the first half of the year. This is not unexpected, and has been factored into 
whole year growth forecast of 1–3%.  
The global economy is slipping into a synchronised slowdown. The latest business surveys in 
all  major  jurisdictions  have  turned  more  negative.  There  is  greater  uncertainty  in  the 
US economy  compared  to  three  months  ago,  especially  with  respect  to  the  labour  market. 
The  Eurozone  remains  mired  in  recession  with  no  early  end  in  sight.  Financial  market 
stresses have eased somewhat but the underlying vulnerabilities remain. In emerging Asia, 
domestic  demand  is  holding  up,  but  growth  is  vulnerable  to  developments  in  America  and 
Europe.  The  full  extent  of  weakness  in  exports,  and  its  effects  through  regional  production 
and trade linkages, has probably not filtered through completely.  
I  must  add  that  our  forecast  is  based  on  three  assumptions:  no  recession  in  US,  no 
significant escalation of the Eurozone crisis, and no “hard landing” in China. If one or more of 
these assumptions do not pan out, Singapore’s GDP growth could dip below 1% for 2012. 
But  growth  of  1–3%  should  be  seen  in  perspective.  The  economy  is  operating  at  full 
employment  and  capacity  utilisation  is  high.  The  Singapore  economy  has  expanded  by  an 
average  of  5.8%  over  the  past  five  years,  faster  than  economy’s  underlying  potential.  The 
moderation in growth thus brings the economy closer to its sustainable level of output, and 
will help relieve cost pressures.  
Let me touch on inflation now.  
CPI-All Items inflation for 2012 is expected to come in at 4.0– 4.5%, but Core Inflation 
will continue to come down and approach 2% by end of the year 
MAS  is  narrowing  forecast  range  for  CPI-All  Items  inflation  in  2012  to  4.0–4.5%,  but  the 
forecast for Core Inflation remains unchanged at 2.5–3.0%.  
 1  Refers  to  average  growth  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  seasonally-adjusted  annualised  basis.  Growth  for  Q2  is 
based on Advance Estimates of –1.1%. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1 
Bringing down inflation remains one of MAS’ top priorities. The figure we watch most closely 
is Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of accommodation and private road transport. We 
were  concerned  when  Core  Inflation  came  in  at  3.1%  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  This 
reflected high commodity prices and the pass-through of strong wage growth in 2011. In the 
second  quarter,  Core  Inflation  moderated  to  2.7%.  It  is  likely  to  ease  further  and  approach 
2% by the end of the year. This is not far from the historical average of 1.7%. 
There are several factors driving moderation in Core Inflation during the course of the year.  
First,  oil  prices.  Global  oil  prices  were  at  US$103  per  barrel  in  the first quarter  of the  year. 
They  are  now  around  US$90.  For  the  rest  of  the  year,  they  should  remain  in  the 
US$90–95  range  on  average,  barring  deterioration  in  the  geo-political  situation  in  Middle 
East.  The  easing  of  global  oil  prices  is  already  passing  through  to  prices  of  domestic 
oil-related  items.  Let  me  give  a  couple  of  examples.  Electricity  tariffs  for  households  came 
down by 2.5% in July, the first reduction this year. Likewise, petrol pump prices have fallen 
for three consecutive months, by a cumulative 9% from March. Going into the second half of 
the year, domestic oil-related prices are expected to keep largely stable. 
Second, food prices. Global food commodity prices, as measured by the UN FAO Food Price 
Index, were 5.4% lower in June compared to beginning of the year. This has started to feed 
through to domestic food inflation, which came down from 3.8% y-o-y in January to 2.3% in 
June. Recently, there has been spike in global corn and soya bean prices due to a drought in 
US. But we do not expect a broad-based surge in global food prices in coming months, and 
so domestic food inflation should remain relatively contained for rest of year. 
Third, domestic wages. The 6% increase in domestic wages last year passed through quite 
strongly  into  a  variety  of  services  costs  earlier  this  year.  We  can  expect  some  continued 
pass-through of wage costs for the rest of this year, but at a more restrained pace compared 
to early this year.  
Like Core Inflation, Headline Inflation – or inflation in CPI-All Items – is also expected to be 
lower on average in the second half of the year compared  to the first half. But, unlike Core 
Inflation, CPI-All Items inflation will remain elevated at well above the historical average. As 
mentioned, MAS is narrowing its forecast for CPI-All Items inflation in 2012 from 3.5–4.5% to 
4.0–4.5%. This largely reflects two factors. 
First, imputed rentals on owner-occupied homes are expected to remain high compared to a 
year  ago.  This  essentially  does  not  involve  an  actual  increase  in  spending  by  households. 
Imputed  rentals  on  owner-occupied  homes  are  based  on  actual  rentals  but,  as  you  know, 
only a small segment of the population rents their homes. We expect continued tightness in 
the housing rental market, especially in the HDB segment. While measures have been taken 
to increase housing supply, it will take some time for this supply to come onstream. 
Second, should demand remain resilient, COE premiums are likely to stay high. This could 
present upside risks to the 4.0–4.5% forecast for CPI-All Items inflation.  
In sum, the costs of imputed rentals on owner-occupied homes and private road transport will 
account for about 60% of CPI-All Items inflation this year. 
CPI-All Items inflation will also be volatile from month to month. Two factors are significant: 
one, the fluctuations in COE premiums; and two, the base effects associated with the timing 
of  the  government’s  disbursement  of  service  &  conservancy  charges  and  rental  rebates.2 
This factor, for example, accounted almost entirely for temporary rise in inflation from 5.0% in 
 2   S&CC  and  HDB  rental  rebates  were  given  out  in  June,  September  and  December  last  year,  but  were 
discontinued after March 2012. This will result in higher temporary contributions from accommodation cost in 
the corresponding months in 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches 
May  to  5.3%  in  June. We  expect  inflation  in  July  to fall  to  around  4%,  in  part reflecting  the 
reversal of this base effect. 
Let me now move on to MAS’ monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary policy has had restraining effect on inflation and current policy stance 
remains appropriate  
The persistence in Headline Inflation has led to some questions about efficacy of Singapore’s 
exchange rate-centred monetary policy framework.  
MAS has studied this issue very carefully. We are assured that monetary policy framework 
remains effective and the current policy stance remains appropriate. 
Monetary policy in Singapore has been tight for more than two years now. Since April 2010, 
MAS  has  put  in  place  a  modest  and  gradual  appreciation  path  for  the  trade-weighted 
Singapore dollar policy band. In April this year, MAS tightened monetary policy by increasing 
the slope of the policy band further. 
This  exchange  rate  policy  stance  has  had  a  restraining  effect  on  inflation  through  two 
channels: first, by filtering import prices; and second, by moderating economic activity. First, 
a  stronger  exchange  rate  has  helped  to  filter  import  prices.  Take,  for  instance,  oil  prices. 
Since  April  2010,  global  oil  prices  have  risen  by  an  average  of  15%  year-on-year,  but 
domestic  petrol  pump  prices  have  only  increased  by  8%,  reflecting  the  effects  of  the 
exchange rate. Second, the stronger Singapore dollar has had a restraining effect on activity 
in the economy, especially through the export-oriented sectors. This has helped to dampen 
business cost pressures.  
These  two  effects  have  been  quite  significant  in  helping  to  dampen  inflation.  Since  April 
2010,  the  trade-weighted  Singapore  Dollar  has  appreciated  by  3.3%  per  annum,  reflecting 
MAS’ tighter monetary policy stance.  Our simulations show that if this appreciation had not 
taken  place,  CPI-All  Items  inflation  this  year  would  have  been  6.5–7.0%,  rather  than  the 
4.0–4.5% we have projected. 
But there is a limit to how far we can use exchange rate policy to contain inflation. First, while 
exchange  rate  policy  is  effective  against  imported  inflation  and  domestic  cost  pressures 
arising from rapid economic growth, it is less so against inflation in housing rentals and car 
prices. Even so, housing prices and car prices cannot keep rising rapidly in an environment 
of  weakening  economic  growth.  The  measures  taken  to  address  supply-side  issues  in  the 
housing market and public transport will also help to ease price pressures in these two areas. 
Second,  too  rapid  a  rate  of  appreciation  of  the  Singapore  Dollar  can  significantly  hurt  our 
economic  performance,  especially  in  light  of  heightened  uncertainty  in  the  external 
environment.  
In  sum,  exchange  rate  is  taking  longer  than  usual  to  moderate  inflation,  but  it  remains  our 
broadest  and  most  effective  anti-inflation  tool.  MAS  will  continue  to  keep  a  close  watch  on 
developments in the global economy and price pressures in the domestic economy. The next 
Monetary Policy Statement will be released as scheduled in mid-October 2012. 
MAS remains focused on anchoring inflation expectations as economy undergoes 
restructuring to reduce dependence on foreign labour 
Looking  at  medium  term,  the  domestic  economic  environment  will  remain  challenging  for 
monetary policy. The Singapore economy is making a transition towards productivity-driven 
growth.  This  will  help  to  reduce  our  reliance  on  foreign  labour  and  raise  the  wages  of 
low-income  Singaporeans.  But  rising  wages  must  mean  rising  costs  and  rising  prices,  at 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3 
least  until  productivity  improvements  kick  in.  We  can  expect  stronger  domestic  price 
pressures  over  the  next  few  years,  and  hence  slightly  higher  inflation  than  we  have  seen 
historically. Slightly higher inflation does not mean runaway inflation. MAS will remain vigilant 
and  calibrate  monetary  policy  to  ensure  that  this  does  not  happen.  We  will  not  allow 
inflationary pressures to become entrenched or inflation expectations to build up. 
Managing risks to economic and financial stability 
MAS is preparing for risks to economic and financial stability posed by escalation of 
Eurozone crisis 
Besides watching growth and inflation trends, MAS has been focusing on downside risks to 
Singapore’s  economic  and  financial  stability.  We  monitor  the  risks  closely,  take  steps  to 
mitigate  these  risks  where  we  can,  and  draw  up  contingency  measures  to  manage  them  if 
they materialise. 
The key risk facing the Singapore economy and financial system is the ongoing crisis in the 
Eurozone. While  Eurozone  governments  have  taken  important  steps  to  deal  with  crisis,  we 
must be prepared for a more adverse turn of events.  
The escalation of the Eurozone crisis can affect Singapore in three ways: first, the impact on 
economic  growth;  second,  stresses  on  our  financial  markets;  and  third,  the  safety  and 
soundness of our financial institutions. 
Let me begin with economic growth. A deeper recession and credit crunch in Eurozone can 
impact  our  growth  through  trade  and  financial  channels.  The  trade  channel  will  be  more 
direct and impactful. The Eurozone is our largest export market, and Singapore’s exports to 
the  Eurozone  have  been  declining  since  Q3  last  year.  For  the  financial  channel,  it  will  be 
mainly  through  a  spike  in  risk  aversion  and  drying  up  of  bank  credit,  quite  similar  to  2008. 
Already,  we  have  seen  some  retraction  in  the  Eurozone  banks’  trade  finance  activities  in 
Asia, but the local and global banks have stepped in to fill the void.  
Financial  market  stresses  will  be  felt  most  keenly  in  capital  flows,  currency  markets,  and 
interbank  funding.  There  could  be  larger  and  more  volatile  capital  flows.  We  must  be 
prepared  for  both  excessive  inflows  as  well  as  outflows.  This  could  in  turn  have  either 
upward pressures or downward pressures on the Singapore Dollar. Interbank funding could 
tighten further. We are keeping a close watch on market liquidity conditions, especially in the 
availability of US Dollar funding. 
Finally,  the  impact  on  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions.  Financial  institutions 
operating  in  Singapore  have  limited  direct  exposure  to  peripheral  Europe.  But  if  the  crisis 
spreads  to  core  Europe,  the  contagion  could  be  larger.  MAS  is  closely  monitoring  banks’ 
lending exposures and funding profiles. Given our close links to global financial networks, we 
will not be unaffected. But  our financial system is sound and we should be able to weather 
the  storm.  Our  local  banks  –  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system  –  have  strong  capital  and 
liquidity positions. They have very good asset quality, with non-performing loans ratio at just 
1.3%. We have been carrying out periodic industry-wide stress tests. The tests suggest that 
major  financial  institutions  in  Singapore  would  be  able  to  withstand  adverse  financial  and 
economic shocks. 
MAS will continue to monitor closely developments in the Eurozone and their potential impact 
on Singapore’s economic and financial stability. The 2008 financial crisis and current crisis in 
the  Eurozone  underscore  importance  of  building  a  sound  financial  sector  through  strong 
regulation and supervision.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches 
A sound financial sector 
Singapore will continue to meet or exceed international regulatory standards 
Let me touch on efforts on the regulatory front in three areas: strengthening our banks’ ability 
to  absorb  losses;  enhancing  our  frameworks  for  consolidated  supervision;  and  extending 
scope of regulation to cover all fund management companies. 
In the area of loss-absorbency, Singapore will fully implement the Basel III capital standards. 
Singapore-incorporated  banks  will  meet  Basel  III  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirements 
two years ahead of the Basel Committee’s timeline of 1 January 2015. They will then meet, 
from  1  January  2015,  MAS’  capital  adequacy  requirements  that  are  2%  higher  than  the 
Basel III global capital standards. 
Next, we are stepping up consolidated supervision of financial groups. In banking, MAS has 
always  conducted  group  wide  supervision.  We  are  increasingly  focusing  on  areas  such  as 
mitigating intra-group contagion risk, preventing the multiple use of capital within the group, 
and limiting group concentration risk exposures. For insurance groups, we will be enhancing 
our supervisory practices. We issued a consultation paper in February this year, with detailed 
proposals.  We  will  also  introduce  a  new  Financial  Holding  Companies  Act.  This  will  cover 
companies incorporated in Singapore, which hold as their subsidiary or subsidiaries, banks, 
insurance companies, or both, but does not itself conduct banking or insurance business.  
Third,  regulation  of  the  fund  management  industry.  All  fund  management  companies  will 
have  to  meet  the  enhanced  competency,  business  conduct,  and  capital  requirements  by 
August. Those with assets under management greater than S$250m will have to be licensed, 
while  those  below  this  threshold  may  operate  under  the  “Registered  Fund  Management 
Company’ regime, which will replace the existing “Exempt Fund Manager” regime. 
I will now touch on the performance and development of Singapore as a financial centre. 
Financial centre: well-positioned for growth 
Singapore financial sector activity subdued in weak global environment, but 
longer-term prospects remain bright 
Singapore’s financial sector contracted on a sequential basis for two consecutive quarters in 
Q4  2011  and  Q1  2012,  amidst  heightened  risk  aversion  in  global  financial  markets.  We 
expect  financial  services  activity  to  remain  subdued  given  uncertainty  and  weakness  in  the 
global  economic  environment.  Activities  such  as  trading  –  which  are  very  sensitive  to 
sentiment – bore the brunt of adjustment. But other activities – tied to Asian demand – have 
remained resilient. They are well-positioned for growth. Asia’s demand for financial services 
will continue to be driven by rapid urbanisation, the demographics of a growing middle-class, 
and the rise of regional multinational companies in need of funding. Let me highlight a few of 
these growth areas. 
First, asset management. As at end-2011, total assets managed by Singapore-based asset 
managers  amounted  to  S$1.34  trillion.  This  is  a  slight  dip  of  1.2%  from  2010,  but  not  bad, 
considering the weak performance of global equity market and the volatile financial markets 
in  general.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  a  more  diversified  base  of  asset  managers  offering  a 
greater  variety  of  investment  strategies.  The  number  of  investment  professionals  increased 
by 15% last year. And we continue to see strong interest from global fund houses seeking to 
set up or expand their Asian presence. 26 of top 30 global asset managers in the world have 
a presence in Singapore 
Second, the corporate debt market. The outstanding stock of corporate debt  – in Singapore 
Dollars  and  non-Singapore  Dollars  –  increased  by  9%  year-on-year  to  S$203  billion  as  at 
end 2011. And despite a more difficult market environment, Singapore Dollar bond issuance 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5 
remained robust last year, at S$25 billion, compared to S$26 billion in 2010. Non-Singapore 
dollar bond issuance volume was also buoyant, growing 110% year-on-year.  
Third,  the  insurance  industry.  Non-life  insurance  gross  premiums  recorded  growth  of 
14.5% in  2011.  Almost  60%  of  total  non-life  gross  premiums  written  in  2011  were  sourced 
offshore, demonstrating Singapore’s role as an international insurance centre.  
Fourth, the Asian Dollar Market. This is the pillar of the Singapore financial sector. Banks in 
Singapore  draw  in  foreign  currency  deposits  globally,  and  deploy  these  funds  to  serve  the 
financing  and  treasury  needs  of  individuals,  corporations  and  institutions  in  Singapore  and 
beyond.  Offshore  lending  expanded  last  year,  with  non-bank  loans  growing  by  17%.  The 
healthy growth has continued into the first quarter of this year, buoyed by regional demand. 
MAS  will  continue  to  foster  sustained  growth  in  our  financial  sector,  underpinned  by  a 
conducive ecosystem and a sound regulatory framework.  
Conclusion 
Before I conclude, a word on MAS’ accounts.  
MAS made foreign investment gains of S$12.1 billion but recorded an overall profit of 
S$2.8 billion in Singapore dollar terms due to a strong exchange rate 
Excluding  exchange  rate  effects,  MAS  achieved  net  foreign  investment  gains  totalling 
S$12.1 billion  during  the  financial  year  (FY)  ended  March  2012,  roughly  similar  to  the 
previous  FY.  However,  in  Singapore  Dollar  terms,  this  translated  to  a  net  profit  of 
S$2.8 billion. 
Let me sum up. The global economy is slowing, and financial markets remain vulnerable to 
renewed stresses. MAS is keeping a close watch. The situation in the Eurozone remains the 
most  significant  risk  to  global  financial  stability.  MAS  is  monitoring  the  various  channels  of 
spillover  to  Singapore.  Bringing  down  inflation  remains  one  of  MAS’  top  priorities.  Core 
inflation is likely to moderate to close to our historical average by the end of year. Headline 
inflation  will  also  moderate  but  remain  elevated  due  to  high 
imputed  rentals  on 
owner-occupied  homes  and  COE  prices.  MAS  will  continue  to  ensure  that  our  financial 
markets  function  smoothly  and  that  investors  maintain  a  high  level  of  confidence  in  our 
financial system.  
I  will  now  be  happy  to  take  questions,  together  with  my  two  deputy  managing  directors, 
Chong Tee and Swee Lian.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches 
