Barry Whiteside: Development of credit and debit card payments in Fiji 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of China 
Unionpay Cards, being accepted at Bank South Pacific ATMs, Suva, 17 September 2012. 
 Salutations  
Mr Cai Jianbo (First Executive Vice President China UnionPay)  
Mr Kevin McCarthy (Bank South Pacific Country Head for Fiji)  
Representatives of the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China  
Representatives of the credit issuing banks and China UnionPay  
Distinguished guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Introduction  
Bula vinaka and Ni How  
It is an honour for me to be here today at the launch of the business partnership between 
China  UnionPay  and  Bank  South  Pacific.  In  Fiji,  we  are  always  pleased  to  see  the 
strengthening  of  collaboration,  partnerships  and  business  opportunities  with  countries  that 
are aligned to our objectives and will help us grow as a nation.  
It is also a pleasure to welcome all our distinguished guests from the People’s Republic of 
China. You may be a long way from home, but please take the time to experience our world 
renowned Fijian hospitality.  
China UnionPay Cards  
I understand that our Prime Minister launched the UnionPay products in Fiji on 20 September 
2010, almost two years ago to the day. At that time the China UnionPay cards were accepted 
by a few merchants in the country. That official launch in 2010 enabled local merchants and 
businesses to be aware of this particular brand. With greater acceptance over time, this is 
vital for the development of the Chinese tourist market.  
Today’s  announcement  of  the  ability  of  BSP  ATMs  to  accept  China  UnionPay  credit  and 
debit  cards  is  a  milestone  achievement.  This  will  now  allow  China  UnionPay’s  3.1  billion 
cardholders  the  ability  to  conduct  financial  transactions  at  any  of  BSP’s  100  ATMs  or 
1,000 EFTPOS terminals when they are visiting Fiji.  
This milestone, with the added convenience of direct flights between Hong Kong and Fiji and 
the Visa on Arrival policy for Chinese visitors to Fiji, will add to the attractiveness of Fiji as a 
popular tourist destination for inbound Chinese travellers.  
China  UnionPay,  together  with  BSP,  will  be  able  to  offer  Chinese  tourists,  as  well  as 
UnionPay  card  cardholders  from  other  countries,  a  better  way  to  facilitate  their  financial 
transactions while they are in Fiji.  
We have noted a large increase in tourist arrivals from China recently. In 2009, the number 
of tourist arrivals from China at 4,087 was just 0.8 percent of total arrivals. In 2010, the figure 
rose to 18,147 or 2.9 percent and further increased to 24,389 or 3.6 percent in 2011. The 
latest figure for January to March 2012 is 5.2 percent. With the increasing trend in arrivals 
from China, we know that such an alliance will be beneficial to China UnionPay and BSP.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Card policy  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  issued  a  press  release  on  Thursday  last  week 
upholding the “no surcharge rule” for credit and debit card payments in Fiji. This extends to 
all merchants and all cards used in Fiji and will be effective from 1 November 2012, allowing 
a necessary transition period for banks to roll out awareness and merchants to review their 
existing practices and procedures.  
The  “no  surcharge  rule”  is  already  in  place  as  stipulated  by  major  credit  card  providers  in 
agreements with banks and contained in agreements between banks and merchants. I hope 
that  this  announcement  will  make  shopping  in  Fiji  more  transparent,  convenient  and 
attractive for our visitors from China. So whether you pay by cash or credit card, the price is 
the same.  
We  look  forward  to  compliance  by  the  commercial  banks  and  merchants  in  the 
implementation of this policy.  
The Fijian economy  
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  Fijian  economy.  Based  on 
economic activity for the first six months of 2012, overall performance has been on track and 
the projected growth of 2.7 percent for the year remains intact. However, we still need to be 
mindful of developments in the global economy and any likely impact on our trading partners.  
Inflation in Fiji was 4.0 percent in July. This is lower than the inflation rates in the previous 
months. The decline is due to lower commodity prices and current benign domestic driven 
inflationary  pressures.  As  a  result,  we  still  expect  the  year  end  inflation  to  be  around 
3.5 percent.  
The  level  of  foreign  reserves  is  currently  just  under  $1.6  billion  or  adequate  to  cover 
5 months of retained imports of goods and non factor services.  
We  are  currently  reviewing  economic  data  and  the  next  official  update  on  the  economic 
variables will be during the 2013 National Budget announcement.  
Conclusion  
In  conclusion,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Chinese  Government  for  its  continuing 
goodwill and  willingness to engage in closer economic ties with Fiji. I also extend my best 
wishes  towards  this  partnership  between  China  UnionPay  and  Bank  South  Pacific.  This 
alliance  is  an  excellent  business  and  investment  opportunity  for  both  countries  and 
institutions.  
I wish you both the very best in your future endeavours.  
Vinaka vaka levu 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
