Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Recent challenges and the way forward 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 22 March 2012. 
 Good evening, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to speak again at 
this special annual event. Each of these years has brought us yet more economic surprises 
and  challenges.  In  2010,  the  world  economy  grew  surprisingly  fast  and  the  Thai  economy 
promptly rode on the wave of global recovery. Then last year, the European sovereign debt 
problem erupted and depressed the global economic environment, while at home both of our 
economies  were  badly  hit  by  devastating  natural  disasters  that  took  a  heavy  human  and 
economic toll. 
In Thailand, the damage from the floods was indeed severe. Output loss was estimated 
to  be  around  3.2  percent  of  GDP  and  economic  activity  contracted  sharply  by  9  percent 
year-on-year in the last quarter of 2011. Manufacturing and agricultural outputs as well as 
exports were severely dented. The automobile industry, which was just recovering from the 
supply chain disruptions following the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, was hit especially 
hard. 
But as you are well aware, shocks from natural disasters are temporary in nature. They 
tend to be followed by rapid resumption of economic activity as things get back on track, as 
was  the  case  with  Japan  in  the  aftermath  of  the  earthquake.  From  a  medium  term 
perspective,  therefore,  such  events  cause  less  economic  dislocation  than  disruptions  that 
reflect inherent structural weaknesses in the economy. Even temporary shocks, however, do 
often expose deeper shortcomings if they are sizeable enough. In Thailand’s case, water 
management  and  crisis  response  systems  have  been  shown  to  be  inadequate.  The 
government has rightly given high priority in addressing these gaps over the medium 
term. 
But  in  the  immediate  future,  there  is  no  question  that  Thailand  will  rebound  quickly 
and  strongly  from  the  recent  setback  caused  by  the  floods.  I  also  believe  that  the 
country’s  underlying  economic  strengths  will  continue  to  support  dynamic  growth  going 
forward and allow our economy to weather the global economic headwinds. In my remarks 
this  evening,  I  would  like  to  first  highlight  Thailand’s  fundamental  strengths  that 
underpin this positive outlook.  Then  I  will  move  on  to  discuss  the role of the Bank of 
Thailand  (BOT) 
in  further  strengthening  economic  resiliency  and  enhancing 
competitiveness.  
Before I delve into the key themes of my talk today, let me briefly touch upon the challenges 
that  we  are  now  facing  on  the  external  front.  With  the  ever  closer  integration  of  global 
markets for goods, services, and finance, it becomes harder to separate domestic economic 
prospects  from  the  international  context.  This  backdrop  is  presently  quite  challenging. 
Continuing strains in the Euro area and fragilities in major advanced economies elsewhere 
make  for  a  highly  uncertain  global  economy.  Without  bold  actions,  economic  as  well  as 
political  ones,  the  potential  for  Europe  to  be  swept  into  a  downward  spiral  of  collapsing 
confidence and stagnant growth looms large. This grim possibility will remain a drag on the 
global  economic  backdrop  and  hence  a  key  risk  factor  for  the  Thai  economy  in  the 
foreseeable future.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While the potential impact on Thailand through financial channel appears limited due 
to  low  direct  exposure  of  the  Thai  financial  institutions  to  the  European  financial 
system,  the  impact  through  trade  could  be  significant.  This  reflects  Thailand’s  strong 
trade tie with Europe, which accounts for around 10 percent of our total exports. Fortunately, 
any  such  slowdown  in  Thai  exports  can  be  cushioned  to  some  degree.  A  key  reason  is 
Thailand’s  shift  towards  more  intra-regional  trade  within  Asia,  as  well  as  our  success  in 
diversifying into alternative export markets more generally. 
Against this backdrop of continuing headwinds from abroad, I believe that Thailand is poised 
for a sustained upward growth trend. Despite the floods, our long-term growth trajectory 
remains intact. We project that economic growth will rebound to 5.7 percent in 2012 driven 
mainly  by  strong  domestic  demand.  Fiscal  spending  through  flood-relief  and  stimulus 
measures  will  play  a  supportive  role.  The  latest  economic  data  show  private  consumption 
already recovering swiftly. Business confidence has also rebounded strongly and investment 
is projected to regain a firm footing by the third quarter of this year. The economy is expected 
to gather momentum and return to its potential from the second half of this year onwards. 
This positive outlook is attributable to a number of key fundamental strengths in the 
Thai  economy.  First,  corporate  sector  balance  sheets  remain  healthy,  thanks  to  robust 
savings  and  profitability.  Net  profit  of  Thai  listed  firms  in  2011  was  forecasted  to  continue 
rising strongly despite damages inflicted by the floods. This will enable firms to rebuild and 
invest.  Second,  our  banking  sector  is  sound  with  a  strong  capital  base.  This  reflects 
sustained  profitability,  good  risk  management  and  rigorous  supervision.  Latest  information 
from our loan officer survey indicates banks’ continued willingness to lend. This will greatly 
facilitate a quick recovery in economic activity.  
Third,  Thailand’s  human  resources  and  know-how  provides  a  solid  foundation  for 
businesses  to  flourish  and  expand.  A  strong  human  capital  base  constitutes  one  of 
Thailand’s  main  comparative  advantages.  And  this  remains  fully  intact.  Finally,  a  key 
element of the nation’s fundamental strengths that I would like to underscore is Thailand’s 
geographic advantage to benefit from the promising growth in Asia. The rise of China and the 
ASEAN  Economic  Community  or  AEC  provide  enormous  opportunities  for  businesses 
operating  in  Thailand  to  expand  and  prosper  as  the  regional  markets  and  productions 
become more integrated. The complex supply network and infrastructure that have long been 
established in Thailand, especially in the automotive and electronics industries, serves as a 
unique platform for international investors to obtain a critical foothold in the region.  
I  believe  that  these  existing  solid  fundamentals  that  I  have  just  outlined  will  help  Thailand 
emerge  strongly  from  the  economic  setback  we  recently  experienced.  However,  in  a 
constantly shifting global landscape, we policymakers cannot be complacent with the status 
quo. A lot remains to be done to guarantee the continued strength of our economy.  
international 
The  key 
competitiveness. This will not only enable Thailand to reap the full benefits of the emerging 
trend  of  regional  integration,  but  also  ensure  sustainable  growth  in  the  long  run. 
Considerable adjustment and transformation of our economy will be required. Bottlenecks to 
businesses  due  to  structural  rigidities  will  need  to  be  removed.  Factors  of  production  will 
have to be upgraded and reallocated to activities that offer the most promising way forward. 
Government policies and laws will have to be updated and changed to best facilitate such 
structural adjustments, all the while making sure that the burden of adjustment on those who 
stand  to  lose  is  bearable.  As  should  be  apparent,  these  challenges  cannot  possibly  be 
completely met in the short-term and will require long-term commitment from both the 
public and private sectors. 
The  BOT’s  role  in  meeting  these  challenges  is,  first  and  foremost,  to  deliver  on  our 
mandate of ensuring macroeconomic stability. A stable macroeconomic environment will 
not  only  foster  business-friendly  climate  and  make  the  process  of  structural  adjustment 
easier,  but  it  is  also  a  key  prerequisite  for  long-term  sustainable  growth.  In  this  regard,  I 
impetus  falls  on  structural  reforms  that 
lift  Thailand’s 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
believe  that  our  Flexible  Inflation  Targeting  framework  will  continue  to  serve  us  well. 
This conclusion is based not solely on Thailand’s favorable experience with the framework, 
but  also  echoes  the  experiences  of  many  other  central  banks  around  the  world. 
Supplementing  this  framework  with  macroprudential  measures  should  help  to  further 
strengthen our ability to deliver long-term economic and financial stability. 
While the current monetary framework gives priority to inflation, the BOT gives a balanced 
consideration  to  economic  growth  and  financial  stability  as  well.  In  the  face  of  severe 
disruption to economic activity from the floods, elevated risks and uncertainties from 
the  global  economy,  and  moderating  inflationary  pressure,  monetary  policy  has 
recently shifted toward addressing risks to economic growth. This is reflected in the two 
consecutive reductions in the policy rate in the last two meetings before yesterday. These 
actions have helped to shore up confidence and accelerate the return of economic activity to 
normal levels.  
At this juncture, upside risks to inflation have begun to increase. Externally, geopolitical 
problems in the Middle East have pushed global oil prices up strongly. Domestically, post-
flood  pickup  in  public  and  private  spending  is  adding  to  demand  pressure.  In  addition, 
various  government  measures,  including  the  reduction  in  the  oil  subsidy  and  a  hike  in  the 
minimum  wage,  may  also  boost prices  in  the  short  term.  As I understand, the minimum 
wage  increase  is  one  of  the  chief  concerns  for  many  of  you  here.  We  very  much 
recognize the potential risks involved and our utmost priority is to limit harmful second-round 
effects of this shock. In doing so, this should help to limit the impact on businesses. 
Apart  from  serving  as  an  anchor  for  macroeconomic  stability,  the  BOT  can  also  work  to 
promote Thailand’s competitiveness and adaptability. We will continue to pay particular 
attention to policies that facilitate businesses in adjusting to a competitive environment. For 
example, the BOT is formulating a Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan to enable more 
flexibility  in  managing  cross-border  investments  and  to  achieve  greater  balance  of  capital 
flows. Foreign exchange regulations would also be streamlined to help reduce the cost for 
the private sector in cross-border transactions as well as to deepen and broaden domestic 
financial markets. 
More directly, the BOT can strive to enhance the effectiveness of the financial sector in 
serving  as  an  efficient  intermediary  that  is  able  to  meet  private  sector  demands  at 
reasonable  costs.  Improvements  can  be  achieved  in  four  dimensions.  First,  encourage 
financial innovation and the expansion of available financial instruments. Second, broaden 
the choice available to firms and households in terms of financial services. Third, reduce the 
cost of these financial services. And lastly, improve access to them. The second Financial 
Master  Plan  is  an  example  of  BOT’s  efforts  aimed  at  pushing  the  financial  sector  in  this 
direction. 
To conclude, I wish to reiterate that with its solid economic foundations, Thailand is poised 
for a strong recovery and is well-positioned to benefit from the rise of Asia. The BOT 
strives  to  be  an  active  player  in  the  broader  push  by  the  public  sector  to  upgrade  our 
economy’s  potential.  Most  immediate  is  to  make  sure  that  we  deliver  on  our  mandate  of 
macroeconomic and financial stability. At the same time, the BOT aims to undertake steps, 
or act as a catalyst for the necessary changes, that will serve to achieve a more competitive 
Thai economy.  
Let me close my remarks tonight by thanking the Japanese Chamber of Commerce and the 
Japanese  business  community  in  Thailand  for  your  commitment  to  our  country.  We  have 
been inspired by how you have dealt with the daunting adversity caused by the earthquake in 
your country. And we have been deeply touched by your support and steadfastness as we 
recover  from  the  floods.  I  hope  that  the  long  history  of  friendship  and  strong  business  tie 
between Japan and Thailand will blossom further into the future for the mutual benefit of both 
our nations.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
