Gane Simbe: The role coins play in the Solomon Islands’ payment 
system 
Speech by Mr Gane Simbe, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at the 
launching of the Solomon Islands new coins, Honiara, 4 July 2012. 
 [I have a message for you in my speech this afternoon. And the message is this: “Coins are 
important for proper pricing of your goods and services and therefore you must actively use 
the  coins  in  your  daily  transactions  and  not  to  store  coins  away  in  wooden  boxes!  Using 
coins as medium of exchange will bring much benefit to you and help our economy grow”.]  
The honourable Prime Minister Mr Lilo; members of Diplomatic Corps who are present with 
us  this  afternoon,  CEO  of  Royal  Australian  Mint,  Mr  MacDiarmid,  distinguish  guests,  the 
good people of Solomon Islands now listening, Ladies and gentlemen.  
Good afternoon to you all and thanking for being part of our celebration this afternoon.  
First let me on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands and 
the Governor, thank the Honourable Prime Minister who has allocated his time from his busy 
schedules  to  come  and  officially  launch  the  new  coins,  as  the  legal  tender  coins  for  our 
vibrant country, the Solomon Islands.  
And  I  am  pleased  that  our  Prime  Minister  is  given  this  honour  to  launch  the  new  coins, 
because the decision that Solomon Islands should have its own currency as one of the key 
symbols of an independent State of Solomon Islands, was a major political decision made by 
our  political  leaders  in  early  1970s  (the  alternative  was  whether  to  continue  use  the 
Australian dollar as the currency for the Independent State of Solomon Islands).  
Looking back at the historical journey of our country, the decision to issue our own currency 
in  my  personal  opinion  was  a  correct  decision.  Our  currency  remains  a  symbol  for  our 
independent State and having our own currency has contributed to the management of our 
economy,  especially  in  terms  of  balance  of  payment  management  in  times  of  economic 
stresses.  
These new coins I am sure will continue to play their roles in the daily trading activities in 
Solomon Islands for many years ahead of us, so long as we choose to continue to live the 
dreams of our pioneering political leaders to have one country, one people, one nation, one 
national budget and one currency to symbolize our independence.  
Secondly, I thank the CEO of the Royal Australian Mint, Mr MacDiarmid for his kind words. 
As the Chairman of the Currency Steering Committee, I appreciate the relationship that we 
have developed with Royal Australian Mint, in this project. Particularly for the Mint to avail of 
its three officers, Technical Director Dr Parbir De Ms Kay Chee and Mr Nigel Priest to work 
with  my  Committee  on  this  currency  reform  agenda.  Thank  you  Mr  MacDiarmid  and  your 
officers the support.  
At the same time I would also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the contribution of 
Mr  Daniel  Haridi,  Chief  Manager  of  the  Currency  and  Banking  Operations  who  is  also  the 
secretariat  to  the  Committee  and  our  link  with  the  Royal  Australian  Mint.  Without  his 
commitment, we might miss the targeted outcome for this project. Time does not permit me 
to thank all members of my Committee individually and to those that contributed in different 
ways towards this project. But I on behalf of the Board of Directors and the Governor, wish to 
thank you all for your valuable contributions towards the completion of this project.  
When the Committee started 2 years ago we targeted the 7th July 2012 as the date when 
these new coins are to be launched. It appears that we are ahead of the scheduled date by 
3 days and as of today the new coins are available at all of the commercial bank branches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  agencies  through  the  Solomon  Islands.  Congratulations  to  you  all  who  provided  the 
logistical support to achieve this outcome!  
Thirdly, let me repeat the message I made at my opening remark. This same message I note 
is again highlighted in the Prime Minister’s speech, this afternoon.  
And the message is this: “Coins are important for proper pricing of your goods and services 
and therefore you must actively use the coins in your daily transactions and not to hide coins 
away in wooden boxes!” Storing coins in containers and not circulating them does not add 
value  to  you  or  the  economy.  If  we  want  to  use  the  coins  as  savings,  then  it  is  more 
beneficial  to  deposit  your  coins  in  a  financial  institution  to  grow  your  savings  than  locking 
them up in wooden boxes.  
I say this, because the cost of minting coins is expensive for the government. However since 
coins have a critical role in pricing of our goods and services and facilitate economic growth 
through trading coins must be made available to the economy.  
Let me remind you that the basic unit of our currency is the one dollar. One dollar is made up 
of  100  cents  and  prices  can  fall  as  fraction  of  the  one  dollar.  For  example  if  we  have  no 
smaller coins, the prices of goods or services will start from one dollar and will increase by 
the  multiples  of  one  dollar.  To  void  this  possibility  of  unfair  pricing,  coins  are  issued  at 
different face value to help with pricing of goods and services. A 10 cent represents 10% of 
the one dollar, 20 cents 20% of one dollar, and a 50 cent represents 50% of one dollar. In 
other words prices can fall as proportion of one dollar and we required coins to set the level 
of prices and receive correct change when we buy goods and services.  
My message to all of you therefore is simple. Our new coins are meant to serve the Solomon 
Island  economy  for  the  next  30  years.  To  ensure  that  these  coins  play  their  role  in  the 
smooth operation of our pricing and payment system you must circulate the coins.  
The new coins have added benefits that you the people have told us to incorporate in the 
new coins. They are smaller in sizes and much lighter weight. And I am sure the new coins 
will not put holes your pockets when you carry them to make payments. I therefore invite you 
all to use the new coins when making small payments.  
Finally, Honourable Prime Minister and the good people of Solomon Islands, may I on behalf 
of  the  Board  of  Directors,  the  Governors,  the  Management  and  Staff  of  Central  Bank, 
congratulate the Government and people of Solomon Islands on achieving and celebrating 
34th year of our country’s Independence.  
Congratulation!  May  God  bless  Solomon  Islands  and  long  live  its  currency,  the  Solomon 
Islands dollar. Thank you all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
