Ebson Uanguta: The impact of the euro area debt crisis on southern 
Africa 
Welcoming  and  opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ebson  Uanguta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Namibia, for the CCBG Macroeconomic Subcommittee, Windhoek, 10 July 2012. 
 On behalf of the Bank of Namibia, I wish to welcome you to Namibia and to this meeting in 
particular.  I  hope  that  you  find  the  arrangements  up  to  your  expectations.  Please,  do  not 
hesitate to approach us for any assistance. It is indeed, a pleasure for us to host you and 
please feel home away from home.  
The  Macroeconomic  Convergence  Subcommittee  is  an  important  organ  of  the  CCBG  and 
SADC  in  general.  It  is  tasked  with  the  responsibility  to  interrogate  and  deliberate  on 
macroeconomic issues in support of the integration process. As the region moves towards 
deeper economic integration, it is obvious that the role of this committee will even become 
more important in advising the Governors on various macroeconomic issues and advancing 
the integration agenda.  
This meeting is taking place at a time when the global economy is facing renewed weakening 
and heightened uncertainty. In particular, the U.S economy continues to recover at a slow 
pace, while worries about the euro area debt crisis and uncertainty over domestic fiscal plans 
are  creating  a  challenging  environment  for  the  world’s  largest  economy.  A  key  factor 
contributing  to  recent  weak  global  economic  performance  is  the  sovereign  debt  crisis 
affecting the Euro Area. Indeed, there cannot be any doubt that the Eurozone financial crisis 
poses a deep risk for the global economy. On-going tensions in some Euro Area sovereign 
debt markets and their impact on credit conditions, the process of balance sheet adjustment 
in  the  financial  and  non-financial  sectors  and  high  unemployment  rates  are  expected  to 
weigh  on  the  underlying  growth  momentum.  Clearly,  it  is  of  urgency  now  that  European 
countries take all the necessary measures to restore confidence so as to contain and lessen 
the impact of the crisis on the rest of the world. With economic activities in emerging market 
economies  having  also  slowed  in  the  last  3  months,  the  global  economy  is  indeed  facing 
challenging times.  
The recent performance of the World economy, and the uncertainties generated by the euro 
crisis,  has  revealed  the  vulnerability  of  our  region  to  external  shocks.  This  is  mainly  on 
account of the openness and trade linkages of SADC economies with the rest of the world. 
Therefore, SADC countries need to do more to trade with one another as a way to minimise 
this exposure.  
In  terms  of  the  developments  in  the  euro  zone,  fundamental  weaknesses  of  a  monetary 
union have been exposed and demonstrate that it needs to be undertaken cautiously. In this 
context, it is important to think about the challenges facing the European monetary union to 
infer and apply some of the lessons to our own situation in SADC in view of the proposal to 
establish a monetary union. A key lesson learned from the EU is that a properly functioning 
monetary  union  requires  more  than  ex  ante  macroeconomic  convergence  and  other 
conditions postulated in the theory of optimal currency area.  
The experiences from Greece, Ireland and Portugal demonstrate that when macroeconomic 
imbalances  arise  in  a  monetary  union,  it  is  inevitable  that  fiscal  policy  adjustments  be 
implemented.  Thus,  a  full  monetary  union  requires  Member  States  to  surrender  both 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  space  to  supranational  institutions.  These  lessons  present  a 
challenge for policy makers in SADC to re-think the practicality of a monetary union for the 
region. Key question to be asked include whether the respective SADC countries are ready 
to  forego  autonomous  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  for  macroeconomic  management  and 
adjustment. We need to know if the members will be prepared for a regional fiscal authority. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
These  and  other  related  questions  ought  to  be  deliberated  and  the  Macroeconomic 
Sub-Committee  is  therefore,  expected  to  play  a  critical  role  in  this  respect  and  make 
recommendations for consideration by the Governors.  
I  am glad  to  note  that the  committee  will  be  discussing  a  paper  titled “Fiscal  sustainability 
– Lessons from the EU for SADC”. I hope that this discussion  will shed  more light on this 
topic and make proposals on the way forward on integration in SADC.  
I  am  informed  that  this  meeting  will  also  review  progress  being  made  on  macroeconomic 
performance and convergence of the SADC economies. I am happy to note the substantial 
progress  was  made towards  achieving  macroeconomic  convergence  targets.  For  instance, 
10  SADC  countries  averaged  single  digit  inflation  in  2011  and  there  have  been  significant 
improvements in the current accounts, budget deficit and public debt since the launch of the 
RISDP  in  2004.  However,  a  lot  still  remains  to  be  done,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
development  of  a  good  accountability  framework  to  enforce  the  targets  that  we  have  set 
ourselves as SADC. It is my hope that the Peer Review Panel will become functional soon so 
that the peer review process could commence in earnest.  
Last but not least, I hope that you will also make time to see a bit of our beautiful City and 
spend as much as possible some of your dollars before you go back.  
I wish you a productive and insightful meeting and thank you for your attention!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
