Ravi Menon: The next phase in Islamic finance 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  3rd  Annual  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference:  Asia  Summit  (WIBC 
Asia 2011), Singapore, 5 June 2012. 
 Dr Ahmad Mohamed Ali Al-Madani, President, Islamic Development Bank,  
Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
And to all our foreign guests, a warm welcome to Singapore. 
An increasingly difficult conjuncture 
We are meeting here for the 3rd Annual World Islamic Banking Conference Asia Summit, at 
a time of increasing stress in the global economy and financial system. 
• 
The  effects  of  monetary  stimulus,  which  had  helped  to  support  the  economy  and 
prevent a full-blown financial crisis, are now levelling off in both the Eurozone and 
the US. 
The labour market remains a significant drag on growth in the advanced economies. 
Unemployment has hit new highs in the Eurozone while employment and production 
numbers in the US are showing signs of weakness. 
The  story  of  a  two-speed  global  economy  is  coming  under  strain,  with  demand 
weakening  across  emerging  Asia.  The  moderation  in  China’s  economic  growth 
appears to be somewhat sharper than expected. India is undergoing an even more 
pronounced and broad-based slowdown. 
  But the key risk that has increased in recent months and poses the biggest threat to global 
economic prospects is the situation in Europe. 
• 
Greece  is  preparing  for  a  historic  election  that  may  well  decide  its  future  in  the 
Eurozone. 
Spain is experiencing severe strains in its banking system against a backdrop of a 
sharp reduction in GDP, high unemployment, and a deteriorating real estate sector. 
Italy  and  Spain  are  facing  higher  sovereign  borrowing  costs  that  threaten  fiscal 
sustainability. 
  To be fair, Eurozone governments have been taking extraordinary measures to help stabilise 
the situation, reduce fiscal deficits, and restore growth. But they have reached a turning point 
where bolder, decisive actions will be needed to reverse the tide. The next few weeks and 
months will be critical. 
Islamic finance: challenges to overcome 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  subject  of  our  conference.  Islamic  finance  has  shown  remarkable 
resilience during the last five years – perhaps the most challenging economic environment in 
the post-war era. The industry has grown by an estimated 20% annually in the last five years 
to reach US$1.3 trillion in total assets in 2011. Islamic banks have grown both in number and 
in scope. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But the sustained growth of Islamic finance is in no way guaranteed. For Islamic finance to 
continue thriving, the industry has to overcome a few key challenges. But in every challenge, 
there is also opportunity. Let me highlight three of them this morning. 
Islamic finance in the era of deleveraging 
The clear and present danger to all financial activity, including Islamic finance, is the risk of 
contagion  from  an  escalation  of  the  Eurozone  crisis.  Islamic  finance  is  closely  intertwined 
with underlying economic activity and will be affected by the impact of slower global growth. 
Contagion from the Eurozone has already curtailed economic growth and capital inflows to 
many emerging economies where Islamic finance has taken root. Potential spillovers from an 
escalation  of  the  Eurozone  crisis  could  lower  output  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa 
region  by  about  3¼  percent  relative  to  baseline,  the  largest  spillover  effect  for  any  region 
outside Europe. 
But Islamic finance has a window of opportunity in the current climate of deleveraging in the 
global financial system. With its strict prohibition on excessive leverage, Islamic finance has 
been spared the worst of the financial crisis. Islamic banks are well positioned to reach out to 
new customers who are in need of financing as many global institutions pull back on their 
lending due to the need to repair their balance sheets. 
Islamic finance should diversify into growth areas such as trade and infrastructure financing, 
where demand is still strong, especially in emerging economies. With a focus on supporting 
real productive activities, Islamic finance is naturally compatible with trade and infrastructure 
development.  Tapping  these  sectors  also  brings  about  greater  diversification  benefits, 
especially for Islamic institutions which have been hurt by their significant lending exposure 
to the real estate sector. 
Islamic finance and global regulatory reforms 
A second factor that Islamic finance will have to contend with is the ongoing global regulatory 
reforms.  The  scale  and  scope  of  these  reforms  are  probably  unmatched  in  recent  history. 
Islamic  financial  institutions  will  have  to  devote  considerable  resources  to  meet  the  new 
international standards.  
But there are certain inherent characteristics of Islamic finance that will stand it in good stead 
in the emerging regulatory environment. Take for example, banking, where the emphasis of 
regulatory reform is on more capital and more liquidity. Islamic banks have consistently held 
higher levels of capitalisation vis-à-vis conventional banks, by some 2.5 percentage points on 
aggregate,  according  to  research from  the World  Bank. Islamic  banks  also  start  off  with  a 
higher level of liquid assets compared to their conventional counterparts. 
Islamic finance is also well placed to meet the increased “return-to-basics” investor demand. 
Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  investors  have  become  more  averse  to  the  unknown 
risks embedded in complex financial instruments. Islamic finance, with its stronger emphasis 
on transparency, price certainty and risk-sharing, can benefit from this renewed demand for 
more basic investments, from Muslim and non-Muslim investors alike.  
Integrating Islamic finance with global finance 
The third, and perhaps most important, challenge that Islamic finance must overcome is its 
present fragmented state. Islamic finance currently suffers from low economies of scale. The 
overall size of Islamic assets is still less than 1% of the global financial system. Being smaller 
and  relatively  young,  Islamic  finance  currently  offers  fewer  product  choices  for  consumers 
and less comprehensive risk management options for institutions. Cross-border investment 
flows  are  also  constrained  by  differing  interpretations  of  permissible  transactions  under 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Shariah principles. The isolated pools of Islamic liquidity in each market restrict opportunities 
for more efficient allocation of capital across consumers, industries, and jurisdictions. 
Islamic finance must become more integrated with the global financial system. The industry 
must expand beyond its traditional markets to include a wider range of financial institutions, 
investors  and  consumers.  This  means  Islamic  finance  must  strike  roots  in  the  key 
international financial centres of the world. These centres can contribute to Islamic finance in 
several ways. 
First,  market  liquidity.  The  broad  and  deep  investor  pools  in  international  financial  centres 
offer  an  opportunity  to  channel  non-traditional  sources  of  funds  into  Islamic  finance.  In 
Singapore,  for  instance,  several  local  and  foreign  issuers  have  successfully  tapped  the 
capital markets using Islamic instruments. The demand comes from not just Singapore but a 
diverse  group  of  international  investors  across  Asia  and  Europe.  Many  of  them  are 
conventional investors, attracted by the credit quality and yields. 
Second,  capabilities  in  global  financial  markets.  Islamic  finance  should  leverage  on  the 
capabilities and strengths offered by conventional financial markets in international centres, 
to augment the range of Shariah-compliant products. Take for example the market for Real 
Estate Investment Trusts, or REITs. Singapore has grown over the past decade to become 
the  largest  REIT  market  in  Asia  outside  of  Japan.  Building  on  this  strength,  players  in 
Singapore  have  established  the  world’s  largest  Shariah-compliant  REIT,  which  draws  in 
conventional and Islamic investors around the world.  
Third,  opportunities for  interaction  and  collaboration.  As  Islamic finance gains  prominence, 
conventional financial institutions increasingly want to be involved to tap these opportunities. 
Financial  centres  like  Singapore  serve  as  intersecting  nodes  where  Islamic  financial 
institutions  collaborate  with  their  conventional  partners  to  jointly  grow  the  industry.  By 
applying  the  same  regulatory  framework  to  both  conventional  and  Islamic  financial 
institutions,  Singapore  aims  to  encourage  financial  institutions  here  to  grow  their  suite  of 
products and services for the Islamic finance industry. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
Islamic finance has come a long way. As it embarks on its next phase of growth, the industry 
must overcome the challenges posed by slower growth and global deleveraging, and build 
scale and reach critical mass. This requires financial institutions, regulators, and international 
standard setting agencies to work closely together. Forums like these are ideal platforms. 
I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
