Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thailand’s financial challenges in global capital 
markets 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thailand 
Focus 2012 “Positioning Thailand for the next growth phase”, Bangkok, 29 August 2012. 
 It’s an honor to speak before you today at the Thailand Focus conference. This morning you 
heard Finance Minister Kittiratt Na Ranong speak on Thailand’s competitiveness and fiscal 
policy.  Later  on  in  the  conference,  other  distinguished  speakers  will  discuss  Thailand’s 
investment  opportunities  in  greater  detail.  To  complement  the  picture,  I  will  speak  on 
monetary  policy  to  complete  your  views  on  the  investment  opportunities  and  prospects  of 
the  Thai  economy.  As  international  investors,  I  believe  you  need  to  have  a  firm 
understanding  of  the  country’s  policy  direction – something  that  is  sorely  needed  in  the 
current uncertain global economic environment. So  today I  will share with you my  thinking 
on  the  monetary  policy  options  going  forward  in  light  of  my assessment  of  the  global 
economy and the risks to the Thai economy. 
The organizer of this conference, President Charamporn, has kindly asked me to talk about 
“Financial Challenges in Global Capital Markets”. This is an especially relevant topic because, 
this  year, the  key  challenge for  Thailand is  the  challenge of  weathering the  financial 
and economic turmoil from the euro crisis. More than one year ago, I had the honor of 
giving a talk here. Some of you who were in attendance may recall that I labeled 2011 “the 
year of rebalancing”  for  monetary  policy.  Why  “rebalancing?”  Because  we  were  steadily 
raising interest  rates  toward normal  territory amid  global and  domestic economic  recovery. 
Well, that was one year ago. One year can be a long time, especially for financial markets. 
And, indeed, things have changed a great deal since then. We had the flood; and the euro 
crisis.  Interest  rate  hiking  was  put  on  hold  and  rebalancing  postponed  amid  post-flood 
recovery and reconstruction and especially amid global uncertainty due to the euro. Now we 
project global economic recovery to be weaker than believed since the financial crisis in 2008.  
So if  last  year was the  “year of rebalancing” what is  this  year? For monetary policy, this 
year  is  a  year  of  risk  and  reassessment. By  risk  I  refer  to  the  possibility  that  the  euro 
crisis may spread to Asia and Thailand. And by reassessment, I refer to how monetary policy 
must  reconsider  rebalancing  and  carefully  re-examine  all  the  options,  given  how  the 
balance of risks has significantly shifted toward growth and away from inflation. 
We  are  therefore  faced  with  three  key  questions.  First,  how  will  the  euro  crisis  play 
out? Second, can Thailand grow through the  euro crisis? And third, what should monetary 
policy do? 
Let me now turn to the first question. How will the euro crisis play out? In  my view, the 
short  answer  is  this.  The  euro  zone  will  mostly  likely  remain  intact  and  avoid  a  liquidity 
seizure similar to the one seen during the Lehman crisis. However, the euro zone will face a 
slow and difficult recovery. 
Let  me qualify my  view  by saying that the reality is  much more complicated. So let  me go 
quickly  over some salient details of the  euro crisis and  its  current  impact  on  Asia. A great 
deal  of  uncertainty, much  of  it  induced  by  lack  of  policy  clarity,  surrounds  the  euro  crisis. 
This is reflected by how global FX markets have been in turmoil as investors fled euro and 
Asian  emerging  markets  assets  for  safe  havens.  The  Thai  baht  was  not  spared  from  this 
turbulence  and  experienced  high  volatility  and  bouts  of  weakening  pressure.  However, 
investors eventually returned to emerging markets in Asia as yields in advanced economies 
moved lower and Asian fundamentals improved amid slowing inflation pressure. In Thailand, 
government bonds, in particular, have proven attractive. In fact, foreign participation in both 
bond and equity is now above pre-Lehman levels. However for equity, the rate of return was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
slow of late; net inflows were negative last year but are now slightly positive for the second 
half  of  this  year.  Amid  all  this  turbulence,  all  this  back-and-forth,  the  baht  fluctuated  in 
tandem, first depreciating in the first quarter of the year up until July and then  appreciating 
somewhat.  This  trend  was  punctuated  by  bouts  of  volatility  each  time euro policy faced 
implementation  difficulties once push comes to shove and member nations  have  to  make 
the difficult tradeoff between national interests and supra-national interests. 
But  back  to  the question of  how the  euro  crisis will  play  out. No  doubt  the  drama of 
policy  uncertainty  will  continue.  But  what  will  be  the  end-game?  Broadly  speaking,  we 
envision two scenarios: an extreme scenario and a baseline scenario. 
In  the  extreme  scenario,  prolonged  political  gridlock  over  policy leads  to  a  liquidity 
seizure.  Failure  to  ratify  the  fiscal  compact  results  in  handicapped liquidity  support  efforts 
on the part of the authorities and heightened market concerns. Rising risk premium leads to 
explosive debt dynamics, loss of market access and rollover difficulty, which in turn leads to 
even greater liquidity needs. With the cost of rescue mounting, internal country politics may 
further delay policy leading to a vicious cycle between rising rescue costs and policy inaction. 
There  are  signs  that  these  risks  are  very  real.  For  example,  last  month  in  late  July, 
Spanish bond  yields  recently  jumped  up  again  over  7  percent,  making  the  country’s  debt 
dynamics unstable.  There  has  also  been  upward  pressure  on  Italian  bonds.  The  ECB 
came  to  the  rescue  by  promising  to  “do  whatever  it  takes  to  preserve  the  euro  as  a 
stable  currency”. Markets stabilized and yields came down. The US stock market also picked 
up.  Nevertheless,  the  risk  that  yields  could  erupt  again  persists,  especially  if  concrete 
progress in implementing  policy  does  not  take  place.  In  the  event  of  a  liquidity  seizure, 
there  will  be considerable spillover into global financial markets. Trade will decline amid the 
credit crunch that will surely follow. Asia, Thailand included, will not be spared the turmoil. 
So that’s the extreme scenario. 
Now  let  me  go  over  the  baseline  scenario.  In  this  scenario,  piecemeal  policy 
averts  a systemic  crisis  and  leads  to  a  prolonged  recovery.  In  the  baseline  scenario, 
progress  in  implementing  policy  remains  bogged  down  by  internal  politics  but  makes 
sporadic  progress,  especially  once  the  possibility  of  a  systemic  crisis  becomes  all  too 
real.  This  scenario  is basically a continuation of the present state of affairs with which you 
are  all  familiar.  Global  capital  markets  are  in  flux.  And  global  trade  slows  down.  The 
recovery  process  is  long  and drawn  out  and  the  authorities  eventually  make  progress  on 
fiscal integration and banking union. 
So  which  scenario  will be  likely?  This is the big question  mark.  There  is considerable 
uncertainty due to the ups and downs of internal politics. But political imperative to maintain 
the  union  has  always  been  strong.  And  a  strong  union  needs  a  stable  common currency 
and economic growth. Once the crisis becomes imminent and threatens the union, authorities 
will have no choice but to take decisive action to avert a systemic crisis. 
So those are of my views of how the Euro crisis will play out. 
Let us move to the second question: can Thailand grow through the Euro crisis? Yes, 
long-term  sources  of  growth  remain  but  adjustment  pain  will  be  unavoidable.  In  a 
globalized world,  nobody  is  immune  from  the  euro  crisis.  In  fact,  there  are  already  signs 
that  Asian  exports,  Thailand’s  included,  are  slowing.  Amid  a  slowing  global  economy, 
this  drag  on growth is  unavoidable in the short-term. To grow out of the crisis and survive 
the  shocks from outside, Thailand must look within and unleash domestic engines of growth. 
Long-term investment  in  productive  infrastructure  is  one  key  engine  of  growth.  Another  is 
domestic structural change spurred by two drivers of change in the region. The first driver of 
change  is  growth  in  China  and  the  attendant  rise  of  the  Chinese  middle  class  and 
demand  for  a broader range of imported goods and services. Chinese exports will also grow 
in sophistication. The second driver of change is trade liberalization in the region – such as 
free trade agreements with China and India as well as the ASEAN Economic Community, or 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
AEC. AEC, in particular, goes beyond free trade and also has the potential to foster not only 
goods and  services  integration but  also  cross-border labor  and  investment flows.  Because 
of  the  sheer  size  of  these  markets  –  China,  India  and  AEC  –  the  regional  pattern  of 
production  will  change  considerably  to  cater  to  new  demands  while  leveraging  on  new 
comparative  advantages  and  supply  chain  synergies.  Uncompetitive  firms  have  to  either 
upgrade  themselves,  or  close  down  and  free  up  labor  resources  to  more  competitive 
firms.  This  reallocation  process  implies  that  the  country  makes  better  use  of  labor 
resources  and achieves  higher  productivity. Ongoing financial sector reform  will  also  build 
financial  sector  resiliency.  Thailand’s  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  now  in  its  second 
phase,  continues,  and  focuses  on  liberalization  through  increased  competition,  raising 
efficiency, and strengthening the financial infrastructure. Our research shows that the gains 
from  structural  change  can  be  considerable  although  adjustment  costs,  in  terms  of  the 
reallocation of labor and capital, will also be significant. 
Now  we  arrive  at  the  third  and  final  question.  Given  the  euro  crisis  and  Thailand’s 
prospects  for  growth,  what  should  monetary  policy  do?  The  dilemma  here  is  how  to 
bridge short-term stabilization  with  long-term  goals  of  structural  change. The  challenge for 
policy is to maintain an overall framework where the trend of increasing economic integration 
can  continue  while  containing  crises. Given  our  baseline  scenario  of  a prolonged  recovery 
without  a  liquidity  seizure  we  lean  towards  long-term  goals  –  for  example,  maintaining 
capital flow liberalization, financial sector liberalization and market-led exchange rates – but 
with a readiness for monetary stimulus should a clear need arise. Let me discuss the policy 
tools at our disposal and how they fit into our overall policy objectives. 
On  the interest rate, the  policy  rate  has  been on  hold  at  3.00 percent since  January  this 
year.  At  the  moment  we  view  it  as  supportive  of  growth  amid  global  risks  and  consistent 
with our inflation target. However, I must stress that the  interest rate is  poised to go either 
way  depending  on  developments  in  the  advanced  economies,  in  particular  the  euro  area 
and the impact on the overall Thai  economy. We  recently saw how the  impact of the euro 
crisis is spreading to Asia in the form of a broad-based slow-down in Thai exports. Incoming 
data  will  need  to  be  carefully  analyzed  to  determine  the  severity  of  the  impact  on  the 
overall Thai economy. 
On the exchange rate, we maintain a managed-float regime. The Thai baht has been quite 
volatile  of  late  amid  concerns  over  the  euro.  Nevertheless, it  remains  broadly  in  line  with 
economic  fundamentals  and  thus  is  market  determined.  The  exchange  rate  should  be 
managed  sparingly  and  only  in  unusual  circumstances of  market  dysfunction or  economic 
misalignment. By  allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  be  market  determined, it  can  serve as  an 
automatic  stabilizer  in  the  short-term  and  as  an  important  price  signal  and  catalyst  for 
structural  change  in  the  long-term – an  issue  I  touched  on  earlier  within  the  context  of 
unleashing domestic engines of growth. Nevertheless, should the euro crisis result in market 
dysfunction or  significant misalignment of the exchange rate, exchange rate intervention to 
stabilize markets or re-align exchange rates with fundamentals may be warranted. 
On  macroprudential  policy,  a 
the  Bank  of  Thailand’s 
mandate covers  both  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Macroprudential  policy  focuses  on 
financial stability.  Monetary  policy  focuses  primarily  on  price  stability.  Macroprudential and 
interest rate  instruments  therefore primarily  serve  different  objectives.  Prudential  measures 
constitute  the  first  line  of  defense  against  financial  imbalances  by  serving  as  “sand  in  the 
wheel”, so  as  to  dampen the financial cycle, weaken pro-cyclicality, and hence  reduce the 
propagation of financial shocks. The interest rate tool, in comparison, is too blunt. However, 
as the  last  line  of  defense,  monetary  policy  can  be  used  to  lean  against  the  winds  of 
excessive asset prices. The prudential measure we implemented some time ago – a loan-to- 
value limit of 90 percent for condominium purchases – is an example. The measure in itself 
is not  particularly  binding;  it  is  more  significant  as  a  pre-emptive  move  designed  to  signal 
policy  resolve  in  mitigating  possible  build-up of  real  estate  bubbles.  At  present, the  risk  of 
real  estate  bubbles  is  not  significant  but  should  capital  inflows  surge  again  amid  strong 
is  needed  as 
framework 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
domestic demand and credit growth in real estate, macro-prudential measures may need to 
be tightened. 
On capital flow liberalization, we  are  moving to liberalize capital outflows so as  to foster 
more balanced capital flows. This will help to balance fund flows and support exchange rate 
movements in line with economic fundamentals. In addition, with the rise of the AEC, cross-
border investment will facilitate regional competitiveness and realize supply-chain synergies. 
Lastly,  on financial  sector  liberalization,  ongoing  financial  sector  reform  will  also  build 
financial  sector  resiliency  to  shocks  from  within  and  without.  Thailand’s  financial  master 
plan,  now  in  its  second  phase,  continues, and  focuses  on  liberalization through  increased 
competition,  raising  efficiency, and  strengthening the  financial  infrastructure. We  also  view 
an  efficient financial sector  as  supportive of unleashing long-term engines  of  growth, such 
as structural change. 
Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
At  this  point, I  hope  we  have  concisely  and  clearly  laid  out  the  monetary policy  vision  for 
Thailand that can serve as a basis for your investment decisions, reassessment of the risks, 
and, ultimately, your continued partnership in the Thai economy amid these troubled times of 
global uncertainty. 
On that note, let me conclude my talk here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
