Mario Draghi: President’s address at the 14th ECB and its Watchers 
Conference 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the 14th ECB and 
its Watchers Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 15 June 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to take part in this fourteenth edition of the ECB watchers conference – 
and the first I am attending as President of the European Central Bank. 
As  you  are  all  aware,  the  ECB  has  the  crucial  role  of  providing  liquidity  to  sound  bank 
counterparties in return for adequate collateral. This is what we have  done throughout the 
crisis, faithful to our mandate of maintaining price stability over the medium term – and this is 
what we will continue to do. The Eurosystem will continue to supply liquidity to solvent banks 
where needed.  
In normal times, “adequate liquidity” may be defined as a volume of refinancing in line with 
the need for banks to meet the obligatory reserve requirements and the financing of other 
autonomous factors. 
In  times  of  increased  financial  instability,  “adequate  liquidity”  indicates  a  volume  of  central 
bank money that also counteracts a temporary inability of banks to refinance in the market, 
which could lead to systemic consequences for the banking sector as a whole. 
In  my  introductory  remarks  this  morning,  I  will  talk  in  a  little  more  detail  about  the  ECB’s 
monetary  policy.  I  will  also  discuss  Europe’s  agenda  for  growth  and  issues  relating  to  a 
longer-term vision of our economic and monetary union.  
Considerations on monetary policy  
1. 
Let me start with monetary policy.  
There are two features I would like to highlight. 
The  first  relates  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  three-year  long-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs) that we launched a few months ago.  
As you will recall, these operations were introduced in an environment where money market 
spreads had surged, liquidity had dried up and banks’ access to market-based funding had 
eroded rapidly.  
The uncertainty about market-based funding for banks – especially medium-term funding – 
was perhaps the most critical issue in that environment. It truly threatened to undermine bank 
lending and created pressures for a broad-based deleveraging.  
A resulting credit crunch would have severely aggravated the slowdown in economic activity, 
hurt employment and given rise to acute downside risks to price stability.  
We  must  always  remember  that  over  two  thirds  of  external  financing  of  firms  comes  from 
banks. This ratio is even higher for small and medium-sized enterprises, which account for 
about three quarters of corporate employment in the euro area.  
It is against this background that we decided to launch the three-year LTROs.  
Their objectives have been broadly met.  
The  April  bank  lending  survey  points  to  a  marked  decline  in  the  net  tightening  of  credit 
standards  and  a  general  improvement  in  banks’  funding  conditions.  This  evidence  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
supported  by  a  range  of  market  and  other  indicators.  Overall,  it  confirms  that  supply  side 
constraints on bank credit have been removed. This has been a very important result.  
The full supportive impact of the three-year LTROs needs time to unfold, so it is too early to 
draw firm conclusions about the behaviour of a single variable – namely, bank credit to the 
private economy – that is influenced by a multitude of factors. In the current environment of 
very weak credit demand and heightened risk aversion, a rebound in the volume of credit will 
be particularly slow. 
Yet  granular  balance  sheet  data  indicate  that  in  February  and  March,  banks  domiciled  in 
stressed constituencies could interrupt and partly reverse the sustained decline in loans over 
the previous months. Indeed, smaller banks in some of those countries could increase their 
supply of loans. 
Inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored  and  there  is  no  inflation  risk  in  any  euro  area 
country. Financial market-based inflation expectations over a ten-year horizon are consistent 
with our definition of medium-term price stability. And should risks to price stability emerge, 
the Eurosystem has sufficient tools at its disposal to absorb excess liquidity.  
The  second  point  I  would  like  to  highlight  as  a  way  of  understanding  the  ECB’s  current 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  heterogeneity.  The  situation  regarding  economic  growth  is 
quite different across the euro area.  
This is not the first time; we had clearly diverging cycles ten years ago. At that time, growth in 
Germany was very low and growth in other countries was buoyant. This is part of a normal 
degree  of  cyclical  heterogeneity  that  we  observe  in  very  large  continental  economies.  It  is 
very similar to what we observe in terms of cyclical heterogeneity within the United States.  
What is new in the current episode is the parallel fragmentation of financial markets. This first 
concerns the interbank market, which works almost exclusively on a national, collateralised 
and very short-term basis. It is also true for broader capital markets and private capital flows, 
where home bias is rising.  
The prime reason for the current home bias is general risk aversion. In addition, we are very 
attentive in monitoring whether regulatory initiatives – including anticipation of future liquidity 
ratios  –  or  initiatives  from  national  supervisors  are  affecting  this  market,  especially  across 
borders.  
We have partly responded to the fact of increased heterogeneity by allowing some national 
central banks to enlarge the collateral pool. This was essential to ensure sufficient outreach 
to  the  real  economy  in  their  constituencies  in  a  context  of  significant  heterogeneity.  They 
could accept more direct credit claims, particularly to support credit to the small and medium-
sized enterprises that are so important for investment and employment.  
This collateral enlargement was crucial for addressing a situation of liquidity abundance in 
some  countries  and  liquidity  scarcity  in  others.  The  enlargement  has  taken  place  with 
prudence and its risk management framework is overseen by the Governing Council.  
While the process will take time, the restoration of adequate credit flows and the renewed 
functioning of the interbank market remain our firm objectives.  
Europe’s growth agenda  
2. 
Let me now turn to the European growth agenda.  
Strengthening the growth potential of our economies is crucial.  
We have a whole range of pending reforms at the national level: the liberalisation of product 
markets; the removal of bureaucratic impediments to entrepreneurial activity; greater labour 
market flexibility, which facilitates the re-entry of the unemployed into the job market; and a 
growth-friendly composition of fiscal adjustment. Let me elaborate a little. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Product  market  regulations  can  be  streamlined  so  as  to  foster  competition,  particularly  in 
sheltered  professions  and  the  services  sector.  Extensive  administrative  reforms  should 
facilitate  the  start-up  of  new  firms.  Moreover,  judicial  systems  can  be  adjusted  so  as  to 
resolve and avoid court backlogs, which hamper the conduct of business activities. Once a 
critical  mass  for  such  reforms  is  achieved,  they  will  considerably  strengthen  economic 
dynamism, innovation and employment. 
These efforts should be complemented by active labour market policies, targeted at the low-
skilled,  the  elderly  and  young  unemployed  people.  This  would  facilitate  re-entry  into 
productive activities for those who typically face the most difficult starting position. It would 
also foster social cohesion despite the burden of economic adjustment facing our economies. 
Second,  important  reforms  are  pending  at  the  EU  level,  with  the  implementation  of  the 
Services Directive being a very important initiative to facilitate cross-border trade in services. 
By reducing the market power of producers, these reforms will put downward pressure on 
prices and upward pressure on productivity.  
Third, I believe that we should oversee national reforms to promote growth in a way that is a 
parallel to the way in which we oversee fiscal policies. Here we might draw inspiration from 
the  fiscal  compact  and  the  idea  of  avoiding  unsustainable  policies  in  the  first  place  and 
providing incentives for positive reform. In a single currency area, national reforms that affect 
growth  potential  and  competitiveness  are  just  as  important  as  fiscal  policies  because  they 
are equally essential for economic sustainability.  
Fourth, many items that are considered at the national level could be considered at the EU 
level.  For  example,  measures  to  foster  labour mobility  could  be  implemented,  inter  alia  by 
facilitating the cross-border portability of pension rights. European funds could be reallocated 
to areas most conducive to long-term growth and durable employment opportunities. And the 
capacity  of  the  European  Investment  Bank  to  finance  infrastructure  projects  could  be 
strengthened.  
As you can see, there is a long-standing agenda on growth. It is time to implement it with 
determination and confidence about its longer-term benefits.  
Collectively  we  can  compete  more  effectively  in  the  global  economy.  Collectively  we  can 
better  support  growth  and  job  creation.  And  collectively  we  can  preserve  our  common 
European values of fairness, social cohesion and social progress. 
3. 
Considerations regarding the longer-term vision for economic and monetary 
union 
Let me turn to the broader question about the evolution of the euro area towards a genuine 
economic union – one that is commensurate with our monetary union.  
As  you  know,  I  am  in  close  contact  with  Presidents  Herman  Van  Rompuy,  José-Manuel 
Barroso  and  Jean-Claude  Juncker  to  reflect  on  elements  of  a  longer-term  vision  for  our 
economic  and  monetary  union.  Ultimately,  such  a  vision  can  be  the  basis  for  a  process 
where objectives, progress, conditions and deadlines are specified; and where credibility is 
substantiated by action in the short run that is in line with long-term objectives.  
Since this is a joint effort and our work is still in progress, I cannot provide specifics about 
this matter as yet.  
But I can tell you that my reflections are founded on the central aim of securing stability and 
sustained prosperity for the euro area.  
Price  stability  will  remain  a  cornerstone  of  economic  and  monetary  union,  as  it  has  been 
since  the  beginning.  But  in  order  to  preserve  broader  economic  stability,  we  need 
strengthened foundations in the fields of financial, fiscal and structural policy-making.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  strengthened  foundations  should  secure  the  past  achievements  of  integration.  They 
should improve the management of the euro area economy. And they should bring economic 
and monetary union closer to the hearts and minds of Europe’s citizens, whose ownership of 
our collective project of integration has been shaken by the crisis.  
A key issue in this context is sovereignty.  
In  processes  of  economic  integration,  we  often  speak  about  giving  up  sovereignty.  Yet 
integration  is  far  from  being  equivalent  to  giving  up  sovereignty.  There  are  many  cases  in 
which integration implies a “sharing” or “pooling” of sovereignty. And there are some cases 
where integration actually leads to more sovereignty and at a higher level.  
For example, some smaller euro area countries actually regained sovereignty with the euro 
by regaining influence over monetary policy at a higher level.  
Something  similar  may  hold  for  countries  joining  the  EU,  when  they  can  participate  in  the 
shaping  of  the  single  market  rules  rather  than  having  to  adjust  to  them.  In  a  globalised 
economy, the dwindling of individual influence may actually be reversed through integration.  
Of course, this is only true if countries and their citizens are involved in joint decision-making. 
The  degree  of  participation  is  therefore  much  more  important  than  the  level  of  policy 
assignment to determine whether sovereignty is lost, shared or actually gained.  
In the case of Europe, more and more decisions have been elevated to a supranational level 
because they could only be taken efficiently and effectively by accounting for interlinkages 
and spillovers. But at some point, when supranational institutions and processes continually 
gain influence, the need for greater political legitimacy becomes more and more pressing.  
In  some  cases  therefore,  the  first  issue  to  consider  with  any  possible  further  transfer  of 
competencies would be the transfer of legitimacy through political accountability. If legitimacy 
is fully ensured at all levels, the policy assignment question can be answered on grounds of 
policy optimality.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
As  half  a  decade  of  crisis  has  forcefully  demonstrated,  macroeconomic  and  financial 
imbalances entail considerable challenges for the smooth functioning of our economic and 
monetary union.  
Despite these challenges, our monetary policy framework, which is firmly anchored in central 
bank independence and a clear focus on price stability, has provided a robust basis for the 
ECB to deliver on its mandate. By preserving an unambiguous commitment to price stability, 
the  ECB  has  made  its  best  contribution  to  mitigating  the  fallout  from  the  crisis.  This 
commitment will continue to guide our policy in the time to come.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
