H R Khan: Infrastructure financing in India – progress & prospects 
Address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Diamond 
Jubilee International Conference on Frontiers of Infrastructure Finance 2011, organized by 
the  Vinod  Gupta  School  of  Management  &  RCG  School  of  Infrastructure  Design  and 
Management, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 29 December 2011. 
 The speaker acknowledges the valuable contributions of Shri. Himanshu Joshi, Ms. Rakhe Balachandran, Shri. 
Prakash Baliga and Shri. Surajit Bose. 
Distinguished members of faculty and students. 
IIT,  Kharagpur  is  one  of  the  very  few  educational  institutes  of  India  which  has  a  strong 
linkage  to  our  struggle  for  Independence  and  our  vision  for  the  future  India.  The  Institute 
started its illustrious journey from Hijli Detention Camp where some of our freedom fighters 
were kept captive and had to make the supreme sacrifice for the freedom of our country. As 
Pandit Nehru, in his first convocation address in 1956, said “….here in the place of that Hijli 
Detention Camp stands this fine monument of India today representing India’s urges. India’s 
future  is  in  the  making  here.”  Today,  61  years  since  the  inception  of  this  Institute,  our 
struggle  for  freedom  from  a  colonial  empire  has  resulted  in  emergence  of  one  of  the 
strongest  democracies  of  the  world.  But  then  our  struggle  for  developing  our  country 
continues.  I  see  all  the  reasons  for  reposing  faith  in  all  the  bright  students  of  the  next 
generation of this Institute, young minds with shoulders to take responsibilities, for a greater 
role to play in shaping the future of this country. It is very important to understand and be 
passionate  about  the  structure  and  emerging  issues  on  the  growth  front  of  the  Indian 
economy. All of you must be aware that except for the estimated sub eight percent growth 
this year, our country is only next to China in achieving high economic growth rate over the 
last few years. However, that is not enough as still a large number of our populace live below 
the  poverty  line.  Thus, we  have  to  carry  forward  this  growth  performance  in  a  sustainable 
and  inclusive  way  to  reduce  poverty  levels  in  our  country.  This  also  assumes  further 
significance as EMEs like India and China will have to continue as the major contributors to 
the  global  growth,  especially  in  the  current  context  when  severe  slowdown  is  afflicting  the 
advanced countries. There are many structural factors on which we have to focus to achieve 
this objective. One important among them is no doubt the development of infrastructure. As 
such the theme of today’s conference “infrastructure financing” is a very topical one.  
The  relationship  between 
is  well 
infrastructure  development  and  economic  growth 
established  in  the  literature.  While  infrastructure  development  facilitates  economic  growth; 
economic growth increases demand for more infrastructure. Thus, development of adequate 
and  quality  infrastructure  is  a  necessary,  if  not  sufficient;  condition  to  maintain  growth 
momentum  in  any  economy.  So  it  is  beyond  anybody’s  doubt  that  India  being  a  country 
which has been going through a high growth phase, needs to ensure adequate investments 
in the development of infrastructure. However, infrastructure development is an arduous job 
for  any  country  as  it  involves  huge  investments,  long  gestation  periods,  procedural  delays 
and  returns  spread  over  a  long  period  of  time.  These  unique  features  of  infrastructure 
development raise some issues which are specific to the financing of infrastructure. My intent 
in today’s speech is to touch upon these issues in brief particularly from the point of view of 
Indian banking system and also present a perspective of Reserve Bank’s enabling regulatory 
measures.  
Investment in the infrastructure sector during the eleventh plan 
The  eleventh  five  year  plan  of  India  recognized  inadequate  infrastructure  as  a  major 
constraint  on  rapid  growth.  Recognizing  the  importance  of  infrastructure  development  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
stimulating economic growth, Government of India planned to raise infrastructure investment 
to over 8 per cent of GDP by the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007–12). The total 
revised estimated expenditure for investment in infrastructure during the eleventh five year 
plan is estimated at around Rs. 21 lakh crore.  
The  total  investment  in  infrastructure  is  estimated  to  have  increased  from  5.7  per  cent  of 
GDP in the base year (2006–07) of the Eleventh Plan to around 8.0 per cent in the last year 
of  the  Plan.  To  step  up  investment  in  the  infrastructure  sector,  apart  from  increasing 
budgetary allocation for the sector, the Government has been encouraging the private sector 
to participate and invest in the sector. Resultantly, during the past four years, a number of 
Public-Private  Partnerships  (PPP)  have  come  up  in  the  sector.  It  may  be  mentioned  that 
private investments accounted for about 36 per cent of total investment in infrastructure in 
the Eleventh Plan.  
Table 1:  
Revised projected investment on infrastructure 
(Rs. crore at 2006–07 prices) 
 Source: Mid-Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, Planning Commission. 
Projected investment in the infrastructure sector during the twelfth plan 
To  support  the  high  economic  growth,  the  investment  requirements  in  the  infrastructure 
sector is estimated to be around 41 lakh crore (revised to Rs 45 lakh crore in the Approach 
paper  for  the  Twelfth  Plan)  during  the  Twelfth  plan  period.  This  implies  that  infrastructure 
investment will need to increase from about 8.0 per cent of GDP in the base year (2011–12) 
of the Plan to about 10.0 per cent of GDP in 2016–17. Over the plan period as a whole, the 
infrastructure investment  is estimated to be about 9.95 per cent of GDP. Financing of this 
investment  would  require  larger  outlays  from  the  public  sector,  but  this  has  to  be  coupled 
with a more than proportional rise in private investment. Going forward, the share of private 
investment  in  infrastructure  may,  in  fact,  have  to  increase  to  50.0  per  cent  in  the  Twelfth 
Plan. However, this estimate on infrastructure investment has to be understood with caution 
as the underlying assumption is nine per cent growth in GDP throughout the plan period. But 
at any case, even with GDP growth of seven or eight per cent, if we want to invest around 
ten  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  infrastructure  sector,  the  financing  requirement  is  going  to  be 
huge (Table 2).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Projected investment in infrastructure during the twelfth five year plan 
(Rs. crore at 2006–07 prices) 
Table 2:  
 Source: Mid-Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, Planning Commission. 
Now the question is how do we finance it? 
First,  let  us  look  at  the  broad  pattern  of  financing  of  infrastructure  in  our  country  before 
highlighting some of the issues involved in it. According to the Planning Commission, during 
the first three years of Eleventh Five Year Plan, funds from the Central Government budget 
financed  around  45  per  cent  of  the  total  investment  in  infrastructure.  The  remaining 
55 per cent  was  divided  between  debt  financing  (41  per  cent)  and  equity  financing 
(14 per cent).  It  is  noteworthy  that  within  the  debt  financing,  commercial  banks  alone 
financed around 21 per cent and another 10 per cent was financed by the NBFCs. Notably 
other  sources  of  financing,  such  as,  External  Commercial  Borrowings  (ECBs),  equity,  FDI 
and insurance companies financed less than 10 per cent of the total infrastructure investment 
each.  
Now, having seen the broad pattern of financing of infrastructure, the question is: whether 
this  pattern  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  Or,  to  put  it  differently,  what  are  the  issues  our 
country faces on this front? 
Issues in infrastructure financing 
Funding gap 
Funding  Gap  is  the  most  important  issue  that  we  face  on  this  front.  According  to  the 
estimates  made  by  the  Planning  Commission  in  March  2010,  after  taking  into  account  the 
recent  trends  in  different  sources  of  infrastructure  financing,  the  funding  gap  in  the 
infrastructure sector during the last two years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan is likely to be 
Rs.1,27,570 crore, which is around 18 per cent of the total estimated requirement (Table 3). 
The  slowdown  in  the  economy  experienced  after  March  2010  has  further  aggravated  this 
funding  gap  in  the  infrastructure  sector  during  the  Eleventh  Plan.  More  recently,  in  the 
context  of  Eurozone  debt  crisis,  accessing  external  resources  by  way  of  ECBs  could  also 
become difficult and this would also accentuate the funding gap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Table 3:  
Funding gap in infrastructure finance during 2010–11 and 2011–12 
(Rs.crore) 
As per existing pattern, # As per trends.@ Including IIFCL. $ Including FDI. 
Source: Planning Commission (2010), Conference on “Building Infrastructure: Challenges 
and Opportunities – Financing of Infrastructure”, March 2010.  
 Fiscal burden 
We have already seen that almost half of the total investment in the infrastructure sector was 
done  by  the  Government  through  budget  allocations.  Here  the  point  to  be  noted  is  that 
Government  funds  have  competing  demands,  such  as,  education,  health,  employment 
generation,  among  others.  Given  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  Government’s  financing  of 
infrastructure, especially in the context of a rule based fiscal policy framework, it is important 
to explore other avenues for financing infrastructure.  
Asset-liability mismatch of commercial banks 
After  the  budgetary  support,  next  in  line  for  financing  infrastructure  were  funds  from  the 
commercial banking sector. However, it is a well known fact that these are institutions that 
primarily leverage on short-term liabilities and, as such, their ability to extend long-term loans 
to the infrastructure sector is limited. This is because, by doing so they get into serious asset-
liability mismatches.  
Takeout financing 
Takeout financing offers a window to the banks to free their balance sheet from exposure to 
infrastructure loans, lend to new projects and also enable better management of the asset 
liability position. In other words, takeout financing enables financing longer term projects with 
medium term funds. However, due to several factors the mechanism has not really emerged 
as  a  game-changer.  One  plausible  reason  is  that  the  model  does  not  envisage  equitable 
distribution of risks and benefits. One of the oft repeated arguments is that banks assume 
credit and liquidity risk since the inception of the project but once the project is economically 
viable, taking out of the loan results in loss of opportunity of earning returns on seasoned 
loans. Further, if the original lenders/bankers are required to part with their security interest 
fully their residual exposure would be sub-ordinated to the interest of the take out financier. 
Investment obligations of insurance and pension funds 
From the point of view of asset-liability mismatches, insurance and pension funds are one of 
the best suited institutions to invest in the infrastructure sector. This is because, in contrast to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the commercial banking sector, these institutions leverage on long-term liabilities. However, 
they  are  constrained  by  their  obligation  to  invest  a  substantial  portion  of  their  funds  in 
Government securities. Of course, in a way, this facilitates the financing of gross fiscal deficit 
of  the  Central  Government  and  hence  enables  the  Central  Government  to  make  more 
investments.  However,  this  limits  the  direct  investment  of  these  institutions  in  the 
infrastructure sector.  
Need for an efficient and vibrant corporate bond market 
India  has  traditionally  been  a  bank-dominated  financial  system  with  corporates  raising 
resources through loan route/public deposits/FCCBs or private placements. This is probably 
due to a combination of factors, such as, banks find loan financing convenient as they do not 
have  to  mark  to  market  loans  in  contrast  to  bonds,  absence  of  a  robust  bankruptcy  law, 
limited investor base, limited number of issuers, etc. This however, does not undermine the 
need  for  developing  an  efficient  and  vibrant  corporate  bond  market  in  general,  and  for 
infrastructure financing, in particular. An active corporate bond market can facilitate long-term 
funding  for  the  infrastructure  sector.  However,  despite  the  various  initiatives  taken  by  the 
Reserve Bank, Securities & Exchange Board of India and Government of India, the corporate 
bond  market  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  in  providing  adequate  financing  to  the  infrastructure 
sector in India.  
Developing municipal bond market for financing urban infrastructure 
For  large  scale  financing  urban  infrastructure  which  is  assuming  critical  importance  in  the 
context  of  rapid  urbanization,  conventional  fiscal  transfers  to  the  urban  local  bodies  or 
municipals  from  governments  are  no  longer  considered  sufficient.  There  have  been  some 
earnest experimentations by these bodies to tap unconventional methods of financing such 
as  public  private  partnerships,  utilizing  urban  assets  more  productively,  accessing  carbon 
credits,  etc.  but  then  these  do  not  address  the  financing  needs.  One  possible  way  of 
addressing the problem is developing a municipal bond market. Today, the size of the market 
is  insignificant  and  distributed  among  a  few  municipals  of  Ahmedabad,  Nashik  and  some 
around  Bangalore.  Given  the  fact  that  the  credit  ratings  for  the  municipalities  of  the 
63 Jawahar Nehru National Urban  Renewal Mission (JNURM) cities are regularly  released 
and quite a few of them are rated as investment grade, we need to provide them avenues to 
tap the markets. Absence of the secondary market for the municipal bonds, problems relating 
to rating of bonds, accounting practices followed by the municipal bodies, adequacy of user 
charges for generating cash flows for servicing of bonds, availability of escrow mechanism 
are some of the issues which require to be addressed to encourage investments. 
Insufficiency of user charges 
It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  a  large  part  of  the  infrastructure  sector  in  India  (especially 
irrigation,  water  supply,  urban  sanitation,  and  state  road  transport)  is  not  amenable  to 
commercialisation for various reasons, such as, regulatory, political and legal constraints in 
the real sector. Due to this, Government is not in a position to levy sufficient user charges on 
these services. The insufficiency of user charges on infrastructure projects negatively affect 
the servicing of the infrastructure loans. Generally, such loans are taken on a non-recourse 
basis and are highly dependent on cash flows. Hence, levy and collection of appropriate user 
charges becomes essential for financial viability of the projects.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Legal and procedural issues 
As  mentioned  earlier,  infrastructure  development  involves  long  gestation  periods,  and  also 
many legal and procedural issues. The problems related to infrastructure development range 
from  those  relating  to  land  acquisition  for  the  infrastructure  project  to  environmental 
clearances  for  the  project.  Many  a  times  there  are  legal  issues  involved  in  it  and  these 
increase  procedural  delays.  The  added  uncertainty  due  to  these  factors  affects  the  risk 
appetite of investors as well as banks to extend funds for the development of infrastructure.  
Given the various issues in financing infrastructure, it is important to glance through what we 
have already done for facilitating fund flow to the sector. This will help us in understanding 
what more can be done. In fact, it is important to note that both the Central Government and 
the Reserve Bank of India have taken a lot of measures to facilitate fund flow to this sector 
especially during the recent years.  
Measures taken by the central government 
Public-private partnership projects in infrastructure 
As  Government  faces  a  tight  budget  constraint  in  the  context  of  a  rule  based  fiscal  policy 
framework,  it  was  important  to  encourage  the  private  sector  to  invest  more  in  the 
infrastructure  sector.  Resultantly,  the  Government  started  encouraging  Public-Private 
Partnership  (PPP)  projects  in  the  infrastructure  sector.  PPP  mechanism  provides  built  in 
credit  enhancement  for  improving  project  viability  by  way  of  buyback  guarantee,  escrow 
arrangement,  substitution  rights  for  the  lenders,  etc.  Government  has  taken  several 
initiatives, especially to standardize the documents and process for structuring and award of 
PPP projects. This has improved transparency in relation to the issues involved in setting up 
PPP projects.  
Setting up of various committees to simplify the procedures 
Recently Government has set up many committees to facilitate more private funding into the 
infrastructure  sector.  These  include  Committee  on  Infrastructure,  Cabinet  Committee  on 
Infrastructure, PPP Appraisal Committee and Empowered Committee among others. These 
were mainly aimed at streamlining the policies to ensure time bound creation of infrastructure 
and  to  develop  an  institutional  framework  that  would  facilitate  more  flow  of  funds  to  the 
infrastructure sector.  
Viability gap funding 
Viability gap funding was introduced in 2006, which provides Central Government grants up 
to 20 per cent of the total capital cost to PPP projects undertaken by any central ministry, 
state  government,  statutory  entity,  or  local  body.  The  scheme  aimed  at  providing  upfront 
capital grant to PPP projects to enable financing of commercially unviable projects. The level 
of grant is the net present value of the gap between the project cost and estimated revenue 
generation over the concession period based on a user fee that was to be levied in a pre-
determined manner.  
Foreign direct investment and infrastructure development 
To facilitate infrastructure financing 100 per cent FDI is allowed under the automatic route in 
some  of  the  sectors  such  as  mining,  power,  civil  aviation  sector,  construction  and 
development 
sector, 
telecommunications  and  special  economic  zones.  Further, FDI  is  also allowed  through  the 
petroleum 
industrial 
projects, 
natural 
parks, 
and 
gas 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Government approval route in some sectors such as civil aviation sector, (Domestic Airlines 
(beyond  49  per  cent),  Existing  airports  (beyond  74  per  cent  to  100  per  cent));  investing 
companies  in  infrastructure/services  sector  (except  telecom);  Petroleum  and  Natural  Gas 
sector  –  refining  PSU  companies;  Telecommunications  –  Basic  and  Cellular  Services 
(beyond 49 per cent to 74 per cent), ISP with gateways, radio paging, end-to-end bandwidth 
(beyond 49 per cent to 74 per cent, ISP without gateway (beyond 49 per cent); Satellites (up 
to  74  per  cent)  and,  mining  and  mineral  separation  of  titanium  bearing  minerals  and  ores 
(100 per cent). 
Setting up of India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) 
Another  major  development  was  the  setting  up  of  IIFCL  by  the  Central  Government  for 
providing  long-term  loans  to  the  infrastructure  projects.  IIFCL  is  involved  both  in  direct 
lending to project companies and refinancing of banks and other financial institutions. IIFCL 
can provide funds to the infrastructure project up to 20 per cent of the total project cost as 
long-term  debt.  Recently,  IIFCL  has  come  up  with  modifications  to  its  takeout  finance 
scheme, which will make the infrastructure loans cheaper. Further, IIFCL has decided to go 
for a transparent and competitive pricing for its takeout financing to ensure fair treatment to 
all  participants.  With  this  change,  all  developers  irrespective  of  their  size  will  get  same 
treatment from the IIFCL depending on the rating of the project. 
Relaxation in take-out financing scheme of IIFCL 
The pricing mechanism of the recently announced takeout finance scheme of IIFCL is now 
based on credit rating of the project and is declared upfront. The rules related to timing of the 
takeout  have  also  been  changed.  While  for  road  projects  the  takeout  can  take  place  after 
commercial operation date (COD), for other sectors it has been relaxed to six months. Under 
existing norms, takeout financing can only be done one year after the scheduled COD of the 
project.  Another  notable  change  is  that  the  developer  can  now  approach  for  take  out 
financing unlike earlier scheme where only the banks could exercise such an option. Further, 
lenders, instead of paying commission to IIFCL, would now be compensated up to a certain 
percentage  of  interest  gain  accruing  to  the  borrower  under  the  take-out  finance  scheme. 
Besides,  interest  rates  to  be  charged  by  IIFCL  have  now  become  non-discretionary  and 
transparent.  
Setting up of infrastructure debt funds 
In the Union Budget for 2011–12, the Union Finance Minister announced the setting up of 
Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  (IDFs)  to  accelerate  the  flow  of  long-term  funds  to  the 
infrastructure  projects.  Accordingly,  in  November  2011,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) notified detailed guidelines for setting up of 
IDFs  which  can  either  be  a  mutual  fund  (trusts)  (IDF-MF)  or  an  NBFC  (companies)  (IDF-
NBFC). The Scheduled commercial banks are allowed to act as sponsors to IDF-MFs and 
IDF-NBFCs with prior approval from RBI subject to certain terms and conditions. Further, to 
attract  off-shore  funds  into  IDFs,  Government  of  India  is  contemplating  the  reduction  of 
withholding  tax  on  interest  payments  on  the  borrowings  by  the  IDFs  from  20  per  cent  to 
5 per cent.  Income  of  the  IDFs  is  also  expected  to  be  exempt  from  income  tax.  The  IDF-
NBFC  can  raise  resources  through  issue  of  either  rupee  or  dollar  denominated  bonds  of 
minimum  five  year  maturity.  IDFs  are  expected  to  channelize  funds  from  insurance 
companies,  pension  funds  and  other  long  term  sources  into  infrastructure  sector.  This  will 
provide  an  alternative  source  of  foreign  currency  funds  for  the  infrastructure  projects. 
However,  certain  dimensions  need  to  be  kept  in  mind  while  assessing  the  success  of  the 
model.  Infrastructure  financing  presents  quite  a  few  challenges  viz.,  little  tangible  security, 
high debt equity ratio, long implementation and repayment periods, etc. Banks and financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
institutions  have  over  the  years  gained  experience  and  expertise  in  assessing  and  pricing 
these  risks.  IDFs  are  likely  to  face  severe  challenges  on  these  issues.  Therefore,  these 
Funds have been allowed to invest only in PPP and post commencement operations date 
(COD)  infrastructure  projects  which  have  completed  at  least  one  year  of  satisfactory 
commercial  operations.  Of  course,  IDF-MFs  can  also  be  set  up  in  respect  of  non-PPP 
projects under higher risk-return framework. If a bank has a mutual fund, then it can float an 
infrastructure  debt  fund,  mop  up  resources  from  investors,  including  private  equity  and 
strategic  investors,  and  invest  the  proceeds  in  the  equity  of  infrastructure  projects.  Thus, 
IDFs could be game changers in the way infrastructure projects are being financed. 
Tapping the retail investor base through infrastructure bonds 
To  provide  further  impetus  to  infrastructure  financing,  Government  of  India  has  permitted 
IFCI,  IDFC,  LIC  and  infrastructure  finance  firms  to  issue  long-term  infrastructure  bonds 
providing for tax benefit of up to Rs.20,000 in the year of investment, under the Income Tax 
Act. The tax-free status has been granted by the government to these bonds issued only by 
designated financial institutions. By introduction of such instruments, the retail base can be 
tapped for raising funds for infrastructure projects. Of the proposed Rs. 30,000 crore funds to 
be raised, National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) & the Railway Finance Corporation are 
raising Rs. 10,000 crore each and HUDCO another Rs. 5,000 crore. 
Major steps taken by the Reserve Bank 
The Reserve Bank has initiated a number of regulatory measures/concessions for facilitating 
increased flow of credit to infrastructure projects. I will briefly touch upon a few of the critical 
measures taken in this regard. 
Use of foreign exchange reserves for infrastructure development 
In India, the increase in quantum of foreign exchange reserves during the decade of 2000, 
coupled  with  escalating  infrastructure  constraints  and  the  related  financing  deficit  led  to  a 
debate  on  possibility  of  using  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  investment  in  infrastructure 
sector. Although use of reserves for such purposes does not meet the criterion of reserve 
management objectives, a special and limited window has been created. Accordingly, IIFC 
(UK) Ltd. was incorporated in London and was set up in April 2008. Under this scheme, RBI 
invests,  in  tranches,  up  to  an  aggregate  amount  of  USD  5  billion  in  fully  government 
guaranteed  foreign  currency  denominated  bonds  issued  by  this  overseas  Special  Purpose 
Vehicles (SPV) of the IIFCL. The funds, thus raised, are to be utilized by the company for on-
lending to the Indian companies implementing infrastructure projects in India and/or to co-
finance the ECBs of such projects for capital expenditure outside India without creating any 
monetary impact.  
Enhanced exposure norms 
In view of the generally large requirements of funds for infrastructure projects, the existing 
RBI  guidelines  provide  for  enhanced  exposure  ceilings  for  the  infrastructure  lending.  The 
credit exposure ceiling limits are 15 per cent of capital funds in case of a single borrower and 
40  per  cent  of  capital  funds  in  the  case  of  a  borrower  group.  Credit  exposure  to  a  single 
borrower may exceed the exposure norm of 15 per cent of the bank’s capital funds by an 
additional 5 per cent (i.e., up to 20 per cent) and a borrower group may exceed the exposure 
norm  by  an  additional  10  per  cent  (i.e.,  up  to  50  per  cent),  provided  the  additional  credit 
exposure is on account of extension of credit to infrastructure projects. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Asset-liability management in the context of infrastructure financing 
In  order  to  meet  long  term  financing  requirements  of  infrastructure  projects  and  address 
asset  liability  management  issue,  banks  are  permitted  to  enter  into  take  out  financing 
arrangement with IDFC/other FIs. Further, banks have also been allowed to issue long term 
bonds  with  a  minimum  maturity  of  five  years  to  the  extent  of  their  exposure  of  residual 
maturity of more than five years to the infrastructure sector. 
Issuance of guarantee 
Keeping in view the special features of lending to infrastructure projects, viz., high degree of 
appraisal skills on the part of lenders and availability of resources of a maturity matching with 
the  project  period,  banks  are  permitted  to  issue  guarantees  favouring  other  lending 
institutions in respect of infrastructure projects provided the bank issuing the guarantee takes 
a funded share in the project at least to the extent of five per cent of the project cost and 
undertakes normal credit appraisal, monitoring and follow up of the project.  
Financing promoters’ equity 
Banks have been permitted to extend finance for funding promoter’s equity in cases where 
the proposal involves acquisition of share in an existing company engaged in implementing 
or operating an infrastructure project in India, subject to certain conditions. 
Relaxation from capital market exposure 
In  order  to  encourage  lending  by  banks  to  the  infrastructure,  the  promoters’  shares  in  the 
SPV of an infrastructure project pledged to the lending bank is permitted to be excluded from 
the banks’ capital market exposure. 
Permission to invest in unrated bonds 
In order to encourage banks to increase the flow of credit to infrastructure sector, banks are 
allowed to invest in unrated bonds of companies engaged in infrastructure activities within 
the ceiling of 10 per cent for unlisted non SLR securities. 
Relaxation in the classification of investments 
Investment  by  banks  in  the  long-term  bonds  issued  by  companies  engaged  in  executing 
infrastructure projects and having a minimum residual maturity of seven years are allowed to 
be classified under the HTM category, which means they need not be marked to market.  
Relaxations relating to asset classification 
With effect from March 31, 2008, the infrastructure project accounts of banks were permitted 
to  be  classified  as  sub-standard  if  the  date  of  commencement  of  commercial  production 
extended beyond a period of two years (as against 6 months in the case of other projects) 
after the date of completion of the project, as originally envisaged. With effect from March 31, 
2010, if an infrastructure project loan classified as “standard asset” is restructured any time 
during the above period of two years, it can be retained as a standard asset if the fresh date 
of commencement of operations is fixed within certain limits prescribed by the Reserve Bank, 
and provided the account continues to be serviced as per the restructured terms.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Certain  relaxations  as  far  as  conditions  specified  for  deriving  asset  classification  benefits 
under our restructuring guidelines are made in respect of infrastructure exposure of banks 
i.e. in respect of repayment period of restructured advances and regarding tangible security.  
Infrastructure debt funds 
Realizing  the  potential  of  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  in  enhancing  financing  to  the  sector, 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has,  as  a  special  case,  permitted  several  prudential  relaxations. 
Sponsor bank of IDF–NBFC has been permitted to contribute up to 49 per cent of the equity. 
In  order  to  enable  and  encourage  higher  quantum  of  take  out  financing  by  an  IDF-NBFC, 
they  have  been  permitted  to  take-on  up  to  50  per  cent  of  its  capital  fund  for  individual 
projects. An additional exposure of 10 per cent can be taken subject to the approval of the 
Board.  On  a  case  to  case  basis,  Reserve  Bank  will  permit  such  entities  for  additional 
exposures  of  another  15  per  cent,  subject  to  conditions.  Thus,  exposure  can  go  up  to 
75 per cent of the capital funds. 
Another  significant  relaxation  is  that  for  the  purpose  of  computing  capital  adequacy  of  the 
IDF-NBFC,  bonds  covering  PPP  and  post  COD  projects  in  existence  over  a  year  of 
commercial operation shall be assigned a lower risk weight of 50 percent. 
Under the extant provisions of Foreign Exchange Management Act, (FEMA) 1999, Reserve 
Bank  has  allowed  investment  on  repatriation  basis  by  new  class  of  eligible  non-resident 
investors  (viz.  SWFs,  multilateral  agencies,  pension  funds,  insurance  funds,  endowment 
funds) in Rupee and Foreign Currency denominated bonds issued by IDF-NBFCs and Rupee 
denominated units issued by IDF-MFs set up as SEBI registered Mutual Funds. IDFs would 
in turn lend to infrastructure projects as intermediaries. Further, SEBI registered FIIs, HNIs 
registered  with  SEBI  and  NRIs  have  also  been  allowed  to  invest  in  Rupee  denominated 
bonds issued by the IDF-NBFCs and Rupee denominated units issued by IDF-MFs set up as 
SEBI registered domestic Mutual Funds. The original maturity of all the securities at the time 
of  first  investments  by  such  investors  shall  be  five  years  and  the  investments  would  be 
subject to a lock in period of three years. All such investments (excluding those by NRIs) will 
however be within an overall cap of US$ 10 billion (which would be within the overall cap of 
USD 25 billion for FII investment in infrastructure debt). 
Other relaxations 
Banks are permitted to treat annuities under build-operate-transfer (BOT) model in respect of 
road/highway  projects  and  toll  collection  rights,  where  there  are  provisions  to  compensate 
the project sponsor if a certain level of traffic is not achieved, as tangible securities subject to 
the  condition  that  banks’  right  to  receive  annuities  and  toll  collection  rights  is  legally 
enforceable and irrevocable.  
In view of certain safeguards, such as, escrow accounts available in respect of infrastructure 
lending,  unsecured  sub  standard  infrastructure  loan  accounts  which  are  classified  as  sub-
standard will attract a lower provisioning of 15 per cent (20 per cent with effect from May 18, 
2011).  To  avail  of  this  benefit  of  lower  provisioning,  the  banks  should  have  in  place  an 
appropriate mechanism to escrow the cash flows and also have a clear and legal first claim 
on these cash flows.  
Banks  can  finance  SPVs,  registered  under  the  Companies  Act,  set  up  for  financing 
infrastructure  projects  on  ensuring  that  these  loans/investments  are  not  used  for  financing 
the budget of State Governments.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Introduction of credit default swaps 
Further,  the  introduction  of  Credit  Default  Swaps  (CDS)  would  help  banks  to  manage 
exposures while increasing credit penetration, and lending to infrastructure and large firms 
without being constrained by the extant regulatory prescriptions in respect of single borrower 
gross exposure limits. With effect from November 30, 2011, the Reserve Bank of India has 
also  permitted  CDS  on  unlisted  but  rated  bonds  of  infrastructure  companies  and 
unlisted/unrated  bonds  issued  by  the  SPVs  set  up  by  infrastructure  companies.  While 
introducing the CDS, which caused considerable regulatory concern during global financial 
crisis in 2008–09, a calibrated approach has been followed, focusing on product safety and 
systemic stability issues. The intention was to introduce a plain vanilla CDS which is easily 
understood by the market. CDS has been designed to limit excessive leverage and build-up 
in risk positions and at the same time ensures credit risk mitigation. Therefore, users are not 
allowed to buy “naked” CDS, i.e., buying credit protection without underlying risk exposures. 
In  order  to  restrict  the  users  from  holding  naked  CDS  positions;  physical  delivery  is 
mandated  in  case  of  credit  events.  Transparency  in  the  CDS  market  which  was  major 
concern  in  other  markets  during  the  financial  crisis,  would  be  ensured  through  mandatory 
reporting  of  trades  by  market  makers  on  the  CDS  trade  reporting  platform  coupled  with 
periodic dissemination of information by the trade repository to the market and also to the 
regulators.  These  measures  are  going  to  provide  fillip  to  bonds  issued  by  infrastructure 
companies.  
Securitisation 
To  facilitate  healthy  securitisation  of  loans,  the  Reserve  Bank  issued  guidelines  on 
Securitisation  of  Standard  Assets  which  are  applicable  to  all  categories  of  loans  including 
infrastructure  loans.  The  circular  contained  various  guidelines  on  true  sale  criteria,  credit 
enhancement,  Policy  on  provision  of  credit  enhancement  facilities,  provision  of  liquidity 
facilities,  provision  of  underwriting  facilities,  provision  of  services,  prudential  norms  for 
investment  in  securities  issued  by  SPVs,  accounting  treatment  of  the  securitisation 
transactions,  disclosures  to  be  made,  among  others.  Subsequently,  keeping  in  mind  the 
lessons  learnt  from  the  financial  crisis  that  struck  the  developed  economies,  international 
developments  in  regulation  of  securitisation  market  and  our  review  of  existing  regulatory 
norms  on  booking  of  profit  on  transfer  of  assets,  reset  of  credit  enhancements  and 
transactions involving transfer of loans through direct assignment, the Reserve Bank of India 
has released a draft circular on “Revisions to the Guidelines on Securitisation Transactions” 
to public comments on September 27, 2011. 
The  objective  of  the  draft  guidelines  is  to  discourage  the  “originate  to  distribute”  business 
model in which loans were originated with the sole intention of immediate securitisation and 
securitisation  of  tranches  of  project  loans  even  before  the  total  disbursement  is  complete, 
thereby passing on the project implementation risk to investors. The draft introduced norms 
on Minimum Holding Period, Minimum Retention Ratio, prohibition of securitisation of single 
loans, loan origination standards, standards of due diligence, among others. It is expected 
that  introduction  of  these  norms  would  result  in  development  of  an  orderly  and  healthy 
securitisation market and ensure greater alignment of the interests of the originators and the 
investors. 
As  a  result  of  the  above  measures  initiated  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  scheduled  commercial 
banks’ exposure to infrastructure sector has shown a steady increasing trend over the years. 
Infrastructure credit as a percentage of bank credit has thus improved from 3.61 per cent as 
at end-March 2003 to 13.36 per cent as at end-March 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Corporate bond market 
Reserve Bank has issued guidelines on repo in corporate bonds to make the market more 
active. Further, all entities regulated by Reserve Bank of India are reporting corporate trades 
on FIMMDA developed platform, enabling greater transparency and thereby facilitating better 
price discovery. To ensure smooth settlement in the secondary market, RBI has permitted 
clearing  houses  of  the  exchanges  to  have  a  funds  account  with  RBI  to  facilitate  Delivery 
versus Payments (DvP-I) based settlement of trades. Primary dealers have been permitted 
higher exposure limits for corporates to enable better market making. As mentioned above, 
CDS on corporate bonds has been introduced to facilitate hedging of credit risk associated 
with  holding  of  corporate  bonds.  Other  measures,  including  permitting  banks  to  classify 
investments in non-SLR bonds issued by companies engaged in infrastructure activities and 
having a minimum residual maturity of seven years under the HTM category and investment 
in non-SLR debt securities which are proposed to be listed as investment in listed securities 
are expected to provide fillip to the market. 
In fact, as a result of these measures, trading volumes in corporate bonds have increased 
many-fold from Rs.1,45,828 crore in 2008–09 to Rs.5,98,604 crore in 2010–11. 
Even as we have been following calibrated approach to opening of debt market to foreign 
investors,  a  separate  limit  of  USD  25  billion  has  been  provided  for  investment  by  FIIs  in 
corporate  bonds  issued  by  infrastructure  companies  with  a  three  year  lock-in  period.  The 
investments under this route can either be through mutual fund debt schemes (for Qualified 
Foreign Investors with a limit of USD three billion) or through investment in bonds issued by 
infrastructure companies with a lock-in period of one year within investment limit of USD five 
billion and with a lock in period of three years with an investment limit of USD 17 billion.  
Liberalisation & rationalization of ECB policies 
Corporates  implementing  infrastructure  projects  were  eligible  to  avail  of  ECB  up  to 
USD 500 million in a financial year under the automatic route. This limit has been raised to 
USD  750  million.  Infrastructure  Finance  Companies  (IFCs)  i.e.,  Non  Banking  Financial 
Companies  (NBFCs)  categorized  as  IFCs  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  are  permitted  to  avail  of 
ECBs, including the outstanding ECBs, up to 50 per cent of their owned funds, for on-lending 
to the infrastructure sector as defined under the ECB policy, subject to their complying with 
certain conditions.  
The Reserve Bank has further liberalized the ECB policy relating to the infrastructure sector 
in  September  2011.  Under  this  dispensation,  the  direct  foreign  equity  holder  (holding 
minimum 25 per cent of the paid-up capital) and indirect foreign equity holder holding at least 
51  per  cent  of  the  paid-up  capital  will  be  permitted  to  provide  credit  enhancement  for  the 
domestic  debt  raised  by  Indian  companies  engaged  exclusively  in  the  development  of 
infrastructure and infrastructure finance companies without prior approval from the Reserve 
Bank.  
Further, considering the specific needs of the infrastructure sector, the existing ECB policy 
has been reviewed to allow Indian companies which are in the infrastructure sector to import 
capital  goods  by  availing  of  short-term  credit  in  the  nature  of  “bridge  finance”  subject  to 
certain conditions.  
Although refinancing of Rupee loan by ECB is generally not permitted, Indian companies in 
the infrastructure sector have now been allowed to utilize 25 per cent of the fresh ECB raised 
by  them  towards  refinancing  of  the  Rupee  loan/s  availed  of  by  them  from  the  domestic 
banking  system,  under  the  approval  route,  subject  to  certain  conditions  specified  by  the 
Reserve Bank.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Considering  their  specific  needs,  Indian  companies  which  are  in  the  infrastructure  sector 
have now been allowed to avail of ECB in Renminbi, under the approval route, subject to an 
annual cap of US Dollar one billion. 
What more needs to be done? 
Now having glanced through what all have already been done to facilitate more fund flow to 
the sector, the question is what more can be done? We all need to think and come out with 
innovative suggestions. Now let me share some of my thoughts in this regard with you.  
Making the infrastructure project commercially viable 
This is the first and foremost thing we should do for financing infrastructure in a sustainable 
manner.  As  mentioned  earlier  infrastructure  projects  involve  huge  financing  requirements, 
most of which are met by banks and other financial institutions directly and indirectly. Thus, it 
is very important to make the project commercially viable to ensure regular servicing of the 
loan.  This  will  lead  to  sustainable  development  of  infrastructure  without  jeopardizing  the 
soundness of the financial sector. Project appraisal and follow-up capabilities of many banks, 
particularly public sector banks, also need focused attention and upgradation so that project 
viability can be properly evaluated and risk mitigants provided where needed. 
Greater participation of state governments 
In a federal country like India, participation and support of the State governments is essential 
for developing high quality infrastructure. The State governments’ support in maintenance of 
law and order, land acquisition, rehabilitation and settlement of displaced persons, shifting of 
utilities, and obtaining environmental clearances are necessary for the projects undertaken 
by  the  Central  Government  or  the  private  sector.  It  is  satisfying  to  know  that  many  State 
governments have also initiated several PPP projects for improving infrastructure.  
Improving efficiency of the corporate bond market 
As  has  been  noted,  vibrant  corporate  bond  market  will  reduce  the  dependence  on  the 
banking  sector  for  funds.  Further,  coordinated  regulatory  initiatives  could  be  considered  in 
the  areas  involving  standardization  of  stamp  duties  on  corporate  bonds  across  the  states, 
encouraging  public  issuance  and  bringing  in  institutional  investors  in  a  big  way.  It  is  also 
important to broad base the investor base by bringing in new classes of institutional investors 
(like insurance companies, pension funds, provident funds, etc.) apart from banks into this 
market.  We  also  need  to  reorient  the  investment  guidelines  of  institutional  investors  like 
insurance  companies,  provident  funds,  etc.  since  the  existing  mandates  of  most  of  these 
institutions do not permit large investment in corporate bonds. As of now, the insurance and 
pension  funds  are  legally  required  to  invest  a  substantial  proportion  of  their  funds  in 
Government  Securities.  These  investment  requirements  limit  their  ability  to  invest  in 
infrastructure bonds. Further, they can only invest in a blue chip stock, which is also acting 
as  a  limiting  factor  since  most  of  the  SPVs  created  for  infrastructure  funding  are  unlisted 
entities. Interest rate derivatives to hedge interest rate risks are being broadened. Reserve 
Bank has therefore permitted introduction of Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) on 91 day Treasury 
bills and 10 year G-sec papers. Reserve Bank is also considering further broadening the IRF 
products by including cash settled IRFs in the two and five year segments.1 
                                                 
1  On December 30, 2011, Reserve Bank of India has permitted cash settled IRF contracts in notional 2 year and 
5 year coupon bearing Government of India securities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
in 
the  absence  of  sound  bankruptcy 
Credit enhancement 
One of the major obstacles in attracting foreign debt capital for infrastructure is the sovereign 
credit  rating  ceiling.  Domestic  investors  are  also  inhibited  due  to  high  level  of  credit  risk 
perception,  particularly 
framework.  A  credit 
enhancement mechanism can possibly bridge the rating cap between the investment norms, 
risk perceptions and actual ratings. Ideally, the credit enhancement should not be provided 
by  the  banks  as  they  are  already  over-exposed  to  the  sector.  Further,  such  bank  based 
backup facility will not lead to genuine development of corporate bond market. Instead we 
need  to  think  creatively  of  other  mechanisms  involving  national  or  supranational  support. 
Working  towards  this  direction,  recently  Asian  Development  Bank  has  offered  to  partially 
guarantee infrastructure bonds issued by the Indian companies. One can expect with hope 
positive outcome from such an arrangement. 
Simplification of procedures – enabling single window clearance 
It is well recognized that while funding is the major problem for infrastructure financing, there 
are other issues which aggravate the problems of raising funds. These include legal disputes 
regarding  land  acquisition,  delay  in  getting  other  clearances  (leading  to  time  and  cost 
overruns) and linkages (e.g. coal, power, water, etc.) among others. It is felt that in respect of 
mega-projects,  beyond  certain  cut-off  point,  single  window  clearance  approach  could  cut 
down  the  implementation  period.  Once  we  solve  these  peripheral  but  critical  issues  with 
regard  to  an  infrastructure  project,  it  will  greatly  facilitate  flow  of  funds  to  the  projects  and 
help in maintaining asset quality to the comfort of the lenders.  
We also need to develop new financial markets for municipal bonds to enable infrastructure 
financing  at  the  grass  root  levels.  We  need  to  create  depth,  liquidity  and  vibrancy  in  the 
G-Sec and corporate bond market so as to enable raising of finance and reduce dependence 
on the banking system. At the same time, there is a need to widen our investor base and 
offer adequate risk mitigating financial products, such as, CDS. Market players should also 
actively  participate  in  such  markets  after  the  products  have  been  introduced.  A  Working 
Group has been set up by the Reserve Bank recently to examine the issues and recommend 
measures to further improve the depth and breadth of the G-Sec market. A vibrant G-Sec 
market  would  facilitate  growth  of  the  corporate  debt  market.  We  also  need  to  revisit  the 
existing provisions of stamp duty governed by separate State Government Acts in respect of 
corporate bond transactions. 
Concluding observations 
In conclusion I would like to mention that infrastructure projects in developing countries like 
India  are  perceived  as  highly  vulnerable  to  risks  which  constrains  financing.  Some  of  the 
notable  risks  that  need  to  be  reckoned  are  risks  arising  during  the  period  of  construction 
leading to time and cost over-runs, operational risks, market risks, interest rate risks, foreign 
exchange risks, payment risks, regulatory risks and political risks. At times, in the absence of 
proper risk mitigation mechanism, the costs of the projects tend to increase and such high 
level of risks cannot be traded off against high returns. The aim of the policy makers should 
be  to  reduce  perceived  risks  by  introducing  greater  policy  clarity  and,  at  the  same  time, 
providing an environment that will reassure investors. I am sure exciting times are ahead of 
us for infrastructure development in our country as we enter the year 2012 which promises to 
open more avenues for innovative planning, projects, policies, products and partnerships. I 
hope this international conference, which has several participants from within and outside the 
country, would throw up ideas and suggestions that would go a long way in addressing the 
issues confronting the financing of infrastructure in India. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
