Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Attributes of quality global citizens in the next 
decade 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the International 
Conference  on  General  Education  “Roles  and  Experiences  in  Cultivating  Global  Citizens”, 
Bangkok, 11 January 2012. 
 Distinguished panelists and moderator,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is an honor and pleasure to be invited to share my views on the issue of global citizenship 
in the next decade. On this issue, I wish to focus on two important dimensions, namely 
driving forces and readiness. First, I will look at the progress of ASEAN integration as the 
major driving force toward global citizenship. And second, I will briefly discuss the necessity 
to  develop  global  competencies  to  ensure  the  readiness  of  local  talents  with  an  aim  to 
integrate with global talents.  
On the first issue, I should stress that global citizenship is linked to the relationship between 
an individual with the state. Since we now live in a virtual world connected by technology, 
today’s global relationship should perhaps be better defined as an association with economic 
opportunities  available  to  an  individual  irrespective  of  physical  presence.  Moreover,  global 
citizenship  implies  the  shift  from  domestic  focus  to  global  focus  with  the  ultimate  aim  of 
attaining global standards in terms of operating environment and resource management.  
At this juncture, however, I see it as unrealistic to think about global citizenship without first 
attaining regional citizenship. Naturally, we in Asia should see this regional citizenship linked 
to  the  economic  opportunities  available  in  our  own  region  and  to  the  degree  of  economic 
integration  between  Asia  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  Thus,  going  forward,  Thai  and  other 
ASEAN nationals need to put more emphasis on the growing ASEAN Economic Community 
or AEC, which will start officially in 2015 only a few years from now.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
As  a  major  driving  force  of  regional  citizenship,  the  AEC  is  part  of  a  larger  plan  for  the 
ASEAN  Community,  which  involves  security,  economic,  and  socio-cultural  cooperation.  It 
aims  to  transform  ASEAN  into  a  single  market  and  production  base,  a  highly  competitive 
economic region, a region of equitable economic development, and a region fully integrated 
into  the  global  economy.  To  this  end,  the  AEC  blueprint  focuses  on  free  flow  of  goods, 
services, investment, and skilled labor, and freer flows of capital, to help minimize transaction 
costs and maximize trade gains.  
On trade liberalization, the ultimate target is not only to reduce all tariffs to zero, but also to 
eliminate  non-tariff  barriers, 
industry 
classification.  And  as  of  1  January  2010,  ASEAN-6  applied  zero  tariffs  to  99  percent  of 
goods, while the CLMV countries plan to achieve the same goal by 2015. A unified trading 
region  will 
trade 
opportunities,  and  allow  ASEAN  to  become  central  to  global  supply  chains.  This  model  is 
supportive  of  Asia’s  new  growth  model  of  a  regional  production  hub  and  increasing 
intraregional trade. Moreover, it is a key development strategy for ASEAN to ride with rising 
Asia as part of an even bigger economic hub of ASEAN+3 and ASEAN+6. The +3 include 
China, Japan, and Korea, with the+6 expanding to cover India, Australia, and New Zealand.  
In addition to trade liberalization in goods, liberalization in services will also spur competition. 
This in turn would lead to lower prices and increased quality of services, as well as better 
transfer  of  know-how  from  outside  and  within  the  region,  in  areas  such  as  business 
facilitate  development  of  production  networks,  bridge 
including  subsidies,  restrictions,  and  sensitive 
fragmented 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
organization and management, and risk management capacity through foreign participation 
in  financial  services,  for  example.  But,  since  services  liberalization  can  involve  short  term 
adjustment  costs,  its  progress  has  been  subject  to  domestic  regulations  as  a  country’s 
institutional  and  regulatory  environment  needs  to  be  strengthened  before  and  during 
liberalization in order to reap eventual benefits.  
A single market and production base for ASEAN cannot be complete without the free flow of 
skilled labor. It is also complementary to other freedoms, such as freedom of capital flows 
(particularly FDI) and services, and together they have important implications for productivity 
growth  and  investment.  Indeed,  it  is  logical  to  expect  that  ASEAN  integrated  business 
organizations would be more effectively run by regional than local managers. This is because 
regional managers have incentives to optimize the economies of scale and scope through 
the  use  of  regional  factors  of  production  to  achieve  competitiveness.  Moreover,  regional 
managers  are  likely  to  promote  more  regional-oriented  investment,  which  means  outward 
investment,  direct  as  well  as  portfolio,  from  one  local  economy  into  other  local  economies 
within and outside ASEAN.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Turning to the dimension of readiness, ASEAN labor mobility pertains only to skilled 
labor  at  present.  Various  country  specific  regulations  continue  to  prevent  completely  free 
labor mobility. While greater mobility should yield substantial economic benefits especially for 
integration objectives, opponents of labor mobility tend to highlight the short term potential 
threats,  particularly  the  “brain-drain”  away  from  home  countries.  Mobility  also  raises  fears 
relating to immigration and cultural impacts. What then can be done to improve readiness for 
labor mobility thereby strengthening ASEAN citizenship?  
For  the  benefit  of  further  exploration,  I  would  like  to  propose  that  we  consider  a  three-
pronged strategy as part of a sustainable solution to this problem:  
First,  we  should  try  to  reduce  short  and  long-term  obstacles  to  labor  mobility.  It  is 
critical  to  recognize  that  greater  labor  mobility  brings  greater  competition  for  local 
professionals. This means that, in the medium and longer term, the “brain drain” is usually 
offset by remittances and a “reverse brain drain”, which brings wealth, skills, experience, and 
their  business  and  social  networks  back  home.  Therefore,  actions  are  needed  to  further 
enhance the free flow of labor through increased use of mutual recognition of professional 
qualifications. Forging university and regional professional networks will surely be supportive 
of this endeavor. Visa, work permits, and regulatory requirements on foreign employment are 
all  important  issues  that  need  to  be  quickly  addressed  to  ensure  that  the  investment 
environment is competitive.  
Over the longer term, I also see it as very crucial that we address obstacles to integration at 
the root cause, which is the weak integration mindset. This integration mindset means that 
we need to assess the benefits and costs of integration more deeply and strategize how they 
fit  with  the  overall  economic  development  plans  of  individual  ASEAN  member  countries. 
There are dangers in allowing such an important assessment to remain vague. My concern is 
that many key stakeholders of ASEAN integration still view the AEC with cynicism; that life 
will  go  on,  with  few  changes  to  the  status  quo.  And  this  complacency  is  very  dangerous 
because we may wake up and find that we are already too late to catch the rising wave of 
ASEAN.  
Distinguished Participants,  
The second part of this three-pronged strategy deals with human capital development 
to meet global competencies.  My  personal  opinion  as  a  CEO  in  the  financial  industry  is 
that  we  need  people  or  our  human  resources  in  the  next  decade  to  be  assertive,  flexible, 
analytical  and  quantitative,  technology  competent,  as  well  as  having  strong  leadership, 
people skills, foreign language proficiency, and cultural awareness. CEOs in other industries 
can add more qualifications to this list according to what they need to satisfy future business 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
solutions. Moreover, to promote mobility, our local talent competency should also aim for a 
better  fit  with  regional  and  global  competency.  In  the  case  of  Thailand,  broad  statistical 
profile points to above 50 percent share of education in social sciences, business, and law; 
with  about  20  percent  in  engineering  manufacture  and  construction,  and  about  another 
10 percent in science. This means that we currently have comparative advantage in terms of 
good  quality  social  scientists,  which  should  be  augmented  by  English  language  and  ICT 
skills. Having said that, we also need to put much more resources into education areas with 
significant impact on wages and work flexibility, such as engineering and science.  
The third part of the strategy relates to the market environment and government policy 
to  support  labor  mobility  and  human  capital  development.  In  many  ASEAN  countries, 
the  labor  market  environment  has  been  that  of  persistent  shortage.  With  plenty  of  job 
opportunities  at  home,  the  lack  of  urgency  to  compete  for  jobs  may  have  lessened  the 
incentives for long-term planning to develop new skills and change human capital profile to 
take advantage of global mobility. This problem has been amplified by the demographic trend 
of an ageing society with young talents becoming scarce in the future.  
On  the  public  policy  front,  public  investment  in  education  is  particularly  necessary  for 
enhancing productivity gains for future growth. Moreover, as people become global citizens, 
we cannot always rely on rules and regulations, or market rules of the game to bring about 
their right behavior. In this regard, the educational curriculum needs to embrace elements on 
transparency,  accountability,  governance,  and  ethics.  This  will  help  lessen  the  corruption 
problem which ranks high in the list of factors that can undermine competitive strength of any 
economy.  
While the role of public investment in education is vital, I see increasing financial constraints 
in this area, as well as in public health and social safety nets, because of short-term fiscal 
limits  and  lack  of  long-term  fiscal  planning  in  a  number  of  countries.  For  education,  in 
particular, while in the short term private sector initiatives for in-house training or vocational 
educational  support  may  help  bridge  skill  mismatch,  this  is  unlikely  to  be  a  sustainable 
solution. Faced with fiscal limitations, the public sector will need to explore creative public-
private partnerships to avoid undermining necessary developments in this important area.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  emphasizing  that  in  the  era  of  global  citizenship,  we  should 
capitalize on the major driving force in advancing toward full global citizenship. For Thailand 
and  ASEAN  countries, we  have  the  AEC  as  a  natural stepping  stone  to  embrace  regional 
citizenship.  Looking  ahead,  much  work  remains  to  be  done  for  a  number  of  countries  to 
improve the readiness of human capital to evolve toward global citizenship. Our people must 
be developed to the degree that they possess similar competencies as those in the global 
workforce.  I  therefore  hope  that  this  conference  will  pave  way  for  further  progress  of  this 
important agenda.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
