Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Post-crisis recovery – Asian lessons for Europe 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  OMFIF 
Golden Series Lecture, London, 12 September 2012. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  honored  and  delighted  to  be  part  of  the  Golden  Series Lecture and would like to 
thank OMFIF for the kind invitation. Events  such as  these  provide  an opportunity  for  us 
to exchange views  on topical issues that are at the center of international finance and I am 
keen to learn from the perspective of our audience. 
Fifteen  years  ago  the  Asian  crisis  forced  us  to  go  through  painful  adjustments  and  far 
reaching  economic  and  financial  reforms.  We  had  to  embrace  legal,  regulatory  and 
governance  reforms,  while  our  business  sector  had  to  deleverage  and  our  bankers 
became  much  more  prudent  and  risk  conscious.  Today,  the  world  is  witnessing  another 
crisis not dissimilar to ours and  I have been  asked  to  share  with  you  some  lessons  from 
the  Asian  financial  crisis. This  is  somewhat  ironic  as  we  in  Asia  look  to  Europe  as  a  role 
model  and  a  benchmark  in  our  integration  efforts.  Individually  we  are  all  small  states  and 
find  it  difficult  to  compete for  foreign  investment without the attraction of size and economy 
of  scale.  So  my  talk  today  will  be  a  modest  contribution  to  the  current  debate  on  the 
challenge of post crisis recovery. 
I will start with a brief recap  of the Asian  crisis, drawing some lessons and comparison with 
the European debt crisis. I would briefly discuss the economic setting and policy reform that 
brought  Asia  out  of  the  crisis  and  end  with  some  thoughts  and  reflections  on  the  post 
crisis recovery period. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As a well-known American author, Mark Twain puts it, “history  doesn’t  repeat  itself,  but  it 
does  rhyme”.  So  despite  the differences in the context and details of both the Asian and the 
European crises, the underlying root causes are not dissimilar. 
First, both crises, like most  others in  the recent economic history of  the  world,  are  often 
associated  with  the  mispricing  of  risk  and distorted incentives structures. 
In  the  case  of  Asia,  our  problem  was  both  a  currency  and  a banking crisis. We had to 
abandon  the  pegged  exchange  rate  system  which  led  to  massive  devaluation  of  our 
currency. With the corporate sector  largely  overleveraged  and  loaded  with  foreign  debt,  the 
sharp  depreciation  of  the  currency  technically  bankrupted  firms  overnight.  Banks  NPLs 
shot  up  and brought  on with  it the banking crisis.  It  was clear that the region’s “original sin” 
was  well  beyond  redemption.  We  borrowed  in  foreign  currencies  and  used  it  to  finance 
projects  that  did  not  generate  foreign  exchange  earning  to  service such a debt. 
In the case of Thailand, the amount of private external debt was over three times the level of 
international  reserves.  Given  the  healthy  public  finances  in  Thailand  (with  9  years  of 
fiscal  surplus  prior  to 1997),  the  expanding  foreign  private  sector  debt  was  interpreted  as 
a sign  of  euphoria  and  confidence  in  the  emergence  of  a  new  tiger  of Asia. 
In  Europe,  a  similar  story  of  mispricing  occurred  when  some  peripheral  nations  were 
able  to  access  financing  at  a  much  cheaper  rate  than  the  country’s  underlying  credit 
rating  would  have  allowed  them  to  do  so  -  and  this  was  made  possible  out  of  sheer 
membership of  the Euro  zone. A single  currency  and  a  convergence  in  risk  rating, like our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fixed  exchange  rate,  gave  the  market a  false  sense  of  security that  encouraged  borrowing 
beyond our means and without proper risk management. 
Second, both crises occurred as a result of a failure to fulfill the necessary “pre-conditions”. 
In Asia, they were preconditions for liberalization, and in Europe they were preconditions for 
integration. 
A number of Asian countries embarked on ambitious liberalization programs with insufficient 
safeguards, appropriate infrastructure  and  policy  tools. Liberalizing  capital  flows  while  still 
maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system  eventually  ran  up  against the impossible trinity. 
The  country  must  give  up  control  over  monetary  policy.  Recourse  to  macroprudential 
policies  to  stem  the excessive  bank  credit  expansion  and  asset  price  inflation,  was  not 
well-known then. 
Along the same line, the currency union proceeded  without the necessary preconditions  for 
integration. Countries  entered  the  union with  large  diversities  both  in  terms  of  economic 
development  and competitiveness, and in the absence of fiscal, and banking union. 
On  the  whole,  these  countries  were  victims  of  their  own  success.  The  “reckless  optimism” 
prior  to  both  episodes  of  crisis  had  ultimately 
face  similar 
consequences  of  severe market  stress  and  capital  flight,  albeit  with  different  symptoms: 
for  Asia,  losses  incurred  in  the  private  sector’s  balance  sheet,  for  Europe,  public  sector 
balance sheet was impaired. 
the  countries 
led 
to 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let’s  now  look  at  how  Asia  got  out  of  the  crisis  and  whether  such  conditions  are 
available for Europe. 
At  the onset  of  the  Asian  crisis,  Indonesia,  Korea,  and  Thailand built up large private short 
term  external  debt  while  high  private  credit  growth  fueled  the  bubble  in  the  stock  and 
property  markets.  Once  the  crisis hit, these countries  faced  sharp capital reversal of  up  to 
10%  and  12.5%1  of  GDP  in  1998  for  Korea  and  Thailand  respectively  and  a  massive 
devaluation  of  the  currency  soon  followed.  Some  of  us  were  forced  to  seek  international 
assistance  (IMF)  or,  in  the  case  of  Malaysia2,  to  undertake  rigorous  self-reform  and  an 
eventual unorthodox measure on exchange and capital flows. 
Notwithstanding  the  different  approaches,  these  steps  were  all  painful  yet  critical  for 
economic recovery. By 1998, the current account  balance  of  the  four  countries  became 
positive,  helping  to improve  the  national  account  and  restore  consumer  confidence. GDP 
growth subsequently returned to positive territory by the second quarter of 1999. 
Two differences stand out between Asia and Europe. 
The  first  is  policy  flexibility. The  devaluation  of  the  exchange rate  helped  restore  export 
competitiveness  of  the  Asian  economies. However, this freedom of flexibility might not be 
practical for Europe given its single currency setting and political complexities. 
The  second  is  the  supportive  global  economy,  which  provided the necessary market for 
Asia  and  allowed  Asia  to  export  our  way  out  of  the  crisis.  Global  GDP  registered  a 
4.7%  growth  in  2000  with advanced economies, the world’s largest consumer, growing at 
4.1%. In  contrast,  the  global  setting  of  the  current  European  sovereign  debt crisis  is  not 
                                                
1   BOT’s staff computation from CEIC data. 
2   Malaysia’s  policy  mix  started  out  with  an  initial  fiscal  and  monetary  tightening,  a  conventional  IMF-like 
measure, followed by a reversed loosening of macroeconomic policies. The insufficiency of these policies to 
restore confidence led the country to resort to exchange and capital control which yielded positive result. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as  favorable.  Global  and  advanced  economies  growth  turned  to  a  negative  territory  of 
0.6%  and  3.4%  respectively  in  2009.  Emerging  and  developing  economies,  increasingly 
feeling  the  pinch of  the  global  slowdown,  witnessed  the  continued  slowdown  of  their GDP 
growth from 8.7% in 2007 to just 2.8% in 2009. 
I believe that there may be other success factors for the European story. But,  we  have  to 
bear  in mind  that  some  of  the success  factors  are  not  without  costs  that  remain  to  be 
addressed. In the  case  of  Asia,  the  sharp  devaluation  and  swift  recovery in  exports led the 
Asian  economies  to  become  addicted  to  large  volume  of  export  at  low  prices.  And,  in  the 
case  of  Thailand,  with  little  incentive  to  invest  in  research  and  development  to  raise  the 
products’  value  and  enhance  human  capital,  the  average  growth  of  labor  productivity3 
had trended down from the 1990s to 2000s. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This  brings  me  to  my  third  part  on  the  lessons  from  the  Asian financial  crisis. I  would  like 
to  offer  three  reflections  that  may  not  necessarily  pertain  to  Europe  but  may  provide 
food  for  thought  for policymakers. 
First,  conventional  policy  prescriptions  may  not  be  appropriate for  unusual  circumstances 
and  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  solution.  Asia  was  a  case  in  point  of  ill-timed  austerity 
measures.  Public  sector debt  in  Thailand  then  was  less  than  15%  of  GDP;  yet  the 
policy prescription  for  Thailand  was  to  tighten  fiscal  policy  and  maintain tight monetary 
policy, resulting in (interbank) interest rate rising from 10%  at  the beginning of 1997  to over 
20%  at  the end  of  1997. With large private external debt beyond the ability of the country to 
service, a way out should have been debt restructuring with international creditors  to  give  the 
country  a  breathing  space  and  avoid  the  painful shock from  the sharp  reversal  in  capital. 
This was made possible only in  the  case  of  Korea  which  has  helped  the  country  recover 
from  the  crisis  and  was  able  to  bring  down  interest  rate  much  faster  than  other  crisis 
countries. 
The  case  of  Indonesia  further  led  the  IMF  to  reform  towards more careful and  focused 
policy prescription. The abrupt  close-down of  Indonesian  commercial  banks  under  the  IMF 
program  added  to  a sense  of  panic,  which  led  to  a  broad-based  bank  run.  Moreover,  the 
conditionalities  did  not  focus  on  the  more  critical  macroeconomic  adjustments  which 
were  directly  related  to  the  problems  of  the  crisis  but  also  included  unrelated  changes 
such  as  requirement  to  abolish import restrictions on all new and used ships. 
Secondly,  policymakers  must  be  ready  to  take  away  the  punch bowl.  In  the past  we used 
to  talk  about  monetary  policy  being  on  the alert  to  take  away  the  punch  bowl.  This  crisis 
has  proven  that  public policy in general need to observe this principle as well.  Fiscal policy 
must guard against falling into the populist trap. Financial supervisors also need to be vigilant 
and  watch  out  for  signs  of  excessive  credit  creation,  and  act  pre-emptively  for  the  cost  of 
cleaning up  the  crisis  far  outweigh  the  brief  euphoria  and  exuberance  of  the moment. 
Central  bank  must  maintain  independence  and  credibility  in  order  to  voice  and  conduct 
appropriate policies that may not be favored  politically.  Going  forward,  I  view  that  there  is 
a  need  for  international  institution  that  oversees  all  finance-related  conducts  to  ensure 
strict  compliance of rule,  implementation  of ethical codes  and avoid double standard across 
nations. 
Lastly,  continuous  and  collective  reforms  are  vital.  Crisis  is  a recurring  phenomenon  and 
no  lessons  from  previous  crisis  will  ever  fully  prevent  the  next  one.  But  through  the 
process  of  reform  after  each  crisis, 
the  market  grows  and  becomes  more  efficient. 
Crises provide a window or “political feasibility” to undertake needed structural  changes  that 
                                                
3  
International Labor Organization (ILO). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
may  be  hard  to  sell  to  the  public  in  normal circumstances,  so  one  should  not  waste  a 
good  crisis.  I  am  pleased  to  see  numerous  improvements  in  key  areas  of  finance  and 
supervision such as the use of macroprudential measures to complement traditional monetary 
policy tools. It is also more acceptable to require banks  to  provision  in  good  times  against 
losses in bad times, for after all most bad loans are made in good times. 
In addition to structural reforms, change in “mindset” is probably  the  most  important. In  order 
to  keep  up  with  the  dynamic global  environment,  we  may  need  to  challenge  and  correct 
some  of our old beliefs. Let me name a few – 1) sovereign is no longer risk-free, 2) we are 
taught to value economies of scale but are now confronted  with  the  too-big-to-exist  problem 
and  3)  banks  should  no longer  be  only international  in  life  but  also  in  death  as  crises  are 
more and  more  systemic  given  the  growing  interconnectedness.  Spillover and  contagion 
were  witnessed  in  1997  where  the  turbulence  spread from  Thailand  to  South  East  Asia 
and to Russia, China and Brazil, as it  was  a  decade later  in 2007  where  the crisis  widened 
from  US  and EU to the rest of the world. Imagine the pace of the spread of crisis in the next 
10  years  in  2017  –  where  crises  would  grow in  size  and  speed  beyond  the  management 
capacity  of  a  single  nation,  real  collective action is called for. 
Most importantly, we have to be forward-looking and well prepared.  As  crises  are  prone  to 
occur  more  frequently  with  larger spillover, reform must be continued during normal times. It 
is  imperative  that  the  public  is  on  board  and  support  the  reform  effort  to  raise  the 
competitiveness  of  the  country,  and  minimize  vulnerabilities  or  imbalances  that  may  be 
triggered  by  external  factors  through  no fault of their own. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  conclude  by  offering  an  observation  that  in  2002,  five  years  after  1997  crisis, 
Asian economies had fully recovered, in particular,  Thailand  was  able  to  repay  the  IMF 
package  some  two years  ahead  of  the  schedule. Today,  four  years  after  the  Lehman 
crisis,  more  work  remains  ahead  of  us. At  this  critical  juncture,  it might  come down  to 
policy action, which entails clarity, commitment and credibility, to progress onwards. 
Indeed,  there  are  always  benefits  from  looking  back  to  the  do’s  and  don’ts  in  the  rear 
mirror  but  it  is  of  greater  importance  to  be looking  forward  in  the  windshield.  As  such, 
for  Asia  and  other  non- crisis  country,  in  this  era  of  growing  uncertainties,  complacency  is 
a luxury we can ill afford. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
