George A Provopoulos: The strategy for the Greek economy’s exit from 
the crisis – what is at stake? 
Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 79th Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 24 April 2012. 
 THE NEW ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMME PROVIDES MORE FAVOURABLE CONDITIONS 
THAN PREVIOUSLY, BUT EXIT FROM THE CRISIS WILL DEPEND EXCLUSIVELY ON 
THE COUNTRY’S WILLINGNESS AND ABILITY TO RISE TO THE HISTORIC 
CHALLENGE 
The historical stakes are still high 
Two years after the first Memorandum, we are now faced with a new challenge, one that is 
especially crucial for the country’s future. Despite the progress made, the failure to act in a 
resolute  and  timely  manner,  along  with  the  recession,  resulted  in  a  worsening  of  the 
dynamics of public debt, making a new agreement for financial support necessary. The new 
loan  agreement  and  the  economic  adjustment  programme  provide  more  favourable 
conditions than before for a return to growth. The new agreement offers conclusive evidence 
of  our  partners’  willingness  to  support  us.  However,  uncertainty  continues  to  surround  the 
global economy, reflecting, in part, the sovereign debt crisis in European economies. 
The economic situation, both at home and abroad, leaves no room for complacency. To take 
advantage of the new opportunity, we must promptly implement what we have agreed to and 
make up for previous delays. There is no easy way out of the crisis. The adjustment must be 
pursued with determination. 
The  current  pre-electoral  period  has  temporarily  sidelined  planned  reforms.  If,  after  the 
elections,  there  is  any  question  about  the  will  of  the  new  government  and  society  to 
implement  the  programme,  today’s  favourable  prospects  will  be  reversed;  the  country  will 
then be at risk of finding itself very soon in a particularly adverse situation, which will impact 
negatively on citizens’ morale.  
What is at stake is the choice between: 
An orderly, albeit painstaking, effort to reconstruct the economy within the euro area, with the 
support of our partners; 
or 
a disorderly economic and social regression, taking the country several decades back, and 
eventually driving it out of the euro area and the European Union. 
Past failures to act in a resolute and timely manner have magnified the actual costs of 
adjustment 
The  second  adjustment  programme,  along  with  private  sector 
the 
restructuring of Greece’s public debt, leading to its substantial reduction, mark the end of one 
phase of the crisis. With the help of our partners, and with a hard effort and at considerable 
cost, under the first programme changes were made that were important, but still insufficient 
in  relation  to  the  size  of  the  economic  problem  at  hand.  This  explains  the  repeated 
underperformance  with  respect  to  the  targets  of  the  adjustment  programme  after  the  first 
Memorandum.  The  related  revisions  would  have  been  avoided  had  we  accepted  from  the 
outset our full responsibility for the necessary change in course, once it had become clear 
that the growth model followed was no longer sustainable. 
involvement 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The needed adjustment did not take place to the extent required. The Memorandum, which, 
in any case, contained reforms that should have been implemented long ago, was handled 
defensively and treated as an external imposition. This defensive stance, however, proved to 
be  totally  counter-productive  –  it  magnified  the  costs  of  adjustment  and  deepened  and 
prolonged the recession. 
A promising new start: a battle has been won, but the war is not over 
The lack of sufficient policy adjustment brought us to the restructuring of debt and the new 
loan  agreement  –  choices  which,  given  the  circumstances,  had  become  unavoidable.  The 
restructuring improves the dynamics of public debt and creates a more favourable framework 
for the economy. Thus, a very difficult phase of the crisis comes to an end, at great social 
cost, but without any devastating effects. We now find ourselves at a promising new starting 
point.  In  this  sense,  a  battle  has  been  won,  but  not  the  war.  This  is  why  there  can  be  no 
slackening  off  or  complacency.  On  the  contrary,  continued  vigilance,  an  intensification  of 
efforts and a faster pace are required. In order to succeed now, we need to promptly make 
fundamental qualitative changes [mainly] to the functioning of the state, the operation of the 
public administration and, more broadly, institutions, the political system, the judicial system, 
the social partners, as well as the values and attitudes that shape our behaviour. 
The agreement of society and of political forces is needed on the main issue: the 
country’s European prospects and growth 
For these changes to proceed, what is needed is the broadest possible consensus across 
society and the spectrum of political views. 
Citizens  must  be  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  the  changes  stemming  from  the  country’s 
choice  of  euro  area  membership;  further,  they  must  understand  that  an  eventual  failure  to 
implement  the  changes  would  entail  losses  many  times  greater,  as  well  as  an  irreparable 
break-up of social cohesion. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  political  forces  will  agree  on  the  issues  that  unite  them,  namely  the 
country’s European prospects and its growth potential; in this way the continuity of the state 
will be ensured. 
The necessary changes can be realised today 
Today  we  are  better  positioned  than  just  a  few  months  ago  to  take  effective  action.  The 
objective conditions that make this possible are in place: 
 
The restructuring of the public debt substantially reduces the country’s obligations 
and the cost of servicing them, thereby facilitating fiscal adjustment. 
The loan agreement and the accompanying economic adjustment programme were 
passed by Parliament with a large majority. 
Whilst  the  fiscal  deficit  remains  high,  it  has  been  substantially  reduced.  The 
objective of achieving primary surpluses from 2013 onwards is clearly attainable. 
There  is  now  broader  public  awareness  of  the  gravity  of  the  situation  and  of  the 
need for radical change if Greece is to remain within the European Union. 
The banking system proved resilient during a difficult period and today looks forward 
to its restructuring, which will enable it to operate more effectively to the benefit of 
the overall economy.  
These  factors  will  help  the  economy,  first,  to  recover  from  the  crisis  and,  then,  to 
settle  onto  a  sustainable  growth  path.  Nevertheless,  the  risks  remain  high  and 
uncertainty is still considerable. 
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The recession and unemployment turned out worse than initially expected 
 
The recession that began in 2008 continues. In 2011, real GDP contracted by 6.9%. 
The situation worsened in the fourth quarter, reflecting, among other things, the fact 
that uncertainty remained high. The decline in GDP was driven by the fall in both 
consumption and investment, the latter dropping by more than 20%. 
A further reason for the deterioration in GDP in the fourth quarter of 2011 was the 
halt in the upward trend in real exports of goods, after four successive quarters of 
growth.  Exports  of  goods  increased  on  average  in  2011,  but  more  slowly  than  in 
2010  (3.6%  against  5.4%).  The  decline  in  exports  in  the  fourth  quarter  can  be 
attributed not only to the slowdown in economic activity in our trading partners, but 
also to financial constraints faced by exporting firms (in particular, limited access to 
bank and trade credit). 
On  the  supply  side,  output  of  the  secondary  sector  fell  sharply  (almost  twice  as 
much as in 2010: –12%, compared with –6.1%). The decline in output of the tertiary 
sector  intensified  as  well  (–5.9%,  against  –3.1%).  By  contrast,  agricultural  output 
increased  by  2.5%,  but,  because  of  the  sector’s  small  size,  this  positive 
development had little effect on GDP as a whole. 
The decline in production was the main cause of the net loss of some 300,000 jobs 
and the surge in the number of the unemployed by approximately 250,000 people in 
2011. 
Conditions  in  the  financial  sector  deteriorated. The  rate  of credit  expansion  to  the 
private sector, which has been steadily decelerating since 2008, turned negative in 
2011. While this development can be partly attributed to reduced demand for credit 
on  account  of  the  recession,  an  important  factor  was  also  the  liquidity  squeeze 
experienced  by  banks,  resulting  from  the  loss of  confidence  brought  about  by  the 
fiscal crisis. Today many sound businesses are suffering the consequences of that 
squeeze. 
    The general government deficit was reduced in 2011, but meeting the fiscal targets for 
2012 will require persistent efforts 
The  general  government  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  was  reduced  by  1.2  percentage 
point in 2011, according to figures released yesterday, while the primary deficit was reduced 
by 2.5% of GDP. Furthermore, in the first quarter of 2012, the central government deficit, on 
a cash basis, decreased markedly year-on-year, while a primary surplus in the order of 0.5% 
of  GDP  was  recorded,  compared  with  a  primary  deficit  of  0.5%  of  GDP  over  the 
corresponding  period  in  2011.  Primary  expenditure  fell,  albeit  less  than  targeted,  due  to 
increased  subsidies  to  social  security  funds.  Attaining  the  full-year  targets  will  obviously 
require persistent efforts. 
Meanwhile, there is considerable uncertainty in the international environment as well 
Global economic activity slowed in 2011 on account of the sovereign debt crisis in advanced 
economies, the general decline in confidence, and the high prices of commodities. 
The  global  economy’s  recovery  suffered  a  blow  in  late  2011  from  the  rise  in  uncertainty 
caused  by  the  intensifying  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  As  a  consequence,  the 
risks surrounding projections for 2012 remain elevated. GDP growth is expected to slow both 
in emerging and developing economies. In 2012, the euro area is expected to experience a 
mild recession. This projection is subject to considerable downside risks, relating in particular 
to an intensification of the debt crisis as well as further increases in commodity prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  response  to  these  challenges,  the  Eurosystem  resorted  to  standard  and  non-standard 
monetary policy measures. At the same time, and in a move to restore market confidence, 
the firepower of support mechanisms was increased. 
The Greek economy: projections of key macroeconomic aggregates for 2012 
The available short-term indicators for the first months of 2012 suggest that the recession will 
continue this year. 
 
The Bank of Greece forecasts an average annual rate of decline in GDP of close to 
5%; implying that the recession will be less pronounced than in 2011; this forecast 
assumes that the necessary structural reforms will be implemented without delay. 
The average unemployment rate is projected to increase this year and exceed 19%, 
up from 17.7% last year. 
Forecast reductions in unit labour costs for 2012–13, together with projected price 
developments,  should  lead  to  a  marked  improvement  in  competitiveness,  thereby 
contributing to export growth and import substitution. In particular, it is estimated that 
by the end of 2012, two-thirds to three-quarters of the total cost competitiveness lost 
over the period 2001–2009 will have been recovered and that, by end-2013, all of 
the loss will likely have been recovered. 
The current account deficit is projected to decrease from 9.8% of GDP in 2011 to 
roughly 7.5% of GDP in 2012 and that this downward trend will continue in the years 
to come. 
The  downward  trend  in  inflation  will  also  continue  in  2012,  with  average  annual 
inflation  expected  to  be  around  1.2%.  In  2013  inflation  is  projected  to  fall  further, 
possibly to below 0.5%. 
    The recession is negatively affecting expectations and fuelling the vicious circle 
Delays  with  fiscal  adjustment  and  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  negative 
developments in the real economy and adverse conditions surrounding the provision of bank 
finance to the economy, apart from their direct impact on incomes and unemployment, are 
also contributing to uncertainty about the economic outlook. As long as the vicious circle of 
fiscal contraction-recession-uncertainty continues, the prospects for meeting deficit and debt 
targets will tend to weaken, thus refuelling negative expectations. 
Some  consider  the  vicious  circle  to  be  due  to  the  tight  fiscal  policy  pursued.  Though  not 
without  foundation,  this  interpretation  is  incomplete.  It  fails  to  take  into  account  that,  while 
fiscal  consolidation  does  bring  about  a  decrease  in  aggregate  demand,  it  also  affects 
expectations. Positive expectations can be generated when: 
 
a  fiscal  consolidation  plan  convincingly  forms  part  of  a  credible  medium-term 
programme, aimed at reducing the share of the public sector in the total economy, 
there  is  strong  evidence  that  the  economic  adjustment  programme  is  likely  to 
succeed  and  that  its  continuity  is  ensured,  regardless  of  changes  in  the  political 
landscape. 
 When  these  two  conditions  are  in  place,  positive  expectations  can  take  hold,  indirectly 
boosting consumption and investment. These indirect effects can, to some extent, offset the 
decline  in  demand  brought  about  by  the  fiscal  deficit  reduction  and  gradually  lead  to 
economic recovery. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A STRATEGY FOR EXITING THE CRISIS AND FOR SUSTAINABLE GROWTH MUST BE 
IMPLEMENTED CONSISTENTLY AND WITHOUT DELAY 
 A national strategy for the orderly reconstruction of the economy 
It has now become clear that the changes undertaken thus far are insufficient. 
 
Both  the  fiscal  and  the  external  deficits  remain  high,  implying  that  the  country 
continues to live beyond its means, by relying on the financial support of its partners. 
Major structural weaknesses in the public sector still remain, even in cases where 
measures to eliminate them have been legislated. 
Market distortions undercut competition and hamper growth. 
Whilst cost competitiveness has improved, structural competitiveness still lags. 
 
 
It is therefore clear that the difficult task which we have before us calls for a persistent effort 
over many years. 
Recovery and growth through the mobilisation of the private business sector 
A strategy for recovery and growth is of utmost priority. Failure to tackle the recession could 
compromise  our  ability  to  meet  the  targets  of  fiscal  consolidation.  In  the  current  context, 
growth requires the mobilisation of the private business sector; this cannot be achieved as 
long as the state continues to dominate the economy. Nor can it happen so long as the fiscal 
deficit  and public  debt are  persistently  high.  Moreover,  there  cannot  be  growth  so  long  as 
there is a climate of uncertainty and distrust exists about the prospects of the economy. 
The prerequisites for growth are therefore: 
 
 
 
The restoration of confidence and the elimination of uncertainty; 
the creation of an environment favouring entrepreneurship; 
the transfer of resources from the bloated public sector to the production of goods 
and  services  by  the  private  sector  and  –  more  generally  –  from  the  sector  of 
non-tradable goods and services to that of the tradable. 
Actions for growth 
As early as in 2010, the Bank of Greece pointed out the need for a comprehensive Action 
Plan  for  Growth,  which  would  run  in  parallel  with  fiscal  consolidation,  specify  needed 
structural policies, and provide a framework for coordinating the growth-enhancing activities 
of the public sector that do not put the fiscal targets at risk. 
Such a plan is all the more urgent today. It includes the following goals: 
Measures with immediate returns 
 
 Reforms to improve the business environment, including measures to deal with red 
tape and reduce the administrative burden on businesses, to simplify the regulatory 
framework, and to restore market competition. 
A speeding-up of the privatisation programme. Apart from generating proceeds that 
reduce  the  debt,  privatisation  may  also  entail  further  investment  in  order  to  fully 
exploit  the  assets  to-be-acquired.  Privatisations  open  up  opportunities  for  foreign 
direct  investment,  which  leads  to  technology  transfer,  efficiency  increases,  and 
productivity gains. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 A  faster  absorption  of  the  funds  for  the  National  Strategic  Reference  Framework 
(NSRF)  and  the  securing  of  funds  from  international  institutions,  such  as  the 
European  Investment  Bank;  such  funds  will  ensure  that  important  infrastructural 
projects that have been put on hold can be resumed. 
in 
the 
the  structure  of  production;  as  a  result, 
Structural changes for a transition to a new growth model 
Apart from measures with immediate returns, a long-term growth policy is needed. Such a 
policy must as of today strive for reforms to foster the transition to a new, export-oriented, 
growth  model.  These  reforms  must  focus  on  changing  the  structure  of  production  and  on 
removing  distortions.  Greece’s  euro  area  entry  did  not  bring  about  any  significant 
differentiation 
level  of  structural 
competitiveness has remained low. 
The last two years have seen an improvement in Greece’s cost competitiveness, mainly as a 
result of lower relative unit labour costs. While this is definitely a positive development, it is 
not  sufficient.  An  improvement  in  competitiveness  is  sustainable  only  when  it  is  based  on 
productivity  increases.  For  this  to  be  achieved,  structural  reforms  are  required  in  order  to 
remove barriers and allow the transfer of resources to the production of internationally-traded 
goods  and  services.  The  ultimate  objective  is  export  growth  and  import  substitution,  i.e.  a 
strengthening  of  the  position  of  domestic  products  in  both  the  external  and  the  home 
markets.  Structural  reforms  aimed  at  a  business-friendly  environment  and  at  attracting 
foreign direct investment make a decisive contribution to progress in this direction. 
Such reforms involve: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None of this is new. The need for such reforms is widely recognised, and in many of these 
areas measures have already been adopted. However, the pace of implementation remains 
slow, meaning that the benefits are not yet visible. At the present critical juncture, all of these 
reforms  must  be  pushed  forward  simultaneously,  with  boldness  and  resolve  and  without 
being watered down. 
bolstering competition in the markets for products and for factors of production; 
modernising public administration; 
ensuring a stable and growth-friendly tax system; 
speeding up judicial procedures; 
rationalising and simplifying the regulatory environment; 
encouraging innovation, research and export-oriented activities; and 
increasing the effectiveness of education at all levels. 
THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE BANKING SYSTEM WILL CONTRIBUTE TO ECONOMIC 
RECOVERY AND GROWTH 
The recession and the evolution of credit flows interact 
The  fiscal  crisis  and  the  climate  of  uncertainty  have  significantly  worsened  financial 
conditions during the past two years. Doubts as to the Greek economy’s ability to break out 
of  the  vicious  circle  affected  Greek  banks,  with  the  result  that  they  were  shut  out  from 
international  markets  and  experienced  a  continuous  decline  in  deposits:  from  end-October 
2009 to end-February 2012, domestic bank deposits by the private sector decreased by over 
€70  billion,  an  equivalent  to  approximately  one-third  of  Greek  GDP.  The  deposit  outflows 
markedly constrained banks’ ability to provide credit to the economy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The economic recovery hinges upon the setting in motion of a virtuous circle, whereby an 
improved economic outlook fosters the strengthening of the banking system, so that the latter 
can,  in  turn,  supply  credit  to  the  real  economy,  with  positive  feedback  effects  on 
expectations, and so on. 
It is possible to improve the funding potential 
Improving the funding potential for the economy can be achieved in the following ways: 
First, by restoring confidence, which could initially lead to a return of bank deposits of some 
€10–15  billion  of  cash  now  being  hoarded  and  then  encourage  capital  repatriation.  This 
would substantially improve banks’ liquidity positions. 
Second, by attracting funds from sources other than the banking system. Two sources can 
be  mentioned  in  this  regard.  The  privatisation  programme,  with  expected  proceeds  of 
€19 billion  by  2015,  mainly  in  the  form  of  capital  inflows  from  abroad,  will  lead  to  much 
greater  total  inflows  if  the  additional  investments  required  to  fully  exploit  the  assets  to-be-
acquired are taken into consideration. Credit flows to businesses could be supported by an 
additional €15 billion, provided that our absorption rate of NSRF funds is improved. To this, 
one should add the funds available from the European Investment Bank. 
The restructuring of the banking system 
The key factor to improving financial conditions is the strengthening and restructuring of the 
banking system, currently in progress. 
2012 will be a critical year in shaping the future structure of the banking system in Greece. 
Banks  now  face  losses  originating  from  the  fiscal  crisis.  First,  they  are  dealing  with  the 
implications of having invested in Greek government bonds, an instrument considered safe 
until  recently.  Banks’  published  annual  statements  show  that  the  related  impact  is  quite 
substantial.  Second,  banks  also  face  the  consequences  of  the  increased  difficulty  that 
households  and  businesses  have  in  servicing  their  debt  obligations  on  account  of  the 
protracted recession. These developments imply that it is imperative for banks to strengthen 
their capital base – a process which is already under way. 
Anticipating  these  challenges,  early  in  2011  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in  cooperation  with  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  the  European  Commission  and  the  European  Central  Bank, 
began  planning  a  number  of  measures  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  These  measures 
include: 
 
 
meeting short-term liquidity needs through the Eurosystem, 
formulating,  in  cooperation  with  the  government,  a  resolution  regime  for  credit 
institutions, and applying it where necessary; 
securing €50 billion from the financial support programme for the banking system’s 
recapitalisation and restructuring. 
 The objective: a sound, strong and competitive banking system 
The banking sector, following its restructuring, will be more sound, efficient and robust. The 
publication of banks’ capital needs will substantially increase transparency, which will in turn 
help  banks  to  gradually  regain  the  confidence  of  markets  and  depositors.  This  will  enable 
them to better perform their fundamental role of financial intermediation and contribute to the 
return of the Greek economy to a path of sustainable growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
THE FUTURE OF THE COUNTRY IS IN OUR HANDS 
Projections for domestic economic developments in 2012 are fraught with uncertainties. The 
economic outlook for the euro area is also subject to uncertainties, linked to the possibility of 
an intensification of the sovereign debt crisis. It is against this challenging backdrop that the 
Greek  economy  needs  to  make  steady  progress.  To  this  end,  work  to  win  the  war  on  all 
fronts  has  to  continue  uninterrupted  from  the  very  first  day  of  the  post-election  period, 
starting  with  the  construction  of  an  efficient  and  flexible  state  that  will  serve  both  the 
competitive functioning of markets and social cohesion. This will avert conditions leading not 
only  to  our  sacrifices  going  to  waste,  but  also  to  a  drastic  deterioration  in  the  standard  of 
living. Thus, the speedy implementation of the policies contained in the second adjustment 
programme  will  place  the  economy  back  on  track  to  recovery  by  the  end  of  2013  and 
gradually into a virtuous circle of confidence-fiscal balance-growth. 
Therefore,  we  all  must  assume  the  historical  responsibility  of  making  the  choice  –  as  a 
society, as a political system, as responsible citizens. The future of the country is today in our 
hands.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
