Christian Noyer: The situation in the euro area 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Paris Europlace Financial 
Forum Luncheon, New York City, 23 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to host this luncheon together with Lawrence Leibowitz. I would 
like  to  thank  Paris  Europlace  for  organizing  this  very  interesting  Forum  and  the  NYSE  for 
welcoming us here, at the very heart of the global financial world.  
I would like to focus my short address on the situation in the euro area where the important 
steps already taken to exit the crisis now need to be further enhanced.  
 1. 
The important steps to exit the crisis already taken by the euro area are 
beginning to bear fruit. 
  Indeed, when you compare the situation of the euro area in the first quarter of this year with 
that in the second half of 2011, the contrast is striking:  
 
Conditions in bank funding markets are much better. For instance, euro area banks 
have already issued about 70 billion euro in senior unsecured debt so far this year, 
which is well in excess of what they did in the whole of the second half of last year.  
The money markets are in much better shape as well: EURIBOR-OIS spreads have 
narrowed substantially, signalling a lowering of risk premia; the US money market 
funds seem to be re-opening access for euro area banks.  
Tensions  on  sovereign  debt  markets  have  also  eased:  10-year  Italian  bond  rates 
have  shed  around  200bps  since  early  December;  Spanish  rates  have  also 
decreased significantly in spite of recent renewed tensions.  
Although at a low level, overall economic activity is stabilizing, as is bank lending. 
 
All these elements indicate a trend reversal. How has this come about?  
All  of  the  players  have  proved  their  commitment  and  ability  to  restore  stability.  National 
authorities, especially in the most troubled countries, have taken far-reaching measures both 
to  consolidate  their  public  finances  and  to  enhance  long-term  growth.  The  new  Greek 
program has been launched. At the European level, a strong new fiscal compact has been 
agreed upon, as well as the rapid implementation of a powerful financial stability instrument. 
Banks are meeting their new capital requirements in an orderly way. And – I saved the best 
till  last!  –  the  Eurosystem  has  taken  measures  that  have  been  absolutely  decisive  for  this 
whole process to take place.  
Unquestionably,  the  steps  already  taken  by  the  euro  area  to  exit  the  crisis  have  been 
numerous  and  important.  But  recent  market  developments  have  reminded  us  that  there  is 
still a tremendous need for further demonstration of the determination of all the players in the 
European crisis to rise to the challenges facing us.  
I will mention three of these challenges.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2. 
2.1. 
But challenges remain to be addressed. 
The challenge for each individual euro country: achieving strong fiscal 
consolidation while ensuring long-term growth 
The  first  challenge  is  the  seeming  dilemma  between  fiscal  consolidation  and  long-term 
growth. One thing is very clear: this crisis is fundamentally a sovereign debt crisis; hence the 
priority in order to exit it once and for all must be a return to a sustainable fiscal path.  
In  fact,  an  impressive  effort  has  already  been  made.  The  Portuguese  deficit  shrank  from 
around 10% in 2009 to around 6% last year. The Italian deficit has been reined in from 5.4% 
in 2009 to 3.9% in 2011, and Italy actually ran a primary surplus of 1% last year, which is 
very rare among developed economies. The French deficit has been cut from 7.5% in 2009 
to 5.3% in 2011. If we look at the aggregate picture for the euro area, we see that it is the 
economic zone that has tackled fiscal consolidation with the greatest intensity and the best 
results. According to the IMF (January 2012 fiscal monitor), after peaking at 6.5% of GDP in 
2009, the public deficit in the euro area started to decline in 2010 and stood at around 4% by 
the end of 2011 (down by 40%). Over the same period, the US deficit was reduced from 13% 
to 9.5% (down by 27%) and the UK deficit from 10.4% to 8.6% (down by 17%). These figures 
show not only that the absolute level of the euro area’s deficit is half what it is elsewhere, but 
also that the pace of fiscal consolidation is actually faster.  
While these efforts are absolutely crucial, there are concerns that too abrupt an adjustment in 
public finances will be detrimental to growth and, ultimately, to fiscal consolidation itself. In 
the current circumstances facing Europe, I believe these concerns are misplaced. We have 
to look at the counterfactuals: delaying consolidation would expose our economies to even 
greater risks. At current debt levels, economic agents are very “Ricardian” and would react to 
fiscal  permissiveness  by  delaying  their  own  private  expenditure.  Financial  markets  would 
continue  to  impose  very  punitive  interest  rates  on  our  countries  to  compensate  for  the 
uncertainty  in  the  fiscal  outlook.  Overall,  the  confidence  and  financial  benefits  of  fiscal 
consolidation far outweigh its negative effects on effective demand in the short run.  
In addition, everyone knows that there are ways to boost growth strongly and durably even in 
times of fiscal consolidation: through structural reforms. Here as well, the progress already 
made  in  many  countries  is  impressive.  In  recent  history,  European  economies  have  never 
reformed so extensively in such a brief period of time. I could cite many examples: the labour 
market  reform  in  Spain  and  now  in  Italy,  the  pension  reforms  in  Italy  and  France, 
privatisations,  public  wage  decreases  in  Ireland,  etc.  Some  positive  effects  from  these 
measures are immediate, but naturally, most of the impact on competitiveness and growth 
will  take  time  to  materialize.  In  any  case,  such  reforms  are  a  necessary  foundation  for 
dynamic and sustainable growth in the future and they must be vigorously pursued. There is 
no doubt that the euro area as a whole will benefit from these national reforms that represent 
a significant asset for us in the global economy.  
2.2. 
The challenge for the banking system: continuing to ensure that the economy 
is properly financed while strengthening the financial sector 
The  dilemma  here  is  easy  to  understand:  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
strengthen  banks’  balance  sheets  to  enable  them  to  better  absorb  shocks,  protect  public 
finances and re-establish normal market functioning. On the other, a disorderly deleveraging 
would create enormous problems and add credit constraints to the many headwinds currently 
facing our economies.  
The  euro  area  is  currently  making  sure  that  these  two  objectives  –  although  sometimes 
difficult to reconcile – are achieved.  
Banks  are  meeting  their  new  capital  requirements.  The  capital  plans  submitted  to  the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  indicate  an  intention  to  exceed  the  benchmarks  set  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more than 20%. French banks already comply with the Basel 2.5 regulations. At the same 
time,  bank  lending  seems  to  be  stabilizing,  although  at  a  relatively  low  level.  Banks  are 
starting to assess their financial situation more positively and in many cases their willingness 
to grant loans is increasing. 
This would not have been possible without the strong support of the Eurosystem.  
As you know, two exceptional three-year liquidity-providing operations have been decided on 
and  successfully  implemented  over  the  last  two  months.  For  the  second  operation,  we 
decided to have an expanded collateral pool, so that smaller banks – which tend to lend to 
smaller businesses that are crucial for the European economic activity – could benefit more. 
The LTROs were specifically designed to help the banking system overcome the dilemma it 
is  facing.  The  idea  was  to  remove  the  funding  pressures,  thereby  allowing  a  smoother 
deleveraging  process;  while  at  the  same  time  preventing  a  major  credit  crunch  that  could 
compromise the maintenance of price stability in the euro area.  
At this stage, positive effects from these operations have already materialized. It is clear that 
banks  were  facing  major  funding  uncertainties  in  2012  and  2013:  these  funding  pressures 
have now been removed. This could in turn contribute to the issuance of new shares and 
hence to the meeting of the capital requirements without forcing excessive deleveraging. A 
reduction  in  counterparty  risk  is  visible  through  lower  BOR-OIS  spreads  and  banks’  CDS 
spreads  have  significantly  narrowed  as  well.  It  is  too  early  to  assess  the  extent  to  which 
these measures will “trickle down” to the financing of the real economy, but the fact that more 
banks participated in the second operation (800 compared to around 500) indicates that the 
money is now closer to small and medium-sized enterprises than it was before.  
The challenge for the EU institutions: enforcing economic union 
2.3 
The weakness of European economic union in the context of monetary union contributed to 
the  development  of  the  current  crisis  and,  if  we  are  to  emerge  from  it  stronger,  real 
improvement is required in this area.  
European  governments  have  fully  understood  this  issue  and  have  made  concrete  and 
significant progress towards a more integrated economic union.  
On  the  one  hand,  Europe  has  considerably  enhanced  its  fiscal  discipline  framework.  The 
legislative  package  (the  so-called  “Six  Pack”)  entered  into  force  in  December  and 
considerably  reinforces  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact:  the  surveillance  powers  of  the 
European Commission over national budgets have been enhanced, sanctions have become 
quasi-automatic,  the  criteria  for  public  debt  and  public  spending  are  being  more  closely 
scrutinised  and  a  new  framework  for  the  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
competitiveness developments has been put in place.  
In  addition,  25  European  Heads  of  State  or  government  signed  the  Treaty  on  Stability, 
Coordination  and  Governance  which  establishes  a  comprehensive  new  “fiscal  compact”.  It 
includes  in  particular  a  requirement  for  national  budgets  to  be  in  balance  or  in  surplus,  a 
criterion that will be met if the annual structural government deficit does not exceed 0.5% of 
GDP.  This  rule  must  be  incorporated  into  the  Member  States’  national  legal  systems, 
preferably at the constitutional level.  
On the other hand, Europe has equipped itself with an instrument to combat crises.  
At  the  last  European  Council  meetings,  it  was  decided  to  accelerate  the  creation  of  the 
permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to July 2012, and to make it more powerful. 
An  important  step  in  this  direction  has  been  provided  by  the  agreement  to  accelerate  the 
payment of the paid-in capital for the ESM, starting with the payment of two tranches in 2012 
and to increase the lending capacity of the ESM to 1tn dollar.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
All  in  all,  these  changes  constitute  the  most  comprehensive  reinforcement  of  economic 
governance  in  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  since  the  launch  of  Economic  Monetary  Union 
almost 20 years ago.  
 The euro area has already demonstrated its determination and ability to take decisive steps 
to  exit  the  crisis.  Many  more  remain  to  be  taken,  and  all  of  the  players  –  the  banks, 
governments, European institutions – need to continue to face up to their responsibilities.  
The Eurosystem is providing the European economy with key elements of stability. First and 
foremost, we are providing price stability and will continue to take all necessary measures to 
fulfil  this  mandate.  Moreover,  our  recent  exceptional  and  temporary  measures  should  be 
seen  as  a  window  of  opportunity  for  banks  to  strengthen  their  balance  sheets  and  for 
governments to step up their efforts in a less troubled financial environment.  
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
