Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity, prices, and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Yamaguchi, 5 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing 
Yamaguchi Prefecture, who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. Allow 
me  to  also  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s Shimonoseki Branch. 
Today  I  will  review  economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  whose  economy  is  heading 
toward recovery despite the effects of the global economic slowdown, and then discuss the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy.  My  concluding  remarks  will  touch  briefly  on  the  economy  of 
Yamaguchi  Prefecture.  Following  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  listen  to  your  views  on  the 
actual situation of the local economy and your candid opinions. 
I. 
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
Overview 
A. 
After the turn of the year, economic activity in Japan started picking up moderately; domestic 
demand  has  been  firm,  supported  mainly  by  reconstruction-related  demand  and  policy 
effects.  While  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  still  in  a  deceleration  phase, 
domestic  economic  activity  has  also  been  firm.  Domestic  demand  –  including  private 
consumption,  public  investment,  and  housing  investment  –  has  been  improving  and  this 
improvement has compensated for a delay  in recovery in production and exports due to a 
slowdown in external demand. 
As for the outlook, while Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path 
as  domestic  demand 
their 
deceleration phase,  there  is  an  increasing  risk  that  a  recovery  in  overseas  economies  will 
be  delayed, which warrants attention. 
I  will  first  review  the  recent  developments  in  overseas  economies,  followed  by  the  current 
situation of and the outlook for Japan’s economy. 
firm  and  overseas  economies  emerge 
remains 
from 
Overseas economies 
B. 
Economic  sentiment,  mainly  in  the  corporate  sector,  has  become  cautious  globally,  and 
there is an increasing risk that the slowdown in the global economy will be a protracted one. 
In  the  European  economy,  particularly  in  Spain,  Italy,  and  other  peripheral  countries,  an 
adverse feedback loop encompassing the fiscal situation, the financial system, and the real 
economy has been operating, and a sense of stagnation has been increasing as a whole. In 
addition,  given  that  a  decline  in  demand  in  peripheral  countries  has  started  to  affect 
household  and  business  sentiment  in  core  countries  such  as  Germany,  partly  through  a 
decline  in  intra-regional  exports,  and  that  long-term  interest  rates  in  Spain  and  Italy  have 
remained  high,  there  appears  to  be  an  increasing  risk  that  economic  recovery  will  be 
delayed. 
As for the European debt problem, since the Greek crisis that began in May 2010, for more 
than two years a process has continued in which governments respond only intermittently to 
pressure from the markets. If this process continues into the future, stagnation in peripheral 
countries  might  start  to  feed  back  into  core  countries  and  the  stagnation  in  the European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economy  might  become  even  more  prolonged  and  aggravated,  weighing  on  the  global 
economy. This is a matter of concern. 
Looking  at  the  background  of  this  problem  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  we  need  to 
recognize  the  merits  and  demerits  of  the  single-currency  euro  in  the  13  years  since  its 
introduction. On  the  merit  side,  one  can  point  out  that  the  absence  of  foreign  exchange 
risks  within  the  region  and  reduced  transaction  costs  stimulated  intra-regional  trade  and 
investment, and that the converging low level of interest rates in member countries for more 
than  ten  years  induced  an  expansion  in  economic  activity. On  the  demerit  side,  one  can 
point  out  that  the  converging  low  level  of  interest  rates  encouraged  loose  fiscal  spending, 
and  this,  together  with  an  optimistic  economic  outlook,  led  to  a  bubble  in  the  real  estate 
market.  In  addition,  necessary  structural  reforms,  including  labor  market  reform  aimed  at 
containing  labor  costs,  did  not  progress  and  the  disparity  in  competitiveness  within  the 
region  was  left  unaddressed. In  a  sense,  we  can  say  that  the  European  debt  problem 
represents the surfacing of the demerits accumulated over a period of more than ten years, 
so it should not be a surprise that the resolution of the problem will take a long time. 
Having said this, with an aim of resolving the problem as quickly as possible, it is necessary 
for  European  leaders  to  respond  appropriately  to  the  challenges,  such  as  improving  fiscal 
conditions in peripheral countries and enhancing growth in Europe, as well as to present a 
specific  roadmap  for  the  longer-term  challenges  of  forming  a  banking  union,  issuing 
Eurobonds,  and  pursuing  fiscal  integration,  and  thereby  dispelling  uncertainties  regarding 
the  euro  zone  economies. In  this  regard,  while  some  gradual  achievements  have  been 
made, the European leaders are expected to show further leadership. 
While  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  supported  by  accommodative 
financial  conditions,  the  pace  of  the  recovery  seems  to  be  slowing  somewhat. The  real 
GDP  growth  rate  for  the  April-June  2012  quarter  (seasonally  adjusted;  the  annualized 
growth  rate  compared  with  the  previous  quarter)  rose  to  only  1.7  percent,  and  growth 
decelerated in domestic demand, including private consumption, business fixed investment, 
and  housing  investment. While  economic  indicators  since  July  have  been  mixed,  what 
concerns  me  is  that  there  seem  to  be  signs  of  weakening  in  the  buoyant  corporate 
sector, which has been supporting the recovery in the household sector. 
Let me amplify this point. In the household sector, private consumption has been firm on the 
back  of  moderate  improvement  in  employment  and  income,  and  housing  starts  and  sales 
have  shown  signs  of  bottoming  out,  while  a  balance-sheet  adjustment  has  been 
progressing as seen in a gradual decline in the ratio of debt to disposable income. On the 
other hand, in  the  corporate  sector,  sluggishness  in  exports  and  deterioration  in  business 
confidence have become apparent, reflecting the European debt problem and a slowdown in 
the  Chinese  economy.  So  far,  given  that  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment 
have  been  firm  and  the  household  sector  has  been  generally  solid,  it  seems  that  the 
recovery  mechanism  originating  from  the  corporate  sector  remains  active.  However,  I 
recognize that attention should be paid to the possibility that employment and business fixed 
investment will be hampered by a further worsening in business confidence, thereby leading 
to an economic slowdown. 
As  for  a  future  risk  to  the  U.S.  economy,  in  addition  to  a  delayed  economic  recovery  in 
Europe  and  China,  I  would  point  to  the  “fiscal  cliff”  problem.  While  a  cut  in  fiscal 
spending  and  expiration  of  a  tax  reduction  are  downside  factors  for  economic  activity,  the 
range  and  size  of  the  factors  are  highly  uncertain  at  present,  and  are  factored  into  the 
U.S. economic  outlook  differently  by  private  research  institutions.  Some  point  out  that 
because  of  uncertainty  associated  with  the  problem,  firms  have  already  been  deferring 
investment  and  new  hiring,  and  we  need  to  be alert  to  how  the  situation  will  evolve  going 
forward. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In the meantime, in U.S. financial markets, stock prices have bounced back to a level prior 
to  the  Lehman  shock,  and  long-term  interest  rates  –  despite  rising  somewhat  –  have 
generally been hovering at low levels. 
As for the Asian emerging economies, a decelerated pace of growth has become somewhat 
protracted due to the recent slowdown in exports to Europe, but the economies are likely to 
pick  up  the  pace  of  growth  led  by  China. Attention  should  be  paid,  however,  to  the 
possibility that the timing of a recovery will be delayed to the autumn or later. 
As for the Chinese economy, the effects of the authorities’ policy measures have started to 
emerge, including an increase in new lending and the bottoming out in housing prices, but 
future economic indicators need to be monitored carefully, since stagnation in the European 
economy  has  been  spreading  to  the  Chinese  economy  through  trade  and  concern  over 
an increase in inventories has not been dispelled. 
As for the NIEs and the ASEAN economies, domestic demand has been strong, but it is a 
matter  of  concern  that  indicators  related  to  exports  and  production  have  recently  been 
sluggish or deteriorating in economies like South Korea and Taiwan. I believe that a key to 
the  future  of  these  economies  will  be  whether  China  regains  its  pace  of  growth  and  their 
exports recover. 
From a longer-term perspective regarding the sound development of the global economy, it 
is critical that the Asian emerging economies maintain a balance between economic growth 
and  price  stability.  In  particular, for  China  –  which  is  expected to  lead  the  global  economy 
together  with  the United  States  –  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to  future  developments, 
including  whether  economic  policy  management  is  maintained  smoothly  following  the 
appointment of the new Chinese leadership. 
  Economic activity and prices in Japan 
C. 
In  Japan,  economic  activity  as  a  whole  has  been  picking  up  moderately,  with  domestic 
demand  improving  mainly  due  to  reconstruction-related  demand  and  policy  effects,  which 
has  compensated  for  a  delay  in  recovery  in  production  and  exports  due  to  a  slowdown  in 
external  demand. The  real  GDP  growth  rate  (seasonally  adjusted;  the  annualized  growth 
rate compared with the previous quarter) was high at 5.5 percent in the January-March 2012 
quarter and maintained steady growth in the April-June quarter at 1.4 percent. 
To  elaborate  on  this,  amid  the  continued  slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  a  pick-up  in 
exports has been slowing and production – affected by the slowdown in exports – has also 
been relatively weak. As for domestic demand, public investment has continued to increase 
and business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend with improvement in 
corporate  profits.  Private  consumption  has  continued  to  increase  moderately  due  partly  to 
the  effects  of  measures  to  stimulate  demand  for  automobiles,  and housing investment has 
generally been picking up. 
At  the  same  time,  there  are  signs  of  concern. There  is  some  inventory  stockpiling  on  the 
back  of  the  continued  slowdown  in  exports  and  production;  machinery  orders,  a  leading 
indicator  of  business  fixed  investment,  have  shown  signs  of  weakening;  the  coincident 
index  in  the  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions  has  been  shifting  from  “improving”  to 
“weakening”;  and  indicators  of  business  sentiment  are  showing  signs  of  weakening. While 
the economy as a whole has been improving, causes for concern seem to have increased 
in number. 
As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path as 
domestic  demand  remains  firm  and  overseas  economies  emerge  from  their  deceleration 
phase. Such  a  scenario  can  be  confirmed  in  the  forecasts  of  the  majority  of  the  Policy 
Board members; in terms of the median forecast as of July 2012, real GDP was projected to 
grow at 2.2 percent in fiscal 2012 and 1.7 percent in fiscal 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
These  forecasts  are  associated  with  upside  and  downside  risks,  and  I  am  paying 
greater attention to the downside risks, as follows. 
First,  there  is  a  risk  of  overseas  economies  slowing  further. As  I  have  already  mentioned, 
the  risk  that  the  economic  slowdown  in  Europe,  the  United  States,  and  Asia  will  become 
protracted has increased somewhat, and if the slowdown actually becomes protracted, it will 
weaken Japan’s move toward a self-sustaining recovery in  which increases in exports and 
production lead to an increase in income and spending. 
Second,  there  is  a  risk  of  further  appreciation  of  the  yen. While  a  positive  case  can  be 
made  for  yen  appreciation  to  a  certain  extent,  excessive  appreciation  will  worsen  the 
competitiveness  and  profits  of  exporting  firms  again  and  act  as  a  headwind  against  firms. 
If a trend of falling stock prices intensifies, together with the trend of yen appreciation, then 
firms’  and  households’  confidence  will  deteriorate  and  currently  solid  business  fixed 
investment  plans  and  private  consumption  will  be  contained,  which  will  weigh  on  Japan’s 
economic recovery. 
Third, there is a risk related to the first and second risks: a risk that the timing of recovery in 
exports and production will be delayed and the transition from domestic demand to external 
demand  will not  occur  as expected. Since  subsidies for  environmentally  friendly  cars have 
already used a  large portion of the budget and growth in reconstruction-related demand is 
likely  to  slow  down  from  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2012  onward,  we  need  to  carefully 
monitor whether external demand will recover by compensating for a slowdown in domestic 
demand.  In  addition,  attention  should  be  paid  to  whether  ambitious  business  fixed 
investment  plans  will  be  steadily  implemented  and  whether  the  moderate  improving trend 
in employment and income conditions will be maintained. 
In the meantime, consumer prices (all items less fresh food; on a year-on-year basis) have 
so  far  been  hovering  around  0  percent  in  2012. A  baseline  scenario  for  the  outlook  for 
prices is that the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices will hover around 0 percent 
for  the  time  being,  and  subsequently  increase  moderately  as  aggregate  supply  and 
demand balance improves. In the forecasts of the majority of the Policy Board members, in 
terms of the median forecast as of July 2012, the year-on-year rate of increase in consumer 
prices was projected to be 0.2 percent in fiscal 2012 and 0.7 percent in fiscal 2013. 
While there are also upside and downside risks to prices, I am paying greater attention to 
downside  risks,  given  that  concern  over  the  economic  outlook  has  been  increasing  and  a 
decline in commodity prices during the first half of fiscal 2012 will put downward pressure on 
prices for  the time  being. Attention  should  also  be paid  to the effects  of  the continued low 
short-term inflation expectations on future price developments. 
II. 
Monetary policy 
Conduct of monetary policy 
A.  
Let  me  now  discuss  the  Bank’s  efforts  to  enhance  monetary  easing. The  Bank  introduced 
comprehensive  monetary  easing 
in  October  2010,  and  has  subsequently  been 
enhancing  monetary  easing.  Comprehensive  monetary  easing  comprises  three  measures: 
the virtually zero interest rate policy of maintaining the uncollateralized overnight call rate at 
around 0 to 0.1 percent; purchases of financial assets through the Asset Purchase Program 
(hereafter  the  Program);  and  the  clarification  of  the  policy  time  horizon,  that  is,  the 
clarification that such measures will remain in place until the Bank judges that price stability 
is in sight. 
At  the February  2012 Monetary  Policy  Meeting, to further  clarify  the Bank’s  stance toward 
overcoming  deflation,  it  introduced  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term.” 
That is an inflation rate the Bank judges as consistent with price stability sustainable in the 
medium to long term. At present, “the Bank judges “the price stability goal in the medium to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
long term” to be within a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI and, more specifically, sets a goal at 1 percent for the time being.” 
On  this  basis,  the  Bank  will  continue  pursuing  powerful  easing  until  it  judges  that  the 
1 percent goal is in sight. 
The Program was established with the aim of encouraging a decline in longer-term interest 
rates  and  various  risk  premiums  mainly  through  the  purchase  of  financial  assets. The 
Bank  established  the  Program  on  its  balance  sheet  and  has  been  purchasing  various 
financial  assets,  such  as  government  securities,  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate 
bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) as 
well  as  conducting  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral. 
Since  its  establishment,  the  total  size  of  the  Program  has  been  increased  from  time  to 
time. It  was expanded  further  in  February  and  April  this  year,  and  at  present  the  Bank  is 
scheduled  to  increase  the  outstanding  amount  of  the  Program  to  about  65  trillion  yen  by 
around end-2012 and  to  about  70  trillion  yen  by  around  end-June  2013,  thereby  pursuing 
powerful  monetary  easing.  In  particular,  for  asset  purchases,  the  total  size  has  expanded 
from 5 trillion yen at the time of introduction to 45 trillion yen, and the purchase of long-term 
government bonds has increased substantially from 1.5 trillion yen to 29 trillion yen. 
At the April Monetary Policy Meeting, the Bank decided to extend the remaining maturity of 
government  bonds  and corporate  bonds  to  be purchased  under the Program from  “one  to 
two  years”  to  “one  to  three  years.” In  addition,  in  July,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  the 
target outstanding amount of the Program is  met, the Bank removed the minimum bidding 
yield  (previously  0.1  percent  per  annum)  for  outright  purchases  of  treasury  discount  bills 
and  CP,  and  revised  the  composition  of  the  Program. The  outstanding  amount  of  the 
Program as of August 20, 2012 stood at about 58 trillion yen, and a further increase of about 
12 trillion yen will be necessary by around end-June 2013. The Bank will continue to steadily 
increase the outstanding amount of the Program as scheduled. 
Under  such  powerful  monetary  easing,  market  interest  rates  have  been  at  extremely  low 
levels. The overnight call rate has been at a level below 0.1 percent, yields of government 
bonds  with  remaining  maturities  up  to  three  years  are  around  0.1  percent,  and  yields  on 
10-year  government  bonds  are  at  the  extremely  low  level  of  around  0.8  percent. As  for 
firms’  funding  costs,  the  average  contracted  interest  rates  on  new  bank  loans  and 
discounts have  declined  to  about  1  percent  and  spreads  of  corporate  bonds  and  CP have 
been stable at low levels. As a result, financial conditions viewed from the fund-raising side 
have been accommodative.  
is  also 
long-term 
interest  rates.  This 
 Monetary policy and long-term interest rates 
B. 
In  considering  the  effects  of  such  monetary  easing,  let  me  summarize  the  relationship 
between  monetary  policy  and 
important  for 
understanding the background of the current historic low levels of long-term interest rates in 
advanced countries. 
Let  us  recall  how  long-term  interest  rates  are  determined. Long-term  interest  rates  are 
considered  to  be  determined  mainly  by  two  factors:  first,  the  forecast  of  future  short-term 
interest rates, and second, an extra interest rate required for risk associated with long-term 
bond  investment.  Regarding  the  first  factor,  if  the  future  economic  growth  rate  or  the 
future inflation rate is forecasted to increase, for example, then the future path of short-term 
interest rates will rise accordingly and one can expect a higher return by investing repeatedly 
in short-term bonds. As a result, demand for long-term bonds will decline and prices of the 
bonds will fall and yields will increase. As for the second factor, long-term bond  investment 
is  associated  with  risks. It  might  become  necessary  to  exchange  bonds for  cash  before 
maturity is reached, and in such a case there will be uncertainty about the selling price. As 
compensation for taking such risks, an extra yield – the risk premium or term premium – is 
required and the long-term interest rate will rise to that extent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Based  on  such  a  mechanism,  let  me  summarize  the  effects  of  a  central  bank’s  asset 
purchases, more specifically purchases of long-term government bonds, in two parts. 
First, there is the effect through the aforementioned risk premium, which focuses on supply 
and demand in asset markets. This effect is called the “portfolio balance channel.” When a 
central bank purchases government bonds in the bond market and absorbs the amount of 
bonds  in  circulation,  the  bond  price  will rise  and  the  yield  will decline. In  this  case,  as  the 
price  change  is  due to  the  supply  and  demand  factor,  the  risk  premium  will  decrease  and 
long-term interest rates or longer-term interest rates in general will fall. 
Second, there is the effect through the risk-neutral forecast of future short-term interest rates. 
If an implementation or announcement of a nontraditional policy action of asset purchases 
is  interpreted  as  a  signal  that  a  central  bank’s  economic  and  price  forecasts  have 
worsened further, then the forecasted duration of a zero interest rate might lengthen and the 
future path of short-term interest rates will decline, and longer-term interest rates – mainly in 
the  short-  to  medium-term  zone  –  will  decline  accordingly.  Or  if  a  central  bank’s  asset 
purchases  are  received  as  a  signal  that  a  central  bank’s  future  policy  stance  has 
changed – for example, a central bank takes more aggressive policy responses in the face of 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  or  there  is  an  adjustment  in  the  policy 
goal – the forecasted path of short-term interest rates will decline, and longer-term interest 
rates – mainly in the short- to medium-term zone – will decline accordingly. 
Both  of  these  effects  encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates. What  is  more 
important, however, is whether such a decline leads to an improvement in a wider range of 
financial  conditions  and,  through  an  increase  in  spending,  eventually  stimulates  economic 
activity  and  prices.  If  such  transmission  mechanism  is  forecasted  to  work,  then  it  will  put 
upward pressure on long-term interest rates in terms of both effects. 
Let me elaborate on this point. As one effect of a decline in longer-term interest rates due to 
government  bond  purchases,  it  is  expected  that  confidence  will  improve  among  investors, 
firms,  and  households,  thereby  encouraging  a  shift  of  investment  from  government  bonds 
and  other  safe  assets  to  a  wider  range  of  risk  assets,  such  as  corporate  bonds,  equities, 
and overseas assets, and this in turn will lower risk premiums of these assets and increase 
asset  prices.  This  can  be  considered  a  portfolio  balance  effect  in  a  broad  sense  and 
means  an improvement in wide-ranging financial conditions. In such a situation, demand for 
government  bonds  will  decline  and  there  will  be  a  certain  amount  of  upward  pressure  on 
term premiums of government bonds (that is, a rise in the extra interest rate required for risk 
associated with long-term bond investment). In addition, if spending is forecasted to increase 
with  a  longer  and  variable  time  lag,  thereby  stimulating  economic  activity  and prices,  it 
will  shift  upward  the  forecast  path  of  short-term  interest  rates,  steepen  the  yield  curve, 
and put upward pressure on long-term interest rates (that is, a rise in the forecast of future 
short-term interest rates). While encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates on  one 
hand  and  expecting  a  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  longer  run  on  the  other hand 
seems contradictory at first glance, in fact it is nothing of the kind.  
Then, how should we understand the fact that long-term interest rates in advanced countries 
have been hovering at historic low levels? It seems that a declining trend in these countries’ 
long-term  interest  rates  involves  the  effects  of  powerful  monetary  easing,  including  asset 
purchases. 
More  recently,  the  trend  of  risk  aversion  on  the  back  of  concern  over  a  slowdown  in  the 
global economy and the European debt problem has been further encouraging a decline in 
long-term interest rates. Some say  that a 1 percent yield on 10-year government bonds in 
the United States and Europe is quite low, based on a general recognition of the long-term 
potential  growth  rate  and  inflation  expectations. In  the  United  States,  the  level  of  the 
target policy interest rate in the longer run is expected to be about 4 percent, according to 
the  economic  projections  by  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  members.  If  such 
views  are  correct,  this  can  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  risk  aversion,  or  a  preference  for 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
safety, in the government bond markets has been firmly maintained. And this might work as 
a  headwind  for  what  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  transmission  mechanism  of  stimulating 
economic activity and prices through the portfolio balance effect in a broad sense. 
Naturally,  greater  attention  is  warranted  as  to  whether  the  current  sources  of  concern 
regarding  the slowdown in  the global  economy  and  the European  debt problem  will  return 
to normal or continue to weigh on the global economy and cause further deterioration. 
(aimed  at 
realizing  an 
“Green  Growth  Strategy” 
The need to strengthen growth potential 
C.  
For Japan’s  economy  to overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a sustainable growth  path, both 
support  from  the  financial  side  and  efforts  to  strengthen  growth  potential  are  necessary. 
Thus far, I have discussed support from the financial side. To strengthen growth potential, it 
is  important  for  every  member  of  society,  from  his  or  her  standpoint,  to  make  positive 
efforts steadily to boost growth potential. Such steps will also help increase the stimulative 
effect of powerful monetary easing on economic activity and prices. 
Of  course,  to  genuinely  strengthen  growth  potential,  a  certain  period  of  time  is  necessary, 
since  such  efforts  need  to  occur  in  concert  with  other  measures,  including  implementation 
of economic and fiscal structural reforms. This is obvious even without citing the example of 
Europe,  and  if  growth  potential  increases  through  the  simultaneous  pursuit  of  aggressive 
efforts  from  the  financial  side  to  overcome  deflation  and  economic  and  fiscal  structural 
reforms,  it  will  lead  to  favorable  effects  on  the  fiscal  side,  including  an  increase  in  tax 
revenue. 
In this regard, in July  2012, the government compiled the Comprehensive Strategy for the 
Rebirth  of  Japan,  which  prioritizes  key  issues. These  comprise  policy  packages  such  as 
the 
innovative  energy  and 
environment-oriented society), the “Health/Life Science Growth Strategy” (aimed at achieving 
a  society  with  the  world’s  leading  health  and  medical  care  and  welfare),  and  the 
“Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Fisheries  Revitalization  Strategy”  (which  seeks  to  double  the 
vitality  of  regions  driven  by  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries).  The  government  has 
presented  specific  strategies  and 
the 
comprehensive  reform  of  the social  security  and  taxation  systems  passed  recently  in  both 
the  House  of  Representatives  and  the  House  of  Councillors,  marking  an  important  step 
forward in maintaining public confidence in medium- to long-term fiscal sustainability. 
The  Bank  has  also  been  implementing  the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support 
Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth,  and  has  been  supporting  financial 
institutions’  individual  initiatives.  The  measure  provides  long-term  funds  for  up  to  four 
years  at  a  low  interest  rate  –  currently  0.1  percent  –  to  financial  institutions  carrying  out 
lending  and  investment  in  growth  areas,  and  was  launched  in  June  2010  with  the  initial 
ceiling  on  the  outstanding  amount  of  loans  at  3  trillion  yen. Subsequently,  the  Bank 
introduced  a  new  lending  arrangement for  the measure,  through  which  it  extends  loans  to 
financial  institutions  for  their  equity  investment  and  asset-based  lending  (ABL)  without 
conventional  collateral  or  guarantees. This  year,  the  Bank  increased  the  ceiling  for  the 
outstanding  amount  of  loans  under  the  main  rules  for  the  measure  from  3  trillion  yen  to 
3.5 trillion  yen,  and  established  special  rules  for  another  new  lending  arrangement  for 
small-lot investments and loans as well as for a new U.S. dollar lending arrangement. The 
current  outstanding  balance  of  the  total  loans  disbursed  by  the  Bank,  including  those 
extended under the special rules, is approximately 3.3 trillion yen. The Bank will continue to 
do its utmost to contribute to strengthening the foundations for economic growth.  
I  have  now  discussed  recent  monetary  policy  in  Japan. In  the  actual  conduct  of  monetary 
policy,  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  should  be  carefully  examined  and,  if 
judged  necessary,  meticulous  and  decisive  measures  should  be  taken.  The  Bank  will 
continue to steadily pursue powerful monetary easing by increasing the outstanding amount 
of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  as  scheduled. The  Bank  will  strive  to  conduct  proper 
In  addition,  bills  related 
timetable. 
their 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
monetary  policy,  and  closely  monitor  developments  in  international  financial  markets  and 
do its utmost to ensure the stability of the financial system in Japan. 
Concluding remarks: The economy of Yamaguchi Prefecture 
My conclusion will touch on the economy of Yamaguchi Prefecture. 
In  my  view,  the  economy  of  Yamaguchi  Prefecture  enjoys  a  number  of  competitive 
advantages. The  first  is  its  location,  since  it  is  close  to  other  East  Asian  countries  where 
demand has been expanding markedly. Second, it enjoys a concentration of basic materials 
industries  with  growth  potential  –  mainly  the  chemical  industry,  which  accounts for  more 
than 40 percent of the industrial production index. And third, the prefecture has the nation’s 
highest labor productivity, mainly in basic materials industries. 
Recently  the  region  has  experienced  a  series  of  negative  events,  such  as  accidents  at 
the  plants  of  major  chemical  manufacturers,  together  with  the  withdrawal  and  closure  of 
factories  of  several  electronics  components  manufacturers. On  the  positive  side,  however, 
amid concern over the hollowing out of domestic industries due partly to the appreciation of 
the  yen  at  the  national  level,  firms  in  the  prefecture  as  a  whole  –  comprising  mainly 
manufacturers  –  have  maintained  their  vigorous  investment  stance. In  fact,  the  Bank’s 
Shimonoseki  Branch’s  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan), 
released  on  July  2,  showed  that  the  business  fixed  investment  plan  of  Yamaguchi 
Prefecture’s  firms  for  fiscal  2012  was  likely  to  maintain  a  substantially  higher  growth  rate 
than  that  of  Japan  as  a  whole.  The  prefecture  recorded  a  year-on-year  growth  rate  of 
12.4 percent,  compared  with  Japan’s  a  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  4.0  percent.  In  fiscal 
2011,  the  business  fixed  investment  plan  of  the  prefecture’s  firms  also  exceeded  that  of 
Japan. 
As  specific  examples  of  this,  in  fields  related  to  chemicals,  next-generation  energy,  and 
medical  care,  there  have  been  moves  among  local  firms  to  pursue  overseas  expansion 
in existing fields with potential for an increase in global demand in the medium to long term, 
and  some  local  firms  are  actively  conducting  additional  investment  to  increase  capacity  or 
research and development in high-value-added areas with potential for growth. For example, 
in connection with the growing need for energy conservation by firms and households, small 
and medium-sized construction firms have entered the geothermal air-conditioning business. 
An increasing number of firms have been making such moves. I  expect that  local firms,  by 
utilizing  their  characteristics  and  strengths,  will  proceed  with reforms to nurture new areas 
with potential for growth, achieving further development. 
In  addition,  Yamaguchi  Prefecture  enjoys  extremely  bountiful  resources  for  tourism,  with 
numerous  attractive  sightseeing  areas  as  well  as  scenic  spots  and  historic  sites,  and 
many excellent structures, including the historic Kintai Bridge, which harmonizes beautifully 
with  its  surrounding  natural  landscape.  Efforts  are  proceeding  to  draw  on  these  ample 
resources  for  tourism,  mainly  by  the  prefectural  government  and  cities,  and  thereby 
promote  the tourism  industry. I  expect  that  by  coordinating  its  regional  characteristics  and 
strengths, the tourism industry will generate further momentum. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
