José Manuel González-Páramo: Monetary policy in unconventional times 
Closing remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  colloquium  “Monetary  policy  in  unconventional  times”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 16 May 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We are approaching the end of this colloquium on “Monetary policy in unconventional times”. 
We have  heard  many  interesting  and  stimulating  presentations  and  I  would  like  to  heartily 
thank  everybody  who  participated  in  our  lively  and  constructive  debate.  Let  me  close  this 
event by adding a few personal thoughts on the two key issues that we discussed today: the 
non-standard monetary policy measures and the interaction between monetary policy, fiscal 
policy, and financial stability.  
Non-standard monetary policy measures: what have we learned? 
2. 
I still have vivid memories about the liquidity-providing fine-tuning operation with full allotment 
that  we  conducted  on  9  August  2007  to  avoid  the  equivalent  of  a  seizure  in  the  euro 
interbank money market. After almost five years, we still have this kind of measures in place 
and the crisis is still on-going. Yet, we can already draw some lessons from our experience 
with unconventional monetary policy. 
When  I  try  to  define  the  general  objectives  of  these  measures,  I  think  of  two  common 
characteristics: 
First,  our  non-standard  measures  address  market  dysfunctions  and  an  impaired  monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism.  From  this  perspective,  non-standard  measures  are  a 
complement rather than a substitute of standard monetary policy, as also illustrated by recent 
academic work.1  
More specifically, these measures address two types of liquidity problems – market liquidity 
and  funding  liquidity  –  by  means  of  a  third kind  of  liquidity,  the  one  offered  by  the  central 
bank. In fact, Markus Brunnermeier and his co-authors have impressively shown in a seminal 
paper that, if left unchecked, a dry-up of market liquidity and funding liquidity can be mutually 
reinforcing and lead to a hazardous downward spiral.2 For instance, the Securities Markets 
Programme and the Covered Bond Purchase Programme have helped to reduce the liquidity 
risk in the government bond and the covered bond market, respectively. From this viewpoint, 
one  could  even  argue  against  the  qualifier  of  “non-standard”  for  these  measures:  by 
implementing  them,  the  central  bank  acts  in  its  traditional  role  of  liquidity  provider, 
compensating for the sudden dry-up of private liquidity. 
Second, non-standard measures “buy time” for the necessary fundamental adjustments. For 
instance,  the  SMP  has  enabled  some  governments  to  maintain  market  access,  while 
implementing  the  necessary  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Similarly,  the 
three-year LTROs are helping banks to implement the necessary deleveraging in an orderly 
fashion, by reducing funding risks and avoiding “fire sales” of banks’ assets. 
                                                
1  See, e.g., Cecioni, M., Ferrero, G. and Secchi, A. (2011), “Unconventional Monetary Policy in Theory and in 
Practice," Questioni di Economia e Finanza 102, Bank of Italy. 
2  Brunnermeier, M. K. and Pedersen, L. H. (2009), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, Review of Financial 
Studies, 22(6), pp.2201–2238. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
While  we  conducted  our  non-standard  measures  with  clear  objectives,  designing  them  in 
“real time” confronted us with challenging tasks. Making an exhaustive list of the issues that 
have  kept  us  so  busy  since  2007  would  be  too  long,  so  let  me  mention  three  essential 
challenges: 
First, while non-standard measures address market dysfunctions, they can have undesirable 
side-effects. Let me give you an example. 
In  the  money  market,  the  ECB  had  to  take  a  greater  role  of  intermediation  as  the  market 
became  fragmented.  One  can  summarise  our  actions  in  this  market  since  2007  as  an 
attempt  to  preserve  a  delicate  balance  between  central  bank  intermediation  and  market 
reactivation.  If  they  are  not  well  calibrated,  both  in  intensity  and  duration,  non-standard 
measures can prolong market freeze, hurting the objective of restoring the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. 
The  second  challenge  that  I  would  like  to  stress  is  related  to  the  central  bank’s 
communication.  The  link  between  price  stability,  interest  rates,  and  monetary  policy 
implementation  is  conceptually  simple  –  even  if  in  practice  very  intricate.  With  the 
introduction of non-standard measures in addition to the traditional interest rate tool, things 
became  much  more  complicated  to  understand,  communicate  and  assess.  As  the  central 
bank intervenes in several dysfunctional markets and expands its balance sheet, the public 
may  become  concerned  about  its  exact  motivations.  Ultimately,  this  may  hurt  the  central 
bank’s credibility and endanger the pursuit of its mandate.  
The  third  challenge  is  the  moral  hazard  implied  by  many,  if  not  most,  non-standard 
measures.  Because  the  central  bank  may  be  expected  to  use  its  virtually  unlimited 
“firepower”,  the  need  for  making  the  painful,  but  necessary,  adjustments  may  easily  be 
forgotten by the other actors – be they banks or sovereigns. 
As there have been three challenges in implementing non-standard measures, so there are 
three conditions to be met for non-standard measures to be effective. 
First, non-standard measures should remain temporary. The central bank should outline its 
strategy for an exit from these measures as soon as economic and market conditions make it 
possible.  Ideally,  non-standard  measures  should  include  built-in  exit  mechanisms.  For 
instance, the ability to repay after one year and the fact that the interest rate automatically 
adjusts alongside the MRO rate are two crucial features of the three-year LTROs.  
As a second condition, the central bank should have a strong and credible communication. 
There should be no doubt that non-standard measures are no substitute for the necessary 
fundamental  adjustments.  Strong 
for  an  orderly 
deleveraging  of  banks  and  for  the  sovereigns’  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms. 
Finally there should be no doubt on the central bank’s independence. 
Third,  the  central  bank  should  remain  alert  and  flexible  in  its  approach  to  standard  and 
non-standard monetary policy but inflexible in the pursuit of its mandate of price stability. I 
am convinced that the ECB has done a good job in maintaining this delicate balance. Our 
non-standard  measures  have  contributed 
inflation 
expectations at a level consistent with our medium-term objective. 
I also believe that the non-standard measures have strengthened the ECB’s credibility as a 
reactive, effective and flexible central bank with regards to the means it employs to achieve 
its objective but also as a central bank determined in the pursuit of price stability, which is, of 
course, its ultimate objective. This is an important legacy, which will help limit the damage of 
the next liquidity crisis when it occurs. 
incentives  should  be  maintained 
the  anchoring  of 
to  maintaining 
Monetary policy, sovereign debt and financial instability 
3. 
Let me now come to the second main topic we have been discussing today. Talking about 
credibility, Matthew Canzoneri pointed out that the 1980s and 1990s may be characterized 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as  a  “war  on  inflation  and  inflation  credibility”.  As  you  all  know,  central  banks  in  major 
industrialized  countries have  eventually  succeeded  in  their quest to  bring  down  inflation  to 
low levels and restore credibility. This experience reinforced two key insights for monetary 
policy  making.  First,  that  price  stability  is  the  main  contribution  of  central  banks  to  macro 
stability and, second, that central bank independence is a prerequisite for credibility.  
Given the success in bringing the average and the volatility of inflation down and keeping it 
low,  the  period  from  the  late  1980s  until  2007  has  been  commonly  coined  the  “great 
moderation”. Low volatility of inflation went also hand in hand with comparatively low volatility 
of output and of several financial asset prices.  
After several years of low macroeconomic volatility, investors, consumers and policy makers, 
started to extrapolate those “tranquil developments” into the future. Large macroeconomic or 
financial  shocks  were  considered  unlikely.  In  line  with  such  a  view  of  the  world,  risk 
assessment and risk pricing in financial markets were arguably subdued. This applied also to 
the  pricing  of  euro  area  government  securities,  which  was  un-differentiated  in  the  years 
before the crisis: notwithstanding considerably different fiscal positions, government bonds of 
different issuers displayed only minor differences in yields.  
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  already  the  founding  fathers  of  EMU  foresaw  that  financial 
markets  were  unlikely  to  discipline  governments  towards  sustainable  levels  of  debt  and 
deficits.3  At  the  same  time,  it  has  always  been  clear  that  sound  public  finances  are  a 
pre-requisite  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  positively  interact  with  stability-oriented 
monetary policy, and vice versa.4  
Accordingly, it was agreed in the design phase of EMU that explicit rules would be necessary 
to avoid high levels of public debt and deficits. This view found its manifestation in the Treaty, 
in  particular  through  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  and  the  no-bail-out  clause. 
Moreover, explicit fiscal rules, coupled with the idea of peer surveillance and sanctions, were 
further fostered by the Stability and Growth Pact. 
However, despite these well-intended safeguards, we are facing the most severe sovereign 
debt crisis since World War II. So, what went wrong? Is the current state of public finances 
and the extreme levels of government bond yields in some euro area countries a result of 
irresponsible public spending? Or are they due to the overreaction by financial markets? Or, 
still, do they stem from the need of governments to deal with the financial crisis and provide 
support to the financial system?  
All  of  these  three  factors  played  a  role  –  although  to  a  different  extent  and  to  different 
degrees when we look across countries.  
As regards financial markets, there have in fact been situations of market dislocations as I 
remarked earlier. However, with sound public debt and deficit levels, such extreme price and 
yield developments would have been without foundation and could not have persisted for so 
long. So the main question is: Where do the high deficit and debt levels – which are at the 
root of the sovereign crisis – come from?  
First,  national  governments  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  with  fiscal  stimulus,  but  also 
with  various  measures  to  support  the  financial  sector,  including  asset  guarantees,  bank 
recapitalization  and  the  creation  of  “bad  banks”.  These  measures,  in  conjunction  with  the 
triggering of automatic stabilisers in a contracting economy, brought along with it a rapid rise 
in government deficits and debt ratios.  
                                                
3  See, e.g., the Delors report (1989). 
4  See, e.g., the article entitled “One monetary policy and many fiscal policies: ensuring a smooth functioning of 
EMU”, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, July 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Second,  some  countries had  clearly  pursued  imprudent fiscal  behaviour  over  several  years 
and  entered  into  the  financial  crisis  with  too  high  debt  and  deficit  levels  –  obviously, 
economic  governance  had  failed  to  guarantee  fiscal  discipline.  Moreover,  some  countries 
experienced  the  build-up  of  potentially  hazardous  private  sector  imbalances.  As  the  crisis 
has revealed, such private sector imbalances can quickly lead to a rise in public debt, thus 
exacerbating government sector imbalances. 
Apart from exposing and exacerbating fiscal imbalances, the crisis also highlighted the fact 
that strained public finances and financial system vulnerabilities can enter into an unsettling 
interplay:  eroding  fiscal  positions,  inducing  a  re-pricing  of  sovereign  debt,  and  adversely 
impacting the financial system via banks’ exposure to government bonds; this has negative 
repercussions for  the macroeconomy  and  can  batter  public finances  and financial  markets 
even further.  
All this made clear that restoring sound public finances now and safeguarding them in the 
future is essential. As you know, steps have been taken in this direction. These include: the 
six-pack legislation, which reinforces both the preventive and corrective arms of the Stability 
and Growth Pact; the two-pack proposal for improving budgetary surveillance; and also the 
“fiscal  compact”,  in  which  all  signatory  countries  committed  themselves  to  enshrining 
balanced budget rules and automatic correction mechanisms into national law.  
The  crisis  has  also  led  to  a  rethinking  on  best  practices  for  financial  regulation  and 
supervision  in  order  to  address  the threats  to financial  stability.  Indeed  financial  regulation 
and  supervision  are  currently  seeing  a  major  overhaul.  This  includes  a  new  institutional 
framework for micro- and macro-supervisions, and also some first – if still insufficient – steps 
towards a more European approach on bank deposit insurance and bank resolution.  
All these initiatives are eventually expected to not only foster fiscal and financial stability, but 
also  to  mitigate  the  vicious  feedback  loop  that  arises  when  one  of  the  two  becomes 
jeopardised.  
Sound  public  finances  and  a  stable  financial  system  create  a  favourable  background  for 
monetary policy. In fact, the interplay between monetary policy, on one side, and fiscal policy 
or financial stability issues, on the other side, has since long been identified. The point has 
been made again today and we will hear further thoughts tonight at the “Armchair debate” on 
“Financial fragility and the role of the central bank”. However, the crisis has underlined that 
there  are  not  only  two  axes  of  interaction  –  monetary  policy  vis-à-vis  fiscal  policy,  and 
monetary policy vis-à-vis financial stability – but that there is a complete interaction triangle, 
including the fiscal-policy financial-stability nexus as a third important edge. The challenge 
for policy makers arises as the poles of this triangle are all endogenous to one another. 
This  brings  me  back  to  my  initial  remarks  on  monetary  policy.  Unsound  public  finances, 
various  forms  of  financial  instability  and  the  hazardous  interplay  between  them  can 
eventually  jeopardize  the  smooth  transmission  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  With  our 
non-standard  measures  we  had  –  at  least  in  part  –  to  address  negative  externalities  from 
other policy areas, while remaining faithful to our mandate to safeguard price stability. 
Let me stress towards the end of my remarks that the defence of price stability never leaves 
room  for  complacency.  Borrowing  the  terminology  that  Matthew  Canzoneri  used  in  his 
presentation: the war on inflation is essentially never over, but is rather an on-going battle.  
I would like to stress in this respect that at the ECB our two-pillar strategy – i.e. the use of 
economic  and  monetary  analysis  –  has  given  us  very  useful  guidance  in  determining  the 
appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  for  maintaining  stable  prices  in  the  euro  area.  I 
appreciate  that  in  Markus  Brunnermeier’s  new  conceptual  framework  that  he  presented 
today, the monitoring of credit growth and monetary aggregates is identified as an essential 
ingredient of successful monetary policy making. 
A key condition for continued success is that our monetary policy stance effectively reaches 
the  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  current  institutional  overhauls  aimed  at  preserving  sound 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
public  finances  and  safeguarding  financial  stability  would  also  contribute  to  favouring  a 
smooth functioning of the monetary policy transmission in the euro area.  
Finally, for achieving price stability the hard-earned credibility of monetary policy must not be 
put at risk. Here, any demand on the ECB to address the short-comings of other policy areas 
by compromising on its mandate or its guiding principles must be clearly rejected. 
Conclusion 
4. 
When I joined the Executive Board of the ECB eight years ago, I was of course not expecting 
that I would have to leave it in the middle of such challenging times. But I am confident that 
eight years from now, my successor as ECB Board Member will have more pleasant topics 
to  talk  about:  how  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  been  renovated,  how  the  financial 
system has been made more resilient, how sound public finances have been restored or how 
the euro area economy has returned to stable growth. In the meantime, of course, I am also 
confident that monetary policy will have continued to maintain price stability in the euro area. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
