Øystein Olsen: Promoting high-quality research in financial economics 
Closing remarks by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Norwegian Finance Initiative (NFI) conference 2012, Oslo, 20 June 2012. 
 In 2011 Norges Bank established the Norwegian Finance Initiative – NFI. Through the NFI 
we aim to promote excellence. Excellence in research, in curiosity and in criticism. 
One objective of NFI is to contribute to a qualified debate in Norway on the fund, its strategy 
and its management. Top-quality research at academic institutions in Norway is a necessary 
condition for this. The fundamental idea of the NFI is to provide incentive programs that will 
lead to long-run structural improvements in research and teaching in financial economics. 
Over  the  past  year,  we  have  introduced  seven  programs,  directed  at  both  students  and 
faculty  of  financial  economics  at  academic  institutions  in  Norway.  One  important  program 
involves  co-sponsoring  positions  and  hiring  of  outstanding  academics.  In  this  way  the 
Norwegian Finance Initiative can help academic institutions in Norway build the infrastructure 
needed to sustain a lively research culture. 
Another NFI program is the publication bonus. The publication bonus has been established 
by the Norwegian Finance Initiative to provide incentives for existing faculty to go the extra 
mile  to  produce  high-quality,  high-impact  research.  The  program  also  signals  to  young 
scholars the value their institutions place on this level of achievement. As scholars in Norway 
begin to respond to these incentives, they in turn will help to set expectations for their peers 
and students, leading to a virtuous cycle. 
Today, I am very proud to announce the first of two such bonuses for articles that have been 
accepted for publication in the best journals after this NFI program was established. The first 
is for Øyvind Norli, professor at the Norwegian Business School – BI. In 2007, Norli authored 
a  much  cited  paper:  “Sports  Sentiment  and  Stock  Returns”,  published  in  the  Journal  of 
Finance.  Here,  Norli  documents  the  effect  of  mood  swings:  Stock  markets  tend  to  take  a 
serious hit the day after losing what is perceived as an important football match. 
Interesting as that is, this is not why we have decided to pay him this bonus now. Recently, 
the Journal of Financial Economics accepted another of his papers: “Geographic Dispersion 
and Stock Returns”. Norli and his co-author Diego García show that companies which are 
truly local outperform more geographically dispersed companies by eight percentage points a 
year – a remarkable effect. 
The other winner I am equally happy to announce is Richard Priestley, also professor at BI. 
Priestley has published several papers on exchange rate regimes, many on the relationship 
between the establishment of the euro and equity pricing across the region. 
The scope of his bonus-winning paper is even more global. It is titled “The World Business 
Cycle  and  Expected  Returns”,  which  has  been  accepted  for  publication  in  the  premier 
European finance journal: the Review of Finance. In this paper, Priestley and co-author Ilan 
Cooper  use  a  novel  and  interesting  measure  of  the  business  variable,  namely  the  ratio  of 
capital to output. This ratio is a good predictor of return on financial indices, both equity and 
bond returns and credit spreads, across time and across markets. 
The paper by Cooper and Priestley demonstrate neatly a central element of modern financial 
economics: expected returns on financial securities vary over time, and tend to move with the 
business cycle. This fact is highly relevant for a long-term investor such as the fund, and is 
one of this conference’s central topics. 
Since its inception in 1998, the mandate of the fund has prescribed a strategic fixed equity 
share; at 40 percent in the initial years, increased to 60 percent some years ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
A  fixed  share  may  sound  trivial.  It  is  not.  The  average  portfolio  of  all  investors  cannot  be 
rebalanced.  As  the  risk  premium  varies  over  time,  equity  values  swing.  Equities  are  more 
volatile  than  bonds,  and  the  equity  share  of  the  combined  market  portfolio  of  bonds  and 
equities fluctuates substantially. 
Rebalancing as we do implies taking on more risk just when risk is already perceived to be 
high.  When  the  value  of  equities  fall  more  than  that  of  bonds,  rebalancing  means  that  we 
would  sell  bonds  and  buy  equities.  To  develop  a  robust  rebalancing  strategy,  we  must 
understand why there are other, also highly competitive investors, who take the other side of 
these trades. We also need to understand our own edge, the comparative advantage – or 
disadvantage – of the size, time horizon, and governance structure of the fund. These issues 
are all intimately linked to questions on the research frontier of financial economics. 
So  far,  the  rebalancing  strategy  has  served  the  fund  well.  From  1998  to  2011,  around 
0.5 percentage point – a considerable portion – of the total annual return can be attributed to 
rebalancing.  We  believe  rebalancing  will  also  be  important  going  forward,  but  we  need  to 
further deepen our understanding of time-varying expected returns and risks. 
The other main topic of today’s conference – well-functioning markets – is also of particular 
interest to us. Without well-functioning markets, the massive reallocation of wealth from oil in 
the ground to a claim on a small share of future global output would not have been feasible. 
Well-functioning  financial  markets  are  also,  through  the  allocation  of  real  resources, 
important for sustained growth at a global level. 
The financial crisis displayed great challenges related to how the markets function. We saw 
mispricing of risk, and the difficulties of managing financial imbalances. Other problems were 
related to liquidity. Trading of fixed income instruments take place at the desks of the large 
investment banks. The problems of these banks in September 2008 implied a literally closing 
of the main fixed income markets. The financial crisis and subsequent great recession have 
dramatically increased interest among academics in research of asset pricing with frictions. 
Questions of regulation, segmented markets, liquidity and principal/agent problems represent 
central issues for a fund manager, and at the same time topics on the forefront of academic 
debate. We need to understand how these issues affect our investment possibilities, given 
the fund’s strategy and characteristics. 
I have pointed to some of the links between the management of the fund and the two main 
areas  discussed  in  this  conference  –  time-varying  risk  premiums  and  well  functioning 
markets.  The  questions  on  the  forefront  of  academic  debate  –  and  their  potential 
answers – are not just of theoretical interest, but of immediate practical relevance to us. 
The  fund  will  be  a  significant  contributor  to  Norwegian  government  budgets  for  decades, 
maybe centuries to come. The strategy of the fund will need continuous development. We 
hope our annual research conferences will provide valuable inputs to this process. 
I would like to thank the organizers for making this conference possible, and not least, the 
speakers for their very valuable contributions. Also, thanks to all the participants – I hope to 
see you again for the conference next year! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
