Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenyan banking sector development over the last six 
years 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Kenya 
Bankers Association 50th Anniversary Luncheon, Nairobi, 7 August 2012. 
 Honourable Njeru Githae, Minister for Finance of the Republic of Kenya; 
Dr. Donald Kaberuka, President of the African Development Bank; 
Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. Habil Olaka, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Members of the KBA Governing Council; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  join  you  on  this  auspicious  day  to  celebrate  the  Golden 
Jubilee  of  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA).  Allow  me  at  the  onset  to  thank  the 
Honourable Njeru Githae, Kenya’s Minister for Finance and Dr. Donald Kaberuka, President 
of the African Development Bank for gracing this occasion. Their presence demonstrates the 
importance they attach to the role that the Kenyan banking sector plays in the economy. Let 
me also congratulate the members and management of KBA on turning 50. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  The  choice  of  the  theme  for  this  luncheon,  “Banking’s  Role  in 
Development, Recognizing the Achievement while Catalyzing Greater Private-Public Sector 
Collaboration”  depicts  the  path  through  which  the  Kenyan  banking  sector  has  scaled  the 
heights over the last six years. The current resilience of our banking sector is the outcome of 
partnership  between  the  regulator  and  the  regulated.  This  is  not  a  common  occurrence  in 
most  sectors,  but  I  can  confidently  tell  you  that  CBK  and  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association 
(KBA)  have  successfully  demonstrated  they  are  agents  of  development  in  the  financial 
market. 
Ladies and gentlemen: The tremendous growth in the Kenyan banking sector in the midst 
of financial turmoil in the developed markets has been put to question by parties who may 
not  be  aware  of  the  past  efforts  towards  a  more  sound  and  resilient  sector.  Allow  me  to 
mention just a few initiatives that CBK and KBA undertook jointly over the last five years to 
complete the financial infrastructure set up in the economy and whose outcome is reflected 
by the unrivalled performance in the region. 
Roll out of credit information sharing: Kenya witnessed several unsuccessful efforts by 
1. 
the Kenyan banking sector to introduce credit information sharing (CIS) in Kenya since 2003. 
However, CIS became a reality in 2008 when a regulatory framework was developed jointly by 
CBK  and  KBA.  As  banks  benefit  from  enhanced  credit  risk  management,  Kenyan  borrowers 
have started enjoying lower lending rates but more needs to be done by banks. 
Roll out of agent banking: On realisation that it is not economical to establish brick and 
2. 
mortar branches across the country, the Banking Act was amended to allow banks to provide 
banking services through third parties (agents). To operationalise this amendment, CBK and KBA 
came together to lay the ground work. This included benchmarking with best practices in other 
countries and developing appropriate guidelines. Following consultative forums with the market 
players, the agent banking model was successfully rolled out in May 2010. 
Since the rollout 11 banks have been granted approval to rollout their agency networks and 
9 of  them  have  engaged  more  than  12,000  agents  spread  across  the  country.  The  aim  of 
agency banking is to increase outreach of banks to enable them satisfy the financial needs of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the under-banked and unbanked Kenyan populace as well as leveraging on additional cost 
effective  distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services.  So  far  agents  of  banks  have 
facilitated  more  than  21  million 
transactions  valued  at  more  than  Ksh.105  billion 
(USD1.2 billion) as at June 2012. 
The cost of collateral and feasible solutions: Banks have cited cost of collateral as 
3. 
one of the main contributing factors to the prevailing high interest rates. To demystify this, 
CBK,  KBA  and  Financial  Sector  Deepening  (FSD)  Kenya  undertook  a  study  on  Cost  of 
Collateral in 2008. The study confirmed that the high costs of collateral creation, perfection 
and enforcement accounted for a sizeable portion of interest rates charged by banks. The 
findings  of  the  study  were  shared  with  the  various  relevant  arms  of  Government  for  their 
consideration. We appreciate the ongoing reforms in the Ministry of Lands and we expect the 
same to be replicated in the other government agencies. 
Establishment of currency centres: The high cost of transporting cash to the nearest 
4. 
CBK branch coupled with increasing robbery cases made it imperative for a solution to be 
established. Through CBK and KBA partnership, three currency centres in Nyeri, Nakuru and 
Meru  were  established  in  phase  one  of the  project.  Savings  realised  by  banks  in terms of 
cash-in-transit  expenses  as  well  as  insurance  premiums  are  expected  to  trickle  to  the 
economy as banks adjust their bank charges accordingly. 
5. 
transfers and T+1 for cheque clearing. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: These are just a few of the joint initiatives in 
the banking sector – they have lowered the cost of doing business in the sector. They have 
allowed the unbanked to be banked – we now have close to 15 million deposit accounts from 
around  2.5  million  in  2007.  Going  forward,  CBK  and  KBA  will  continue  to  collaborate  in 
strengthening the banking sector’s legal and regulatory framework as well as enhancing the 
credit information sharing mechanism. 
Ladies and gentlemen: I once again applaud Kenya Bankers Association for the cherished 
partnership  we  have  had.  I  urge  them  to  remain  committed  to  our  mutual  cause  for  the 
benefit of our economy. I assure you of CBK’s commitment. 
With these few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my pleasure to welcome 
Honourable Njeru Githae, Minister for Finance to make his remarks. 
Thank you 
Clearing  and  settlement  process:  Effective  and  targeting  real  time  for  electronic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
