Peter Praet: Heterogeneity in a monetary union: What have we learned? 
Speech by Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the 14th ECB and its 
Watchers Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 15 June 2012. 
 I would like to thank Maarten Dossche and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contribution to the preparation of this 
speech. 
It is a great pleasure to be speaking here today at what has, over the years, become a prime 
opportunity  for  the  European  Central  Bank  to  exchange  views  with  ECB  watchers  on  the 
challenges faced by monetary policy in the euro area. My remarks today  will focus on the 
question of how imbalances in terms of competitiveness and private and public sector debt 
have gradually led to a worrying degree of heterogeneity in the euro area. I will also highlight 
the effects of the ECB’s liquidity-providing operations, arguing that these contribute to more 
homogeneous  financial  conditions  across  the  euro  area  and  allow  a  smoother  adjustment 
process during the transitional period needed in order to reabsorb accumulated imbalances. I 
will, however, also argue that these operations can only be regarded as temporary support, 
as  the  underlying  structural  problems  and  weaknesses  require  a  truly  structural  response 
completing the overall architecture of EMU. 
When the euro was first introduced, many critics claimed that EMU would not work because 
euro area countries’ business cycles and economic structures were not sufficiently similar. 
But does economic integration really need to imply economic uniformity? I do not think so. 
This  can  clearly  be  seen  in  the  United  States.  Regional  economies  are  hit  by  different 
economic shocks and perform differently owing to their differing economic structures, even 
over  extended  periods.  At  the  same  time,  institutional  safeguards  are  required  in  order  to 
ensure that heterogeneous developments do not become self-reinforcing and pose a threat 
to  overall  macroeconomic  stability.  Here  in  the  euro  area,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that 
economic conditions have, today, become increasingly heterogeneous. But let me state very 
clearly up front that this does not imply that a common currency cannot succeed in the euro 
area.  To  my  mind,  this  means  that  we  need  to  address  the  institutional  shortcomings  and 
weaknesses of EMU in order to allow the euro area to cope with heterogeneous economic 
developments and large asymmetric shocks, as is the case in the United States. There, too, 
economic and monetary union did not occur overnight; it was a long process. 
Otmar  Issing1  argued,  more  than  a  decade  ago,  that  “one  size  must  fit  all”.  Provided  that 
institutions adapt, EMU should be beneficial for all. Since the introduction of the euro, many 
of  us  have  been  aware  of  institutional  deficiencies,  both  in  terms  of  the  prevention  of 
imbalances and as regards the management of such imbalances in the event of a crisis. The 
crisis is now forcing us to address these deficiencies.  
Allow me, in the remainder of my remarks, to look at how and why imbalances arose in the 
euro area and how the ECB’s monetary policy responded to them.  
                                                
1 
Issing, O., “The single monetary policy of the European Central Bank: One size fits all”, International Finance, 
4:3, 2001, pp. 441–462. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How and why did imbalances arise in the euro area? 
Financial uniformity with increasing imbalances 
The situation prior to the financial crisis is best described as one in which euro area countries 
achieved  a  very  high  degree  of  convergence  in  terms  of  financial  conditions,  while  at  the 
same time large macroeconomic and financial imbalances were gradually accumulating. 
With  the  advent  of  the  euro,  there  was  significant  convergence  in  terms  of  the  financial 
conditions in the various euro area countries. Euro area banks were able to trade with one 
another in a unified money market. Consequently, there was also significant convergence in 
terms  of  the  interest  rates  that  banks  charged  households  and  firms.  Indeed,  these  are 
necessary  conditions  for  a  single  monetary  policy  that  affects  all  economic  agents  in  the 
same  way.  However,  the  sovereign  bonds  of  the  various  euro  area  countries  were  also 
priced at rates that were very similar, with those rates bearing little relation to the fiscal and 
macroeconomic fundamentals of the individual countries. With the benefit of hindsight, this is 
a puzzling outcome. Clearly, a single monetary policy should imply a single money market 
interest  rate,  as  well  as  a  single  long-term  risk-free  interest  rate.  And  with  inflation 
expectations converging across the euro area, sovereign bond yields could be expected to 
become  less  dispersed.  However,  despite  the  single  monetary  policy,  differences  in  the 
default  risk  of  individual  countries,  consumers  and  firms  remained.  But  financial  markets 
were less wary of such risks, thereby establishing improper incentives for public and private 
sector borrowers. 
One  simple  summary  indicator  of  the  degree  of  economic  heterogeneity  is  cross-country 
inflation  differentials.  These  reflect  differences  between  countries  in  terms  of  the  business 
cycle, productivity growth and the functioning of labour and product markets. They also affect 
countries’ real interest rates, as well as the international price competitiveness of their goods 
and  services.  Monetary  union  resulted  in  inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area  falling  to  a 
level comparable to the United States. However, although the two had inflation differentials of 
a  similar  size,  the  persistence  of  those  seen  in  the  euro  area  remained  much  greater, 
pointing  to  the  possible  existence  of  macroeconomic  imbalances.  As  a  result,  since  the 
introduction of the euro, the persistent inflation differentials in the euro area gave rise to a 
divergence of relative prices that is twice as large as the one observed in the United States. 
(Slide 2) 
The  main  driver  of  those  persistent  inflation  differentials  is  related  to  the  cross-country 
differences  observed  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms and has little to do with real convergence or so-called “Balassa-Samuelson effects”. 
In some euro area countries, governments failed to implement the necessary reforms in their 
product and labour markets. Consequently, wage growth exceeded productivity growth and 
prices  rose  faster  than  in  other  countries.  (Slide  3)  These  inflation  differentials  led  to 
divergent developments in international competitiveness and contributed to the accumulation 
of unprecedented current account positions in the euro area. (Slide 4) 
In  a  number  of  countries,  this  all  led  to  economic  activity  gradually  shifting  away  from  the 
more  export-oriented  manufacturing  industry  towards  the  more  domestically  oriented 
construction  sector.  Because  sectoral  reallocation  is  typically  a  slow  process,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  now  readjust  those  countries’  economies  quickly  in  response  to  the  crisis.  In 
addition,  in  most  countries  there  is  a  high  degree  of  downward  wage  rigidity,  which  is  a 
further impediment to rapid adjustment. 
Accumulation of private and public sector debt in some countries 
Moreover, the persistently higher inflation rates in some countries implied persistently lower 
real interest rates, particularly in light of the high degree of convergence in terms of nominal 
lending rates. Countries with lower real interest rates experienced stronger credit growth and 
housing  booms,  which  placed  further  pressure  on  wages  and  prices.  (Slide  5)  Lower  real 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest rates also meant that it was easier for governments to borrow, slowing down fiscal 
consolidation.  Governments  did  not  adopt  sufficiently  counter-cyclical  policies  to  limit  their 
own accumulation of debt or to counteract the accumulation of debt in the private sector. In 
fact,  because  those  economic  booms  were  based  on  stronger  domestic  consumption  and 
rising  property  prices,  they  led  to  improvements  in  cyclical  fiscal  balances  as  long  as  the 
boom went on, so that governments had few incentives to tighten fiscal policy before the bust 
set in.2 
The accumulation of imbalances was exacerbated by institutional deficiencies 
The question naturally arises as to why this unsustainable degree of heterogeneity occurred 
in the euro area and not the United States. In the United States, regional imbalances tend to 
be more mean-reverting, owing to higher levels of labour mobility and more flexible product 
and  labour  markets.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  also  less  scope  for  unsustainable 
accumulation of debt at state level. Most states have adopted legislation that prevents them 
from accumulating the levels of debt seen in the euro area.3 
The institutional design of the euro area has clearly given rise to moral hazard and lacked the 
capacity to credibly engage in measures to prevent rising imbalances.4 Although there was 
an unseen accumulation of debt in some euro area countries, financial markets were allowed 
to  set  financial  conditions  in  such  a  way  that  private  and  public  sector  borrowers  in  those 
countries  could  essentially  continue  to  borrow  at  the  same  interest  rates  as  borrowers  in 
countries with much sounder fiscal and macroeconomic fundamentals. As a result, financial 
flows ran from countries with strong productivity growth to countries with weak productivity 
growth,  fuelling  a  persistent  economic  boom  based  on  the  accumulation  of  debt.  To  be 
efficient,  financial  flows  should  instead  have  run  towards  countries  with  higher  levels  of 
productivity growth.  
Heterogeneity during the crisis and the ECB’s response 
The financial crisis has led to a strong increase in heterogeneity within the euro area. The 
re-emergence of cross-country differentials in terms of financial conditions has contributed to 
divergence in macroeconomic and financial fundamentals. Conversely, these heterogeneous 
financial conditions mainly reflect persistent fiscal, macroeconomic and financial imbalances, 
as well as persistent structural problems in several countries.  
The  first  dimension  of  heterogeneity  concerns  real  developments.  Some  countries  have 
recovered  well  while  others  continue  to  be  affected  by  persistent  structural  problems.  But 
some  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  have  begun  to  adjust.  Competitiveness  has 
improved in countries where labour costs used to persistently exceed the euro area average. 
That  being  said,  such  adjustment  has  remained  too  limited.  Sizeable  imbalances  persist, 
particularly  high  levels  of  public  and  private  sector  debt  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
sector. Looking ahead, it is of the essence that government policies decisively address these 
various fiscal, financial and structural impediments to growth.  
This brings me to the second – and most evident – dimension of heterogeneity, namely the 
sharp divergence observed in financial conditions in euro area countries. In the course of the 
crisis,  secured  and  unsecured  money  markets  have  become  increasingly  impaired, 
                                                
2  See, for instance, Bénétrix, A. and Lane, P., Fiscal cyclicality and EMU, Trinity College Dublin, mimeo, 2012. 
3  See, for instance, Henning, R. and Kessler, M., “Fiscal federalism: US history for architects of Europe’s fiscal 
union”, Bruegel Essay and Lecture Series, 2012. 
4  See, for instance, Persson, T. and Tabellini, G., “Federal fiscal constitutions: risk sharing and moral hazard”, 
Econometrica, 64, 1996, pp. 623–646. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
especially  across  national  borders.  Countries’  sovereign  bond  yields  have  diverged 
significantly.  Corporate  bond  markets  have  also  experienced  tensions.  Overall,  there  is 
ample evidence that country-specific factors have become more important in driving yields.  
The emergence of fragmented financial markets within the euro area began in the aftermath 
of Lehman Brothers’ default and intensified following the onset of the sovereign debt crisis in 
May 2010. Financial integration came to a halt and was partly reversed, as can be seen from 
the  fact  that  non-bank  debt  securities  were  increasingly  purchased  domestically,  with 
non-domestic euro area holders selling these bonds. (Slide 6) Euro area countries’ financial 
sectors retreated within national borders. 
As a result of those fragmented financial conditions, the transmission of the ECB’s monetary 
policy  stance  to  interest  rates  was  increasingly  impaired.  Moreover,  banks  in  countries  in 
which government finances were under strain faced restricted access to the money market 
and other sources of financing, given the interconnectedness between banks and sovereign 
states.  Had  this  been  allowed  to  continue,  these  funding  restrictions  would  probably  have 
hampered growth in credit to households and non-financial corporations. This, combined with 
deleveraging needs, could have resulted in a “credit crunch” in several parts of the euro area, 
with negative consequences for the economy and price stability in the euro area. 
In reacting to this exceptional degree of heterogeneity, the ECB’s monetary policy continued 
to be guided by its objective of ensuring price stability for the euro area as a whole. Key ECB 
interest rates were reduced significantly. In addition, non-standard measures were adopted 
in order to support the functioning of the transmission mechanism by bringing back liquidity 
to  dysfunctional  markets.  For  instance,  in  light  of  the  constraints  in  funding  markets  for 
banks,  the  maturities  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  successively  extended, 
culminating in the three-year operations conducted in December 2011 and February 2012. 
Following  these  operations,  funding  constraints  have  eased,  with  money  market  spreads 
declining.  (Slides  7  and  8)  Moreover,  the  already  broad  collateral  framework  has  been 
extended  further,  with  corresponding  risk  control  measures  to  mitigate  the  Eurosystem’s 
exposure  to  risk.  This  has  made  it  easier  for  collateral-constrained  banks  to  continue  to 
participate in refinancing operations.  
Overall,  banks’  recourse  to  refinancing  operations  has  been  particularly  strong  in  those 
countries  that  have  been  worst  affected  by  the  crisis.  While  open  to  all,  the  ECB’s 
non-standard measures have been used most intensively in countries facing financial stress. 
Cross-country differences in the use of non-standard measures have thus largely reflected 
heterogeneity in financial conditions across the euro area. Our policy measures have helped 
to reduce heterogeneity in financial conditions thereby ensuring a smoother transmission of 
monetary policy across the euro area. 
The extent of the heterogeneity in banks’ financing needs can also be inferred from national 
central banks’ balances in TARGET2. These balances reflect the national central banks’ net 
claims  or  liabilities  resulting  from  commercial  banks’  cross-border  payments  in  TARGET2. 
The increasing net liabilities of some national central banks are a reflection mainly of funding 
stress in their individual banking systems, with financial outflows being compensated for by 
increased recourse to Eurosystem refinancing operations. (Slide 9)  
Our policy measures have, in particular, increased the ECB’s intermediation between banks. 
Looking at the interbank market, reduced willingness to lend, especially across borders, has 
hampered the distribution of liquidity to those banks that are most in need of it, particularly 
banks in countries facing financial stress. Increases in deposits held with the Eurosystem by 
banks  in  financially  strong  countries  can  be  seen  as  an  indication  of  the  degree  of 
disintermediation  in  the  money  market.  (Slide  10)  Banks  in  such  countries  tend  to  be 
recipients of cross-border payment flows and therefore need less central bank liquidity than 
banks in countries facing financial stress.  
The  surplus  of  central  bank  liquidity  in  banks  in  financially  stronger  countries  has  raised 
concerns  that  such  liquidity  could  fuel  asset  price  bubbles  in  parts  of  the  euro  area, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
potentially posing a threat to price stability. These concerns are not warranted at the current 
juncture. Thus far, only a moderate recovery has been seen in asset prices. As regards the 
housing market, developments in money and credit – traditionally good leading indicators of 
booms in house prices – have remained subdued. However, we  will continue to pay close 
attention to such developments.  
Conclusion 
To sum up, the measures adopted by the ECB have contributed to greater homogeneity in 
the  pass-through  of  policy  rates  to  the  economy,  with  a  view  to  maintaining  price stability. 
However,  monetary  policy  cannot  provide  a  lasting  solution  to  the  underlying  problems 
causing  this  persistent  heterogeneity.  While  the  ECB  can  help  to  ensure  a  smooth 
adjustment process and offer temporary relief, this cannot replace the necessary structural 
adjustment. Instead, governments need to act in a  variety of policy areas – particularly as 
regards  fiscal  consolidation,  structural  reforms  and  financial  stability  –  within  a  reinforced 
governance framework at the European level. This is the only way that we can put the euro 
area back on a sustainable growth path.  
The crisis has highlighted several shortcomings in the institutional framework of EMU, and 
these  need  to  be  addressed.  This  framework  failed  to  ensure  sound  fiscal  discipline  in  all 
euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  to  prevent  or  correct  the  accumulation  of  financial  and 
competitiveness  imbalances.  Crisis  management  and  financial  sector  repair  –  such  as  the 
rescue  and  resolution  of  financial  institutions  –  were  left  to  national  authorities,  despite 
considerable  cross-border  activity  in  the  financial  sector. We  saw  only  too  clearly  that  the 
interconnectedness  of  banks  and  sovereign  states  can  lead  to  adverse  feedback  loops 
between  sovereign  and  bank  financial  conditions,  with  significant  consequences  for  the 
macroeconomic stability of the euro area as a whole.  
Several steps have already been taken with a view to enhancing the governance framework 
for  EMU  and  improving  the  prevention  and  correction  of  fiscal,  macroeconomic  and 
competitiveness  imbalances.  At  the  same  time,  an  overhaul  of  the  framework  for  financial 
supervision  and  regulation  has  been  initiated.  Finally,  firewalls  and  crisis  management 
instruments have been established in order to further safeguard financial stability, particularly 
by addressing the risk of contagion across countries and financial market segments.  
Looking  ahead,  further  steps  will  need  to  be  taken  in  order  to  supplement  the  single 
monetary  policy  with  a  more  integrated  framework  for  bank  supervision,  resolution  and 
deposit  insurance,  as  well  as  far  more  extensive  coordination  of  government  policies 
affecting competitiveness. As the President said this morning, if we are to achieve this, euro 
area countries will inevitably need to surrender more national sovereignty and increase their 
coordination  of  national  policies.  The  global  economy  is  becoming  increasingly  integrated. 
The importance of national sovereignty has been waning as a result of increasing economic 
interdependence  at  the  global  level.  It  is  an  illusion  to  think  that,  in  an  integrated  world, 
countries will be able to decouple themselves from developments in other countries.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
