Luis M Linde: Assessment of Spain’s economic situation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 17 July 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Every year the Governor of the Banco de España appears before this Committee to give an 
assessment  of  the  economic  situation,  as  part  of  the  presentation  of  the  Bank’s  Annual 
Report.  
The  backdrop  to  today’s  appearance  is  one  of  great  difficulty  and,  therefore,  of  great 
importance. The Spanish economy is undergoing difficult economic circumstances and the 
problems  our  public  finances  and  banking  system  face  are  a  focal  point  of  interest  for 
national  and  international  investors,  analysts  and  policymakers.  I  therefore  believe  that, 
changing the usual emphasis of the presentation of the Report, there are grounds to devote 
an  extensive  part  of  my  address  to  the  important  and  pressing  problems  of  our  financial 
system and to the measures for redressing them.  
My presentation is therefore structured around four areas: 
 
 
 
International economic developments. 
The situation of and outlook for the Spanish economy. 
Developments  in  our  banking  system  following  the  outbreak  of  the  international 
crisis in 2008.  
The plans to clean up, reform and strengthen our banks’ solvency and operational 
capacity. 
 International economic developments 
1 
I should first point out that the process of recovery in the world economy, begun in 2010, has 
come unstuck in 2012. We are currently experiencing a further bout of weakness in global 
activity that is affecting the most developed economies and the euro area, but also the major 
emerging economies.  
The euro area 
1.1 
The sovereign debt crisis, initially confined to a limited group of economies, evolved over the 
course of last year to become, first, a systemic crisis for the euro area as a whole, and later, 
a cause for concern and a factor of risk for the global economy.  
The  roots  of  the  current  crisis  must  be  sought  in  the  build-up  of  imbalances  in  different 
countries’  public  finances.  The  crisis  has  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  institutional 
arrangements  underpinning  the  euro  and  the  common  monetary  policy  have  cracks  and 
inconsistencies that must be repaired, and the political difficulties regarding how to set about 
such repair have contributed to exacerbating them.  
Admittedly,  there  has  been  progress  in  the  field  of  domestic  economic  policies  and  in  the 
management of the area as a whole. In the countries affected by the most serious tensions 
(Greece, Portugal and Ireland), ambitious fiscal consolidation and reform programmes have 
been  set  in  train.  Reforms  include  both  those  undertaken  in  the  markets  for  goods  and 
factors and those addressing banking systems. The common monitoring and early-warning 
mechanisms and those, where necessary, for the correction of macroeconomic – primarily 
fiscal – imbalances have been strengthened and extended, and a European mechanism for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
crisis management and the provision of financial support to Member States in difficulty has 
been designed: first, and temporarily, the European Financial Stability Facility and later, and 
permanently, the European Stability Mechanism.  
In  recent  months,  several  principles  have  been  laid  down  to  improve  economic  cohesion 
among  the  European  Union  countries,  structured  around  four  major  courses  of  action:  an 
integrated  financial  framework  at  the  European  level;  greater  fiscal  integration;  greater 
co-responsibility  in  the  design  of  economic  policies;  and  advances  in  transparency  and 
accountability geared to strengthening the legitimacy of the entire process. 
But, irrespective of these medium- and long-term measures, it must be said that a major part 
of the task of stabilising the euro area has fallen on the European Central Bank, both with 
conventional monetary policy measures, and with non-conventional measures involving the 
purchase of member countries’ sovereign debt. There is a debate on the role of the ECB, as 
to  whether  it  has  been  sufficiently  resolute  or  expansionary;  but  it  should  in  any  case  be 
acknowledged  that  its  provision  of  long-term  liquidity  and  its  debt  purchases  have  been 
positive measures.  
According to the International Monetary Fund, the growth outlook for 2012 is negative for the 
euro area countries as a whole (–0.3%), and points to very scant growth for 2013 (around 
0.7%).  
Other developed economies and emerging countries 
1.2 
The euro area sovereign debt crisis has adversely affected the other advanced economies, 
thus  compounding  the  contractionary  impulses  (such  as  the  tsunami  in  Japan  and  its 
implications for the nuclear industry, and the political tensions in the Arab countries) and the 
short-term  effects  of  the  adjustments  under  way  to  reduce  private-sector  debt  levels,  to 
redress financial systems and to scale back oversized real estate sectors. The United States 
grew  by  1.7%  in  2011,  compared  with  3%  in  2010;  the  United  Kingdom  posted  growth  of 
under 1% in 2011 and Japan fell back by 0.7%.  
The  emerging  economies,  however,  were  more  resilient  to  this  contractionary  current  and 
grew by 6.4% over the year as a whole. The uptrend in commodities prices, capital inflows 
and the continuing dynamism of the Chinese economy helped explain these developments. 
That said, the global context of growing uncertainty, the slowdown in world trade, induced by 
the  diminished  dynamism  of  the  developed  economies,  and  the  contractionary  monetary 
policies  implemented  in  these  countries  to  combat  the  risks  of  overheating  all  exerted  an 
effect which was felt, above all, in the second half of the year.  
The crisis of the Spanish economy 
2 
I shall now turn to the Spanish economy.  
The  Spanish  crisis  has  a  home-grown  component,  whose  origins  lie  in  the  expansionary 
phase  that  followed  the  1992–1993  crisis  and  which  ran  until  the  outbreak  of  the  current 
crisis  in  the  summer  of  2008.  During  this  expansion,  severe  macroeconomic  and  financial 
imbalances  built  up,  essentially  a  marked  deterioration  in  competitiveness  and  excessive 
debt. 
Heavy  corporate  and  household  debt  (routed  through  Spanish  credit  institutions  which,  in 
turn,  had  to  resort  to  external  borrowing  to  obtain  the  funds  needed)  left  the  Spanish 
economy potentially exposed to the global financial instability and to the instability of the euro 
area.  
The extraordinary expansion of the construction and real estate sector played a decisive role 
in  this  process  of  over-indebtedness,  since  a  most  sizeable  volume  of  financing  was 
required. The pattern of expansion in this sector prompted other misalignments, such as the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  malfunctioning  of  certain 
episode of acute overvaluation of real estate assets and an oversized construction sector. 
The outcome of these developments was the most severe real estate crisis the economy has 
witnessed in recent decades, which triggered the recession in Spain.  
The impact of the real estate adjustment on employment and activity was particularly marked 
in the initial stages of the crisis owing to the intensive use of labour in construction and to the 
knock-on  effects  on  other  productive  sectors,  a  feature  common  to  other  developed 
economies with a similar set of problems.  
Our public finances benefited during this stage from exceptional revenue growth (I refer to 
the years from 2003 to 2007), which detracted from the effort to contain domestic demand. 
This all took place, moreover, in very accommodative financial conditions, i.e. with very low 
or, indeed, negative real interest rates at times, owing to the policy then pursued both by the 
US Federal Reserve and by the European Central Bank. This growth in public revenue would 
ultimately prove unsustainable, meaning that the recession resulted in a serious fiscal crisis, 
precisely  when  events  in  Europe  would  lead  analysts  and  the  markets  to  focus  on  the 
sustainability of public finances.  
The  Report  stresses  that  this  situation  requires  an  economic  policy  that  redresses  the 
financial  position  of  all  sectors  –  households,  firms,  general  government  and  financial 
institutions  –  and  corrects 
institutions  which  hamper 
adjustments and affect competitiveness.  
The three pillars that should underpin this economic policy strategy are an ambitious process 
of  fiscal  consolidation  and  public  saving;  the  pushing  through  of  reforms  to  enhance 
efficiency  and  competition  in  the  sectors  least  exposed  thereto;  and,  of  course,  the 
restructuring and reform of our banking system and its regulations.  
Among these reforms, mention should first be made of that of the labour market. For many 
years,  practically  all  international  economic  agencies  and  analysts  across  the  ideological 
spectrum have repeatedly signalled the problems of our labour market, its adverse effects on 
job  creation  and  what  the  broad  thrust  of  reform  should  be.  Understandably,  there  are 
discrepancies  on  aspects  of  the  reform;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  our  old  labour  market 
model was very inefficient and required reform. 
The Annual Report of the Banco de España explains how the heightening of the sovereign 
debt  crisis  and  its  interaction  with  the  financial  system  situation  plunged  the  Spanish 
economy into a double recession, both in 2009 and 2012. At issue is an extraordinary event, 
for which there are no precedents in our economic history, and which renders notably more 
complex the correction of the imbalances in our public finances owing to their dual impact, 
hindering any increase in revenue and favouring an increase in expenditure.  
The forecast of the Banco de España is for a decline in GDP of 1.5% in 2012 as a whole. 
But,  on  the  positive  side,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  our  economy  is  undergoing  an 
adjustment  of  already  appreciable  intensity.  We  will  conclude  2012  with  a  current  account 
almost in balance, with fairly favourable prices (our inflation rate remains below the euro area 
average)  and  with  developments  in  wages  that  will  make  the  course  of  unit  labour  costs 
compatible with an improvement in our competitiveness. Evidently, some of the adjustment in 
the current account balance is attributable to low economic activity, but only part of it. There 
is also an improvement in competitiveness.  
The situation of our banking system 
3 
Now to our banking system, and the developments in recent years and its current situation. 
Our  banking  system  is  undergoing  difficulties  whose  origins  must  be  sought  in  the  long 
period of expansion that began in the mid-1990s and ran until early 2008. This was a period 
in which credit to the resident private sector increased at an annual average of 15%, a rate 
which quickened in the final stretch of this period, rising to average figures of 23% between 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
2004  and  2007.  The  gross  debt  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  rose  from 
107% of GDP in 2000 to 201% in late 2011, when this same ratio stood at around 165% both 
in the euro area as a whole and in the United States (although in the United Kingdom it was 
at 207%).  
This accumulation of debt by the private sector led to an increase in the Spanish net debit 
position vis-à-vis the rest of the world, which stood in 2011 at 92% of GDP. This figure is 
close  to  that  exhibited  by  Greece  (before  the  haircut),  Portugal  and  Ireland  (all  of  them 
around 100%). Countries such as France, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States 
showed net debit positions against the rest of the world of between 10% and 20% of GDP. At 
the other extreme, Germany and the Netherlands have net asset positions in relation to the 
rest of the world of around 35% of their GDP.  
Turning  to  the  asset  side  of  bank  balance  sheets,  the  growth  in  credit  was  not  balanced 
across the various sectors of the economy, but was concentrated mainly in the real estate 
sector. As a result, exposure relating to real estate purchases, development and construction 
came to account in 2007 for 62% of financing to the resident private sector. 
This progression in lending portfolios could not be funded through natural growth in resident 
retail  customers’  deposits,  which  is  the  most  stable  base  of  financing;  rather,  increasing 
resort was made to wholesale and interbank markets, which provided at that time abundant 
liquid resources at reasonable prices, but which, on the other hand, exposed banks to very 
high risks of liquidity and rollover costs, risks that many Spanish banks were not accustomed 
to managing.  
As  a  result,  the  scale  of  real  estate  risk  and  of  the  dependence  on  –  largely  foreign  – 
wholesale funding markets turned into two sources of vulnerability which became patent with 
the crisis as from 2008.  
Measures adopted in the 2008–2011 period 
3.1 
The international financial crisis began in mid-2007 in the United States, from where it spread 
to the economies and financial systems of the developed countries as a whole.  
In Spain, the first measures were adopted in October 2008. The Fund for the Acquisition of 
Financial Assets was set up and a public guarantee mechanism was approved to facilitate 
new issues of bank paper, with the aim of tackling the difficulties progressively emerging on 
the interbank market and which were affecting the wholesale funding of certain banks.  
Next,  also  in  2008,  the  coverage  of  deposits  guaranteed  by  banks,  savings  banks  and 
cooperatives was raised to an amount of €100,000, as was then the case in certain other 
European countries.  
In 2009 the FROB (Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector) was set up to 
provide  public  aid  to  integration  processes  between  credit  institutions,  defining  a  new 
resolution  framework.  This  initiative  allowed,  or  promoted,  a  series  of  mergers  and 
integrations  between  savings  banks,  whose  number  declined  from  45  to  17  institutions  or 
groups at the end of 2010.  
An  important  piece  of  legislation,  Decree  11/2010,  was  enacted  in  2010  to  tackle  the  two 
main limitations facing Spanish savings banks: their inability, or the impossibility for them, to 
raise  capital  on  the  markets  and  their  governance  problems,  opening  the  way  for  them  to 
pursue  their  financial  business  indirectly,  via  banks,  a  formula  which  rapidly  became 
widespread.  
Also in 2010, measures were adopted in relation to accounting for provisions, tightening the 
treatment of foreclosed assets and of real estate collateral, and shortening the provisioning 
schedule for doubtful loans; a policy of greater transparency in the so-called “stress tests”, 
conducted under the coordination of the European institutions, was pursued; and the Banco 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
de  España  required  banks  to  increase  the  information  they  provided  on  their  real  estate 
development and construction loans and on their retail mortgage portfolios. 
In  early  2011,  further  to  Decree-Law  2/2011,  capital  requirements  were  increased  for 
Spanish credit institutions, with a new minimum capital – so-called “core capital” – ratio being 
set at 8%, which was raised to 10% for banks highly dependent on wholesale markets. This 
same  Decree-Law  offered  FROB  backing  to  those  banks  that  could  not  attain  the  new 
minimum obligatory levels by their own means, through new aid arrangements that opened 
the way for the FROB to take up capital stakes in banks.  
In  October  2011,  the  three  deposit  guarantee  funds  of  banks,  savings  banks  and 
cooperatives were unified, with the possibility for this new fund to participate in the financing 
of restructuring operations managed by the FROB.  
Measures adopted in 2012 
3.2 
Although  the  problem  dated  back  further,  as  earlier  stated,  the  figures  on  our  financial 
system  clearly  indicate that  there  was  a  most  sizeable  increase  in  our  total  gross and  net 
debt from 2003 to 2007. That affected the economy as a whole and, in a country where the 
prevalence of banks is as great as it is in Spain, the debt was channelled essentially through 
the banking system.  
Despite the measures adopted from 2008 to 2011, doubts over the viability of a segment of 
our bank and savings bank system were not dispelled, and indeed heightened in 2011 and 
early  2012.  The  worsening  international  economic  picture  and  the  slide  by  our  economy 
towards a fresh recession naturally contributed to this situation, which was primarily centred 
on the accounting valuation and treatment of the mass of assets related to real estate risk.  
Evidently, however, we cannot attribute all responsibility for the downturn in confidence in our 
banking system to the international economic situation, to the problems of the euro area (in 
particular,  the  situation  in  Greece  and  the  negotiations  on  its  bail-out  which  have  had  an 
unquestionable and strong impact, as the European Central Bank itself has acknowledged 
on several occasions) or to our recession.  
I am going to move on now to an area which I am well aware is delicate and where I risk 
being misinterpreted. But it is an aspect I do not wish to sidestep or avoid. I wish to make 
some observations on events in our financial system from the standpoint of the supervision 
and responsibilities of the Banco de España.  
In the real estate and financial bubble years that ended in 2008, there was a sort of euphoria, 
not only in Spain but in all the European Union countries and in the United States, which led 
to the risks that were accumulating to not be seen, or not wish to be seen. It was as if nobody 
wanted to forecast scenarios of recession, interest-rate rises or collapses in funding.  
Merely by way of illustration I am going to highlight three issues on which, I insist, with the 
ready lucidity hindsight offers, and, of course, without seeking to teach anybody a lesson, we 
can conclude that actions were taken with little resolve or insufficiently and inappropriately.  
Firstly,  the  “Institutional  Protection  System”  mechanism,  the  so-called  “cold  mergers”,  a 
means of integration which sought to avoid or circumvent the political difficulties posed by 
regional governments, and other difficulties posed by the banks themselves, in the face of 
savings bank merger and integration processes that were deemed advisable. “Cold mergers” 
were accepted with the aim of promoting certain processes that could allow the sector to be 
rationalised and improve the efficiency of specific savings banks; clearly, however, their final 
effect was not very positive and contributed rather to delaying decisions and adjustments.  
Another  example  lies  in  countercyclical  provisioning,  which  the  Banco  de  España  was 
obliged to abandon, if not in full, at least in part. The Banco de España was, indisputably, a 
pioneer  in  the  introduction  of  this  measure  which  would  be  classified  today  as  a 
macroprudential  policy  tool.  At  the  time,  the  measure  was  criticised  by  the  international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
financial community because it was not readily compatible, it was said, with accounting rules 
and  because  it  ran  counter  to  the  separation  of  macro  and  regulatory  policies  then 
advocated.  And  it  was  also  criticised,  we  should  recall,  by  Spanish  banks,  since  it  was 
understood that it damaged or could damage their competitive position. 
From today’s standpoint, many would agree that the main shortcoming of that regulation was 
its timidity and its insufficiency to rein in excessive credit growth, and that we would all have 
come  out  winning  had  it  been  maintained  and  applied  across  the  board,  as  the  Banco  de 
España  had  argued  at  the  start  of  the  new  millennium,  and  had  it  been  made  even  more 
demanding. In sum, the Banco de España was considered to be unorthodox at the time. But 
today we know that it should have been even more unorthodox in using its regulatory and 
supervisory powers to mitigate the vulnerability of our financial system.  
Further, and this is the third point on which I should like to like to comment, I believe that 
practically  nobody  foresaw  the  double-dip  recession.  This  event  undoubtedly  affected  the 
quality  of  the  stress  tests  conducted  by  the  Bank  in  2010  and  2011  under  the  exercise 
overseen by the European Banking Authority.  
In short, and judging past events with the information we have at hand today, the Banco de 
España was admittedly unsuccessful in what we now call “macroprudential supervision”. We 
failed  to  tackle,  with  the  resolve  we  now  understand  would  have  been  necessary,  the 
considerable increase in our debt and, later, the heavy deterioration in bank balance sheets, 
the outcome of the bursting of the bubble and the recession. The fact we are not the only 
European supervisor that can be reproached on this is of no consolation to anybody.  
That  said,  I  would  now  like  to  move  to  the  beginning  of  the  current  year,  2012.  The  two 
Decree-Laws passed in February and May have involved adopting a more radical approach 
to  tackling  actual  or  potential  non-performing  assets  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  and  to 
cleaning up and restructuring a significant portion of our banking system.  
The first of these decrees, in February, focused on problem loans, stipulating extraordinary 
provisioning requirements for loans classified as doubtful or sub-standard, irrespective of the 
value  of  the  attendant  collateral,  and  for  real  estate  foreclosures  or  assets  received  in 
payment of debt. In addition, in the case of problem loans with a greater risk profile, such as 
land and developments in progress, a capital buffer was required to safeguard banks against 
potential extraordinary losses. Moreover, banks had to set aside a provision of 7% for the 
portfolio of loans considered performing or normal.  
The second decree in May took a further step and sought to resolve doubts over assets in a 
normal or performing accounting situation, by increasing the provisions required on the basis 
of the nature of the assets financed. In sum, average provisions were increased from 7% to 
30%, with greater penalties for land-financing and unsecured exposures.  
The  overall  effort  for  credit  institutions  resulting  from  the  two  decree-laws,  which  must  be 
completed in the current year, 2012, amounts to around €59 billion worth of provisions and 
€11 billion in respect of capital buffers.  
With this fresh effort, the Spanish banking sector will, from 2007 to 2012, have made write-
downs  exceeding  €200  billion,  to  which  must  be  added  the  increase  in  core  capital 
requirements (the above-mentioned €11 billion). Overall, that entails an effort equivalent to 
more than 20% of Spanish GDP in 2011.  
External assessment and agreement with the Eurogroup 
4 
A complex set of circumstances has influenced the deterioration of confidence in the Spanish 
banking system: the adverse performance of the international economy; the euro area crisis; 
the absence of an improvement in public finances in a group of countries including Spain; 
and, of course, the market perception that our banking system was not resolving its problems 
of non-performing assets and real estate asset impairment. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
four  auditors 
independent  appraisers  and 
Given  this  situation,  in  May  the  government  took  two  decisions:  1) to  undertake  an 
independent  assessment  of  the  degree  of  solvency  of  the  Spanish  banking  system,  as  a 
whole, and of its business outlook; and 2) to obtain financial aid from our European partners 
in order to implement a plan for the restructuring and recapitalisation of our banking system. 
Regarding the first of these measures, you will recall that an agreement was reached with 
two 
to  estimate  Spanish  banks’  capital 
requirements in two recession scenarios, one a severe recession, from 2012 to 2014. The 
results of this initial assessment were made public on 21 June and showed initially that the 
Spanish banking system, as a whole, might need between €51 billion and €62 billion in order 
to  maintain  a  capital  ratio  of  6%  in  a  very  pessimistic  macroeconomic  scenario  which,  in 
short, means a cumulative fall in GDP of 6.5% between 2012 and 2014. 
This initial examination should be completed with two further exercises to be performed by 
the  end  of  September,  which  will  involve  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  balance  sheets  of 
14 banking groups,  the classification  of  assets,  the  provisions  recorded  and  the  valuations 
which  have  been  taken  into  account,  in  order  to  determine  the  recapitalisation  and 
provisioning needs of each of the institutions studied, which will account for more than 90% 
of the Spanish banking system. 
The entire assessment and audit exercise has been, and will be, coordinated and monitored 
by  committees  on  which  the  European  Commission,  the  European  Central  Bank,  the 
European Banking Authority and the International Monetary Fund – in addition, of course, to 
the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Competitiveness  and  the  Banco  de  España  –  are 
represented. The agreement reached between the Spanish government and the Eurogroup 
will be, firstly, in the form of a Memorandum of Understanding that will be signed on 20 July 
and followed by other agreements to develop and implement it. 
The actual use of the funds may only be specified when the exercise has been finished in its 
entirety,  i.e.  when  the  bottom-up  exercise  and  the  monitoring  by  appraisers  has  ended. 
However, the general criteria for using the funds, which will be included in the Memorandum 
of Understanding are already known and I shall briefly summarise them. 
An initial group of banks will meet the new core capital references envisaged in the exercise 
without  the  need  for  recapitalisation  measures.  It  is  no  secret  that  the  major  banks  in  the 
Spanish  financial  system  have  demonstrated  their  solvency,  their  loss-absorbing  capacity 
under  stressed  situations  and  their  ability  to  generate  high  levels  of  capital  within  the 
business. Accordingly, it can be assumed that, together with other smaller institutions, they 
will be in this group. In short, the exercise will confirm that a significant portion of our banking 
system is in a position, without the need for public aid, to maintain all of its activity and to 
contribute efficiently to the channelling of our economy’s financial flows. 
There is a second, pre-defined group of institutions comprising banks which have been taken 
over or are managed by the FROB: BFA/Bankia, Catalunya Banc, NCG Banco and Banco de 
Valencia.  We  can  readily  anticipate  that  the  biggest  needs  for  capital  arising  from  the 
exercise will be at these banks. 
A  third  group  of  banks  will  include  those  with  additional  capital  needs  which,  in  terms  of 
amount and the position of the institutions, may only be met by having recourse to the public 
aid envisaged in the European financial assistance programme. 
Finally, a fourth group of banks will include those which, without reaching the required capital 
levels,  propose  in  their  recapitalisation  plans  adequate  measures  to  raise  private  capital 
within a moderate period of time. If the additional capital required is high, it is reasonable that 
they  should  provisionally  receive  a  temporary  injection  of  public  funds  in  the  form  of 
contingent capital. 
Those are the details for banking groups. However, the Memorandum of Understanding also 
contains procedures and targets, which I will summarise in five points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
the 
The  aid  lent  to  each  bank  shall  entail  compliance  with  a  series  of  conditions,  the 
broad  framework  of  which  has  been  negotiated  by  the  European  and  Spanish 
authorities. The ultimate aim is to cement the long-term capacity and resilience of 
our banking system and to generate the confidence needed for it to regain normal 
access to the markets. 
The banks receiving public aid shall have to undergo restructuring compatible with 
European  regulations  on  State  aid.  Logically,  the  stringency  of  the  restructuring 
plans will have to be commensurate with the volume of aid envisaged and will be 
geared to strengthening the banks’ capacity to maintain a sustainable and profitable 
business.  The  restructuring  may  result  in  adjustments  in  size,  the  elimination  of 
unprofitable  business  segments, 
funding  structures, 
improvements in governance and the rationalisation of networks. 
Should an institution be deemed not to be viable, it will be wound up in an orderly 
fashion, as has occurred with certain institutions throughout this crisis, such as Caja 
de Castilla La Mancha, CajaSur, la Caja de Ahorros del Mediterráneo and Unnim. 
Two  of  the  principles  that  will  underpin  the  recapitalisation  and  restructuring  of  a 
portion of our banking system will be the separation of troubled assets (the vehicle 
that we have taken to calling a “bad bank”, although it may not be a bank but an 
asset management company); and the participation of shareholders, creditors and 
taxpayers in general in the clean-up and restructuring costs: 
a 
rebalancing  of 
The  segregation  of  troubled  –  mainly  real  estate  –  assets  continues  and 
further  pursues  an  avenue  opened  up  by  our  legislation  with  Decree  Law 
18/2012, which envisages the segregation into separate companies of assets 
acquired  in  payment  of  debt,  thereby  definitively  removing  impaired  assets, 
foreclosures and bad loans from the balance sheets of banks receiving public 
aid.  It  is  a  technique  tested  in  other  countries such  as  Sweden,  Ireland,  the 
United  States  and  Germany.  It  is  a  vehicle  or  entity  for  concentrating  those 
assets for their subsequent management and sale, by “cleansing” the balance 
sheets of institutions and permitting, should they be viable, their valuation and 
ensuing disposal. 
In relation to the equitable distribution of costs, the agreement will include the 
need  to  minimise  the  burden  for  taxpayers  through  measures  which  may 
affect,  among  others,  the  payment  of  dividends,  remuneration  of  bank 
managers  and  directors  and  the  commitments  undertaken  by  holders  of 
instruments qualifying as capital other than shares. 
b 
include 
The  Memorandum  will  envisage  a  series  of  measures  applicable  to  all  Spanish 
banks. These measures will focus on the requirement of a capital ratio of 9% and 
will 
treatment  of  risk 
concentration, the role of savings banks as shareholders of banks, the transparency 
of financial information, supervisory procedures, the marketing of complex products 
and the Central Credit Register, among other aspects. 
in:  resolution  regulations, 
improvements 
the 
The  recapitalisation  plans  submitted  by  banks  must  be  realistic  and  capable  of  being 
implemented  in  the  short  term;  otherwise,  the  institutions  will  have  to  demonstrate  their 
viability,  undergo  restructuring  and  receive  public  aid.  Were  any  institution  not  sufficiently 
robust to guarantee its future existence, it would have to face an orderly process of resolution 
or  winding  up.  Management  of  the  mass  of  impaired  real  estate  assets  of  institutions 
receiving  aid  will  be  extended  over  time,  albeit  separately,  without  impinging  on  banks’ 
operations and results. 
The  core  of  our  banking  system  is  essentially  healthy  and  I  am  sure  that  soon,  with  the 
implementation  of  the  current  programme,  our  banks  will  pursue  their  activity  with  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
solvency  and  vitality  needed  to  fulfil  their  main  mission:  efficiently  intermediating  financial 
flows and contributing to economic growth. 
We  have  a  financial  system  with  banks  that  rank  among  the  most  efficient  under  any 
international comparison. I believe that we will all take to heart the lessons learned , which 
are very painful from various standpoints, and that our financial system will emerge from this 
crisis strengthened and more efficient. It will again be the cornerstone it has always been for 
economic progress and the well-being of our people. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
