Njuguna Ndung’u: Working towards an East African Monetary Union  
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening 
of the meetings of the Economic Affairs Sub-Committee of the Monetary Affairs Committee 
MAC, Nairobi, 3 April 2012. 
 MF and IGC officials present;  
Distinguished delegates from EAC Partner States Central Banks and EAC Secretariat; 
Ladies and gentlemen:  
The Central Bank of Kenya is delighted and honoured to host you in this workshop aimed at 
reviewing the various studies under MAC priority activities that will assist in understanding 
the policy terrain and the process of EAMU protocol negotiation. The EAC has a target of 
moving towards a Monetary Union and this meeting will improve and further consolidate our 
understanding  of  the  EAMU  process  and  invigorate  and  guide  our  integration  agenda.  On 
behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya, let me take this early opportunity to thank all those who 
have contributed to the organization of this workshop and all the participants and resource 
persons. I wish you an enjoyable stay in Nairobi.  
Ladies and gentlemen; The Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC) of the EAC Central Bank 
Governors is working on various fronts to provide a knowledge base for exchange rate and 
monetary  policy  frameworks  and  how  the  policy  designs  can  be  applied  in  EAC.  This  will 
support the East African Monetary Union (EAMU) protocol negotiation, currently underway. 
In  order  to  fast  track  this  process,  Governors  met  in  June  2010  and  identified  and 
apportioned the various priority study areas that would ensure that the decisions taken on 
EAMU are informed and policy proposals are consistent with the aspirations of EAC.  
The Central Banks of EAC identified three levels of this process:  
 
Analytical  and  design  work,  which  entails  immediate  activities  to  improve  the 
understanding of the entire EAMU process, especially the pre-conditions for EAMU 
establishment and the institutional set up;  
Harmonization  of  operating  frameworks,  which  entails  undertaking  all  the 
activities  that  will  result  in  the  harmonization  of  EAC  Partner  States’  operating 
frameworks,  thereby  setting  the  stage  for  enhanced  convergence  in  not  only 
policies, but also the required structures; and,  
The above blocks will deliver the input to the policy regimes block, which entail the 
tools for negotiating the EAMU protocol. This block is being dealt with by the High 
Level Task Force (HLTF).  
  Distinguished  delegates:  The  output  from  the  first  two  blocks  is  meant  to  provide  the 
technical  input  required  to  inform  the  HLTF,  a  body  mandated  to  negotiate  the  EAMU 
protocol.  The  East  African  Monetary  Union  is  currently  being  negotiated  by  the  Partner 
States.  The  HLTF  is  preoccupied  with  negotiating  policy  issues  of  the  monetary  union 
integration, especially the creation of common frameworks across the member countries in 
order to facilitate the institutional arrangement envisaged in the process towards the EAMU.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  It  is  within  this  context  that  two  separate  studies  were  identified 
under the “analytical and harmonization platforms” of MAC’s priority activities. The first study 
is  on  the  “Harmonization  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Framework  for  the  EAC  Partner  States” 
being undertaken by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the second study is on the 
“Exchange  Rate  Arrangements  in  the  EAC”  being  undertaken  by  the  International  Growth 
Centre (IGC). The two institutions have undertaken the studies in collaboration with Partner 
States Central Banks, and we are really grateful for this technical support.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Since the inception reports, the final report of the two studies we are reviewing today is a 
culmination of a lot of work at the technical level. There was a meeting held in August 2011 
here  in  Nairobi  to  review  the  progress,  besides  the  various  presentations  and  feedback 
during the different Ordinary and Extra-ordinary MAC meetings. This attests to the quality of 
output expected from these two studies.  
Distinguished delegates: I believe that there is a great wealth of experiences and ideas to 
be shared in this workshop given the diversity in the knowledge base of participants gathered 
here. By the end of this workshop, we shall have a better understanding of how the region’s 
exchange rate arrangements can be aligned to a common regime and how monetary policy 
frameworks  can  be  harmonized  in  the  process  of  the  envisaged  East  African  Community. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and gentlemen, I declare this workshop open and wish you 
fruitful discussions. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
