Glenn Stevens: Latest economic and financial developments in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 24 February 2012. 
 instability 
When  we  last  met  with  the  Committee  in  August,  we  had  entered  a  period  of  heightened 
uncertainty about the global economy and financial system. The investment community was 
focusing increasingly on the high levels of public debt in major countries, and especially on 
the  situation  in  the  euro  area,  where  budgetary  pressures,  banking  pressures  and 
competitiveness  issues  within  the  single  currency  area  make  for  a  very  difficult  set  of 
problems.  There  was  considerable 
that 
in  markets.  But  our  view  at 
time – tentatively – was that we were not witnessing a repeat of the events of late 2008.  
Admittedly,  the  second  half  of  2011  saw  some  very  anxious  moments.  There  was  a  flight 
from risk that pushed up borrowing costs for major countries like Spain and Italy, but pushed 
them down for countries like Germany and the United States to the lowest levels for more 
than  50  years  in  spite  of  the  fiscal  challenges  the  US  itself  faces.  Funding  markets  for 
European  banks  in  particular  effectively  closed  for  a  few  months,  and  for  other  banks 
became much more difficult and certainly more expensive.  
The palpable fear before Christmas that Europe was on the brink of some sort of very bad 
financial event has lessened over our summer. The anxiety has not gone entirely away, and 
nor  will  it  for  some  time.  But  the  worst  has  not  happened.  Financial  markets,  while  hardly 
brimming with confidence, have recovered somewhat over the past couple of months. Banks 
are able to access term funding markets again, albeit at higher cost. High-frequency gauges 
of business conditions and confidence have stabilised over the past couple of months in Asia 
and North America, and even in Europe. We have not seen the very steep fall that we saw in 
all these indicators in late 2008.  
The actions of the European Central Bank contributed greatly to the stabilisation of financing 
conditions,  essentially  by  removing,  for  a  time,  questions  over  the  funding  of  European 
banks.  The  efforts  of  European  leaders  to  craft  a  stronger  framework  for  euro-wide 
governance on the fiscal side have also continued. A great deal more needs to be done to 
place European banks and sovereigns onto a stable footing, and to boost potential growth in 
Europe. But progress is being made.  
Forecasts for the global economy in 2012 have been marked lower, mainly due to the effects 
of the problems in the euro area. Revisions to the IMF’s forecasts in particular have been 
given great prominence. Our own forecasts have come down too, though they had already 
been a bit weaker than the IMF’s. On these forecasts, global GDP will grow by about 3¼ per 
cent in 2012. That is down from about 3¾ per cent in 2011, which was about the average 
rate of growth over the past 15 years. On its face, this performance, should it occur, would be 
no disaster. After all, growth is going to be below average some of the time.  
If we look for things to worry about, we will certainly find them. The global outlook has a very 
uneven composition: some countries, particularly in Europe, will record very weak outcomes. 
Moreover it is unlikely that a moment will come any time soon when we will be able to say 
the  problems  in  Europe  are  behind  us.  Progress  will  be  slow  and  there  will  be  periodic 
setbacks and bouts of heightened anxiety – that is the nature of these things.  
But  equally,  we  should  recognise  that  things  have  not  been  uniformly  bad  recently.  The 
US economy  has  not  experienced  the  “double  dip”  some  had  feared  six  months  ago,  but 
instead has continued growing. The US corporate sector is in very strong shape, is cashed 
up and will at some point be able to start moving ahead more quickly. It appears American 
corporations have stepped up the pace of hiring in the past few months.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  China,  the  slowing  in  growth  we  have  seen  seems  to  have  been  roughly  what  the 
policymakers  were  looking  for,  and  they  appear  to  be  getting  on  top  of  their  inflation  and 
housing boom problems. Around the rest of Asia, activity has also slowed, in part reflecting 
trade links with Europe. But it has not slumped and as inflation comes down, policymakers 
have increased room to respond. The pressure on European banks to shed assets has led to 
some tightening of trade credit in the Asian region, but at this stage the system seems to be 
adjusting to that without major drama. We have not, to date, seen the collapse of trade credit 
and trade flows we saw in late 2008. 
Commodity prices, which had declined noticeably from their peaks in the first half of 2011, 
have actually moved sideways, or in some cases picked up a bit, for a few months now. They 
remain  high  by  historical  standards.  That  seems  roughly  consistent  with  the  group  of 
countries  that  makes  up  Australia’s  main  trading  partners  expanding  at  a  reasonable 
pace – expected by the IMF to be over 4 per cent this year, not very different from last year. 
Again, we do not, at this point, see the signs of the rapid collapse in global demand we saw 
three years ago.  
At home, most of the information coming in suggests the economy has grown at close to an 
average pace over the past year. This outcome was weaker than we had expected a year 
ago. It was partly due to the effects of flooding on resource production but also due to softer 
outcomes  in  the  non-resource  side  of  the  economy.  CPI  inflation  has  come  down,  as 
expected, as the impact of last summer’s floods on food prices reverse. In underlying terms, 
inflation was about 2½ per cent over 2011, also a slightly lower outcome than we had, at one 
point, thought might occur. The labour market was generally softer in 2011 after a year of 
unusual strength in 2010 (though the unemployment rate  at its latest reading was virtually 
unchanged from a year earlier).  
These changes to the macroeconomic picture, against a backdrop of a period of intensified 
international  turmoil,  saw  the  Board  lower  the  cash  rate  by  50  basis  points  in  the  closing 
months  of  2011.  Perhaps  surprisingly  in  the  face  of  developments  in  wholesale  funding 
costs, this was initially fully reflected in a reduction in most lending rates, though there has 
been  a  partial  reversal  of  that  recently.  We  have  repeatedly  made  clear  that  the  shifting 
relationship between the cash rate and other rates in the economy is a factor the Board takes 
into consideration in setting the cash rate. That will remain the case. Recent developments 
do not materially affect the capacity of monetary policy to achieve its goals.  
Looking ahead, the Bank’s central expectation is for growth to be close to trend, and inflation 
close to the target, over the coming one to two years. There are, naturally, risks surrounding 
this central view. Those are spelled out in the latest Statement on Monetary Policy.  
Perhaps  what  is  most  noteworthy  about  the  Australian  economy  is  the  way  in  which  the 
drivers of growth have changed in recent times. The Bank has spoken at length before about 
the  terms  of  trade,  and the  resulting  resource  investment  boom,  which  is  still  building  and 
which will take the share of business investment in GDP to its highest level for 50 years. We 
have spoken also about how, on the other side, household behaviour has changed – people 
are saving more and borrowing less. Spending is growing in line with income, but people are 
spending their money differently. The retail sector is finding it has to adapt to this changed 
environment. Some other industries are struggling with the high exchange rate. Meanwhile 
certain  service  sectors  are  growing  quite  smartly.  Hence,  while  the  economy  overall  has 
recorded  “average”  growth,  few  sectors  are  in  fact  experiencing  “average”  performance 
themselves – some are clearly quite weak relative to average, while some others are much 
stronger.  
The Bank is quite aware of these differences and the pressures they bring to businesses and 
individuals.  But  we  also  know  that  monetary  policy  cannot  remove  the  forces  generating 
different  paces  of  growth  in  our  economy.  We  have  to  keep  our  eye  on  the  overall 
performance of demand and prices. We are acutely conscious that history may offer limited 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
guidance in assessing the net impact of the disparate and very powerful forces that are at 
work. Nonetheless, that is the assessment we must try to make. 
Our most recent assessment was that, with growth near trend, inflation consistent with the 
target, interest rates about average and an outlook suggesting more of the same, the setting 
of policy was about right for the moment. Of course, we continue to reassess things each 
month. 
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
