Øystein Olsen: Monetary policy and financial stability considerations 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
European Banking & Financial Forum, Prague, 27 March 2012. 
 The text below may differ from the actual presentation. This speech does not contain assessments of the current 
economic situation or interest rate setting. 
Introduction 
The past few years have clearly shown the costs of financial instability. The near collapse of 
the financial system in autumn 2008 led to the most severe economic downturn of our time. 
There was a dramatic decline in international trade, and total world output fell from one year 
to the next for the first time in generations. 
When financial markets failed, the authorities had to intervene. Bailout packages for banks 
shifted debt from private to public hands. Governments increased spending in order to curb 
the  fall  in  activity.  Many  countries  are  now  trying  to  rein  in  large  deficits  and  rising 
government debt under difficult conditions. Pension rules and tax systems are under review. 
The costs of such structural reforms would have been lower in good times. 
A financial crisis has to be met with appropriate measures, but the main objective in our work 
on  financial  stability  must  be  to  reduce  the  risk  of  crises  emerging.  History  tells  us  that  a 
financial crisis typically arises when debt has accumulated over a long period. An important 
task is therefore to contain the buildup of imbalances and secure a robust financial system. 
A decade of inflation targeting 
The  Norwegian  economy  emerged  quickly  and  fairly  painlessly  from  the  recent  global 
economic downturn. Since 2001, economic policy in Norway has been guided by a fiscal rule 
and  a  flexible  inflation  target.  With  solid  government  finances  based  partly  on  petroleum 
revenues and firmly anchored inflation expectations, there was room for manoeuvre both in 
monetary and fiscal policy when the financial crises hit. 
Inflation  in  Norway  is  currently  low,  but  it  has  been  close  to  target  over  the  past  decade. 
During this period, monetary policy has faced demanding trade-offs, and the application of 
judgment has been put to a test. We have gradually learned more about the functioning of 
our economy under an inflation targeting regime. Let me touch upon some of these insights. 
Fairly soon after we had adopted inflation targeting, we learned how demanding it may be to 
strike a balance between different monetary policy considerations in a small open economy. 
When the key policy rate is raised to restrain a pronounced rise in domestic inflation, it may 
strongly impact the exchange rate, as we experienced in the period 2002–2003. Both the real 
economy and inflation were affected. 
Midway  through  the  decade,  global  inflation  rapidly  declined.  China’s  entry  into  the  WTO, 
and  increased  imports  from  Asia  to  the  west  led  to  a  persistent  fall  in  import  prices.  The 
combination  of  very  low  inflation  and  strong  economic  growth  posed  new  challenges  for 
monetary policy. Interest rates – both in Norway and abroad – were set at low levels. This 
amplified the cyclical upturn in our part of the world. 
Towards the end of the decade, during the financial crisis, policy interest rates were reduced 
sharply  and  to  record-low  levels.  That  was  a  natural  and  necessary  response.  But  a 
persistently  low  interest  rate  poses  challenges  in  an  economy  where  there  is  a  strong 
appetite  for  borrowing  and  property  prices  are  rising,  as  this  may  increase  the  risk  of 
imbalances further ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
These experiences have provided new insights into how the interest rate functions under an 
inflation  targeting  regime.  Norges  Bank’s  analyses  and  communication  have  evolved. 
Economic  agents  have  become  familiar  with  our  response  pattern.  When  setting  the  key 
policy rate, we do not exclusively assign weight to bringing inflation back to target, but we 
also  take  into  account  the  impact  of  the  interest  rate  on  output  and  employment.  Inflation 
targeting has become more flexible. 
In our most recent Monetary Policy Report, published in March 2012, we further clarified the 
Banks’s response pattern. By way of three criteria, we highlight what we take into account 
when we set interest rates. The first criterion states that the interest rate should be set with a 
view to stabilising inflation at target or to bring it back to target if a deviation has occurred. 
The second criterion states that the interest rate path set by the Bank for the period ahead 
should provide a reasonable balance between the path for inflation and the path for overall 
capacity utilisation in the economy, i.e. the inflation targeting regime is flexible. The third and 
final, criterion states that monetary policy should be robust. The interest rate should be set in 
order  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  a  buildup  of  financial  imbalances,  and  so  that  acceptable 
developments in inflation and output are likely also under alternative assumptions about the 
functioning of the economy. 
The various considerations taken into account in the criteria must be weighed against each 
other. 
At our most recent interest rate meeting the key policy rate was reduced by 0.25 percentage 
point  to  1.50  percent.  In  its  assessment,  the  Executive  Board  stated  that  “...weak  growth 
prospects  abroad  and  the  strong  krone  are  contributing  to  keeping  inflation  low  and 
dampening economic growth in Norway (...). If the interest rate is set too high, the krone may 
appreciate further, inflation may continue to fall and growth in output and employment may 
become too low. This suggests that the key policy rate should be reduced further. On the 
other hand, there is virtually normal capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Moreover, 
low interest rates over time may induce households and enterprises to take excessive risks 
and accumulate excessive debt.” 
By  taking  account  of  the  deviation  in  the  nominal  interest  rate  from  a  normal  level  when 
setting the key policy rate, Norges Bank seeks to counter the buildup of financial imbalances 
that may disturb activity and inflation further ahead. This does not mean that the level of the 
key  policy  rate  is  an  independent  objective  in  its  own  right.  Rather,  the  purpose  is  to 
overcome  weaknesses  in  our  analytical  tools  related  to  the  possible  buildup  of  financial 
imbalances resulting from keeping interest rates low over time. Monetary policy will continue 
to react to shocks that affect the medium term path for inflation, output and employment. 
After a decade of learning, inflation targeting has become more flexible. Flexibility is good to 
have,  and  easy  to  lose.  The  inflation  target  has  to  be  reached  over  time,  otherwise  our 
credibility is put at risk. In assessing various considerations, monetary policy must be geared 
to meeting its primary objective of low and stable inflation. There are limits as to how many 
goals monetary policy can meet. Other instruments must be used to attain other objectives. 
To  ensure  that  new  or further  financial imbalances  do not build  up  we  also  need a  tighter 
international overarching policy framework to address the stability of the financial system as 
a whole. A macroprudential policy framework should be part of this new framework. 
Macroprudential policy framework 
Financial  market  participants  can  trigger  self-reinforcing  economic  fluctuations.  Individual 
banks  and  investors  do  not  necessarily  take  into  account  the  overall  risk  in  the  financial 
system. The consequences became clear during the financial crisis: banks had inadequate 
equity capital, relied excessively on short-term wholesale funding and had insufficient buffers 
of liquid assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The new international regulatory framework is intended to remedy this situation. I would like 
to draw attention to three main aspects of ongoing work in this area: 
First, stricter capital adequacy and liquidity coverage standards are in the offing. Higher and 
better-quality  capital  will  increase  banks’  resilience  to  pronounced  fluctuations  in  the 
economy without their having to tighten lending abruptly. 
Second,  the  new  framework  includes  macroprudential  tools.  One  such  measure  is  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer.  Banks  may  be  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements  if 
credit  growth  in  the  wider  economy  is  excessive.  This  will  smooth  out  lending  growth  and 
better equip banks to bear potential losses during downturns. 
Third,  the  authorities  must  acquire  tools  that  allow  banks  to  be  wound  up  in  an  orderly 
manner.  The  structure  of  banking  groups  should  be  transparent,  and  thus  enable 
differentiated government interventions in case of a crisis. Plans must be drawn up for the 
recovery  or  resolution  of  banks  in  the  event  of  difficulties.  Owners  and  creditors  –  not 
taxpayers – must bear the losses. The interest rate on banks’ funding will then reflect the risk 
they take rather than an implicit government guarantee. This will in itself have a preventive 
effect. 
Politicians  have  the  overriding  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  It  can  be  demanding  to 
restrain credit growth in times of strong optimism and confidence in the future. Well defined 
mandates and a clear delegation of responsibility in the field of monetary policy has worked 
well.  Similarly,  the  legal  authority  to  implement  macroprudential  measures  to  safeguard 
financial stability should be delegated. 
It  must  be  acknowledged  that  no  regulation  can  prevent  financial  institutions  from 
encountering difficulties. A new regulatory framework must therefore ensure that banks bear 
the ultimate responsibility for risk undertaken by them. Regulatory compliance will then be in 
their own interest. 
We  can  never  fully  insulate  the  financial  system  from  shocks.  But  we  can  increase  our 
resilience. One of the most important things we can do is to keep our own house in order – 
by preventing major imbalances from building up in the economy or in the financial system, 
and by ensuring that the financial system in general is robust. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
