Christian Noyer: Demographic shifts – threats or opportunities? 
Opening remarks by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Montreal conference: 
“Demographic shifts – threats or opportunities?”, Montreal, 11 June 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a real pleasure for me to open this session of the Montreal conference on demographic 
shifts.  I  am  no  demographics  expert,  you  know,  but  I  will  try  to  give  my  opinion  of  central 
banker on this extremely important matter.  
There is no major uncertainty as to the demographic shifts that are in progress. We already 
have a clear idea of the likely demographic trends for the coming decades and, even more 
importantly, of their age and geographical breakdowns. 
We must  capitalise  on  this  knowledge  to  analyse  the  potential  impacts of  these  shifts  and 
determine how they could contribute to decision-making. In that regard, I would like to raise a 
few points that are relevant to central bankers. 
I  will  focus  on  the  case  of  developed  countries  and  more  particularly  on  Europe,  where 
demographic developments are mainly driven by the combination of longer life expectancy 
and a low fertility rate. As regards the latter, it is comforting to note that this rate in France 
and Canada is less problematic than those in most economies of the same group. 
When considering demographic developments, much attention is paid, legitimately, to public 
debt issues. But demographic shifts can also impact the macroeconomic environment more 
broadly.  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  impact  of  demographic  shifts  on  potential  growth  and 
monetary  policy.  Then,  I  will  discuss  other  likely  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability 
outcomes, via the impact of ageing on savings and investment. 
Direct impact on potential growth and monetary policy 
1. 
Ageing can weigh on monetary policy notably through its impact on potential output.  
For  a  central  bank,  potential  output  and  output  gap  developments  are  of  major  concern. 
From  a  more  practical  point  of  view,  among  many  other  measures,  the  Eurosystem  uses 
Taylor-like rules to determine its monetary policy stance. According to these rules, the central 
bank’s rate should be close to the natural interest rate, i.e. the rate consistent with output at 
its potential level and stable inflation. The difficulty lies in how to assess the gap between 
observed and potential output. You see that potential output matters in our reaction function 
and  since  demographic  developments  are  a  key  parameter 
for  potential  output, 
demographics ultimately directly concern monetary policy as well.  
What are the main consequences of demographics for potential output? The decline in the 
working  age  population  due  to  ageing  should  negatively  affect  potential  output  in  the  long 
run, through the  decrease  in  the  labour force  contribution  and  productivity,  all  other  things 
being  equal.  I  must  stress  here  that  France  has  a  specific  advantage:  its  population  is 
expected to keep on growing fast for some decades thanks to a relatively high fertility rate 
and  a  dynamic  migration  policy;  while  our  German  neighbours  for  instance  are  on  a 
decreasing  trend.  Overall,  based  on  European  Commission  projection  trends,  we  estimate 
that  the  expected  decline  of  1.5%  in  the  working  age  population  in  the  European  Union 
between 2010 and 2020 could take 1 percentage point off its potential output. But there are 
ways  to  offset  this  evolution.  A  rise  in  the  participation  rates  of  the  young,  seniors  and 
women  is  one  of  them.  Pension  and  labour  market  reforms  implemented  in  Europe  are 
certainly a step in the right direction and should be further pursued.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Provided  that  the  necessary  reforms  are  implemented  and  that  some  changes  in  working 
habits are made, we expect that the euro area will be able to cope reasonably well with the 
expected fall in the population and working age population over the long run, notably in terms 
of  the  potential  growth  rate.  Nevertheless,  ensuring  that  public  spending  dynamics  remain 
sustainable in the face of population ageing will continue to be a challenge, given the current 
debt situation in Europe.  
Impact on savings and investment 
2. 
How are savings likely to evolve, both in terms of levels and structure? 
Levels of savings 
If we follow the consumption smoothing theory, individual savings behavior is driven by the 
life-cycle:  individuals  tend  to  increase  their  savings  as  they  earn  more  and  then  decrease 
their savings until they actually become negative when they retire and earn less, thus leading 
to a hump-shaped pattern for their accumulated wealth. Consequently, as the proportion of 
the aged population increases, private savings, as a proportion of income, should decrease. 
However,  this  decline  may  be  gradual  with  the  negative  impact  of  ageing  on  the  levels  of 
savings prevailing in the longer run. 
Structure of savings 
In  terms  of  structure,  the  fact  that  elderly  people  account  for  an  increasing  share  of  the 
population  could  change  savings  habits  and  have  an  impact  on  the  demand  for  certain 
classes of assets. In particular, given that elderly people are more risk adverse, this could 
increase the already high demand for low-risk assets.  
Investment 
The  standard  production  function  exhibits  two  productive  inputs:  labour  and  capital.  If  the 
labour force tends to decrease or decelerate because of demography, then the production 
process may become more capital intensive, leading to a fall in the productivity of new capital 
and, in theory, a decline in the rate of capital return. Investment could be less dynamic and 
negatively  impact  potential  growth. This  would  in  turn  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the real 
interest rate, so that domestic savings and investments would balance. One danger of such 
developments is that, in the face of a prolonged period of low interest rates, asset managers 
might be tempted to chase “tail-risks”. This calls both for more market discipline in the form of 
better monitoring and disclosure of the risks borne by financial institutions and possibly by 
investors, and for a close supervision of these institutions. 
Demographic shifts are a key factor in the equation of the future world economy. They are 
key  for  economic  activity,  the  fiscal  stance,  and,  maybe  less  obviously,  for  the  monetary 
policy stance, given their impact on output gap and financial stability. That is why I found the 
topic of this session particularly appropriate and timely, and I am sure that your discussions 
will bring very interesting insights.   
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
