Alan Bollard: A tale of two crises 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  and  Mr  Mike 
Hannah,  Head  of  Communications  Department  and  Board  Secretary,  to  the  Canterbury 
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 27 January 2012. 
Thanks to colleagues at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. This paper does not represent financial advice. 
 Introduction 
As New Zealanders get back to work they are looking back over the year as a guide to the 
challenges that will lie ahead. The year has been marked by two slow-burning but dramatic 
events that all are having to continue to adjust to: the European sovereign debt crisis and the 
Canterbury earthquake aftershocks. 
These crises were not predicted, and they have shocked the New Zealand economy in quite 
different  ways,  evoking  different  responses.  We  look  at  the  economic  effects  and  how 
New Zealand is responding. 
Part 1:  The European sovereign debt crisis 
The European crisis to date 
A sovereign debt crisis starting among the peripheral euro-economies, and accelerated by 
the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC),  has  blown  out  with  the  threat  of  contagion  to  larger 
European economies, affecting funding markets for all countries, including New Zealand. 
The peripheral and central European economies are still threatened, with recession looming, 
despite  a  number  of  policy  initiatives.  The  New  Year  has  opened  less  bleakly  than  some 
feared,  but  credit  downgrades  and  funding  market  nervousness  in  Europe  also  indicate 
clearly that it is too early to call an end to the uncertainty and volatility. 
The GFC and sovereign debt crises have both severely shaken global financial markets, and 
reduced wealth and economic activity. They are related crises to a large extent, but they are 
different crises, and their different natures mean different responses and resolutions. 
The  GFC  was  essentially  a  credit  and  bank  crisis,  with  interbank  lending  and  liquidity 
freezing as banks lost trust in one another, nervous as to who would be left holding worthless 
subprime paper hidden in opaque derivatives. 
It was a crisis that taught us about tail-end risk and the fragility of market liquidity, despite the 
depth of the market. Funding markets (even highly liquid conventional ones) can freeze up 
under stress, despite the apparent availability of funds and credit-worthy borrowers. 
The European crisis has highlighted the crucial role of sovereign debt markets, where banks 
have managed to transfer unfunded liabilities to governments, and governments have issued 
debt to fund the transfers.  
The  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  owed  much  of  its  origin  to  the  GFC,  but  also  to  the 
imbalances that had built up in many economies, through large unsustainable fiscal deficits, 
persistent  current  account  deficits,  and  demographic  and  other  public  liabilities.  When 
governments in a poor fiscal state were required to issue more debt, either to bail out banks 
or fund ongoing fiscal programmes, the pressure on the sovereign balance sheets became 
intolerable to markets. New and even roll-over funding became difficult to access and much 
more expensive.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Different crises bring different market responses. Whereas a banking debt crisis can flare 
up, the sovereign debt crisis has manifested itself in a “slow-burn”, and financial markets 
have  reassessed  their  capacity  to  fund  large  and  growing  levels  of  government  debt. 
Markets  are  now  incorporating  different  levels  of  credit  risk  for  member  states,  and 
assessing the differing degrees and credibility of government support – whereas, before 
the crisis, sovereign debt in the euro zone was viewed as being largely free of default risk. 
Policymakers are still struggling to come up with credible policy responses that will reduce 
these  credit  risk  premiums  without  creating  the  moral  hazard  that  would  encourage 
continued indiscipline by some countries.  
10-year government bond yields 
 Source: Bloomberg 
With  economic  activity  at  stalling  speed,  short-term  inflation  risk  is  very  low.  In  these 
conditions, inflation-targeting countries, including New Zealand, have seen scope for big cuts 
in interest rates during the GFC and persisting through the subsequent sovereign debt crisis. 
However, monetary policy in Europe, unlike in New Zealand, has had to operate a lot closer 
to the “zero bound”, where policy interest rates are near zero with no scope for further cuts. 
This has left quantitative easing (QE) and other unorthodox monetary policy as options still in 
Europe  and  the  US,  as  their  economies  have  failed  to  restart.  These  tools  are  worth 
considering at the zero-interest bound, but they can have unpredictable effects and may be 
hard to exit. Where QE has been employed, it is still too early to judge the overall impact. 
Moreover, monetary policies around the world have begun to take on some features that we 
tend  to  associate  with  fiscal  policy,  assisting  the  private  sector  directly.  This  casts  central 
banks in a non-traditional role. 
Another lesson from the sovereign debt crisis has been the benefit that New Zealand derives 
from retaining a flexible exchange rate, especially where there are country-specific sources 
of economic stress. In Europe, while the depreciation in the euro generally makes European 
exports  more  competitive,  the  one-size-fits-all  currency  presents  adjustment  difficulties  for 
the  much  weaker  peripheral  countries.  The  fact  that  New  Zealand  has  its  own  flexible 
currency, on the other hand, means our economy has the ability to cushion some effect of 
adverse external shocks.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We  have  also  learned  about  the  effectiveness  of  various  exchange  rate  interventions, 
ranging from a variety of capital controls to (so far) apparently “successful” interventions like 
the Swiss, and “unsuccessful” ones like the Japanese. 
Fiscal  policy  can  also  provide  useful  stimulus  if  the  recession  is  deep  and/or  long.  But  it 
needs  to  be  swiftly  identified  and  implemented,  credibly  sun-setted,  and  coordinated  with 
monetary policy. The sovereign debt crisis has underlined the importance of maintaining a 
strong  fiscal  position  and  effective  institutions  leading  into  a  crisis,  which  otherwise  can 
contribute to longer-term structural and financing problems. 
A  major  crisis,  however,  can  deliver  a  severe  combination  of  reduced  revenue,  higher 
transfers, and ballooning government debt (potentially exacerbated by bailed-out bank debts 
being  transferred  on  to  a  government’s  balance  sheet).  That  exposes  other  structural 
problems like population ageing and long-term savings and investment imbalances. 
As this crisis persists, it is evident that public borrowing capacity is being much more tightly 
constrained  by  credit  ratings,  fiscal  projections  and  market  discipline.  This  limits  what 
governments can do to stimulate economies in the future, or bolster bank balance sheets, if 
there  were  to  be  a  double  dip.  And  governments  also  need  to  be  aware  of  the  risks  of 
consolidating budgets too quickly and damaging growth.  
In Greece, worsening fiscal numbers led markets and credit rating agencies to demand more 
austerity  measures,  which  in  the  short  term  at  least  led  to  further  worsening  in  the  fiscal 
numbers, as the economy weakened. It is difficult for them to get out of this vicious circle, 
and avoid the consequent broader impacts on their society. 
The  sovereign  funding  markets  have  put  a  premium  on  public  transparency,  foresight, 
exchange  rate 
flexibility,  credible  debt  management,  and  good  political  economy. 
Governments  are  consequently  becoming  more  focussed  on  achieving  structural  budget 
balance, or at least a credible timeframe for achieving these. 
The European sovereign crisis has demonstrated that banks must have adequate capital and 
long-term  funding  to  ensure  survival  in  tough  times.  Following  the  GFC,  international 
regulators have agreed to bolster the minimum capital adequacy and liquidity requirements 
of  banks,  as  set  out  under  the  “Basel  III”  proposals on  prudential standards.  The  Reserve 
Bank expects these new standards to be broadly applied to the New Zealand system, with 
some tailoring for local circumstances. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  part  owes  its  origin  to  government  assistance,  sometimes 
specifically for institutions judged “too big to fail”, or more broadly in the form of guarantees 
to wholesale and retail investors. The former was not seen in New Zealand, but guarantees 
have  left  their  mark.  Relative  to  overseas  experience,  New  Zealand  got  off  lightly,  but 
taxpayers still bore sizeable losses as guaranteed non-bank deposit takers collapsed for a 
variety of reasons. 
The issue of “too big to fail” needs to be addressed. For this reason, the Reserve Bank is 
focussing on alternative “failure resolution” options. For example, the Bank is requiring the 
large banks to pre-position for its “Open Bank Resolution” (OBR) policy.  
Fortunately,  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  was  relatively  well-positioned  to  handle  the 
fallout from the European crisis as it moved from credit risk to funding risk. The major banks 
all have similar risk profiles; their predominant risk exposures are to the local housing market 
and to agriculture, two sectors that held up relatively well. We are alert to the possibility that 
the  next  crisis  could  impact  these  sectors  in  a  more  systematic  way  and  have  moved  to 
enforce capital requirements (under the Basel II framework) that are relatively conservative 
by international standards.  
We should not over-state what bank regulators can do. Sophisticated international regulators 
were unable to predict and control the crisis. Financial innovation was, and will continue to 
be, an integral part of a growing banking sector. The next crisis will be different, but as in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
past, will likely involve the less-regulated parts of the financial system. Regulators must be as 
innovative as the practitioners. 
There are technical economic solutions to Europe’s dilemma, but we cannot just assume that 
politicians can deliver them, given their differing governmental structures, complex coalition 
agreements, the role of officials, and public sentiment (e.g. broad-based Greek opposition to 
austerity, Washington gridlock on debt ceilings). It is worth noting that all the peripheral euro-
economies have changed governments since the beginning of the crisis. 
In the medium term, political stances will need to respond to market pressures, but meantime 
we are already seeing the enormous political challenges some countries are facing in moving 
towards  sustainable  fiscal  policies.  There  is  more  public  concern  and  engagement  on 
economic and financial problems – take note of the “Occupy” movement. Social media are 
playing a new role in reflecting public concerns about crisis and debt. 
How the euro crisis may develop 
The  euro  area  debt  crisis  has  exposed  flaws  in  the  current  structure  of  the  European 
monetary  union.  In  particular,  unified  monetary  policy  has  not  been  supported  by  political 
union or a set of credible fiscal rules. The outlook for the euro zone remains very uncertain, 
partly because the outcome will in large part be determined by political considerations rather 
than  purely  economic  ones.  What  may  be  economically  optimal  (e.g.  risk  sharing  among 
euro zone countries, moves towards fiscal union) may not be politically optimal. Many of the 
proposed solutions would involve some surrender of national policy sovereignty, which would 
not be palatable for member states. 
Although  governments  in  several  countries  are  facing  funding  difficulties,  the  country  most 
likely to default, or restructure its debt, is Greece.  
Progress with European banks 
Progress with European governments 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Avoiding default or managing an orderly default, with “fire breaks” in place to limit contagion, 
would provide an opportunity for the euro zone to reform its institutions. We saw the first step 
towards this with the “fiscal compact” agreed in principle by euro zone members  and nine 
other EU states last December. However, a disorderly Greek default, with funding markets 
seizing up for other governments and banks, would have a major negative effect on the euro 
zone  and  the  rest  of  the  world  economy.  In  a  worst-case  scenario  this  could  lead  to  the 
break-up of the European Union. 
Despite the problems facing the Greek economy, and financial markets factoring in a rising 
risk of default, we believe the  most likely outcome is that the euro zone will stay intact. A 
country  choosing  to  leave  the  euro  zone  might  also  have  to  leave  the  European  Union, 
depriving  it  of  free  access  to  export  markets  that  would  be  needed  to  drive  its  recovery. 
Converting its public debt from euro into a less valuable new domestic currency would also 
cause significant damage to the domestic banking system and banking systems in the rest of 
the euro zone.  
So  far,  progress  has  been  made  in  providing  liquidity  to  banks  and  roll-over  funding  for 
governments.  But  this  has  not  changed  the  fundamental  picture  about  bank  solvency  and 
fiscal discipline. 
As long as uncertainty remains high, and funding conditions are difficult, growth in Europe is 
likely to remain weak, with several countries possibly entering a recession. Looking ahead, 
the  current  economic  recovery  is  very  slow  and  fragile  and  there  will  be  more  problems 
ahead; it may take some years for Europe to get back on to the previous growth track.  
Growth forecasts 
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ 
 Implications for New Zealand 
The  world’s  recovery  from  the  GFC  and  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  been 
disappointingly slow and fragile. Rogoff and Reinhardt’s review of global financial crises in 
their  book  “This  Time  it  is  Different”,  suggests  that,  where  banking  crises  are  involved,  it 
takes economies several years to recover (like in the 1930s Depression), whereas recoveries 
post-war have typically taken several quarters. As economies work off their debt overhang, 
they will continue to suffer through asset price adjustments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
New Zealand’s geographical isolation is no protection from economic events abroad. If major 
world economies have a significant economic problem, then that is going to affect us too, as 
New Zealand has seen in our export commodity prices, currency, and funding our foreign debt. 
Experience shows that regions cannot “decouple” themselves from global financial events, 
though  the  timing  and  transmission  of  shocks  can  be  quite  different.  For  example,  New 
Zealand’s  increasing  reliance  on  Asia  as  a  trading  partner  reflects  export  market  flexibility 
and has helped growth, but could not shield us from the slowdown in world demand, or the 
drying  up  of  financing,  even  if  it  has  meant  a  smaller  drop  in  demand  for  our  exports. 
Economies in the Asia-Pacific region (including Australia) account for around 60 percent of 
New Zealand’s merchandise exports by value, a significantly larger share than exports to the 
euro area (at just 7 percent). 
Europe  accounts  for  a  significant  share  of  global  economic  activity,  and  is  an  important 
trading partner for many Asia-Pacific economies. Spillovers from a recession in Europe could 
spark a slowdown in Asia, pushing down commodity prices, and having a marked impact on 
Australia and New Zealand.  
When large economies take remedial measures such as the bailouts in the euro zone and 
quantitative  easing  in  the  United  States,  and  the  consequent  fiscal  austerity,  it  can  have 
major distortionary effects on the global economy and New Zealand. Such measures affect 
financial market pricing, access to international credit and international capital flows. Funding 
may not be available to banks or to sovereigns. 
European  banks  have  been  deleveraging  worldwide  and,  while  this  has  not  yet  had  much 
direct impact on New Zealand, they have been significantly involved in funding and trade in 
the Asia/Pacific region, so indirect effects are likely. 
International markets are an important source of funding for our domestic banks. Although 
New Zealand banks are currently well funded, bank funding costs are likely to increase to 
some  degree  over  the  coming  year.  This  is  likely  to  put  some  upward  pressure  on  retail 
interest  rates  relative  to  the  Official  Cash  Rate  (OCR).  Monetary  policy  will  need  to  take 
account of such pressures.  
The Reserve Bank’s new prudential liquidity policy, introduced in 2010, has helped to reduce 
this  vulnerability  of  the  banks  to  liquidity  shocks,  by  requiring  banks  to  hold  more  “core 
funding”  (i.e.  retail  deposits  and  long-term  wholesale  funding).  However,  the  underlying 
vulnerability  will  remain  until  New  Zealand  achieves  a  sustained  improvement  in  national 
savings.  
Part 2:  The domestic earthquake crisis 
While the whole world is focused on the European crisis, New Zealand has been suffering 
from its own domestic dramatic events – the Canterbury earthquakes. 
The earthquake to date 
The  earthquakes  have  been  a  debilitating,  chronic  event,  with  a  profound  human  and 
economic impact that will continue to be felt for many years. It has been 16 months since the 
first of the major earthquakes. The location and timing of the quakes has been quite acute. 
There  has  been  an  unusual  propensity  to  liquefaction.  Significant  aftershocks  are  still 
occurring – there have been more than 400 greater than Richter magnitude 4, including more 
than  40  greater  than  Richter  magnitude  5  since  September  2010  –  and  this  has  been  a 
shock  to  everyone’s  hopes  for  recovery  and  rebuilding.  The  scale  of  impacts  and  ongoing 
activity means the rebuild is unprecedented. 
The Reserve Bank is interested in the ongoing economic effects of this shock and how we 
expect rebuild to happen.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  will  focus  on  the  economic  effects  and  what  we  expect  to  happen,  and  the  limitations 
surrounding what we are doing. 
To date, demolition has progressed and basic repairs have begun, and this will continue for 
some time. However, widespread reconstruction is on hold while aftershocks continue. When 
it  does  begin,  major  reconstruction  is  assumed  to  take  more  than  five years,  with housing 
and  essential  infrastructure  first.  Reconstruction  of  commercial  structures  could  be  even 
more protracted. 
The availability of insurance has been an important factor in the timing of the rebuild. There 
are  some  unique  or  unusual  aspects  (e.g.,  CBD  closure,  building  code  changes,  land 
remediation, damage on damage) which mean that assessing the value of claims is complex 
and takes time. Additionally, with the risk of ongoing damage from aftershocks and still high 
levels  of  uncertainty,  insurers  are  not  currently  increasing  their  overall  exposure  to 
Canterbury and some insurance holders are having difficulties getting cover for new risks or 
increased limits. 
We now know that damage to buildings is only part of the story. We generally understand 
structural  remediation.  But  in  addition,  land  has  been  damaged  by  subsidence,  lateral 
spread, cliff collapse and by soil liquefaction, all of which present major technical, insurance 
and economic problems for rebuild.  
It has proved very difficult to calculate the complete cost of the damage resulting from the 
earthquakes, and we found that early cost estimates could be unreliable. The earthquakes 
resulted in significant damage to housing, as well as commercial buildings and infrastructure.  
Our working assumption before the December 2011 aftershocks was that around $20 billion 
(in current dollars) of damaged property would be rebuilt. This would be equivalent to around 
10 percent of GDP – a very large shock indeed. (As a comparison, the massive earthquake 
that struck Japan in March 2011 is estimated to have caused damage equivalent to around 
3 to 4 percent of Japan’s annual GDP.)  
The nominal cost of rebuilding could be higher as construction costs and prices for materials 
may  well  increase  over  the  coming  years,  and  as  reconstruction  incorporates  quality 
improvements.  
Furthermore, we estimate that the total cost of claims stemming from the earthquakes could 
be much higher – around $30 billion – as this includes claim handling expenses, claims for 
business interruption, temporary accommodation, consequential loss and other non-rebuild 
related costs.  
Recent aftershocks are likely to have added to nominal insurance costs, but the costs of the 
rebuilding in real terms may not be significantly affected (i.e., you only rebuild a house once). 
As the main rebuild is yet to get underway, and various regulatory (e.g., building standards) 
and legal issues are still to be resolved, there remains considerable uncertainty around these 
numbers. Revisions are likely to continue for some time, and the final cost will be known only 
once all claims have been settled, which could be some years away.  
In addition, the longer the delays to rebuilding, the greater the human cost and the risk of 
leakage of businesses and residents from Christchurch to other centres. Delays could also 
mean  the  rebuild  is  done  more  quickly,  albeit  starting  later,  so  exacerbating  inflationary 
pressures. 
Central  and  local  government  have  faced  significant  costs  as  a  result  of  the  earthquakes. 
The largest of these has been the $11.7 billion EQC insurance cost (and the more recent 
aftershocks are likely to increase EQC’s costs). The costs of the February 2011 quake have 
exceeded EQC’s reinsurance cover of $2.5 billion per event, and EQC and Government, as 
guarantor, bear the cost of any subsequent cost increase for that event. The total claims are 
expected to exhaust EQC’s available assets – that is, the National Disaster Fund.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Earthquake-related building consents 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
 The  Government  also  faces  significant  expenses  related  to  the  purchase  of  residential 
properties  in  the  red  zone,  support  for  AMI,  and  costs  associated  with  damage  to 
infrastructure.  
In addition to these expenses, there are significant costs related to welfare and emergency 
responses (totaling around $363 million at end of June 2011). Following the earthquakes, the 
employment  situation  of  many  individuals  was  at  risk  with  around  40,000  employees  and 
9,000 sole traders seeking assistance. It was also necessary for the Government to increase 
spending related to healthcare, social services and public administration and safety services.  
Earthquake-related  public  expenditure  estimated  at  $13.6  billion  contributed  to  a  marked 
deterioration  in  the  Government’s  operating  deficit  over  the  2010/2011  year,  and  further 
earthquake  related  expenditure  will  be  required  over  the  coming  years.  The  resulting 
pressure on the Government’s debt position was highlighted by Standard and Poor’s when 
they downgraded New Zealand’s long-term sovereign rating to “AA” earlier this year. Fitch 
also  noted  some  concerns  about  the  impact  of  the  earthquakes  on  the  fiscal  debt  in  their 
latest assessment.  
In  response  to  the  costs  associated  with  the  earthquakes,  the  Government’s  June  Budget 
incorporated an increased focus on fiscal consolidation with a reduction in new discretionary 
spending over the coming four years. In addition, the Government has recently announced 
an increase in the earthquake cover levy component of home insurance, to cover the costs 
faced  by  the  EQC  and  to  rebuild  its  Natural  Disaster  Fund.  Banks  and  other  financial 
institutions may have to absorb bad debts from some households and businesses as a result 
of  the  earthquakes.  The  impact  on  the  New  Zealand  banking  sector  is  expected  to  be 
manageable, based on banks’ bad debt provisioning estimates.  
Banks  report  that  the  Canterbury  earthquakes  have  had  a  relatively  small  impact  on 
aggregate  asset  quality.  Three  of  the  major  banks  commented  on  their  earthquake 
provisioning  in  their  results  for  the  half-year  to  March  2011,  and  these  banks  have  made 
additional  provisions  in  the  region  of  $125  million  –  well  under  0.1  percent  of  their  total 
lending.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Overall,  there  still  remains  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  in  quantifying  the  effects  of  the 
earthquakes. Provisioning estimates have been based on many unknowns, and these will be 
subject to change as the insurance climate and other uncertainties become clearer.  
As  the  regulator  for  insurers,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  now  responsible  for  overseeing  the 
introduction of new prudential requirements for insurers, including new solvency standards, 
fit  and  proper  requirements  for  directors  and  other  senior  officers,  and  a  requirement  that 
insurers  have  appropriate  risk  management  programmes.  All  insurers  wanting  to  continue 
insurance business in New Zealand must obtain a licence by March 2012.  
It is well known that one large insurer (AMI) has faced financial difficulties associated with 
meeting the large value of claims, while some small niche insurers have indicated they intend 
to selectively withdraw coverage nationally or from certain regions. Insurers remain cautious 
about writing new insurance in this environment. Balance sheets of other insurers have been 
significantly  impacted,  in  some  cases  requiring  more  capital,  and  shareholders,  including 
foreign owners, are providing this, as is appropriate. 
The  Reserve  Bank  continues  to  monitor  the  effects  on  balance  sheets  in  the  insurance 
sector. Our focus is on the soundness of the sector, and so we are particularly interested in 
levels  of  existing  and  future  catastrophe  cover.  We  are  starting  to  see  higher  global 
reinsurance costs being reflected in increased non-life insurance premiums for New Zealand 
customers. 
We are yet to see how the industry realigns itself as a result of these events. There is the 
prospect  of  some  consolidation  with  the  purchase  of  AMI  by  IAG  (subject  to  regulatory 
approvals), and we are seeing changes to reinsurance capital requirements and availability 
of insurance. We can expect that there will be changes, and that the industry will adjust. 
New  Zealand  is  well-placed  in  that  insurance  will  fund  the  majority  of  the  costs  of  the 
Canterbury  earthquakes,  and  most  of  this  funding  comes  from  large  offshore  reinsurers. 
New Zealand  is  unusual  in  its  degree  of  insurance  and  re-insurance.  In  other  parts  of  the 
world, such as Japan, government, businesses and households have borne a much greater 
share of disaster costs.  
The wider impacts of the earthquakes 
Following  the  earthquakes,  we  saw  sharp  declines  in  consumer  confidence  and  business 
sentiment  throughout  the  economy.  Short-term  economic  activity  was  severely  disrupted, 
mainly  due  to  reduced  household  and  business  spending,  as  well  as  lost  exports  and 
production in Canterbury. Sectors most affected have been tourism, education and central 
business district retailing.  
The  domestic  economy  has  proven  relatively  resilient  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the 
Canterbury  earthquakes,  encouragingly  including  some  of  the  significant  contributors  to 
Canterbury’s economy, particularly agriculture, manufacturing and professional services.  
In Christchurch we are currently seeing residential investment and consumption picking up 
more than elsewhere in New Zealand.  
Business  investment  spending  is  also  expected  to  increase  over  the  coming  years,  as 
damaged  assets  are  rebuilt  and  replaced,  as  well  as  a  more  general  lift  in  investment 
spending as activity in Canterbury and other regions recovers. 
We have continuously updated our reviews of the Official Cash Rate to take into account the 
impact on economic activity and inflationary pressures. We cut the OCR in March 2011 as an 
“insurance  cut”  following  the  February  2011  aftershock.  The  deepening  Euro  crisis  and 
ongoing aftershocks in Christchurch have led us to leave the OCR unchanged over seven 
successive reviews. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Domestic trading activity 
Source: NZIER Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion 
 Reconstruction,  is  projected  to  eventually  provide  a  boost  to  demand  similar  to  the  mid-
2000s  housing  boom.  Residential  and  non-residential  investment  will  lift  growth  sharply. 
Spare capacity and labour will be absorbed rapidly, and inflation pressures will pick up from 
current  low  levels.  We  will  need  to  keep  monitoring  this  to  judge  whether  the  level  of  the 
OCR continues to be appropriate. 
The outlook for rebuilding in Canterbury remains subject to a high degree of uncertainty. In 
the  January  OCR  Review,  we  took  account  of  the  latest  aftershocks  and  pushed  out  our 
assumption of the rebuild by a few months, with a gradual lift in activity over 2012, consistent 
with  demolition  and  repairs 
to  housing  and 
infrastructure  getting  underway,  with 
reconstruction getting underway in earnest in 2013.  
Reconstruction spending 
Source: RBNZ 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
One learning from other large earthquakes overseas (e.g. Kobe, San Francisco, Chile) has 
been  that  activity  bounces  back  relatively  quickly  once  major  shocks  have  stopped. 
Additionally, even if activity is delayed, pressure on resources may not be avoided. Building 
regulations will play a key role in not only the rebuild in Christchurch but potentially in other 
earthquake-prone regions. 
In Christchurch businesses have proved adaptable and innovative in getting operations back 
up and running after the quakes and aftershocks. Their resilience and tenacity is reflected in 
how  few  have  actually  left  the  city  and  in  visible  fight-backs  such  as  the  new  container 
shopping mall and the business “hub”.  
With 80 percent of Christchurch insured, capital could prove less of an issue than in other 
disaster-hit  countries  such  as  Japan  or  China,  with  much  lower  insurance  rates.  A  further 
boost  will  come  from  a  large  temporary  reconstruction  workforce  that  will  require 
accommodation and services.  
The earthquake reconstruction in Christchurch is very big in relation to the national economy. 
Along with strong commodity prices it represents the major driver of growth over the next few 
years. How well Christchurch manages that will reflect on all New Zealand. 
GDP growth (annual average) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ 
 Conclusion 
2011  saw  two  bad  jolts  hitting  the  New  Zealand  economy.  These  have  already  had  their 
initial impacts, showing up in lower actual growth numbers. But the New Zealand financial 
system  has  so  far  stood  up  well,  and  the  people  of  Canterbury  have  comprehensively 
insured their structures sufficiently. These preparations have meant we are weathering the 
shocks well. 
Both events have important economic implications and have created uncertainty, but we now 
have a clearer picture of the future. In the terms made famous by Donald Rumsfeld, we are 
moving  from  “unknown  unknowns”  to  “known  unknowns”.  We  cannot  expect  to  have 
complete clarity for 2012. Unexpected things will continue to happen and there will be more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
aftershocks, both financial and seismic; the effects of both shocks could continue to rumble 
on for some time. 
The challenge for all of us, policy-makers and business people alike, in 2012 will be to deal 
with these “known unknowns”, to get on with economic activity, and to help Christchurch and 
New Zealand grow. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
