Emsley Tromp: Central bank cooperation – the experiences of emerging 
and developing economies 
Address by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, at 
CEMLA’s  60th  Anniversary  Commemorative  Conference  “Central  Bank  cooperation  at  the 
beginning of the 21st century”, Mexico City, 19 July 2012. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
First,  allow  me  to  congratulate  CEMLA  on  its  60th  anniversary.  For  the  past  60  years, 
CEMLA has consistently promoted better knowledge of financial and monetary topics in Latin 
America  and  the  Caribbean  through  cooperation  among  the  region’s  central  banks.  This 
cooperation has evolved according to the prevailing economic conditions, developments in 
economic thinking, and political views. Against this background, I would like to discuss the 
experiences of emerging and developing economies in the area of central bank cooperation. 
Central banks have a long tradition of cooperation. Over time, the objective of cooperation 
has  shifted  from  monetary  stability  towards  the  more  comprehensive  issue  of  financial 
stability, and, the intensity and forms of cooperation have changed. During the 1920s, central 
bank cooperation was aimed primarily at sustaining the gold standard. In the 1960s, central 
banks  cooperated  mainly  to  maintain  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  but  adjustable 
exchange  rates.  Because  of  the  disappointing  experiences  with  foreign  exchange  rate 
interventions  in  the  1970s,  central  banks  became  more  inclined  to  preserve  monetary 
stability  through  domestic  monetary  policy  actions  than  through  international  policy 
coordination.  As  financial  markets  became  more  integrated  because  of  technological 
developments and financial innovations, in the 1980s and 1990s central banks cooperated 
largely on development and introduction of international standards for prudential regulation 
and  coordinated  financial  sector  supervision.  During  the  international  financial  crisis  that 
started  in  2007,  central banks  coordinated their efforts  to fight  systemic  liquidity  risks  and, 
through monetary policy coordination, attempted to reduce the risk of deflation and prevent a 
deep global recession. 
Cooperation  among  central  banks  is  important  both  at  a  global  and  regional  basis. 
Cooperation is encouraged at a global level and carried out at a regional level to account for 
regional differences. In the case of emerging and developing economies, cooperation among 
central banks follows by and large policies agreed upon by multilateral institutions. The Bank 
of  International  Settlements  is  of  course  the  best  example  of  a  global  organization  for 
discussion,  consultation,  and  cooperation  among  central  banks.  Meanwhile,  CEMLA 
promotes  cooperation  between  central  banks  on  a  regional  level.  In fact,  as mentioned  by 
Javier  Guzman  this  morning,  CEMLA  has  played  a  key  role  in  the  promotion  of  regional 
coordination  through  a  global  perspective.  Hence,  CEMLA  has  become  a  global  regional 
player. 
Over  time,  the  number  of  central  bank  organizations  in  our  region  has  increased  and 
includes organizations such as the Central American Monetary Council (CMCA), the Fondo 
Latinoamericano  de  Reservas  (FLAR),  and  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and  Finance. 
The main reason perhaps, for the increasing number of regional organizations is that certain 
exchange  rate  and  financial  stability  issues  are  regional  in  nature  and  directly  impact  a 
particular region. Such issues can be best addressed regionally. Also, some emerging and 
developing  economies  have  claimed  that  the  global  organizations  are  overwhelmingly 
oriented towards the Western economies. However, the risks always exist that a proliferation 
of  regional  organizations  may  result  in  fragmentation  of  our  coordination  and  cooperation 
efforts leading to less effective results. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Cooperation and coordination of central banking activities is very important for emerging and 
developing  economies.  Central  banks  in  industrialized  economies  usually  have  just  one 
responsibility,  that  is,  conducting  monetary  policy  with  the  single  objective  of  maintaining 
price stability. In contrast, central banks in emerging and developing countries usually have 
several tasks in addition to monetary policy. These tasks include debt management, advising 
the government, and financial sector regulation and supervision. As a consequence, these 
central  banks  have  to  pursue  several  objectives  in  addition  to  exchange  rate  stability  and 
promotion of economic growth. At the same time, the resources of these central banks, in 
particular  financial  and  human  resources,  often  are  limited.  Therefore,  cooperation  and 
coordination with other central banks can be very beneficial for these institutions. 
Central  banks  are  willing  to  cooperate  as  long  as  they  pursue  common  goals.  This 
cooperation can take several forms, the simplest of which is the exchange of information and 
experiences. In the case of the emerging and developing economies, cooperation between 
central  banks  in  this  area  is  crucial  given  their  relatively  limited  human  and  financial 
resources. First, central banks exchange data and forecasts, which enable them to compare 
and discuss economic and financial conditions and trends. 
In  this  context,  the  standardization  of  concepts  and  the  availability  of  data  are  crucial. 
Second,  central  banks  share  and  discuss  theories,  empirical  studies,  and  research.  This 
exchange  will  enhance  their  understanding  of  economic  issues  such  as  inflation  targeting, 
potential  output,  exchange  rate  behavior,  the  transmission  mechanism,  and  equilibrium 
interest  rates.  Also,  central  banks  exchange  information  about  their  policy  choices  and 
approaches, which can stimulate policy coordination between central banks. 
CEMLA has played an important role in our region in the area of dissemination of information 
and  experiences  among  central  banks.  Over  the  years,  the  organization  has  organized 
several  seminars  on  statistical  methodologies  and  theoretical  approaches.  In  addition,  the 
CEMLA regularly publishes and distributes empirical studies by central bank researchers in 
the region and organizes seminars and conferences to discuss the empirical findings. 
A  second  area  of  cooperation  between  central  banks  is  the  provision  of  emergency 
assistance  in  exceptional  circumstances.  Over  time,  central  banks  have  supported  each 
other  in  situations  such  as  liquidity  crises  in  order  to  mitigate  systemic  liquidity  risk.  This 
emergency  assistance  has  included,  among  other  things,  coordinated  foreign  exchange 
operations.  In  the  past,  several  central  banks  in  the  emerging  and  developing  economies 
received  emergency  liquidity  assistance.  For  example,  during  the  debt  crisis  of  1982,  the 
US Federal Reserve offered the Bank of Mexico a $700 million swap agreement. During the 
currency  crisis  of  1994,  the  Bank  of  Canada  offered  Mexico  a  shortterm  swap  of 
US$ 1 billion.  Furthermore,  Brazil  received  financial  support  from  the  Bank  of  International 
Settlements  in  1998  in  the  context  of  an  IMF  stabilization  program.  During  the  recent 
international  financial  crisis,  a  new  form  of  cooperation  emerged  in  the  provision  of 
emergency  assistance.  Major  central  banks,  including  the  US  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
European  Central  Bank,  opened  up  inter-central  bank  swap  facilities  and  repurchase 
agreements to provide central banks with emergency liquidity. 
In  my  view,  the  third  and  most  ambitious  form  of  cooperation  between  central  banks  is 
coordination of monetary and exchange rate policy. The rationale for policy coordination in 
these two areas stems from the potential externalities that domestic policy in one country can 
have  on  other  countries  i.e.,  the  “beggar  thy  neighbor”  policies.  For  example,  monetary 
tightening  in  one  country  to  reduce  inflation  will  lead  to  exchange  rate  appreciation  and 
hence may cause inflationary pressures in a trading partner of that country. As a result of 
increased globalization, these spillover effects have become more apparent. 
However,  after  the  fall  of  the  Bretton Woods  system  in  1971,  the  appetite  for  coordinated 
monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  intervention  declined.  Central  bankers  had  a  common 
belief  that  the  best  way  to  achieve  monetary  stability  was  through  domestic  policies.  As  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
result,  central  banks  became  less  inclined  to  trade  off  their  policy  autonomy  for  global  or 
regional policy coordination in the areas of monetary and exchange rate policy. 
However,  the  recent  international  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  an  intensification  of 
monetary  policy  coordination.  In  October  2008,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  together  with  the 
Bank  of  Canada,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Sweden, and the Swiss National Bank announced a reduction of their policy interest rates to 
counterbalance deflationary pressures and an economic slowdown in these countries. In my 
opinion,  this  joint  intervention  signaled  the  return  of  monetary  stability  as  an  important 
objective  of  central  bank  cooperation.  Hence,  today,  central  bank  cooperation  is  aimed  at 
maintaining both monetary and financial stability. 
Finally, financial sector regulation and supervision is a fourth area of cooperation between 
central  banks.  While  most  industrialized  countries  have  separate  authorities  in  charge  of 
financial sector regulation and supervision, in most emerging and developing countries this 
task is concentrated at the central bank. Hence, this area of cooperation is very relevant for 
our region. 
As  I  mentioned,  because  of  technological  advancements  and  financial  innovations,  the 
financial  markets  have  become  more  integrated  across  countries.  To  promote  financial 
stability,  central  banks  have  been  cooperating  in  the  area  of  financial  supervision  and 
prudential  regulation.  Besides  central  banks,  policymakers  and  other  market  players  also 
have been involved in these international efforts. 
One  example  of  successful  cooperation  among  central  banks  in  this  area  is  the  Basel 
Committee  on  banking  supervision.  In  addition,  central  banks  participated  in  the  Financial 
Stability Forum. In our region as well, we have several central bank organizations aimed at 
promoting financial stability. 
Notwithstanding  these  efforts,  the  world  economy  experienced  a  major  financial  crisis  in 
2007. We are still experiencing the effects of this crisis. In an effort to prevent a collapse of 
the  global  financial  system,  authorities,  particularly  in  industrialized  countries,  took 
unprecedented  measures  aimed  at  supporting  demand  and  reducing  uncertainty  and 
systemic risk in financial markets. Meanwhile, through multilateral cooperation and collective 
policy  actions  among  for  examples  the  members  of  the  G-20,  the  effects  of  this  financial 
crisis were mitigated. This multilateral cooperation and policy coordination has reshaped the 
cooperation among central banks in emerging and developing countries. 
Economists and policymakers worldwide agree that the weaknesses that led to this financial 
crisis should be addressed. Financial regulation and supervision need to be strengthened to 
prevent  a  similar  crisis  in  the  future.  This  will  require  a  number  of  steps.  (1)  Regulation 
should  be  broadened  to  include  all  activities  that  pose  economy–wide  risks.  (2)  Financial 
regulation will have to focus on strengthening financial institutions’ management of liquidity 
and  risks.  (3)  Conflicts  of  interest  should  be  reduced  by  making  bonuses  more  consistent 
with  long-term  success  than  with  short-term  profits.  (4)  The  transparency  of  the  financial 
system  should  be  improved.  In  the  area  of  financial  supervision,  the  focus  should  be  on 
detecting developments in the financial sector that might lead to a systemic crisis. 
An important lesson of the last international financial crisis is that international cooperation 
and  policy  coordination  are  crucial  to  maintain  financial  stability.  Hence,  these  issues  are 
currently being addressed on a global and regional level. 
International and regional cooperation in this area is very important for the Central Bank of 
Curacao  and  Sint  Maarten  to  promote  financial  stability  in  our  monetary  union  and  to 
strengthen our position as an international financial centre. Our Bank is currently a member 
of  several  international  and  regional  organizations  aimed  at  promoting  financial  stability. 
These  include  among  others,  the  Association  of  Supervisors  of  Banks  of  the  Americas 
(ASBA),  the  Group  of  International  Finance  Centre  Supervisors  (GIFCS),  the  Caribbean 
Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  (CGBS),  the  Offshore  Group  of  Insurance  Supervisors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
field  with  uniform  rules  within 
(OGIS),  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  the  Council  of 
Securities  Regulators  of  the  Americas  (COSRA),  the  Caribbean  Group  of  Securities 
Regulators (CGSR), and the Offshore Group of Collective Investment Schemes Supervisors 
(OGCISS). 
Colleges  of  supervisors  are  an  important  example  of  regional  cooperation  providing  an 
effective and efficient supervisory oversight on cross-border financial institutions. Therefore, 
within  the  Dutch  Kingdom,  which  comprises  the  Netherlands,  Aruba,  Curaçao,  and  Sint 
Maarten, we also are increasing cooperation and coordination of our policy initiatives in the 
areas of financial sector supervision and regulation. We have created a financial supervisory 
structure  in  which  each  country  within  the  Kingdom  has  its  own  supervisory  institutions 
complemented by a standard-setting body at the Kingdom level: the Committee of Kingdom 
Supervisors. 
This  Committee  consists  of  the  presidents  of  the  respective  central  banks  and  is  charged 
with preparing legislation in line with international best practices, the timely implementation of 
rules  and  regulations,  and  monitoring  compliance.  Such  a  structure  while  regional, 
guarantees compliance with international supervisory standards. In addition, it creates a level 
playing 
the  Kingdom  and  promotes  credibility  and 
transparency. 
In my opinion, a new economic order has emerged as a result of the international financial 
crisis. 
This new economic order has reshaped cooperation between central banks. First, the scope 
of central bank cooperation has broadened and deepened. For the past 30 years, the main 
focus of central bank cooperation was financial stability. Today, central bank cooperation is 
aimed  at  both  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Second,  while  industrialized  countries  were 
the key players in global governance before the financial crisis, today, emerging economies 
also are actively involved in the international decision-making process with regard to efforts 
and interventions for monetary and financial stability. The emerging economies have gained 
this position thanks to the many structural reforms they have introduced over the years. As a 
result  of  these  reforms,  these  countries  remained  a  source  of  strength  for  the  global 
economy during the recent crisis. 
In  conclusion,  during  its  60  years  of  existence,  CEMLA  has  witnessed  several  forms  of 
central bank cooperation. Today, the aim is to promote both monetary and financial stability. 
Also emerging economies, including those in our region, are now playing a key role in the 
governance of central bank cooperation. The 60th anniversary of CEMLA is an occasion for 
not  only  celebrating  but  also  reaffirming  our  commitment  to  close  cooperation  in  order  to 
achieve  monetary  and  financial  stability,  crucial  for  sustainable  economic  advancement  of 
our countries, the region, and the world in general. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
