Agathe Côté: Strengthening financial infrastructure – the new Canadian 
central counterparty 
Remarks by Ms Agathe Côté, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Association of 
Quebec Women in Finance, Montréal, Quebec, 14 June 2012 
 It gives me great pleasure to address the Association of Quebec Women in Finance. 
You  are  all  aware  that  we  are  once  again  in  the  midst  of  a  period  of  heightened financial 
turbulence. This current episode reminds us—if that was necessary—of how important it is to 
have a robust financial system. 
Today,  I  will  briefly  talk  about  the  risks  to  which  Canada’s  financial  system  is  currently 
exposed. However, my main focus will be on a major step that we have taken to strengthen 
our financial system against future shocks. 
I  am  referring  to  the  new  central  counterparty  service  for  repo  transactions,  which  was 
launched  on  21  February.  This  service,  operated  here  in  Montréal  by  the  Canadian 
Derivatives  Clearing  Corporation  (CDCC),  is  a  key  initiative  designed  to  improve  the 
infrastructure of Canadian core funding markets. 
Recall that our short-term funding markets, like those of many other countries, were severely 
battered in 2008. These markets are not immune to further turbulence, so it is important that 
we take measures to increase their resilience. 
CDCC worked closely with the Investment Industry Association of Canada, stakeholders in 
the financial industry, the Bank of Canada and other regulatory authorities to create this new 
central counterparty. 
However, much remains to be done. It is my hope that, by the time I conclude my comments, 
you  will have a greater understanding of why  it is essential that we continue with the next 
phases  of  implementation,  in  which  the  volume  of  transactions  and  the  number  of 
participants with access to the counterparty will be expanded. 
Risks presented in the Financial System Review 
But first, let’s talk about risk. Today, the Bank of Canada is releasing the latest issue of its 
Financial System Review, in which it analyzes the principal risks weighing on our country’s 
financial system. 
I am sure it’s not news to you that these risks remain high. 
After a period of calm earlier this year, global financial conditions have deteriorated markedly 
in recent weeks as the debt crisis in Europe has intensified. Markets are skeptical about the 
capacity and resolve of policy-makers to address unsustainable fiscal situations, the capital 
adequacy of some euro-area banks and the underlying balance-of-payments problems within 
the euro area. If these issues are not dealt with in an orderly way, the contagion effects on 
global financial conditions could be significant. 
While less urgent than the situation in Europe, the risks surrounding sovereign debt are also 
affecting other regions. In particular, in the United States the spectre of a “fiscal cliff” looms 
over that country’s prospects for growth. 
More generally, weakness in global demand that is partly due to international current account 
imbalances continues to represent a major source of risk. 
Moreover, in several advanced economies, keeping policy rates low over an extended period 
of time may stimulate excessive risk-taking. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1 
Here  in  Canada,  the  high  level  of  indebtedness  and  the  potential  for  a  correction  in  the 
housing sector are the principal domestic risks facing the financial system. As well, the fragile 
situation abroad increases the probability of a negative shock to the incomes and wealth of 
Canadian households. 
To  date,  the  crisis  in  Europe  has  had  a  limited  impact  on  our  financial  system.  Canadian 
markets  have  remained  relatively  stable,  and  our  banks  continue  to  have  good  access  to 
wholesale  funding  markets.  Nonetheless,  a  deterioration  in  the  situation  could  have  a 
considerable effect on Canada through trade, confidence and financial channels. 
Even though our financial system is solid, it is important to take further steps to bolster its 
ability to absorb shocks. The creation of a central counterparty for the repo market is a step 
in that direction. 
With your permission, I will now turn to the crucial role played by the repo market in Canada. 
The repo market 
Repos  –  transactions  that  involve  selling  a  security  while  concurrently  committing  to 
repurchasing it at a later date for the sale price plus interest – are the economic equivalent of 
secured loans. 
Investment dealers and banks use the repo market as a source of low-cost secured financing 
to  fund  long  positions  and  hedge  short  positions  on  securities.  These  activities  allow 
market-makers  to  generate  liquidity  for  the  broader  financial  system  and  maintain  liquid 
secondary markets. Other institutions, such as insurance companies and pension funds, also 
use the repo market as a tool to manage cash balances. 
Since  a  very  large  proportion  of  repo  transactions  are  short  term,  the  turnover  rate  in  this 
market is high. These transactions provide the immediate margin of adjustment for financial 
institutions’ funding structures. 
To give you a sense of magnitude, on 30 March 2012, the repo positions on the securities of 
Canadian banks were valued at a total of Can$90 billion (approximately 5 per cent of their 
Canadian-dollar-denominated  assets).  Government  of  Canada  securities  provided  the 
underlying collateral for almost 70 per cent of transactions. Hence, the repo market supports 
the functioning of crucial cash markets. 
In  sum,  the  repo  market  is  considered  a  core  funding  market  in  Canada,  because  it 
represents a major source of funds for financial institutions. In addition, there is no immediate 
substitute for this market, so if it were to cease operating, significant contagion would likely 
result.1 This is why we must make every effort to ensure that it remains continuously open. 
Risks brought to light by the crisis 
During  the  financial  crisis  of  2007–08,  weakness  in  the  infrastructures  of  some  financial 
markets contributed to uncertainty and, although not the cause of the crisis, intensified the 
systemic risk. 
This  was  notably  the  case  in  repo  markets.  In  fact,  participants’  uncertainty  about  the 
valuation  of  collateral  and  the  network  of  bilateral  exposures  among  financial  institutions 
exacerbated their aversion to counterparty risk, to the point that many reduced the number of 
trades and, in some cases, even left the market. 
                                                
1  J.-S. Fontaine, J. Selody and C. Wilkins, “Improving the Resilience of Core Funding Markets,” Bank of Canada 
Financial System Review (December 2009): 41–46. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches 
the  bankruptcy  of  major 
Recall that illiquidity in the repo market was an important contributor to the near-collapse of 
Bear Stearns in March of 2008. 
Repo  markets  in  Canada  suffered  a  severe  liquidity  crunch  in  the  autumn  of  that  year. 
Following 
institutions  abroad,  concerns  about 
counterparties spread, and balance sheets were subject to severe strains. In the absence of 
a  CCP  that  would  allow  its  members  to  ease  their  balance  sheets  through  balance-sheet 
netting, banks drastically curtailed their repo activity. 
The crisis clearly demonstrated the need for action to bolster the resilience of this market. 
In Canada, the Investment Industry Association of Canada, with the support of the Bank of 
Canada,  issued  a  request  for  proposal  for  the  development  of  CCP  services  for  repos.  In 
December 2009, CDCC was selected to provide these services. 
financial 
The CCP for repo transactions and risk management 
How does this central counterparty work? 
Put  simply,  a  central  counterparty  functions  as  an  intermediary  in  financial  transactions. 
Through  a  legal  process  called  “novation,”  it  becomes  the  buyer  for  every  seller  and  the 
seller for every buyer.2  
In other words, a very complex network of bilateral exposures is replaced by one exposure to 
a hub, the central counterparty. This process does not, however, eliminate risks? risks that 
are  now  concentrated  in  a  single  institution.  As  a  result,  for  a  central  counterparty  to 
contribute to reducing systemic risk, it must have solid risk-control mechanisms in place and 
be subject to rigorous oversight. 
CDCC  has  implemented  mechanisms  to  manage  the  various  risks  confronting  it,  notably, 
legal, operational and financial risk. With regard to financial risk, controlling both credit and 
liquidity risk is key to containing overall counterparty risk in the system.3  
The  legal  rules  that  govern  CDCC’s  management  of  defaults,  together  with  the  financial 
resources available to it for addressing credit risk and liquidity risk, enhance the stability of 
the  repo  market  by  ensuring  an  orderly  winding  down  in  the  event  that  a  major  institution 
defaults, while also ensuring that all novated transactions are settled. 
During the crisis, the benefits of a central counterparty became apparent with the bankruptcy 
of  Lehman  Brothers.  Thanks  to  the  participation  of  Lehman  in  a  central  counterparty  for 
derivatives,  its  positions  on  interest  rate  swaps  –  which  were  enormous  (US$9  trillion  and 
more than 66,000 transactions) – were unwound in an orderly and timely fashion. Thus, the 
market for interest rate derivatives – another core market – continued to function smoothly 
despite the Lehman collapse. 
The role of the Bank of Canada 
In  light  of  the  crucial  role  played  by  this  central  counterparty  service  in  the  efficient 
functioning of the repo market, the Bank of Canada considered that the Canadian Derivatives 
Clearing  Service  (CDCS)  might  pose  a  systemic  risk,  whereupon  it  designated  the  CDCS 
under the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act. Consequently, CDCS has been subject to 
oversight by the Bank since 30 April 2012. 
                                                
2  N. Chande, N. Labelle and E. Tuer, “Central Counterparties and Systemic Risk,” Bank of Canada Financial 
System Review, (December 2010): 43–50. 
3  P. Chatterjee, L. Embree and P. Youngman, “Reducing Systemic Risk: Canada’s New Central Counterparty 
for the Fixed-Income Market,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2012): 43–49. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3 
The Bank’s oversight process includes reviewing significant changes to both the system and 
its operating rules, reviewing the results of audits, and defining standards. 
In  carrying  out  its  oversight  mandate,  the  Bank  works  closely  with  the  relevant  financial 
market  regulators,  the  Autorité  des  marchés  financiers  and  the  Ontario  Securities 
Commission. 
This  oversight  will  soon  be  based  on  new  international  standards  developed  with  the 
participation  of  the  Bank.  It  is  worth  noting  that  lessons  learned  during  the  creation  of 
Canada’s central counterparty for repo transactions were very useful in the development of 
these new standards. 
Implementation of the central counterparty 
The metaphor frequently used by the industry to describe the financial system infrastructure 
is simple and appropriate: it’s called “plumbing.” Why? Because it is essential to the viability 
and efficient functioning of markets. 
As for our financial system, the plumbing is quite complicated. 
Hence, developing this new infrastructure took a great deal of time. It is a complex process, 
in  terms  of  both  creating  and  implementing  adequate  and  robust  risk-control  mechanisms. 
Moreover,  time  is  required  to  resolve  operational  issues,  such  as  the  development  and 
testing of required software for both the central counterparty and the participants, and issues 
associated with the interaction between new software and existing systems. 
The  launch  of  the  first  phase  of  the  service  therefore  represents  a  major  step.  But  much 
remains to be done. Delivery will take place in three phases. Phase one deals with bilateral 
repo transactions on a single Government of Canada security, although these represent only 
a small fraction of the market. 
Phase  two,  planned  for  the  end  of  this  year,  will  incorporate  cash  transactions  on 
fixed-income securities and repo transactions negotiated by intermediaries, including those 
with anonymous counterparties. 
Finally,  phase  three,  proposed  for  2013–14,  will  target  general-repo  transactions  in  which 
any  security  in  a  predetermined  basket  of  instruments  can  serve  as  collateral.  The 
introduction of this last phase is expected to significantly increase the volume of trades made 
through the central counterparty, as well as the liquidity and efficiency of the repo market. 
International efforts to mitigate risk in Short-Term Funding Markets 
In  Canada,  the  creation  of  a  central  counterparty  will  contribute  significantly  to  limiting  the 
risk of instability emanating from the repo market. 
At the international level, the Financial Stability Board is currently assessing potential reforms 
of repo markets and for loans of securities in the context of its work on the shadow banking 
sector.4  
The repo market is part of this sector because it is a form of credit intermediation which, like 
banking intermediation, rests on maturity transformation and may include leverage effects. 
There are a number of possible reforms. 
                                                
4  Financial  Stability  Board,  “Securities  Lending  and  Repos:  Market  Overview  and  Financial  Stability  Issues,” 
Workstream  on  Securities  Lending  and  Repos,  Interim  Report  of  the  Shadow  Banking  Workstream  5, 
15 March 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches 
One  of  the  specific  measures  under  consideration  is  the  increased  use  of  central 
counterparties.  Another  promising  avenue  addresses  the  regulation  of  margins  to  mitigate 
the  problems  associated  with  procyclicality.  Adopting  minimal,  or  countercyclical,  margins 
could help to curb excessive leveraging during periods of exuberance and lessen the extent 
of a disruptive curtailment of leveraging during difficult periods. 
Moreover, 
implementation of this type of regulation. 
increased  use  of  central  counterparties 
for  repos  could 
facilitate 
the 
Conclusion 
It  was  my  intention  today  to  talk  about  risks,  but  even  more  to  shed  some  light  on  the 
significant  strides  taken  in  Canada  to  improve  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  One 
tangible, and local, example of this progress has been the creation, right here in Montréal, of 
a central counterparty for repo transactions. 
Transactions executed by this counterparty are completely transparent and well capitalized, 
and  there  are  rules  and  procedures  in  place  in  the  event  of  default.  Today,  Canada’s 
experience is benefiting other countries and authorities. 
However, it’s worth emphasizing that it was the willingness of the private and public sectors 
to work together that led to the creation of this counterparty. It is essential that this spirit of 
co-operation  be  maintained,  because  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  success  of  this 
counterparty depends on the subsequent phases of implementation, which will broaden its 
sphere of influence. 
We  will  never  have  a  risk-free  financial  system.  That’s  why  we  need  to  take  measures  to 
render it more resilient to shocks that may occur, either from abroad or domestically. 
Let us make the financial system stronger to build a more stable future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5 
