K C Chakrabarty: Banking sector – maintaining resilience to risk and 
shock and the role of the accounting profession 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  (ICAI)  International  Conference  on 
“Accounting  Profession:  Leveraging  Emerging  Challenges  for  Inclusive  Growth”,  Chennai, 
7 January 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Dimple Bhandia in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri Amarjit Chopra, past president, ICAI, Shri G. Ramaswamy, present president, ICAI, Shri 
Reddy  and  other  council  members,  distinguished  Guests  and  Delegates,  ladies  and 
gentlemen.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  address  this  august  gathering  of  accounting 
professionals  from  around  the  world.  I  must,  at  the  very  outset,  laud  the  initiative  of  The 
Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  (ICAI)  in  organising  this  conference  for 
accountants to dwell on issues of topical and critical interest relating to the global economy. 
The  recent  global  crises  have  thrown  up  many  lessons,  including  for  the  accounting 
profession. The years ahead are also very challenging with a disturbed global environment 
and  all  of  us,  in  the  central  bank  and  eminent  accounting  professionals  such  as  those 
gathered here, have a critical role to play in guiding the financial sector through these choppy 
waters. 
The title of the current session “Banking Sector: Resilience to Risk and Shock” is also very 
topical. Maintaining resilience to risk and shock is an integral part of bank management and 
also  bank  regulation  and  supervision.  However,  the  events  of  the  last  few  years  have 
underscored like never before the importance of ensuring that the banking sector builds up 
its ability to handle the headwinds of adverse events with relative equanimity. Over the years, 
many practices have been exposed in financial institutions that point to the importance of risk 
management and controls. Efforts have been ongoing, across the globe, to develop a risk 
management framework to identify where the key risks lie, and set out how they are to be 
managed. But, mishaps continue to surface, clearly indicating that the development of a fool 
proof risk management system is still a work in progress and whatever level of sophistication 
and advancement we reach, shocks are unavoidable.  
The Governor, Reserve Bank of India has recently spoken on the close linkages and sharing 
of professional space between the accounting profession and us in the Reserve Bank. At the 
Reserve Bank, we depend on the accounting profession for at least two reasons – for the 
audit  of  our  own  balance  sheet  and  the  audit  of  the  balance  sheets  of  commercial  banks 
which we regulate and supervise1. I will take this opportunity to share my thoughts on the role 
that  the  accounting  profession  can  play  in  building  up  the  resilience  of  banks  to  risks  and 
shocks, as an integral part of the second aspect of their profession referred earlier. 
Risks and shocks 
(I)  
At  the  outset,  let  me  first  say  a  few  words  on  risks  and  shocks.  Risks  are  generally 
understood to be the uncertainties related to the outcomes (in terms of revenue and profits, 
for example). Risks, thus, represent “expected losses”. Shocks, on the other hand, refer to 
unanticipated adverse events and the impact of such events represents “unexpected losses”. 
                                                 
1   “Challenges  to  the  Accounting  Profession  Some  Reflections”,  Inaugural  address  by  Dr.  Duvvuri  Subbarao, 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 26th Regional Conference of the Western India Regional Council of 
the Institute of Chartered Accounts of India in Mumbai, December 16, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Financial  institutions,  and,  in  particular,  banks,  are  supposed  to  and  must  build  up  their 
resilience to both expected and unexpected losses.  
The regulatory framework for banks provides for such resilience to be built up for both risks 
and  shocks  through  a  prudential  framework.  Provisioning  requirements  are  aimed  at 
providing banks with the necessary buffers to deal with expected losses while capital buffers 
provide  banks  with  the  wherewithal  to  cope  with  unexpected  losses.  The  former  requires 
robust  identification  and  measurement  of  risks  so  as  to  ensure  that  expected  losses  are 
estimated  with  a  fair  degree  of  reliability.  Building  resilience  to  shocks,  on  the  other  hand, 
necessitates a complex judgement as to how much capital buffers need to be maintained by 
banks  to  deal  with  unexpected  and  potentially  catastrophic  events.  Regulators  attempts  to 
identify  a  minimum  level  of  capital  which  each  bank  must  maintain  in  relation  to  their  risk 
weighted  assets.  The  actual  level  of  capital  maintained  by  banks  over  and  above  this 
minimum is determined by banks depending upon their own estimate of the potential impact 
of unexpected losses. 
The role of the regulators has also been, to some extent, pedagogic in this connection. They 
have been sensitising banks about the importance of risk management systems. They have 
been guiding banks in their efforts to put in place a robust risk management system and have 
been sharing global best practices in this regard. In the Reserve Bank too, many efforts have 
been made to guide the banks in the country to put in place an effective risk management 
system.  The  guidelines  on  asset-liability  management  and  risk  management  systems  in 
banks were first issued in 1999 while Guidance Notes on Management of Credit Risk and 
Market  Risk  were  issued  in  October  2002  and  the  Guidance  Note  on  Operational  Risk 
Management in 2005. 
The accounting profession, both through its prescription of financial statements and through 
its  audit  in  banks,  has  a  critical  role  to  play  in  ensuring  that  the  banks  are  proactive  in 
identifying  the  passage  and  path  of  risks  and  that  the  extant  provision  and  capital  buffers 
make  them  adequately  resilient  to  risks  and  shocks  as  envisaged  in  the  regulatory 
guidelines.  
Banks and risks 
(II)  
It is perhaps a tautology to state that banking is about risk management. Banks are in the 
business  of  taking  risks  as  risks  are  inherent  in  the  process  of  maturity  transformation. 
Taking  of  risks  is  indeed  central  to  the  very  existence  of  banking,  in  fact,  of  all  enterprise 
cutting  across  all  segments  of  the  nation,  the  society  and  the  financial  system.  As  John 
Maynard  Keynes  once  remarked  “If  human  nature  felt  no  temptation  to  take  a  chance….. 
there might not be much investment merely as a result of cold calculation”.  
In  recent  years,  however,  risk  management  has  emerged  as  a  central issue  especially  for 
financial institutions. There is increased focus on the mechanisms for the quantification and 
communication  of  risks  on  multiple  levels  –  individual  risk  takers  within  organizations, 
organizational units, the institution as a whole, and more recently, the entire financial system.  
Having said this, it would be incorrect to assume that financial institutions, in general, and 
banks,  in  particular,  had  no  risk  management  earlier.  In  fact,  banks  have  always  had  a 
framework  for  risks  within  an  overall  asset  liability  management  (ALM)  framework.  A  risk 
management  framework  extends  this  in  the  context  of  modern  financial  intermediation, 
attempting  to  include  a  greater  “risk  orientation”  through  measuring  risks  in  all  asset  and 
liability classes, including off balance sheet positions; to include all kinds of risks and not just 
interest rate based risks; and to arrive at an overall risk adjusted return framework for the 
financial entity. 
So what has changed now? The recent increased focus on risk management can be traced 
to  several  developments  in  the  financial  sector  over  the  last  couple  of  decades.  First,  the 
deregulation of financial markets coupled with increased volatility. Second, the diversification 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  activities  of  banks  from  the  traditional  function  of  lending  and  borrowing  to  activities 
including, inter alia, custodial services, securities underwriting and corporate advisory. Third, 
the  emergence  of  complex  global  financial  institutions  coupled  with  the  growing  inter-
connectedness of the financial system. Fourth, regulators across the world also added to the 
process  by  increasingly  requiring  banks  to  maintain  capital  in  accordance  with  their  risks. 
Fifth, the increasing role of securities and derivative products along with increasing growth of 
complex financial products. As new complex products proliferated in the market place, their 
valuation posed challenges as did their illiquidity and opacity. As noted in a 2009 report of an 
Oversight Panel of the US congress, “The risks troubled assets continue to pose…depend 
on  how  many  troubled  assets  there  are.  But  no  one  appears  to  know  for  certain….  It  is 
impossible  to  ever  arrive  at  an  exact  dollar  amount  of  troubled  assets,  but  even  the 
challenges of making a reliable estimate are formidable.” 
The  recent  financial  crisis  provided  a  further  fillip  to  the  importance  of  risk  management 
frameworks for banks. It highlighted the fact that adoption of business models without taking 
adequate  cognizance  of  risks  involved,  did  matter,  especially  when  the  chips  are  down.  It 
underscored the importance of pricing risks and the dangers of giving in to the temptation to 
under-price risks in a bid to generate maximum profits, especially during the upturn of the 
economic cycle. It brought to the centre stage the importance of internal controls, corporate 
governance and risk management in ensuring the resilience of financial institutions to risks 
and shocks. 
The  above  developments  have  meant  that  the  risk  management  challenge  for  banks  has 
been  steadily  growing  more  complex  over  the  last  two  to  three  decades.  These 
developments have brought forth a fundamental shift in the approach to risk management. 
Risk management practices earlier were primarily informal and relatively simple. They were 
largely based on intuition and the techniques employed were primitive. Risk management in 
recent years has transited to a different animal – one that is complex and necessitates the 
use  of  sophisticated  technology.  Most  importantly,  risk  management  is  now  information 
based relying on advanced statistical techniques. 
So what does putting in place an effective risk management framework involve? And what 
does it involve in particular for banks? For banks, risk management essentially involves a risk 
return trade off – minimising risks for a given return or maximising returns for a given level of 
risk. Critically, it requires banks to be able to price risks in a reasonably accurate manner.  
The  question  that  then  arises  is  to  what  extent  the  risk  management  framework  in  banks, 
including Indian banks, are oriented to identify risks in a manner which is able to identify the 
passage  and  path  of  risks  and  to  price  such  risks  appropriately.  A  report  by  the  Senior 
Supervisory  Group  entitled  “Lessons  on  risk  management  from  the  global  financial  crisis” 
(March  2008)  identified  several  weaknesses  in  the  effectiveness  of  risk  identification  and 
analysis in financial firms. A report of the Institute of International Finance on “Reform in the 
financial  services  industry:  strengthening  practices  for  a  more  stable  system”  (December 
2009)  also  highlighted  substantial  gaps  in  the  risk  management  framework  of  large 
international banks. 
My own view is also that the basic tenets of risk management are still to take roots in banking 
systems, including in the Indian banking system. While, the best way to measure, manage 
and  mitigate  risks,  will  differ  from  bank  to  bank,  there  are  some  basic  tenets  which  risk 
management systems in banks need to follow and which we in the Reserve Bank and the 
audience  here  representing  the  accounting  profession  can  help  facilitate.  Prudential 
guidelines were introduced by the Reserve Bank in 1992 and cover various areas including 
provision  for  Credit  Risk,  Market  Risk  and  Operational  Risk.  These  guidelines  have  been 
periodically strengthened in line with evolving risk perceptions. Banks have also developed 
their risk management systems to meet the requirements of the prudential guidelines. I will 
discuss these issues in greater detail shortly.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Banks and shocks 
(III) 
I mentioned at the outset of my address today that shocks refer to the unexpected losses 
and that typically capital buffers are maintained to make banks resilient to such unexpected 
losses.  I  will  speak  on  two  critical  aspects  in  this  regard  –  the  role  of  regulators  and  the 
importance of stress testing. 
Role of regulators 
Regulators have played a major role in facilitating the build up of capital buffers by banks to 
enable  them  to  face  the  headwinds  arising  from  unexpected  events.  The  first  major  joint 
international regulatory initiative to put in place a framework for banks to recognise risks and 
to provide for risks was in the form of the Basel Capital Accord in 1988. The Basel Accord, as 
the prescriptions came to be called, asked banks to identify the credit risk in their activities 
and to provide capital to meet obligations and absorb unexpected losses arising from such 
risk. The Basel I framework was later extended to cover market risks. In 2004, the first Basel 
Accord was replaced by a new Accord, called Basel II, which sought to shift the focus from a 
single  broad  brush  risk  measure  to  measures  which  were  more  risk  sensitive  and  flexible, 
provided more emphasis on banks’ internal methodologies, supervisory review and market 
discipline and which provided incentives for stronger and more efficient risk management by 
banks.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  a  package  of  reform  measures  titled  Basel  III  was 
announced. The policy package is aimed at improving both the quantity and quality of the 
capital maintained by banks, strengthening liquidity standards and also its risk coverage and 
will also facilitate more effective risk management by banks.  
Stress testing 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  importance  of  stress  testing  in  building  up  banks’ 
resilience  to  shocks.  Stress  tests  typically  assess  the  resilience  of  banks  to  shocks  in  an 
extreme  adverse  scenario  as  compared  to  a  baseline  scenario.  It  also  provide  banks’ 
management with a tool to improve their internal risk managements by identifying the stress 
points  in  their  operations.  The  relevance  of  stress  tests  for  assessing  banks’  resilience  to 
shocks lies in the fact that these tests focus on the unexpected or “tail” events going beyond 
typical  risk  management  assessments  which  focus  on  events  within  the  “three  sigma” 
doubled interval. 
The importance of stress testing as part of banks overall risk management framework has 
been  recognised  under  Basel  II.  In  the  wake  of  waning  investor  confidence  and  concerns 
about the health of the banking sector, the Federal Reserve Bank and the European Banking 
Authority conducted a series of stress tests to assess the resilience of the banking system as 
a whole, and the capacity of individual banks to absorb potential shocks. The Dodd Frank Act 
goes a step further and requires that policy makers in the US conduct annual stress tests of, 
inter alia, large bank holding companies and publish a summary of the results of the stress 
tests. The Act, in fact, mandates both supervisory stress tests (regulators specify the adverse 
scenario  and  determine  the  resulting  loss  estimates  on  a  standardized  basis  drawing  on 
information  submitted  by  each  firm)  and  bank-run  stress  tests  (regulators  specify  the 
scenario but require each bank to model the stress event itself). 
In India, too, the importance of stress testing was realised well ahead of the recent global 
crisis. Stress testing guidelines were issued by the Reserve Bank to banks in 2006. Of late, 
the Reserve Bank has been conducting a series of top down and bottoms up stress testing to 
assess the resilience of the banking system to a series of shocks in specific risk factors and 
to  deterioration  in  the  overall  macrofinancial  environment.  Various  other  techniques  to 
assess the resilience of banks to simulated distressed conditions in the banking sector and in 
the  larger  financial  sector  through  tools  such  as  network  analysis  and  modelling  of  the 
distress dependencies between banks are also being deployed for the purpose. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Going  forward,  it  would  be  critical  that  the  stress  testing  results  be  incorporated  in  the 
business  and  capital  assessment  and  planning  exercise  of  banks.  The  overall  acceptable 
levels  of  expected  and  unexpected  loss  willing  to  be  incurred  by  banks  should  be  a 
management  decision  driven  based  on  rigorous  and  analytical  assessment  of  available 
information. While it is not expected that banks provide for unexpected losses in the manner 
prescribed  for  expected  losses,  the  “economic  capital”  which  the  bank  seeks  to  maintain 
must be driven by considerations which encompass such losses. 
to 
is  geared 
the  bank’s  management 
Role of banks’ management in building up resilience to risks and shocks 
(IV)  
As the regulatory architecture has evolved over a little over the last couple of decades, it has 
been  accompanied  by  an  increasing  emphasis  on  internal  controls  and  methodologies  for 
building  up  the  banks’  resilience  to  risks  and  shocks.  First  line  of  defence  for  risk 
management  has  to  come  from  bank  managements  and  specially  from  bank  boards. 
Assessment and planning of capital adequacy by banks is key to ensuring that banks remain 
resilient to risks and shocks. For the management of losses arising from realisation of risks 
or emergence of shocks, there is no substitute for senior management and the Board asking 
the  right  questions.  Unless 
internalize  and 
institutionalize a risk and control culture in banks, any attempts to increase the resilience of 
banks can be effective only to a limited extent. 
If management has to pose the right questions, it is critical that information systems in banks 
are geared to respond to these questions. Banks today will be hard pressed to respond to 
questions  about  the  risk  return  characteristics  of  different  activities,  for  example.  Unless 
information  systems  are  developed  to  answer  such  questions,  effective  decision  making, 
which takes into account associated risks, will remain a casualty. I recollect in this context, a 
comment made by Governor Alan Greenspan who stated that: “It has been my experience 
that competency in mathematics, both in numerical manipulations and in understanding its 
conceptual  foundations,  enhances  a  person’s  ability  to  handle  the  more  ambiguous  and 
qualitative relationships that dominate our day-today financial decision making”2. Given that 
financial decision making is becoming complex, it is up to us to design information systems 
which facilitate such decision making. In the context of putting in place a risk management 
framework in particular, there is a need to ensure that information systems in banks are able 
to  provide  “information  on  “returns”  at  activity  level  and  segmental  reporting  in  a  granular 
manner”3. 
Finally, management has to play a critical role to get the balance between the business units 
and  risk  management  right  if  banks  have  to  develop  adequate  resilience.  Experience  has 
shown,  time  and  again,  that,  in  good  times  particularly  when  there  is  a  tendency  for 
misaligned incentives to emerge, there is a tendency to listen more to the business side.  
Role of the accounting profession 
(V)  
Let me now spend a few minutes dwelling on the role which the accounting profession plays 
and can potentially play in ensuring the banks remain resilient to risks and shocks. 
                                                 
2   www.alangreenspan.org. 
3   “Introduction of IFRS – Issues and Challenges”, Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank, at 
the  inauguration  of  a  national  level  seminar  on  IFRS,  Prahladrai  Dalmia  Lions  College  of  Commerce  and 
Economics, Mumbai, on February 11, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Role of accounting statements 
Modern accounting as we know today owes its origin to a Venetian monk Luca Pacioli, who 
till today, holds the distinction of being called the “Father of Accounting”. In the year 1494, 
Pacioli  published  his  famous  book  “Summa  de  arithmetica,  geometria,  proportioni  et 
proportionalita”  (“The  Collected  Knowledge  of  Arithmetic,  Geometry,  Proportion  and 
Proportionality”).  One  section  in  the  book,  “Particularis  de  Computis  et  Scripturis”,  was  a 
treatise on accounting that, for the first time, described double-entry accounting, also known 
as the Venetian method.  
The  development  of  the  accounting  profession  as  we  know  it  today  owes  its  origin  to  the 
emergence  of  the  joint  stock  company  which  resulted  in  the  separation  of  ownership  from 
management  necessitating  the  need  for  an  independent  and  informed  opinion  on  how  the 
funds entrusted to the management were being used / accounted for. In India, the origin of 
the profession can be traced to the enactment of the Companies Act in 1857. The profession 
has since come a long way and its opinions and assessment of the accounts of companies 
serve  to  provide  assurance  to  a  wide  base  of  stakeholders  –  share  holders,  lenders, 
investors, the banking system, regulators, the government and society itself.  
What  is,  however,  clear  is  that  neither  the  origin  of  accounting  nor  that  of  the  accounting 
profession  had  their  “raison  d’etre”  in  risk  management.  Notwithstanding,  considerable 
reliance  has  been  placed  on  accounting  statements  for  assessing  the  risk  management 
framework  of  financial  firms.  A  BIS  working  paper4  succinctly  states  the  purpose  of 
accounting statements: “First, information about any firm – be it a financial or non-financial 
firm  –  should  concern  three  characteristics,  namely:  estimates  of  its  current  financial 
condition  and  profitability;  estimates  of  its  risk  profile;  and  a  measure  of  the  uncertainty 
surrounding those two types of estimate”.  
While  the  accounting  statements  undoubtedly  present  estimates  of  the  current  financial 
conditions,  the  extent  to  which  they  have  been  successful  in  estimating  the  risk  profile  of 
firms is open for debate. Referring to the words of Harvard professor Eddie Riedl to his MBA 
class  that  “Accounting=  Economic  truth  +  Measurement  error  +  Bias”,  Satyajit  Das,  in  his 
recent  book  “Extreme  Money”, 
fact,  comments 
is  now  mainly 
“measurement error” and “bias” – a remarkable progress! 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  also  revealed  several  weaknesses  in  accounting 
statements,  indeed  in  the  accounting  standards  based  on  which  the  statements  are 
prepared.  Accounting  practices,  or  at  least  some  of  them,  were  criticised  for  either 
contributing  to,  or  at  least,  exacerbating  the  severity  of  the  crisis.  The  issues  identified 
included the failure of accounting standards to deal with illiquid markets and distressed sales, 
delayed recognition of losses associated with loans, structured credit products, off-balance 
sheet  financing  structures,  permitting  certain  structured/  special  purpose  entities  and 
exposure to remain off-balance sheet, lack of “visibility” in accounting statements, to name 
just a few. The manner of preparation of accounting statements shared at least some of the 
blame in aggravating pro-cyclicality and causing volatility in financial statements, all of which 
added to systemic risks. In any case, the extraordinary complexity of accounting standards 
especially those related to financial instruments came under severe criticism in the wake of 
the crisis.  
Consequent  to  the  identification  of  these  issues,  the  Basel  Committee  issued  a  set  of 
“Guiding  principles  for  the  replacement  of  IAS  39”  which,  inter  alia,  reflect  the  lessons 
learned from the financial crisis and emphasize the need for earlier recognition of loan losses 
to ensure robust provisions; recognise that fair value is not effective when markets become 
that  accounting 
in 
                                                 
4   BIS  Working  Papers,  No  180,  “Accounting,  prudential  regulation  and  financial  stability:  elements  of  a 
synthesis”, Claudio Borio and Kostas Tsatsaronis, Monetary and Economic Department, September 2005. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
dislocated  or  are  illiquid;  permit  reclassifications  from  the  fair  value  to  the  amortised  cost 
category;  which  should  be  allowed  only  in  rare  circumstances  following  the  occurrence  of 
events having clearly led to a change in the business model; promote a level playing field 
across jurisdictions.  
Some critical accounting standards have been/are being amended to take cognisance of the 
lessons of the crisis and will contribute significantly to ensuring that the capital and provisions 
held by the bank are better aligned to the risks in the banks’ balance sheet. The estimation of 
both expected and unexpected losses is an inexact science. The attempts to better estimate, 
provide  for  them  and  to  present  an  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  buffers,  therefore, 
remains a continuing one.  
Role of audit 
Let me now turn to the role of audit in ensuring the efficacy of risk management and capital 
adequacy systems in banks. Put in an extremely narrow perspective, auditors ensure that the 
audited entity is adhering to the prevailing accounting standards pretty much like supervisors 
are tasked with ensuring that banks are following the prescribed regulatory framework. But 
expectations  from  supervisors  and  auditors  –  from  society,  from  the  financial  system  and 
from ourselves – goes beyond this narrow perspective.  
In the context of the current discussion, both supervisors and auditors have a vested interest 
in  ensuring  that  banks  are  resilient  both  to  “known”  risks  and  to  “unknown”  shocks.  In 
particular,  both  supervisors  and  auditors  are  keen  to  ensure  that  banks  put  in  place  an 
effective  system  of  risk  management  which  ensures  that  risks  are  identified,  measured, 
managed and correctly priced.  
It is important in this connection that the auditors ask probing questions about the adequacy 
of  banks’  provisions  and  capital.  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  auditors  currently  are  not 
focussing  on  these  aspects  at  the  moment.  Gaps,  however,  remain  as  suggested  by  the 
findings  of  the  Annual  Financial  Inspection  of  banks  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  There  remains 
thus scope for more rigorous attention to the issues of adequacy of capital and provisions by 
auditors. 
Going forward 
Accounting standards and accounting statements were not geared to take into account the 
compulsions  of  the  risk-return  trade  off.  To  some  degree,  the  post  crisis  reforms  to 
accounting  standards  are  addressing  this.  Going  forward,  however,  it  will  be  critical  that 
accounting  statements  assess  and  present  the  gamut  of  issues  related  to  the  level  of 
provisions and capital maintained by banks and their adequacy in ensuring the resilience of 
banks to risks and shocks. 
The role of auditors will also remain key as they gear themselves to play a more effective 
role  as  part  of  the  control  systems  of  banks.  For  the  purpose,  auditors  need  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  bank’s  business.  Their  review  must  transcend  the  ordinary  to  enable 
them  to  critically  analyse  the  operations  of  the  banks  they  audit  and  recommend 
improvements to the internal control framework. The ever increasing complexity of products 
and operations, the parallel development of regulations such as the Basel Accords and the 
impending migration to the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) add to these 
challenges and place intense demands on the technical resources and authority of auditors.  
To  gear  up  to  these  challenges,  auditors  need  to  take  into  account  a  system  wide 
understanding  of  markets,  products  and  their  inter  connectedness,  especially  in  times  of 
stress. Auditors will need to move beyond narrow transaction audit considerations to look at 
the larger picture. They will need to ask pointed and relevant questions. Do decisions in the 
bank  take  adequate  cognisance  of  risk  considerations?  Is  the  focus  on  returns  or  income 
adequate  given  that  higher  returns  can  only  be  possible  with  higher  risks?  Do  banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
adequately  understand  the  risk  reward  characteristics  of  product/market/business  they  are 
entering into? 
Against this backdrop, the recent comments of the Governor, Reserve Bank, on the need for 
auditors  to  concentrate  on  the  audit  of  head  office  of  banks  as  against  audit  of  branches 
given the emergence of core banking, centralised record keeping and even centralised risk 
management, are very relevant. 
Concluding remarks 
The recent global financial crisis underscored the fact that risks and shocks are unavoidable. 
Taking risks is an inevitable part of the business of banks. Management of risks is thus, key, 
to banks, but risk management practices in banks remain misaligned from some of the basic 
tenets of the risk-return trade off. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us, as central banks and 
the  accounting  profession,  to  ensure  that  these  risks  are  managed  and  banks  develop  an 
acceptable degree of resilience to risks and shocks. 
In many respects the concerns of banking supervisors and auditors are complementary. The 
crisis has proved that we have to learn to be more proactive and more intrusive. As the world 
around  us  becomes  more  complex,  we  will  need  to  gear  ourselves  up  to  the  challenges. 
Critical in this context will be building up of skills and expertise and continuing research and 
education in these areas. 
Accountants,  in  particular,  have  to  move  beyond  the  narrow  considerations  of  accounting 
standards and continuously seek answers. This is not to suggest that they should not work 
within  the  accepted  conceptual  framework  for  risk  management  but  that  they  should  be 
proactive to emerging risks within the parameters of the framework. Let me conclude with the 
words  of  Sir  David  Tweedie5,  recently  retired  Chairman  of  the  International  Accounting 
Standard Board,  
“I do believe the accountant is an artist, but he has to portray his subject faithfully. 
I don’t believe the accounting profession’s ………..judgement should be replaced 
by a search engine and most questions are answered by the standard-setter or 
relevant  accounting  authorities.  I  don’t,  on  the  other  hand,  believe  the  painting 
can be a personal creation. The world has moved on. The picture to be painted is 
no longer a personal conception about business. How the success or failure of a 
business  should  be  measured  is  now  determined  by  standards  defining  more 
precisely a conceptual framework agreed by the global financial community”. 
All  these  notwithstanding,  the  mainstay  of  accounting  profession  or,  for  that  matter, 
“supervision”  lies  always  on  the  concept  of,  as  former  President  of  USA,  Ronald  Reagan 
believed, “Trust….but verify”. To what extent should we trust and what extent we verify is a 
matter of judgement. I am sure the deliberations at this conference have given some clue to 
arrive at a better judgement. Thank you ladies and gentlemen for a patient hearing.  
                                                 
5   “Beancounters or Market Drivers? – The Role of the Reporting Accountant”, Address by Sir David Tweedie at 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland (ICAS) on 4 September 2008. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
