Peter Praet: Managing financial crises – the role of the European Central 
Bank 
Address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  40th  Economics  Conference  of the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Austria  “European 
Monetary Union – lessons from the debt crisis”, Vienna, 10 May 2012. 
 I would like to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for his contribution to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a real pleasure for me to share my thoughts on the role of the European Central Bank 
(ECB) 
the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank. 
the  40th  Economics  Conference  of 
financial  crises  at 
in  managing 
Introduction 
1. 
We meet here to discuss this subject at a time when it has already preoccupied us for almost 
half a decade. And yet it could not be more topical today. What started as a liquidity crisis in 
the  money  market  in  2007  quickly  morphed  into  a  full-blown  financial  crisis  following 
Lehman’s collapse in autumn 2008, and finally into a sovereign debt crisis starting in May 
2010.  We  have  been  facing  a  situation  in  which  all  these elements  rapidly  and  profoundly 
reinforce  each  other,  thus  combining  to  create  a  challenge  far  bigger  than  the  sum  of  its 
individual parts.  
Since the onset of the crisis, financial market turbulence and the associated deterioration in 
credit  conditions  and  overall  economic  confidence  have  dragged  down  the  real  economy. 
The resulting downward impact on economic activity has led to an erosion of tax bases and 
taken  a  massive  toll  on  public  finances.  The  concomitant  threats  to  debt  sustainability,  in 
turn,  have  required  several  governments  to  adopt  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  measures 
during the downturn to regain control of their fiscal positions. Furthermore, the financial and 
economic crisis forced many governments to intervene in domestic banking sectors, again 
placing  severe  strains  on  fiscal  positions  in  several  cases.  Vice  versa,  fiscal  sustainability 
concerns have rapidly spilled over to the financial sector, thus giving rise to a vicious cycle 
that is difficult to break. 
Disentangling this web of mutually reinforcing risk factors is the number one challenge that 
we, as economic policy-makers, are facing. As I will show, the ECB has played an important 
role in confronting this challenge. By cutting its main policy rates and introducing additional 
measures  to  directly  address  liquidity  and  funding  constraints  in  the banking  sector,  it  has 
bought  time  to  facilitate  the  structural  adjustment  of  the  financial  industry.  It  belongs  to 
governments to continue their efforts to ensure fiscal discipline, restore competitiveness and 
to remove remaining shortcomings in economic governance at the European level. 
Identifying and addressing these shortcomings is key for the future. 
Lessons from the past – risks for the future 
2. 
A central observation regarding the period before the crisis is that most countries did not do 
enough  to  ensure  resilience  in  the  face  of  adverse  economic  shocks.  For  example,  while 
headline  fiscal  balances  in  many  countries  improved  over  the  period  between  the 
introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  start  of  the  crisis,  this  improvement  was  driven  to  a 
considerable  extent  by  very  favourable  cyclical  conditions.  These  in  turn  disguised  the 
vulnerabilities originating from expansionary expenditure policies. Moreover, despite benign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economic conditions, half of the euro area member countries were already recording deficits 
before the crisis. This failure to sufficiently consolidate public finances in good times left little 
or  no  room  to  absorb  the  fiscal  burden  arising  from  the  recession  and  bank  rescue 
measures.  In  addition,  rather  than  using  the  cyclical  upswing  to  implement  far-reaching 
structural  reforms,  a  number  of  countries  witnesses  a  sharp  deterioration  of  their 
competitiveness,  as  evidenced,  inter  alia,  by  sharp  increases  in  unit  labour  costs.  The 
reliance  on  demand-side  expansion,  often  fuelled  by  public  sector  deficit  spending, 
exacerbated the downturn in these countries when credit conditions took a turn for the worse. 
While responsibility for addressing these developments was – and continues to be – for the 
most part on the side of national governments, the situation has wide-ranging implications for 
financial and economic conditions in the euro area as a whole. And it thus creates substantial 
challenges for monetary policy in EMU.  
The ECB’s monetary policy is firmly and unambiguously anchored in our primary objective of 
maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  which  is  defined  by  keeping  euro  area  HICP 
inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The credibility of this commitment is 
corroborated  by  medium-term  inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area  economy,  which 
remain in line with our objective. 
This  mandate  has  also  guided  the  ECB’s  policy  response  throughout  the  crisis.  When 
confronted with acute downside risks to price stability, the ECB reduced its main policy rates 
and  adopted  a  range  of  additional  policy  measures,  often  referred  to  as  “non-standard” 
measures. These have served as a complement to the changes in interest rates when the 
channels by which, in normal times, the central bank transmits policy signals to the broader 
economy were seriously impaired. As I will discuss in more detail below, these policies were 
devised in such a way that the ECB’s capacity to ensure price stability over the medium term 
was preserved, thereby contributing to the overall stability of the financial system in the euro 
area. 
However, the central bank’s contribution to fighting the impact of the crisis entails a delicate 
balancing  act.  On  the  one  hand,  the  risks  to  price  stability  emanating  from  a  possible 
financial  meltdown  call  for  decisive  action  from  the  central  bank.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
resulting mitigation of a crisis which, to a considerable extent, reflected shortcomings in other 
policy areas and excesses in the financial sector, can alter incentives for the different actors 
to correct the imbalances that undermined financial stability in the first place. If the central 
bank  does  not  react  forcefully,  it  risks  losing  its  ability  to  deliver  on  its  mandate  of  price 
stability. At the same time, monetary policy cannot address the root causes of the crisis; this 
can only be done by policy-makers at national level and actors in the different sectors of the 
economy  that  have  built  up  excessive  leverage.  This  in  turn  requires  a  broad  range  of 
measures  usually  comprising  growth-enhancing  structural  reforms,  fiscal  consolidation, 
restructuring of the domestic banking sector and balance sheet repair. But such measures 
are likely to prove challenging and politically costly to implement. 
If  domestic  policy-makers  and  other  economic  actors  delay  necessary  reforms  and 
adjustments on the expectation that the central bank may have to provide renewed support 
should market conditions deteriorate, monetary policy may end up being subject to a short-
term  bias.  Such  a  strategy  could  give  rise  to  a  regime  of  “financial  dominance”,  which 
Hervé Hannoun,  the  Deputy  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements, 
recently described as a situation in which “monetary policy becomes increasingly dominated 
by short-term concerns about adverse financial market developments”.1 
                                                 
1  See Hannoun, Hervé (2012 ), “Monetary policy in the crisis: testing the limits of monetary policy”, speech at 
the 47th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, 13–14 February. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To avoid such a situation, extraordinary monetary policy interventions have to be temporary 
in  nature  and  tied  to  a  commitment  of  swift  reversal  as  soon  as  conditions  improve.  But 
would this commitment be sufficient to align the incentives of the different actors involved? 
This  question  relates  to  the  concept  of  “time  inconsistency”,  which  describes  conditions  in 
which a policy-maker states its intention to follow a specific course of action in the future but 
cannot  credibly  commit  itself  to  this  course.  As  a  consequence,  other  economic  agents 
expect  the  policy-maker  to  deviate  from  its  stated  intention  and  adjust  their  actions 
accordingly. 
The solution proposed in the economic literature to this type of problems is based largely on 
two  elements:  institutional  frameworks  setting  out  clearly  defined  objectives  for  key  policy 
areas and the adoption of “rule-type behaviour” that consistently and predictably determines 
the  response  of  policy-makers  to  specific  circumstances.  These  elements  increase  the 
credibility  of  policy  commitments,  thereby  allowing  a  policy-maker  to  steer  expectations  of 
other actors in line with its long-term intentions and overcoming the short-term bias resulting 
from the time inconsistency problem. 
Both of these crucial elements are in place in the euro area as regards the single monetary 
policy. The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union establishes a strong institutional 
framework for monetary policy in the euro area based on central bank independence and a 
primary  objective  of  price  stability,  as  enshrined  in  Articles  130  and  127,  respectively. 
Together with the prohibition of monetary financing of public debt, laid down in Article 123, 
this framework provides an important safeguard against monetary policy being dominated by 
fiscal  policy  considerations.  And  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  builds  on  a 
comprehensive analysis of risks to price stability via its two pillars and is communicated to 
the general public in a regular and transparent manner, entails “rule-type behaviour” on the 
part of the ECB. These elements provide a framework which is geared towards the medium 
term and which counteracts short-term bias towards fine-tuning macroeconomic and financial 
developments. 
The current crisis has instead exposed severe shortcomings in the institutional architecture 
of EMU as regards the areas of fiscal, structural and financial stability. These shortcomings 
have made it possible for national authorities to often pursue economic policies that finally 
led to strong negative externalities on the euro area as a whole. Besides inducing a build-up 
of  risks,  this  also  indirectly  affected  the  smooth  functioning  of  EMU  by  exacerbating 
heterogeneity between countries. In particular, misaligned budgetary policies, unsustainable 
wage developments and structural rigidities in product and labour markets, as observed in 
several countries, constitute a source of persistent inflation differentials within the currency 
union. These in turn represent also a challenge for monetary policy. 
As  regards  the  origin  of  such  institutional  shortcomings,  there  are  four  factors  that  play  a 
particularly prominent role: first, weakly enforced fiscal rules incapable of promoting prudent 
fiscal  policies  in  times  of  favourable  economic  conditions;  second,  the  absence  of  a 
mechanism  to  prevent  and  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances  within  the  EU;  third, 
insufficient coordination of macro and micro-prudential supervision of financial sectors at the 
EU  level;  and  finally,  the  absence  of  a  crisis  management  framework  to  avoid  contagion 
between countries and sectors. 
In  response  to  these  problems,  policy-makers  have  set  in  motion  ambitious  reforms  to 
strengthen  economic  governance  at  the  EU  level,  and  many  national  governments  have 
committed to ambitious fiscal and structural reforms. All these measures should contribute to 
addressing  the  underlying  causes  of  the  crisis,  thereby  also  supporting  the  smooth 
functioning  of  EMU  in  the  future.  But  let  me  first  explain,  in  more  detail,  the  ECB’s  policy 
since the start of the current crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
3. 
The ECB’s response to the financial and sovereign debt crisis – measures and 
guiding principles 
Since  the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  2008,  and  against  the 
background of rapidly receding inflationary pressures, the ECB has implemented monetary 
policy  measures  that  are  unprecedented  in  nature  and  scope.  This  has  included  a  swift 
reduction  in  our  key  interest  rates  to  historical  lows,  with  the  rate  on  the  main  refinancing 
operations now standing at 1% as compared with 4.25% in summer 2008. These steps are 
often referred to as “standard” policy measures, since changes in short-term interest rates 
are the main tool adopted by the ECB to achieve its price stability objective. 
However,  besides  triggering  a  sharp  fall  in  global  economic  activity,  the  crisis  severely 
affected the monetary transmission channels. In particular, central banks around the world 
were confronted with repeated waves of market turbulence, in which liquidity in overnight and 
longer-term  money  markets  was  sharply  falling,  in  view  of  heightened  uncertainty  about 
counterparty risk between banks. As consequence, the functioning of the interbank market 
was seriously hampered and the ability of banks to provide credit to the real economy was at 
risk.  These  developments  severely  jeopardised  the  ECB’s  ability  to  affect  economic 
magnitudes and ultimately to contain downside risks to price stability. 
In  response,  the  ECB  embarked  on  a  series  of  “non-standard”  measures  with  the  aim  of 
relieving liquidity and funding constraints in the banking sector and mitigating impairments to 
the  monetary  policy  transmission  channels.  In  particular,  they  have  taken  the  form  of: 
provision to euro area banks of unlimited liquidity at a fixed rate against adequate collateral; 
a substantial lengthening of the maximum maturity of refinancing operations; the extension of 
the list of assets accepted as collateral; and the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies. 
These  measures  have  served  to  improve  financing  conditions  and  credit  flows  above  and 
beyond what could be achieved through reductions in the key ECB interest rates.  
While  these  measures  clearly  differ  in  their  specific  design  and  scope,  they  all  follow  the 
same guiding principle: a clear focus on the ultimate objective of price stability, supported by 
the intermediate target of ensuring depth and liquidity in dysfunctional market segments to 
restore the proper functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. To that effect, 
they  serve  as  complements  to  our  standard  monetary  policy  tools  and  can  be  unwound 
should upward pressures on price stability materialise. 
Let  me  provide  an  example  of  this  guiding  principle,  by  looking  at  the  most  recent  non-
standard  monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the  ECB,  i.e.  the  long-term  refinancing 
operations (LTROs) decided in December 2011. 
The  second  half  of  2011  was  characterised  by  a  renewed  intensification  of  turbulence  in 
sovereign  debt  markets,  which  quickly  spilled  over  to  the  banking  system.  As  a 
consequence, the access of euro area banks to market-based funding came under strain, as 
reflected,  for  instance,  in  a  substantial  surge  of  euro  area  money  market  spreads  since 
July 2011. In the ECB bank lending survey more than half of all participating euro area banks 
reported a deterioration in wholesale funding conditions.  
Without  effective  remedies,  these  developments  could  have  severely  undermined  bank 
lending  to  firms  and  households  and  triggered  broad-based  selling  of  assets.  The  LTROs 
were aimed at alleviating these adverse funding conditions. Banks were able to satisfy their 
additional liquidity needs, in the context of a net liquidity injection of around €520 billion – 
taking  into  account  the  shifting  of  liquidity  out  of  other  operations.  Moreover,  the  LTROs 
provided  banks  with  a  more  certain  medium-term  funding  situation  owing  to  the  longer 
maturity of the new operations. 
The full supportive impact of the three-year LTROs will need time to unfold. Any assessment 
of their impact on the economy can be only preliminary in nature at this stage.  
However, the data available to date give some encouraging signals. Money and credit figures 
up to March confirm a broad stabilisation of financial conditions and thereby the avoidance of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
an  abrupt  and  disorderly  adjustment  in  the  balance  sheets  of  credit  institutions.  Funding 
conditions  for  banks  have  generally  improved,  and  there  has  been  increased  issuance 
activity  and  a  re-opening  of  some  segments  of  funding  markets.  At  the  same  time,  the 
demand  for  credit  remains  weak  in  the  light  of  still  subdued  economic  activity  and  the 
ongoing process of balance sheet adjustment in non-financial sectors.  
Beyond  these  short-term  effects  on  market  conditions,  a  key  aspect  in  the  design  of  the 
three-year  LTRO  is  its  consistency  with  the  ECB’s  capacity  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. Most importantly, the interest rate on the three-year operations is indexed to 
the  ECB’s  main  policy  rate,  i.e.  the  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations.  Thus,  if  ECB 
were to increase this rate, the costs for the remaining period of the three-year LTROs would 
also rise. Hence, the three-year liquidity allocation does not stand in the way of an increase 
in  short-term  interest  rates;  rather,  it  would  allow  such  an  increase  to  be  immediately 
translated into the outstanding liquidity operations.  
As in the past, the Governing Council will be vigilant in order to contain upside risks to price 
stability. In this context, let me point out that what is relevant for measuring monetary liquidity 
is not the balance sheet of the Eurosystem, but the balance sheet of the euro area banking 
sector.  Only  the  latter  shows  the  interaction  with  the  real  economy.  This  interaction  is 
captured  by  monetary  and  credit  data  which,  despite  the  recent  stabilisation  I  mentioned 
earlier, are still very subdued.  
If these conditions were to change in a way that entailed upside risks to price stability, the 
Governing Council would use all the instruments at its disposal to continue delivering on its 
primary mandate.  
The ECB’s monetary analysis pillar serves to assess signals coming from developments in 
money and credit conditions. I would also like to mention that our monetary analysis is not 
narrowly confined to the analysis of headline money and credit dynamics, but also tries to 
understand their determinants. 
Let  me  summarise.  The  ECB  has  taken  an  active  role  in  mitigating  the  financial  and 
economic  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  which  has  been  fully  consistent  with  its  mandate. 
Reductions in the main policy rates have served to counteract acute downside risks to price 
stability.  Non-standard  measures  have  addressed  impairments  to  monetary  transmission 
channels,  thereby  complementing  changes  in  policy  rates  when  highly  dysfunctional  and 
perturbed market conditions impeded their effectiveness. To preserve our primary objective 
to ensure price stability, these non-standard measures are temporary and will be withdrawn if 
upward pressures to price stability materialise.  
It 
is  crucial 
financial  supervision. 
The way forward and conclusions 
4. 
However, the ECB’s exceptional measures should not distract from the fundamental causes 
of the crisis and the adjustments needed in the fiscal, structural and financial domains. The 
institutional  architecture  in  the  EU  has  to  ensure  that  Member  States  live  up  to  their 
responsibility  for  restoring  fiscal  sustainability  and  competitiveness  and  for  implementing 
effective 
the  central  bank’s 
responsibilities from other policy domains, such as fiscal sustainability and financial stability. 
Therefore, efforts to reinforce the economic governance framework at the European level are 
indispensable.  In  this  regard,  European  policy-makers  have  made  important  progress 
recently. As a result of the strengthening of the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact 
and  the  introduction  of  the  fiscal  compact,  member  states  now  face  stronger  incentives  to 
adopt sound budgetary policies, which are crucial for a smooth functioning of EMU. These 
derive, inter alia, from the requirement for national authorities to legally adopt a fiscal rule, 
preferably at constitutional level, stipulating that the general government deficit remain below 
0.5% of GDP in structural terms. The new Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure constitutes 
a useful mechanism requiring governments to adopt competitiveness-enhancing policies and 
to  clearly  separate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
in 
financial 
instability 
their  domestic  economies.  The 
tackle  potential  sources  of 
establishment  of  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  and  the  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board has led to closer cooperation in micro and macroeconomic supervision within the EU 
that is commensurate to its deep economic and financial integration. Finally, the creation of 
firewalls  in  the  form  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  European  Stability 
Mechanism  will  contribute  to  isolating  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  from  financial  turmoil 
affecting individual or a small group of countries. By providing financial assistance linked to 
strong  and  comprehensive  conditionality,  these  mechanisms  should  also  grant  recipient 
countries  additional  time  to  overcome  structural  deficiencies  in  specific  sectors  of  their 
economies. 
While  the  EU  governance  framework  thus  contains  some  key  elements  necessary  to 
overcome  the  current  crisis  and  mitigate  future  crises,  it  is  now  paramount  that  all  these 
elements are implemented in a swift and steadfast manner.  
Moreover,  to  meet  the  challenges  with  which  our  economies  will  be  confronted  over  the 
coming decades, most notably in the form of population ageing and increasing competition 
from  emerging  market  economies,  structural  reform  efforts  aimed  at  boosting  long-term 
economic  growth  should  be  high  on  the  European  agenda.  Only  if  productivity  and 
competitiveness keep pace with these challenges will Europe be able to preserve a standard 
of  living  similar  to  that  we  enjoy  now.  To  mark  this  commitment  to  fostering  long-term 
economic growth, key principles for sound and sustainable growth could be enshrined in the 
common economic governance framework. 
All these reform efforts will put the framework for fiscal and macroeconomic policies (the “E” 
in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union)  on  a  stronger  footing  and  will  facilitate  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy – which has been supported by the strong institutional framework provided 
by the Maastricht Treaty since the very beginning of EMU. A strong institutional framework 
as  regards  both  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  coupled  with  an  extension  of  “rule-type 
behaviour” to other key policy areas, can also make it possible to address the moral hazard 
problem inherent in any supportive policy measure that needs to be taken during the crisis.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
