Daniel Mminele: Inflation targeting in the wake of the crisis and the South 
African experience 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Luncheon  of 
Industry, 
Johannesburg, 25 July 2012. 
the  Southern  African-German  Chamber  of  Commerce  and 
1. 
Introduction 
 Good  afternoon  and  thank  you  to  the  Southern  African  –  German  Chamber  of  Commerce 
and  Industry  for  the  invitation.  I  thought  it  may  be  an  appropriate  time  to  take  stock  of 
monetary policy in  general and more  specifically in  South  Africa since the sub-prime crisis. 
The  years  between  the  mid-1980s  until  the  outbreak  of  the  sub-prime  crisis  are  often 
referred  to  as  the  “Great  Moderation”.1  This  period  of  reduced  macroeconomic  volatility 
came  to  an  abrupt  end  in  2007,  following  which  uncertainty,  instability,  extraordinary 
volatility  and  strain  in  financial  markets  became  the  norm.  Increasing trade  and  financial 
inter-linkages  with  the  global  environment  meant  transference  of  this  volatility  and 
uncertainty  to  the  South  African  economy,  with  consequences  for  monetary policy. South 
Africa’s  monetary  policy  has  been  influenced  by  developments  in  the  US  and  Europe, 
however, it is also true that our experience has been vastly different to that of central banks 
abroad. I say this because at no time did we  employ  unconventional  monetary  policies,  nor 
did  we  implement capital controls or  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  We  were 
one  of  the  few  emerging market central banks not to have tightened monetary policy during 
this period. 
The  crisis  in  Europe  shows  no  signs  of  abating  and  the  threat  of  the  US  fiscal  cliff looms 
large.  Judging  by  the  most  recent  developments,  things  seem  to  be  getting  worse. 
Speculation  about  the  likelihood  of  a  third  round  of  quantitative  easing  by  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  and  a  third  long-term  refinancing  operation  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  is 
gaining impetus. Globally, the stance of m onetary policy is accommodative  and  one  would 
be hard pressed to find anyone betting on a change in the state of affairs anytime soon. 
I  will  discuss  how  inflation  targeting  has  fared  through  the  crisis  and  then  share  some 
thoughts  with  you  on  South  Africa’s  experience  and  recent  developments  on  the 
monetary policy front. 
2. 
The appropriateness of inflation targeting? 
New  Zealand  was  the  pioneer  of  inflation  targeting2  and  adopted  the  framework  just  over 
two  decades  ago.  The  idea  of  explicitly  targeting  inflation  proved  to  be  an  attractive 
proposition  for  central  banks  and  thus  became  much  more  widely  embraced,  with 
approximately  39  central  banks3  said  to  have  inflation  targets  at  the  beginning  of  2012. 
Much  as  there  is  no  one  correct  way  of  implementing  inflation  targeting,  as  there  are 
various nuances depending on individual country circumstances,  it  can  be  safely  argued 
that  it  is  the  consensus  position  when  it comes  to  monetary  policy  frameworks.  Among 
the  most  recent  central  banks  to move in this direction are Bank of Japan and US Federal 
Reserve System. 
 1  Featuring a reduction in macroeconomic volatility, of both output and inflation 
2  Germany is known for having adopted many elements of inflation targeting earlier than 1990 
3  Central Bank News, The Central Bank Inflation Targeting Report Card for 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
targeting  was 
thus  presented  as 
the  primary  mandate  of  central  banks, 
Inflation 
although  in  reality  even  without  an  explicit  inflation  target,  ultimately  all  central  banks  are 
concerned  with  inflation.  The  policy  is  not  without  its  critics,  of  course,  who  argue  that 
because  it  was  implemented  in  a  period  of  low  and  stable  inflation  and  steady economic 
growth, that this environment paved the way for the success of the framework. Others would 
argue  that  it  was  precisely  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  that  helped  to  contribute  to 
the  years  known  as  the  Great  Moderation. 
Some  steadfastly  believe that  inflation targeting  is  harmful  to economic  activity, failing  to 
recognise  that  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  is  in  fact  consistent  with  stabilising 
output in periods when the economy may be faced with a shock (such as excessive  growth 
in  aggregate  demand).  Promoting  lower  and  more  stable  inflation is important for long-run 
economic growth and stability. 
The belief  that central bankers care only about inflation without any regard for factors such 
as  output  growth  is  clearly  a  misconception.  Since  1990,  the  manner  in  which  inflation 
targeting  has  been  applied  has  largely  converged,  with  many  central  banks  practising 
flexible  inflation  targeting –  allowing  where  appropriate for  shifts  away from the  target,  and 
returning  within  some  reasonable  time  horizon,  therefore  taking  into  consideration  factors 
such  as  output.  It  would  therefore  be  fundamentally  incorrect  to  characterize  inflation 
targeting  (as  conducted  in  practice)  as  an  iron-clad  policy  rule.  Ben  Bernanke,  prior  to 
being  appointed  as  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  said that  inflation  targeting  is  better 
thought  of  as  a  policy  framework,  in  which  policy  is  “tied  down”  in  the  long  run  by  the 
inflation  target  (which  serves  as  a  nominal  anchor  for  the  system),  but  in  which  there  is 
also  considerable  leeway  for  policymakers  to  pursue  other  objectives  in  the  short  run.4 
Transparency and flexibility have been key in the success of inflation targeting and produced 
a sound underpinning for monetary policy in pursuit of price stability. 
The  sub-prime  crisis  and  subsequent  developments  raised  question  marks  as  to  the 
suitability  and  relevance  of  inflation  targeting  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  During 2008, 
the  significant  financial  market  disruptions  and  rises  in  food  and  energy  prices  led  to 
increases in headline inflation. As the financial crises worsened, many advanced  economies 
entered  recession or experienced  sharp declines  in economic activity as well as disinflation. 
Consequently,  concerns  swung  from  inflation  to  deflation.  As  you  know,  inflation  targeting 
countries  do  not  just  operate  with  an  upper  bound  but  also  with  a  lower  bound  for  the 
inflation  target  or  certain  tolerances  around  the  target  where  there  is  a  point  target  as 
opposed  to  a  range.  The  severity  of  the recession  in  fact  strengthened  the  arguments  in 
favour  of  inflation  targeting,  as  the credibility of  inflation  targeting  central banks resulted  in 
stable  inflation  expectations,  helping  reduce  the  risk  of  deflation.  Even  in  the  current 
environment of loose monetary  policy  and  substantial  global  liquidity,  inflation  expectations 
appear  to  be  well  anchored.  This  is  not  to  say  that  the  framework  is  perfect  as  it  is, 
there  are  refinements  to  be  made,  not  least  of  which  would  include  incorporating 
financial  conditions  into  monetary  policy  deliberations,  and  including  financial  stability  as 
part  of  the  central  bank’s  mandate,  because  as  we  know,  achieving  price  stability  does 
not equate to achieving financial stability. 
Including  financial  stability  or  macro-prudential  policy  into  the  central  bank’s  mandate 
requires  a  combination  of  monetary  and  regulatory  tools,  however,  the  implementation  of 
macro-prudential  policies  will  have  an  impact  on  the  transmission mechanism  of  monetary 
policy,  given  that  it  works  through  the  same  channels  (bank lending and balance sheets of 
financial  institutions)  and  focuses  on  the  same  institutions  (monetary  and  financial)  as 
monetary  policy  does.  It  is  uncertain  exactly  how  macro-prudential  policy  and  monetary 
policy  will  interact.  This  is  uncharted territory  and  there  is  still  much  research  which  is 
 4  The National Bureau of Economic Research, Ben S Bernanke, Inflation Targeting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
going  into  this  topic.  In  this  new  world  of  co-habitation  of  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability,  the  challenge  for  the  future  will  be  to  find  the  right  mix  between  the  two,  such 
that  some  of  the  inherent conflicts  that  could  arise  in  pursuing  both  simultaneously,  are 
in  some  defensible balance. 
Interestingly,  in  an  IMF staff  position  note  entitled  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy”,5  the 
authors  argue  that  low  inflation  limits  the  scope  of  monetary  policy  in  deflationary 
recessions  and  poses  the  question  whether  higher  average  inflation  and  higher  nominal 
interest rates to start with, would  have made it possible to cut interest rates  more,  thereby 
probably  reducing  the  drop  in  output  and  the  deterioration  in  fiscal  positions.  They 
question  whether  the  net  costs  of  inflation  would  be  much higher  at  4  per  cent  than  at 
2  per  cent  and  how  much  more  difficult  it  may  be  to  anchor  expectations  around  a 
higher  level.  These  are  interesting  questions  indeed,  but  as  the  quote  about  hindsight 
goes, “one cannot ride a horse backwards and still hold  its  reins”.  The  authors  conclude  by 
noting  that  the  ultimate  goals  should  be  to  achieve  a  stable  output  gap  and  stable 
inflation,  but  that  policy  makers  will  need  to  watch  many  more  targets  and  have  many 
more  instruments  at  their  disposal  –  the challenge is in learning how to use these optimally. 
In  another  interesting  and  unfolding  debate,  the  view  of  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate  and 
intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  whilst  having  an  explicit  inflation  target 
appears  to  be  changing  somewhat  since  the  crisis.  Under  inflation  targeting, the  credibility 
of  the  regime  entails  an  institutional  commitment  to  price  stability  with other goals such  as 
the exchange rate subordinated to price stability. The traditional view  has been that inflation 
targeting  was  incompatible  with  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  It  appears 
there  may  be  a  shift  in  this  view,  and  we  have  witnessed  this  in  practise,  where  some 
countries  have  moved  from  freely  floating exchange rates towards some form of managed 
float.  There is  also a growing conviction  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  can  include  foreign 
exchange  intervention,  but  not  with  a  view  to  targeting  a  specific  level  or  range  for  the 
exchange  rate,  but  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  to  avoid  abrupt  adjustments  and  for 
purposes  of  smoothing volatility. 
Emerging  market  economies  generally  suffer  high  exchange  rate  volatility,  as  well  as  a 
higher  pass-through  from  the  exchange  rate  to  inflation.  For  this  reason,  it  is  not feasible 
to  neglect  the  exchange  rate;  consequently  many  emerging  markets  may adjust  interest 
rates  to  contain  the  effect  of  temporary  exchange  rate  shocks  on inflation and financial 
stability. Since the global financial crisis, many emerging markets  intervened  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  to  try  and  limit  exchange  rate  volatility.  The  view  is  that  foreign 
exchange  intervention  could  reduce  exchange  rate  volatility  and  thus  lead  to  a  more 
favourable  trade-off  between  stable  inflation  and  real  economic  activity,  and  by  so  doing, 
could improve the overall performance of the inflation  targeting  regime.  There  is  the  risk  of 
course,  that  central  banks  could  lose credibility if they rely too heavily on intervention. 
3. 
The South African experience 
The  South  African  experience  with  the  implementation  of  inflation  targeting  has  been  a 
positive  one.  Work  done  by  my  MPC  colleague  Brian  Kahn  and  others  has  shown  that 
South  Africa  has  benefited  from  a  flexible  approach  to  inflation  targeting  and managed 
to  weather  the  storms  that  came  along  with  challenges  of  multiple  supply side  shocks  of 
an  extended  duration,  and  exchange  rate  shocks.  This  was  done  by  looking  through 
short-term  impacts  and  focusing  on  second  rounds  effects,  thus  resulting  in  inflation 
being  allowed  to  be  outside  the  target  for  longer,  but  not  overreacting  with  policy,  while 
keeping a close watch on inflation expectations. 
 5  Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Olivier  Blanchard,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paolo  Mauro,  IMF  Staff 
position note, February 12 2010 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  end  of  2008,  when 
In  August  2008,  South  Africa’s  headline  inflation  rate  peaked  at  13.7  per  cent,  at which 
time  the  repo  rate  had  been  increased  to  12  per  cent.  This  occurred  in  a period  when 
global  inflation  had  started  edging  lower  and  policy  rates  in  advanced  economies  were 
being  reduced.  Towards 
it  became  quite  clear  that  the 
US sub-prime  crisis  was  to  have  a  much  more  devastating  impact  on the  local  economy 
than had initially been expected, the Monetary Policy Committee started to reduce the repo 
rate. At this time, inflation pressures had started to abate and  by  the  end  of  2010,  the  repo 
rate  had  been  reduced  to  5.5  per  cent,  by  which time  inflation  had  again  started  to  rise. 
Nonetheless,  the  repo  rate  was  kept  at  this low level  in  response  to  the  crisis, taking into 
consideration that the nature of  the rise in  inflation  over  this  period  was  largely  cost-push, 
and  did  not  appear  to  be  feeding into  more  general  price  pressures  in  the  economy.  The 
CPI  inflation  rate  has  since  come  back  within  the  3  –  6  per  cent  target  range,  and  looks 
likely  to  decelerate  in  the  months  ahead,  given  evidence  of  softer  food  prices  and 
moderating  demand.  The  Bank  expects  inflation  to  decelerate  to  4.9  per  cent  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2013 and remain stable around 5 per cent to the end of 2014. 
Like  other  countries,  South  Africa  is  drawing  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  and  the 
changing  role  of  central  banks.  Our  mandate  has  been  clarified  to  more  explicitly 
include  a  financial  stability  responsibility,  and  we  are  working  on  clarifying  the  role  of 
financial  stability  in  monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation,  having  elevated  the 
status of the Financial Stability Committee in the Bank. 
As  for  the  exchange  rate,  the  South  African  rand  has  been  one  of  the  most  volatile 
currencies  among  emerging  market  currencies  and  also  has  a  significant  effect  on 
inflation. The SARB did not at any time intervene in the foreign exchange market to try and 
influence  the  value  of  the  rand.  However,  significant  portfolio  inflows  and  FDI  flows  have 
been  absorbed  by 
foreign  exchange 
reserves.  While  sticking  to  the  policy  of  not  targeting  the  exchange,  a  much  healthier 
position  with  regard  to  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  places the  Bank  in  a  better 
position  to  smooth  abrupt  movements  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  should  conditions 
warrant in future. 
the  Bank  and  used 
the  country’s 
to  build 
Of  course  some  old  lessons  remain,  namely  that  controlling  inflation  at  lower  and stable 
levels  continues  to  be  of  paramount  importance  to  central  banks,  given  its vagaries and 
distortive and erosive effects. 
Questions  are  often  asked  as  to  why  South  Africa  does  not  instead  target  employment. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  contribute  directly  to  economic  growth  and employment creation 
in  the  long  run,  but  by  creating  a  stable  financial  environment, monetary  policy  fulfils  an 
important  precondition 
the  attainment  of  economic  development.  The  underlying 
rationale  for  controlling  inflation  is  that  low  inflation  will  provide  an  appropriate  basis  for 
sustainable  growth.  The  Bank’s  view  is  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade-off  between 
unemployment and inflation. 
for 
Flexible  inflation  targeting  may  not  be  perfect,  but  compared  to  whatever  else  there is  to 
choose from currently, it is probably the closest you can get based on what we know today. 
4. 
Recent developments 
The  recovery  thus  far  has  been  bumpy  and  fragile,  largely  led  by  private  and  public 
consumption  growth,  while  export  volumes  and  private 
investment  have  remained 
markedly  below  pre-crisis  levels.  South  Africa  has  also  not  fully  recovered  the  jobs lost  in 
the  previous  recession,  and  although  jobs  are  being  created,  it  is  not  at  sufficient 
enough  a  pace  to  absorb  the  new  labour  market  entrants.  The  number  of discouraged  job 
seekers  is  increasing.  Unemployment  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012 was  25.2  per  cent,  and 
the  level  of  the  index of  formal  non-agricultural employment was still about 1 per cent lower 
than in the third quarter of 2008. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
World  trade  has  improved  since  2009,  surpassing  levels  before  the  global  financial crisis. 
Advanced  economy  exports  have  not  fully  recovered  but  emerging  market exports have 
recovered  robustly.  In  sharp  contrast  to  the  performance  of  most  other  emerging  market 
economies, South Africa’s real exports have not recovered to 2008 levels,  with  real exports 
still  13  per  cent  lower  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012  than  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008, 
notwithstanding  the  recovery  in  trading  partner  country  import demand  to  pre-crisis  levels. 
South  Africa’s  share  of  global  exports  has  increased modestly since 2005, despite strong 
terms of  trade gains,  whereas other comparable countries  have  seen  significant  increases 
in  market  share.  The  IMF  estimates  SA’s  export  volumes  to  remain  around  15  per  cent 
below their pre-crisis peaks.6 
More  recent  economic  data  reveals  a  softening  growth  momentum,  pointing  to  a 
moderation  in  household  consumption  expenditure,  which  has  been  the  main  engine  of 
growth  thus  far  during  the  recovery.  The  rise  in  unemployment  is  impacting  aggregate 
demand,  while  consumer  confidence  declined  considerably  in  the  second  quarter  of  2012 
to  its  lowest  level  since  the  most  recent  recession.  Real  retail  sales also  reflect  a  slowing 
momentum,  as  the  strong  year-on-year  headline  figure  hides substantial base effects. 
Apart from signs of a further moderation in growth, there are continued risks emanating from 
the  European  sovereign  debt  and  banking  crisis  which  have  culminated  in  a  number  of 
emerging  market  countries,  resuming  an  easing  monetary  policy  bias  and  advanced 
economies  employing  further  unconventional  measures. The  Bank’s forecast for  domestic 
growth  has  been  revised  lower  from  2.9  per  cent  in  2012  to  a  modest  2.7  per  cent  and 
3.8 per cent in 2013. The risks to this forecast are tilted to the downside. 
It  was  against  this  backdrop  of  soft  growth  and  moderating  inflation,  that  the  Bank further 
reduced  the  repo  rate  to  5.0  per  cent  at  the  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
meeting last week. 
As  indicated  in  our  most  recent  monetary  policy  statement,  while  we  believe  that  the most 
recent  policy  action  will  alleviate  certain  pressures  and  will  be  supportive,  monetary 
policy  on  its  own  will  not  overcome  all  the  challenges  that  the  economy  is  facing.  While 
monetary  policy  needs  to  play  its  part  and  remain  relevant  to  the  context,  there  are 
limits  to  what  monetary policy  can  do,  and  it  needs  to  be  part  of  a carefully defined overall 
macro economic policy mix. 
5. 
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  end  my  remarks  by  highlighting  that  the  inflation  targeting  framework  has 
served South Africa very well, both before and during the crisis. South Africa has practised 
“flexible”  inflation  targeting,  and  considers  all  factors  driving  inflation,  including  output 
growth  and  the  external  environment.  With  financial  stability  also  being  a  part  of  the 
central  bank’s  mandate,  the  factors  to  consider  have  grown  and  the  universe  of 
instruments  have 
to  be  expanded.  We  have  an  interesting  time  ahead  as  central 
bankers and no doubt still many challenges to face. 
I thank you. 
 6 
IMF Article IV Report, South Africa, 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
