Carlos da Silva Costa: L’enjeu européen: stabilité, solidarité, prospérité 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Conference 
organized by Fondation Calouste Gulbenkian – Délégation en France, Paris, 17 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
Large current account imbalances persist in the world economy; 
Severe fiscal imbalances remain to be tackled, particularly in the US and Japan; 
The sovereign debt crisis continues to affect the euro area.  
1. 
Good  Evening  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  It  is  a  real  pleasure  to  be  here  and  to  have  this 
opportunity to speak to you about an important topic that very much concerns all of us.  
We are now entering the 5th year since the beginning of the global crisis and we still find it 
hard to “see the light at the end of the tunnel”: 
 
 
 
Global financial markets have been the transmission chain of the crisis in its different stages. 
Up  to  2007,  markets’  tolerance,  and  even  neglect,  contributed  to  the  build-up  of  large 
imbalances  in  the  world  economy.  Since  then  lack  of  confidence  and  nervousness 
propagated the crisis and amplified its effects. 
In the past two years, Europe has been the epicentre of the crisis. Three European Union 
Member-States - Greece, Ireland and Portugal – lost access to market financing and had to 
negotiate  financial  assistance  packages  with  the  European  Union  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund. The negative interplay between public finance and financial sector fragilities 
is not confined to these three countries and other euro area economies have suffered from 
intense market pressure.  
Market pressure is not so much about unsound policies or unsustainable debt paths in the 
euro area. Taken together, the fundamentals of the euro area are stronger than those of the 
US  or  Japan.  However,  the  crisis  brought  to  the  forefront  severe  inconsistencies  in  the 
governance  model,  the  internal  organization  and  the  instruments  available  to  manage  the 
single  currency.  These  flaws  contributed  to  significant  cross-country  divergences  in 
macroeconomic performance within the euro area.  
The initial response of European leaders to the crisis was slow and hesitant putting a heavy 
burden  on  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  was  forced  to  act  testing  the  limits  of  its 
mandate.  
The  euro  area  systemic  crisis  is  threatening  the  very  survival  of  one  of  Europe’s  greatest 
achievements  –  the  single  currency.  While  important  and  encouraging  decisions  were 
recently taken by European leaders, markets are yet to be convinced on the irreversibility of 
the euro. Failure is not an option: we would risk irreversible damage to the foundations of the 
European Union itself, with unpredictable geopolitical consequences.  
The  challenges  ahead  are  huge  and  are  well  captured  in  the  three  words  chosen  for  the 
theme of this talk: Stability, Solidarity and Prosperity. What I propose to do today is to take 
stock  of  the  root  causes  of  the  global  and  European  crises  and  then  embark  on  the 
discussion of those three challenges.  
2. 
The build-up of the global and European crises 
The great moderation and regulatory failure 
The causes of the global financial crisis are now well understood.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The mid-1990s marked the start of a decade of sustained economic growth and low inflation 
– a period that came to be known as “the Great Moderation”. Globalization favored benign 
macroeconomic conditions, creating the illusion of a new economic paradigm. Low consumer 
inflation  eased  the  pressure  on  central  banks  –  most  notably  the  US  Fed  –  to  tighten 
monetary policy and rein in credit growth. 
Rather  than  translating  into  consumer  price  inflation,  credit  expansion,  deriving  from  the 
ample liquidity and low interest rates, led to fast rising asset prices. In particular, very low US 
interest  rates  promoted  the  rapid  expansion  of  consumer  and  mortgage  credit  fuelling  a 
widespread housing bubble.  
Regulatory and supervisory failures amplified these developments. The financial bubble and 
the  subsequent  disruptions  owe  much  to  the  wide-ranging  financial  de-regulation;  the  pro-
cyclicality in regulatory frameworks; insufficient attention to financial interconnectedness and 
macro-systemic and liquidity risks; and, last but not least, the lack of market transparency. 
The  emphasis  was  put  on  expanding  lending,  rather  than  on  the  borrower’s  ability  to  pay 
reflecting the move from the “originate-to-hold” to the “originate-to-distribute” business model 
and perverse incentives from the self-regulation paradigm. 
The  accumulation  of  imbalances  in  the  US  economy  mirrored  the  build-up  of  imbalances 
elsewhere  in  the  world  economy.  Current  account  surpluses  in  emerging  countries,  most 
notably  China,  were  invested  in  US  securities  and  other  low-risk  assets  further  amplifying 
liquidity and depressing yields. This encouraged investors to turn to riskier assets in search 
for higher yields leading to severe underpricing of risk. 
The impact of EMU  
Beyond  the  global  context,  in  Europe  specific  developments  were  also  at  play  in  the  mid-
1990s – the most notable one being the plans to set up an Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU).  
The prospect of EMU fostered the rapid convergence of interest rates to the levels prevailing 
in Germany, the anchor country in the then Exchange Rate Mechanism. Prospective EMU 
members – especially those with worse policy track-records – benefited from a virtuous cycle 
between nominal convergence and the prospect of EMU participation. 
In  these  so-called  “converging”  countries,  policy  efforts  towards  fiscal  consolidation  and 
lower  inflation  increased  the  likelihood  of  EMU  participation,  as  these  countries  became 
closer to fulfilling the Maastricht criteria. In turn, a higher probability of joining EMU facilitated 
exchange  rate  stability,  the  decline  of  interest  rates  (reflecting  lower  risk  premia)  and  the 
improvement  of  the  budget  balance  (as  a  result  of  both  lower  interest  payments  on  public 
debt and buoyant tax revenues).  
The magnitudes involved were impressive: long-term interest rates in Portugal declined from 
over  12  per  cent,  in  April  1995,  to  around  4  per  cent,  in  December  1998,  just  before  the 
country  adopted  the  euro.  During  the  same  period,  the  10-year  interest  rate  differential 
against  the  D-mark  narrowed  from  over  5  percentage  points  to  about  30  basis  points. 
Differentials  remained  very  low  for  almost  a  decade  –  in  2007,  the  average  10-year 
differential  between  Portuguese  and  German  government  bonds  was  still  below  20  basis 
points.  Interest  expenditure  by  the  public  sector  more  than  halved,  dropping  from  5.6%  of 
GDP in 1995 to 2.4% in 2005. Similar developments occurred in other converging countries 
like Italy, Ireland, Spain and, with some lag, also Greece. 
As  this  “new  world”  of  low  interest  rates  and  abundant  financing  appeared  to  offer  a  free 
lunch to the converging countries, severe imbalances and cross-country divergences started 
to build-up. The substantial easing of liquidity constraints led to booming private sector credit 
and  lower  savings.  Households’  consumption  of  durables  and  housing  investment  soared 
and corporate leverage increased significantly. Large current account deficits emerged as a 
counterpart to the boom in private spending. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While  private  sector  dynamics  were  very  similar  within  the  group  of  converging  countries, 
imbalances  took  somewhat  different  shapes  reflecting  cross-country  differences  in  fiscal, 
financial and structural policies and institutions. 
In countries such as Portugal or Greece, fiscal imbalances became a major problem – even if 
the size of the problem was, and is, substantially different. Savings arising from lower interest 
rates and boom-related windfall revenues were used to finance new expenditure. When the 
initial  impact  of  EMU  on  growth  disappeared,  the  underlying  unsustainable  fiscal  policies 
soon became apparent. Also, structural bottlenecks and lack of competition translated into a 
mismatch between wage and productivity developments and led to an overexpansion of the 
non-tradables sector. 
In  countries  such  as  Spain  or  Ireland,  fiscal  policies  were  more  prudent.  Still,  imbalances 
built-up,  mainly  taking  the  form  of  a  real  estate  bubble.  In  Ireland,  an  oversized  financial 
sector developed in tandem with the real estate bubble.  
The subprime crisis and the sovereign debt crisis 
The burst of the real estate bubble in the US in mid-2007 – the so-called sub-prime crisis – 
set in motion the current global crisis. Banks in northern European countries were hard hit by 
the loss in value of the structured products in their balance sheets. The collapse of Lehman 
Brothers in the summer of 2008 triggered widespread fears of contagion and massive help to 
these banks. 
As the financial crisis developed into a global recession, policy authorities around the world 
responded  with  massive  liquidity  provided  by  central  banks,  fiscal  expansion  and  the 
provision  of  public  guarantees  to  banks’  debts.  The  aim  was  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the 
crisis on output and employment and to prevent a fully-fledged crisis that could resemble that 
of 1929.  
The resulting deterioration in the balance sheets of the public sector came at a time when 
markets  had  become  much  more  rigorous  in  their  risk  assessment.  Markets  focused 
increasingly on the high external and public sector debt levels and low growth of several euro 
area  countries,  where  the  policy  room  for  manoeuvre  was  limited.  The  associated 
sustainability  concerns  brought  us  to  the  current  stage  of  the  crisis  –  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis. 
What lessons from the European crisis? 
With the benefit of hindsight, how can we explain the developments of the past 15 years? 
How  was  it  possible  that  such  high  current  account  deficits  persisted  in  a  number  of  euro 
area  countries  without  financial  markets  questioning  these  countries’  ability  to  repay  their 
increasing debts? 
We cannot ignore that EMU was a major regime change. As such, it had a major impact on 
the  formation  of  expectations,  the  transmission  channels  and  the  equilibrium  values  of 
economic variables. This made it extremely difficult to evaluate developments in real time, 
causing  very  reasonable  and  competent  people  to  disagree  in  their  assessments  and  to 
advocate different policy responses. 
For  a  number  of  years,  the  dominant  view  in  academic  and  policy  circles,  as  well  as  in 
financial markets was what we might call the “benign view”. Many respectable economists 
and  policy-makers  claimed  that  current  account  imbalances  were  the  expected  result  of 
deeper  integration  among  countries  with  different  levels  of  economic  development.  In  a 
monetary union, a current account deficit reflecting the financial balance of the private sector 
would be no cause for concern. Credit risk monitoring would ensure adequate risk-pricing, 
and there would be no aggregate (and thus policy-relevant) macroeconomic imbalance.  
This view found support in the predictions of standard macroeconomic frameworks. In a neo-
classical  growth  model,  an  interest  rate  decline  caused  by  a  drop  in  the  home  country’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
idiosyncratic  risk  premium  leads  to  higher  consumption  (through  the  wealth  and  inter-
temporal substitution effects) and stimulates investment (reflecting a permanently lower user 
cost of capital). The initial disturbance also causes an increase in the relative price of non-
traded  goods  (an  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate)  and  an  increase  in  real  wages. 
Excess  demand  is  then  progressively  eliminated  on  account  of  both  improved  supply 
conditions  (reflecting  the  initial  higher  investment)  and  lower  expenditure  on  consumer 
durables and housing investment (as the latter has adjusted to new equilibrium levels). The 
implied adjustment process is slow and efficient. 
An alternative explanation of the converging countries’ adjustment to EMU can be obtained 
from  a  standard  intertemporal  macroeconomic  model  without  a  production  sector.  Such  a 
model  illustrates  the  crucial  importance  of  the  intertemporal  substitution  effects  in 
consumption that dominated EMU’s early years. Also in this setting, the implied adjustment 
process, which will eventually be triggered by the accumulation of foreign debt, is slow and 
benign. 
The  assumptions  underlying  the  benign  approach  turned  out  to  be  highly  unrealistic  and 
misleading from a policy perspective. Indeed, the conceptual frameworks described abstract 
from  the  key  realities  of  life  such  as  complex  expectations  formation  mechanisms,  the 
possibility of default, frictions in product and labour markets or imprudent fiscal behaviour. 
As  it  turned  out,  higher  potential  growth  did  not  materialise  as  the  investment  boom  was 
largely concentrated in non-productive investment, particularly in the construction sector. In 
addition,  the  fact  that  the  domestic  banking  system  intermediated  the  access  of  individual 
agents  to  the  European  financial  market  led  to  a  concentration  of  risk  and  funding 
imbalances in the banking sector of the converging countries. 
From  today’s  perspective,  it  is  clear  that  a  more  “prudent  view”  was  warranted.  Short-
sightedness and overoptimistic expectations about future growth prospects, weak domestic 
institutions  and  real  and  financial  frictions  should  have  made  a  strong  case  for  policy 
intervention aimed at mitigating the boom-bust pattern of monetary integration. Prudent fiscal 
management recommended that the boom in private spending be partly offset, even if only 
by letting automatic stabilizers play their role. Financial policies should also have played a 
counter-cyclical role.  
The  buffers  that  would  have  resulted  from  lower  public  debt  and  stronger  capital  in  the 
banking  sector  would  have  put  the  converging  economies  on  a  much  sounder  position  to 
face the financial storm. Also, a more ambitious and consistent approach to structural reform 
would have left these economies better equipped to face the challenges of globalisation and 
population ageing.  
Shall  we  infer  from  this  view  that  only  domestic  policy  and  institutional  failures  are  to  be 
blamed for the current state of affairs in Europe? 
The  answer  is  clearly  negative.  While  it  is  true  that  inadequate  –  and  in  many  instances 
irresponsible – domestic policies go a long way in explaining where we are, one must also 
acknowledge  the  role  played  by  an  incomplete  and  deeply  unbalanced  EMU  architecture. 
The EMU governance model rests on four incompatible premises: 
– 
Preservation of euro area countries’ fiscal sovereignty – in contrast with monetary 
unification,  Member  States  maintain  responsibility  for  fiscal  policy,  subject  to 
common rules and procedures at EU level; 
No  default  –  the  possibility  of  orderly  sovereign  debt  restructuring  has  not  been 
considered; 
No bail-out – no crisis management mechanism has been established; 
No-exit – the possibility of one member abandoning the euro is not envisaged. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  4 
 into 
these 
imbalances 
The crisis has challenged economic governance in the European Union and exposed more 
clearly than ever the weakness of the economic pillar of EMU. Indeed, we have created a 
single  currency  resting  on  a  full-fledged  monetary  pillar  and  an  underdeveloped  economic 
pillar. The monetary pillar has successfully fulfilled its role: the euro has established itself as 
an international currency and price stability in the euro area has been delivered. At the same 
time,  the  economic  pillar  –  or  lack  thereof  –  was  not  able  to  prevent,  or  correct,  diverging 
developments among euro area Member States and the accumulation of large and persistent 
imbalances.  The  crisis  brought 
the  spotlight  and  exposed 
unsustainable trends in many European countries. 
The Maastricht Treaty drafters were perfectly aware that we could not rely on market forces 
alone  to  ensure  discipline  and  the  correction  of  imbalances.  Numerous  historical  episodes 
have shown that financial markets tend to be too slow and weak in penalising profligacy in 
normal times, and can suddenly turn disruptive and cause overshooting during crises. 
In order to contain moral hazard and prevent disruptions, the Stability and Growth Pact was 
agreed  as  a  complement  to  the  Maastricht  architecture.  The  Pact  set  budgetary  rules  and 
procedures to reinforce fiscal discipline at the national level. It was intended to avoid gross 
fiscal policy errors, through peer monitoring and peer pressure, as well as through the threat 
of sanctions.  
However,  implementation  of  the  Pact  was  rather  weak  in  EMU’s  early  years.  Tensions 
emerged already in the early 2000s, and in November 2003, when action should have been 
taken against both France and Germany, the ECOFIN Council decided not to act, overruling 
the European Commission. This unwillingness to apply the rules was a “mortal sin”: a clear 
message was sent to the other euro area members that the Pact was not there to “bite”. 
Weak economic governance in the euro area had three major consequences: 
– 
First,  inadequate  domestic  fiscal  policies  were  tolerated,  leading  to  unsustainable 
fiscal positions in some countries and tensions in the conduct of the single monetary 
policy; 
Second,  insufficient  attention  was  devoted  to  losses  of  competitiveness  and  the 
accumulation of current account imbalances within the euro area; 
Third,  and  probably  most  important,  the  correlation  between  the  ability  of  the 
financial sector and of the sovereign states to obtain financing was largely ignored.  
  The European challenge: stability, solidarity and prosperity 
3. 
Looking ahead, there is no easy or quick way to solve the problems of the European Union. 
These are undoubtedly very challenging times for us all. We have to learn from the past to 
safeguard our present and build our future. We need stronger and more resilient institutions 
and rules, better enforcement and control mechanisms and, above all, we must avoid making 
the same mistakes.  
From what I have already said, it is easy to conclude that it is paramount to strengthen the 
economic pillar of EMU and to ensure that this pillar is robust and consistent to support the 
single currency.  
The  single  currency  and  the  close  integration  of  European  markets  have  increased  the 
interdependencies  among  Member  States  and  hence  the  potential  for  cross-border 
contagion. The EMU must have rules and these rules have to ensure that the policies of one 
Member  State  do  not  impact  negatively  on  other  Member  States  via  the  increased 
interdependence of their economies. Member States must regard their economic policies as 
a matter of common interest and coordinate them.  
Together with the rules, the EMU has to be equipped with the means and the will to ensure 
compliance. The European Commission has to be at the centre of this new dynamics and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
EMU must be able to reconcile the individual responsibility of each Member State with the 
solidarity within the group. In this regard, I see with particular concern the weakening of the 
Commission’s role in recent years. 
In  addition,  neither  stability  nor  solidarity  will  survive  without  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth  in  the  European  Union  anchored  in  a  widely-shared  economic  and  social 
development model. We must not forget that monetary union or the single market are not the 
main purpose – la raison d’être – of the European Union. They are “simply” instruments to 
achieve the ultimate and higher purpose of the EU, which is to promote peace, the well-being 
of  European  citizens  and  the  European  values  of  respect  for  human  dignity,  freedom, 
democracy, equality and rule of law. 
Let me elaborate on each of these three elements: Stability, Solidarity and Prosperity. 
Improving stability through reinforced governance and surveillance 
In  order  to  restore  stability,  action  is  needed  both  at  the  national  and  EU  level.  To  be 
successful, national and EU measures must be consistent, as regards both their design and 
timing. 
At the national level, the utmost priority must be placed in restoring public debt sustainability, 
increasing  domestic  savings  and  enhancing  potential  growth,  in  particular  in  crisis-hit 
countries.  These  are  necessary  conditions  to  stabilize  external  debt  and  put  it  on  a 
downward path. On the budgetary front, national fiscal frameworks have to better echo the 
priorities and guidelines of EU budgetary surveillance. In the case of my own country, these 
concerns  are  well-captured  in  the  adjustment  programme  signed  with  the  European  Union 
and the International Monetary Fund in May 2011.i  
At  the  EU  level,  although  the  rules  and  principles  of  the  Stability  and Growth  Pact  remain 
valid and very relevant, the crisis made it clear that a new economic governance model was 
needed  to  deliver  fiscal  discipline,  to  prevent  continued  losses  in  competitiveness  and  to 
promote financial stability.  
Some  very  important  steps  have  already  been  taken  in  recent  months  to  fundamentally 
improve and strengthen economic governance in the EU and, in particular, in the euro area. 
Further  work  is  still  ongoing.  Within  the  new  framework,  the  closely  interdependent  EU 
economies should be in a better position to face current and future challenges. 
One  important  benchmark  for  the  whole  process  was  the  endorsement  by  the  European 
Council,  in  October  2010,  of  the  recommendations  by  the  Task-Force  on  economic 
governance  led  by  President  van  Rompuy.  Building  on  these  recommendations  and  on  a 
number  of  proposals  put  forward  by  the  European  Commission,  the  EU  has  gradually 
reinforced its surveillance architecture with well-known initiatives such as: (i) the Euro Plus 
Pact;  (ii)  the  European  Semester;  (iii)  the  Six-Pack;  (iv)  the  Fiscal  Compact;  (v)  the  Two 
Pack. 
In March 2011, the euro area Member States and 6 other EU countries agreed on the so-
called  Euro  Plus  Pact.  The  Pact,  (which  is  part  of  the  new  economic  governance 
framework), focuses on four key areas: competitiveness; employment; sustainability of public 
finances; and financial stability. The additional commitments taken therein – also in areas of 
national competence – are included in the National Reform Programmes of the concerned 
Member States. 
The  EU  also  agreed  on  a  new  approach  to  economic  surveillance  and  on  a  new  policy-
making calendar, setting up the European Semester. The first European Semester started 
in  the  first  half  of  2011.  The  new  approach  allows  for  a  discussion  of  the  economic  and 
budgetary  priorities  at  the  same  time  every  year,  starting  with  the  Commisssion’s  Annual 
Growth Survey. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A major step to fill some of the gaps of the Stability and Growth Pact – and “to give it more 
teeth” – was the approval of legislative package, the so-called “six-pack”, which entered into 
force on 13 December 2011. The new legislation aims at strengthening both the preventive 
and  corrective  arm  of  the  Pact,  setting  minimum  requirements  for  national  budgetary 
frameworks, and preventing and correcting macroeconomic and competitiveness imbalances 
(including the introduction of a new Excessive Imbalance Procedure)ii. Enforcement has also 
been strengthened by recourse to 'reverse qualified majority' voting1.  
On 2 March 2012, the "Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic 
and  Monetary  Union"  (which  includes  the  so-called  “Fiscal  Compact”),  was  signed  by 
twenty-five Member States (all but the UK and Czech Republic). According to the Treaty, the 
annual structural balance of the general government must be balanced or in surplus (with a 
lower limit of –0.5 % of GDP at market prices). These Member States will have to enshrine 
this  rule  in  their  national  legal  system  through  provisions  of  binding  force  and  permanent 
character, preferably constitutional. An automatic correction mechanism is triggered in case 
of a deviation from the fiscal objective.2  
In  addition,  on  23  November  2011,  the  Commission  proposed  two  new  draft  Regulations 
(“two  pack”),  which  aim  at  further  strengthening  the  surveillance  mechanisms  in  the  euro 
area,  especially 
that  are 
experiencing/threatened with financial difficulties. Work is still in progress.  
Strengthened  economic  and  budgetary  surveillance  procedures  are  complemented  by  an 
enhanced  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  at  EU  level.  The  European  System  of 
Financial Supervisors was set up, comprising the new European Supervisory Authorities (the 
so-called ESAs) for banking, insurance and securities markets and the European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB) to address macro-prudential matters. 
All  these  initiatives  lay  the  foundations  for  stronger  governance  and  a  sounder  euro  area. 
The  new  rules  and  procedures  should  contribute  to  enhance  fiscal  discipline,  prevent  the 
emergence  of  large  and  persistent  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  safeguard  financial 
stability in the euro area.  
However, it is still premature to make judgments about the effectiveness of this setting as the 
potential benefits will very much depend on actual implementation and 0enforcement. One 
cause  for  concern  is  the  complexity  of  the  new  economic  governance  structure.  The  new 
model needs to be well explained and well understood by all the actors involved and should 
promote equal treatment and a level playing-field. A further challenge concerns the need to 
ensure a smooth relationship between euro area and non-euro area countries within the new 
set up. 
those  countries  with  excessive  deficits,  or/and 
for 
Solidarity is needed to preserve the cohesion of the group 
We must also be aware that even with appropriate rules and institutions an economic and 
monetary union is not immune to exogenous shocks and to liquidity problems in its Member 
States.  Indeed,  when  a  country  has  its  own  free-floating  currency,  a  loss  in  market 
confidence translates into a bond sell-off, which in turn leads to higher yields and exchange 
rate depreciation. Investors cannot precipitate a liquidity crisis forcing the country to default. 
In contrast, for a country belonging to monetary union, a loss of confidence and the resulting 
bond sell-off imply not only higher yields, but a shortage of liquidity, which can easily turn into 
solvency problems.  
                                                 
1   A Commission recommendation or proposal to the Council is considered adopted unless a qualified majority of 
Member States votes against it. 
2   This Treaty – which is an Intergovernmental agreement (not EU law) - will enter into force on 1 January 2013, 
provided  that  at  least  twelve  euro  area  countries  have  ratified  it.  The  Fiscal  Compact  and  the  six-pack 
complement each other and will run in parallel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
This  is  why  measures  to  reinforce  the  economic  pillar  of  EMU  also  need  to  contemplate 
solidarity mechanisms to support individual Member States facing serious financial difficulties 
or  market  pressure,  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  preserve  the 
cohesion  of  the  group.  Well-designed  and  robust  firewalls  should  promote  accountability, 
avoid moral hazard and be endowed with adequate financial means. The more robust and 
credible these firewalls are, the less likely will they need to be used. 
Euro  area  governments  agreed  to  establish  the  first  European  temporary  mechanisms  for 
euro-area  countries  (the  EFSF  and  EFSM)  in  May  2010.  The  Treaty  establishing  a 
permanent stability mechanism in the euro area, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) 
was signed on 2 February 2012 and the ESM is expected to be fully operational in July 2012. 
On 30 March 2012 the Eurogroup agreed on a further accelerated calendar for the payment 
of the tranches of ESM’s paid-in capital, so as to ensure a timely availability of its lending 
capacity. The Eurogroup also decided to raise the combined EFSF/ESM lending  ceiling to 
€ 700 billion.  
Other  institutional  innovations  have  been  proposed  by  academics,  analysts  and  several 
bodies. Among these is the possible creation of Eurobonds. The idea of joint issuance of 
government bonds by euro area countries is not new. Indeed, it was already addressed in 
the  late  90s  by  the  Giovannini  group,  whose  report  (November  2000)  recognised  the 
fragmentation in the euro-area government debt market and recommended greater issuance 
coordination. One of the possible ways to achieve this objective was the creation of a single 
debt  instrument  backed  by  joint  guarantees.  More  recently  –  on  23  November  2011  –  the 
Commission  published  its  Green  Paper  on  the  feasibility  of  introducing  stability  bonds, 
intended to stimulate the debate on this subject.  
Eurobonds are not a solution for the immediate challenges and difficulties faced by the euro 
area,  even  though  they  may  be  part  of  a  medium  term  solution.  The  Eurobonds  idea  is 
appealing  and  brings  to  the  forefront  an  important  feature  of  European  integration: 
“solidarity”.  However,  the  issuance  of  Eurobonds  raises  many  political,  legal  and  technical 
questions which need to be analyzed further. 
Stability and solidarity will not endure without prosperity 
Restoring stable macroeconomic conditions in the individual Member States and setting-up 
effective solidarity mechanisms to preserve the cohesion of the euro area and the EU are 
necessary  conditions  to  overcome  the  current  crisis.  However,  it  goes  without  saying  that 
neither  stability  nor  solidarity  will  endure  if  not  accompanied  by  sustainable  and  balanced 
development within the European Union. I will devote the final part of this talk to this third 
crucial dimension, which I call “prosperity”. 
We have seen that – not only in Europe but elsewhere in the world economy – growth since 
the  early  1990s  was  to a  large  extent  financed by  increasing  private  and  public  debt.  The 
resulting over-leveraged public and private sector balance sheets have eventually brought us 
to the crisis we have been facing in the past five years.  
A new growth paradigm is needed, one that produces sustainable rather than illusive growth 
and  allows  us  to  preserve  the  essential  features  of  the  European  social  model.  In  other 
words, we need a growth and development strategy that will bring us closer to the “highly 
competitive  social  market  economy”  aimed  at  full  employment  and  social  progress,  better 
environment and scientific and technological advance advocated by the EU Treaty. 
This growth and development strategy could be built around three dimensions: institutional 
and  structural  reform;  completion  of  the  single  market;  and  strengthening  of  Europe’s 
external dimension. 
(i)  
Institutional  and  structural  reforms  aimed  at  removing  barriers  to  competition,  promoting 
innovation  and  entrepreneurship  and  fighting  vested  interests  are  needed  to  support  long 
Institutional and structural reform 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Completing the Single Market 
term  growth,  improve  debt  sustainability,  promote  competitiveness  and  rebalance  the 
economy.  
The fact that the crisis seems to have acted as a catalyst for reforms is good news. The pace 
of structural reforms has accelerated markedly in recent years and this renewed commitment 
to  economic  reform  has  been  particularly  strong  in  countries  under  EU-IMF  adjustment 
programs and/or experiencing tensions in sovereign debt markets. 
We  are  all  aware  that  the  road  to  reform  is  often  bumpy  and  windy.  In  order  to  maximise 
benefits  and  minimise  the  risk  of  social  upheaval,  reform  efforts  should  be  pursued  in  a 
coordinated manner. The different initiatives at the national, European and international level 
have to be part of a well defined and consistent strategy where the right sequencing needs to 
be found.  
(ii)  
On the Single Market, let me quote President Barroso, who claimed that “The Single Market 
has  always  been  the  driving  force  behind  our  economic  development  and  prosperity  and, 
now more than ever, it remains our best asset in facing the crisis.” 
I  could  not  agree  more.  It  is  almost  twenty  years  now  since  the  single  market  was 
established. And while the single market has brought us enormous benefits and created new 
opportunities, we have to acknowledge that a truly integrated European market is still lacking 
in  some  important  fields,  including  services  and  energy.  Legislation  is  missing  and,  more 
importantly, administrative obstacles and lacking enforcement leave the full potential of the 
single market unexploited. 
The  European  single  market  is  the  largest  in  the  world  by  value.  The  commitment  and 
actions put forward by the European Commission in order to exploit the untapped potential of 
the single market are thus very much welcome and encouraging. 
(iii)  
While  it  is  crucial  to  complete  and  deepen  the  European  single  market,  Europe  must  not 
leave  the  growth  potential  from  external  trade  unexploited.  The  current  crisis  is  unfolding 
against a background of population ageing. This is a long-term trend that cannot be rapidly or 
easily inverted, and which puts significant underlying pressure on Europe’s growth potential 
and public finances. In contrast, other areas of the world are catching up with the advanced 
economies and offer a handful of opportunities to European businesses. Deepening Europe’s 
economic  ties  with  the  most  dynamic  areas  in  the  world  in  a  context  of  strict  reciprocity 
should thus be a clear priority in the European growth strategy. 
The EU external dimension 
Concluding remarks 
5.  
Let me conclude with a word of confidence in the future.  
Europe  has  experienced  difficult  crisis  before.  These  crises  have  been  a  catalyst  for 
deepening  and  strengthening  the  European  project.  While  I’ve  tried  not  to  downplay  the 
seriousness of the situation and the magnitude of the challenges we face, I believe that a 
stronger and fitter European Union will emerge from the current crisis. 
The  crisis  has  shown  the  urgent  need  for  enhanced  international  cooperation  and 
coordination, better economic governance, strengthened market supervision and increased 
discipline  and  transparency.  Much  progress  has  been  made  in  this  direction.  However, 
neither  of  this  will  endure  without  sustainable  and  equitable  economic  growth  and  job 
creation.  In  other  words,  we  need  to  ensure  the  EU  is  a  positive-sum  game  and  that  the 
cross-country distribution of gains is well-balanced.  
We cannot miss this unique opportunity to introduce fundamental changes and deep-rooted 
structural  reforms,  to  complete  the  single  market  and  to  strengthen  Europe’s  international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
role. The EU would hardly survive a failure of the euro and this would not only be a European 
but rather a global problem with profound geopolitical consequences.  
We have a huge responsibility towards present and future generations. The responsibility of 
safeguarding  the  conditions  for  prosperity  and  welfare  and  of  ensuring  that  Europe  has  a 
leading role in the international arena. No Member State, irrespective of its size or economic 
importance,  no  European  institution  and  no  citizen  is  exempt  from  this  collective 
responsibility. 
References  
Barbosa, António Pinto et al., (1998), O Impacto do Euro na Economia Portuguesa, Lisboa, 
Publicações D.Quixote. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  and  Francesco  Giavazzi  (2002),  “Current  Account  Deficits  in  the  Euro 
Area:  the  End  of  the  Feldstein-Horiokka  Puzzle”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity, 
2:147:209. 
De Larosière et al (2009), Report by the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the 
EU, http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf 
European  Central  Bank,  “Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  16  February  2011  on 
economic governance reform in the European Union” (CON/2011/13), Official Journal of the  
European Union, 25/5/2011, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/c_15020110520en00010041.pdf 
European Council Conclusions – 24/25 March 2011,  
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/120296.pdf 
European  Union  (2011),  “The  six-Pack”,  Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union  –  L306  – 
23/11/2011,  
http://www.google.com/url?q=http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do%3Furi%3DOJ:L:2011:306:FULL:EN:PDF&sa=U&ei
=SJiNT_T2GqPM0QWTzfTnDA&ved=0CBIQFjAA&usg=AFQjCNEVQxpcfBsaiZyU0-
ixt13iUfhlfg 
Fagan, Gabriel and Vítor Gaspar (2008), “Adjusting to the euro”, Chapter 4 of Bulding the 
financial  foundations  of  the  euro  –  Experiences  and  challenges,  Jonung,  Lars,  Walkner, 
Christoph and Max Watson (eds), Routledge, 2008 (also available as ECB Working Paper 
N.716, January 2007), http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp716.pdf 
Giovannini Group (2000), Co-ordinated Public Debt Issuance in the euro area – Report of the 
Giovannini Group, November 2000,  
http://www.ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/publication6372_en.pdf 
OECD  (2012),  Economic  Policy  Reforms:  Going  for  Growth  2012,  February  2012 
http://www.oecd.org/document/4/0,3746,en_2649_34325_49693508_1_1_1_1,00.html 
Treaty  Establishing 
http://www.european-council.europa.eu/media/582311/05-tesm2.en12.pdf 
Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and  Governance  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  – 
2nd March 2012, 
http://european-council.europa.eu/media/639235/st00tscg26_en12.pdf 
Von Rompuy et al (2010), Strengthening Economic Governance in the EU – Report of the 
Task-Force to the European Council, 21 October 2010,  
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/117236.pdf 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism  –  1st  February  2012, 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
Endnotes 
i  The  Programme  foresees  action  on  three  fronts:  (i)  putting  fiscal  policy  on  a  sustainable 
footing; (ii) stabilization of the financial sector; and,(iii) in-depth structural reforms to support 
an orderly unwinding of external and internal imbalances and to raise potential growth.  
Less than one year since the beginning of the Programme, good progress has already being 
achieved: the correction of the “short term” variables (budgetary and external deficits) is on 
track, faster than expected; financial stability is being reinforced and structural reforms are 
ongoing, even though there is still a long way ahead.  
As regards financial stability, measures and targets are well on track. Portuguese banks are 
now more capitalised, more transparent and less leveraged than a year ago. Monitoring and 
supervision  were  significantly  enhanced  and  the  regulatory  environment  has  considerably 
improved.  
This  being  said,  the  challenge  remains  huge  and  there  is  no  room  for  complacency. 
Combining mounting capital needs with deleveraging requirements, while at the same time 
preventing a harmful credit contraction in the economy is not an easy task. It is a task that 
requires a fine balance between ‘science and art’ in policy-making.  
In the fiscal/structural domain, an important step has been taken with the setting up of an 
independent  entity  (the  Public  Finances  Council)  responsible  for  assessing:  (i)  the 
consistency of macroeconomic and budgetary scenarios; (ii) the compliance with budgetary 
rules; (iii) the path of public finances and their long run sustainability. 
ii Strengthening of the preventive arm of the Pact – Member States are required to make 
significant progress towards their medium-term budgetary objectives (MTO); introduction of 
expenditure benchmarks; interest-bearing deposit of 0.2% of GDP imposed on non-compliant 
euro-area countries); Strengthening of the corrective arm of the Pact – An EDP can now 
also result from government debt developments; Member States with debt ratios above 60% 
of GDP should reduce their debt in line with a numerical benchmark; progressive financial 
sanctions  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  EDP,  etc.);  Minimum  requirements  for  national 
budgetary frameworks – Need to comply with minimum standards and cover all levels of 
government;  multiannual  budgetary  planning;  numerical  fiscal  rules;  Preventing  and 
correcting  macroeconomic  and  competitiveness  imbalances  –  Introduction  of  a  new 
Excessive Imbalance Procedure (EIP). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
