Daniel Mminele: Taking stock of the global and South African 
environment 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
6th Annual Cocktail Function of the Financial Markets Department, Pretoria, 10 May 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good  evening  ladies  and  gentlemen  and  welcome  to  the  Financial  Markets  Department’s 
annual cocktail function. It is customary for us to take stock every year of what has happened 
in the global and domestic environment. We last met in April 2011, at a time when adverse 
developments in the euro zone were gathering momentum and financial stability risks were 
intensifying,  thereby  threatening  the  sustainability  of  the  global  recovery.  It  is  a  year  later, 
and while much has been done on various fronts to try and resolve the crisis, we continue to 
face  significant  global  economic  and  financial  market  challenges.  Downside  risks  remain 
elevated  and  continue  to  hold  back  a  strong  and  sustainable  global  economic  recovery. 
Geopolitical  tensions  remain  a  threat,  with  the  potential  to  again  trigger  a  sharp  rise  in  oil 
prices. 
Central banks have continued to play a fundamental role, in an attempt to prevent a collapse 
of  the  financial  system  and  continued  downward  economic  adjustments.  In  the  process 
central  banks  ventured  even  deeper  into  new  territory,  which  Martin  Wolf  of  the  Financial 
Times  last  week  described  as  the  new  world  of post-financial-crisis  central  banking,  which 
will  create  significant  institutional  and  intellectual  challenges.  In  Europe,  firewalls  were 
increased after long debates, and under the auspices of the G20 and IMF, countries have 
also come together to provide additional financial resources to the IMF for purposes of crisis 
resolution  and  prevention. Will  these  measures,  beyond  ensuring  that  the  global  economy 
does  not fall  back  into  recession,  be enough  to restore the  required  level  of  confidence  in 
financial markets? Recent market moves appear to suggest not. Have all these actions not 
raised the risk of moral hazard, with investors expecting central banks to continue pumping 
money  into  the  financial  system;  and  will  the  system  become  hooked  on  central  bank 
money?  Jaime  Caruana1  has  pointed  out  that  these  actions  have  bought  time,  but  in  so 
doing,  may  have  actually  made  it  easier  to  waste  that  time,  increasing  the  risk  that  the 
“balance sheet recession” leads to protracted weakness, and also potentially raising political 
economy risks. It would indeed be unfortunate if what is essentially a temporary relief were to 
breed a sense of complacency with regard to the repair work that is still necessary. While we 
may  not  be  able  to  answer  these  questions  tonight,  let  me  briefly  touch  on  global  and 
domestic  financial  market  developments,  before  updating  you  on  the  activities  of  the 
Financial Markets Department over the past year.  
Global economic developments and financial markets 
2. 
While  volatility  in  global  financial  markets  declined  during  the  first  half  of  2011,  the  third 
quarter witnessed a renewed rise in tensions, first driven by the congressional debate over 
the debt ceiling in the United States, and then by renewed concerns about the solvency of 
peripheral euro area sovereigns. Greece may have been at the forefront of the news flow, 
but by late 2011, concerns had spread to a number of other sovereign issuers in the euro 
                                                
1  Central banking in a balance sheet recession. Panel remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the 
BIS, at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2012 conference on “Central banking: before, 
during and after the crisis”, Washington, 23–24 March 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
zone periphery, resulting in a sharp widening in spreads, which in turn spilled over to banks’ 
funding costs and generally tighter financial conditions in the rest of the world. 
As  already  indicated,  it  again  became  necessary  for  central  banks  to  respond  in  an 
unconventional  manner:  the  US  Federal  Reserve  lengthened  the  maturity  of  its  securities 
portfolios (in what became known as “Operation Twist”); the Bank of England and the Bank 
of Japan expanded their respective balance-sheets via additional securities purchases; while 
the ECB for the first time (and in two instalments) supplied banks with almost EUR1 trillion in 
three-year  repo  funding.  The  goals  of  these  measures,  however,  were  broadly  similar: 
stabilizing the funding structure of the banking system, and thereby fending off the risk of a 
severe  credit  crunch.  These  measures  helped  to  limit  undue  market  volatility  that  risked 
forcing illiquid but solvent sovereigns into insolvency. At the same time, public and private 
creditors worked out a voluntary restructuring plan for Greek sovereign debt.  
The  market’s  initial  response  was  positive.  Risk  indicators  declined  markedly  from 
December 2011 to March 2012, with the VIX index in particular falling to a level of 15, which 
was more or less around the lows recorded at the beginning of the financial crisis. Intra-euro 
zone sovereign spreads underwent a sharp compression, as did bank CDS spreads, while 
the  reduction  in  risk-aversion  spurred  a  marked  rally  in  equities.  Yet  many  questions 
remained unanswered. For example, will vulnerable sovereign states take advantage of this 
“window  of  opportunity”  to  implement  the  necessary  strengthening  of  their  public  finances 
and to improve their competitiveness? Will credit to non-financial entities start flowing more 
strongly  again  now  that  banks  have  been  able  to  secure  more  solid  financing?  Will 
authorities manage to implement fiscal austerity measures without unduly damaging growth 
prospects in Europe? And then there is the issue of whether geopolitics will push oil to levels 
that threaten the fragile global recovery. Let me briefly add that Europe is not the only source 
of risk, as there are, e.g., major fiscal challenges in US, which could come to a head early 
next year. The jury is still out on these questions, but investor concerns seem to be rising 
again, especially with respect to the credibility of fiscal consolidation plans in Europe. At the 
most recent meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bank governors last month, there 
was  some  optimism  that  tail  risks  faced  by  the  global  economy  had  started  to  recede. 
However,  the  persistence  of  downside  growth  risks  and  the  need  for  on-going  structural 
reform  and  global  rebalancing  were  also  highlighted  as  needing  to  be  kept  firmly  on  the 
G20 agenda. 
Implications for South Africa 
3. 
As has been the case since the beginning of the financial crisis, South Africa has not been 
immune  to  these  fluctuations  in  international  markets.  Our  banking  system  is  solid  and 
well-capitalized, our financial markets (including the interbank market) have not experienced 
any problems that required official intervention, and our external and public finance situation 
looks  far  more  manageable  than  in  many  developed  economies.  Yet  the  country’s  strong 
trade  links  with  the  European  Union;  its  reliance  on  commodity  exports;  and  its  liquid  and 
sophisticated  financial  markets  provide  as  many  channels  for  the  transmission  of  external 
shocks. The past year’s fluctuations in domestic equities, bonds and the exchange rate, as 
well as the sensitivity of local GDP to the global cycle, bear testimony to this relationship.  
Supply-side  problems  undermined  South  African  growth  in  2011.  Some  of  these  were 
external,  including  disruptions  to  the  automobile  sector’s  supply  chain  following  the 
devastation in Japan. Others were internal – and I refer here to safety-related interruptions in 
mining and industrial action in both the mining and manufacturing sectors. The consequence, 
however, was that GDP growth only averaged 3,1 per cent in 2011, a lesser increase than 
what the Reserve Bank had been projecting this time last year. Admittedly, the latter half of 
the  year  brought  some  good  news  on  the  domestic  demand  front.  Thus,  real  GDP 
accelerated  to  3,2 per  cent  (quarter-on-quarter  annualized)  in  the  fourth  quarter,  driven  by 
sustained  solid  expansion  in  consumer  spending  and  an  acceleration  in  both  private  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
public  fixed  investment.  Yet,  many  factors  justify  caution  –  above  all  the  uncertain  global 
environment – and the Reserve Bank’s latest projection for 2012 growth at 3,0 per cent still 
falls marginally short of the growth rate achieved last year, and of the rate of growth required 
to put a serious dent into unemployment. In this regard, latest figures show an unfortunate 
rise in unemployment in the first quarter of 2012.  
The past twelve months also saw a mild breach of the Reserve Bank’s 3–6 per cent inflation 
target, with the headline CPI rate increasing to 6,3 per cent in January before retreating to 
6,0  per  cent  in  March.  Price  pressures  over  the  past  year  have  remained  essentially  of  a 
cost-push  nature.  The  moderate  pace  of  “core”  inflation  (4,4  per  cent  in  March  when 
excluding  food,  petrol  and  energy)  shows  that  despite  some  evidence  of  price  pressures 
becoming more broad-based, these are still expected to remain contained by the relatively 
subdued state of the domestic economy. In fact, as highlighted by the MPC on March 29, the 
Reserve Bank expects that CPI inflation will gradually decline from the second quarter of this 
year onwards, with a projected average of 5,2 per cent by the end of the forecast period at 
the end of 2013. 
The behaviour of domestic fixed-income markets over the past twelve months would suggest 
that  investors  by  and  large  agree  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  interpretation  of  the  inflation 
acceleration  as  temporary  and  largely  supply-driven  in  nature.  Despite  volatile  global 
markets, rand-denominated bond yields declined over the past year, testing post-recession 
lows, while breakeven inflation expectations are not markedly different from where they were 
a year ago. Both the government bond and swap yield curves are flatter up to the ten-year 
maturity. And while the performance of longer-term bonds appears in part to be dictated by 
investor  expectations  of  subdued  growth  both  globally  and  locally,  the  planned  faster 
reduction  in  the  government  budget  deficit  compared  with  initial  National  Treasury  targets 
may  also  have  reassured  investors.  Activity  in  the  domestic  bond  market  by  non-resident 
investors  illustrates  their  relatively  constructive  approach  towards  emerging  market  debt  in 
general, and South African bonds in particular. Statistics show that net foreign purchases of 
local bonds were positive in ten of the twelve months to April 2012, and despite a hefty sell-
off  in  September  2011,  the  cumulated  net  purchases  amounted  to  R74,5 billion.  In 
comparison,  the  previous  calendar-year  record  in  2006  stood  at  R34,3 billion.  In  recent 
weeks,  the  announcement  of  the  possible  inclusion  of  South  Africa  into  the  World 
Government  Bond  Index  later  this  year,  has  provided  some  impetus  to  the  local  currency 
bond  market  and  non-resident  inflows.  This  is  a  positive  development  as  the  criteria  for 
inclusion  is  based  on  the  level  of  sophistication  of  our  bond  markets  with  regard  to  size, 
credit quality and lack of barriers to entry, as well as on its liquidity and a transparent price 
discovery process. This represents another endorsement of South Africa’s financial markets 
as being world-class. 
Other financial assets, however, have experienced a more volatile environment over the past 
year. Equity prices, as measured by the JSE all-share index, failed to post any gain over the 
whole of 2011 despite a recovery in the latter part of the year. Furthermore, a continuation of 
the late 2011 rally into early 2012 quickly lost steam, bearing testimony to continued investor 
concerns about any speedy return to solid economic growth. In contrast to positive inflows 
into  bonds,  net  non-resident  activity  into  local  equities  has  resulted  in  net  sales  of 
R25,4 billion in the twelve months to April 2012. 
The  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  while  not  repeating  the  wild  gyrations  of  earlier  financial 
crises,  has  remained  vulnerable  to  shifts  in  global  risk  appetite  and  swings  in  commodity 
prices.  Following  relative  stability  in  the  first  half  of  2011,  the  currency  weakened  beyond 
R8.00/US$ in September as foreign investors sold domestic bonds, and even the resumption 
of bond purchases in the ensuing months failed to bring the rand back to its previous range. 
The  past  few  months  have  again  been  a  period  of  moderate  volatility,  with  the  rand 
seemingly  driven  –  as  with  other  so-called  “commodity  currencies”  and  emerging  market 
currencies – by the countervailing forces of abundant global central bank liquidity, fledgling 
investor appetite for risk and movements in the EUR/USD exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Financial market operations 
4. 
The management of overall money-market liquidity continues to be one of the most important 
functions  of  the  Financial  Markets  Department  (FMD)  as  part  of  the  implementation  of  the 
monetary  policy  decisions  of the  MPC.  The  Bank continuously  reviews  its  monetary  policy 
operational procedures for appropriateness and effectiveness, and changes are implemented 
when deemed necessary. As you are aware, various changes were implemented in August 
2010  and  March  2011  following  research  conducted  within  the  Bank  as  well  consultations 
with market participants through the Financial Markets Liaison Group (FMLG). As a result of 
the changes, the actual daily liquidity requirement increased markedly from a daily average 
of R10,3 billion in the twelve months before August 2010 to an average of R15 billion in the 
next  twelve  months,  and  further  to  an  average  of  R16,8 billion  from  September  2011  to 
30 April  2012. The  number  of  banks  participating  in  the  main repo  auctions  has  increased 
from four to a total of six and at times, seven banks, with the combined bid amounts tending 
to be higher than the announced average weekly liquidity requirement.  
The  introduction  of  longer-term  foreign  exchange  swaps  with  maturities  of  up  to  twelve 
months has improved the Reserve Bank’s open market operations and has led to the more 
effective  management  of  money-market  liquidity.  The  discontinuation  of  the  practice  of 
announcing the estimated weekly liquidity ranges to the market has significantly reduced the 
Reserve Bank’s activity in the money-market. Participation in SARB debenture auctions has 
also improved.  
Following further consultations with market participants, another set of enhancements to the 
Reserve Bank’s monetary policy operational procedures was implemented on 01 March 2012: 
• 
When the auction is oversubscribed, the amounts tendered for by commercial banks 
in the weekly main repo auctions are now allocated on a pro rata basis, up to the 
announced average daily liquidity requirement for the week; 
The  Bank  now  conducts  2-  and  5  day main  repo  auctions  during the  week  of the 
MPC meetings; and 
SARB  debentures  and  reverse  repos  are  now  issued  with  maturities  of  7-  and 
14 days, in addition to the usual 28- and 56 days maturities.  
  These enhancements have further improved the functioning of the money market, especially 
the  interbank  market,  have  also  increased  the  level  of  flexibility  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
liquidity management operations, and have eliminated the lack of synchronisation between 
the Reserve Bank’s main repo auctions and the MPC interest rate announcements. This lack 
of synchronisation had previously led to discrepancies in the market, as interest rates in the 
interbank market changed when the repo rate was changed, while the interest rate for the 
main repo remained unchanged for the rest of the week.  
Financial  market  development  initiatives  remain  an  important  strategic  focus  area  of  the 
Financial Markets Department in cooperation with members of the FMLG, its various working 
groups  and  other  market  participants.  The  focus  for  the  next  period  will  be  on  completing 
projects  such  as  the  pricing  of  the  floating  rate  notes  (FRNs)  in  the  secondary  market, 
gaining a better understanding of high-frequency trading in the foreign exchange market and 
developments  in  over-the-counter  (OTC)  market  in  foreign  exchange  derivatives  and 
reviewing the calculation reference rates in the money-market.  
Reserves management 
5. 
In line with stated policy of not targeting a specific level of the exchange rate, the Reserve 
Bank continues its activities in the foreign exchange market for purposes of building reserves 
when market conditions are conducive and to execute client transactions. The official gross 
gold  and  foreign-exchange  reserves  increased  from  US$49,3  billion  on  31  March  2011  to 
US$50,7  billion  on  31  March  2012.  The  change  reflected  a  combination  of  valuation 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
adjustments,  maturing  forward  transactions,  and  proceeds  of  a  government  foreign  bond 
issue.  The  international  liquidity  position  improved  from  US$44,7  billion  to  US$48,9  billion 
during this period.  
The reserves accumulation strategy continued to be implemented in close consultation with 
the  National  Treasury.  During  the  2011/12  financial  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  purchased 
approximately  US$4,0  billion  for  reserve  accumulation  purposes.  These  purchases  were 
swapped  into  the forward  market  by  means  of FX  swaps  in  order  to  sterilise  rand  liquidity 
injected into the money market. By end-2011, foreign exchange reserves could comfortably 
cover  a  year’s  worth  of  South  Africa’s  external  funding  requirements  (consisting  of  the 
current  account  deficit  and  short-term  external  debt,  as  per  the  so  called  augmented 
Guidotti Ratio definition).  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  continued  to  manage  official  reserves  following  prudent  risk 
management and governance principles. The strategic asset allocation is reviewed regularly, 
compiled in accordance with the Reserve Bank’s investment objectives and determines the 
structure of the foreign-exchange reserves in terms of currency composition, asset allocation 
and market risk.  
Conclusion 
6. 
It  is  now  time  for  me  to  conclude,  by  thanking  you  for  your  co-operation  over  the  past 
financial year as many of you are counterparties in our transactions, participate in information 
exchanges  bilaterally  and  in  fora  such  as  the  FMLG,  and  readily  make  your  research 
available to us. No doubt, future challenges lie ahead in what remains an unusually uncertain 
global financial environment. Yet I trust that the spirit of co-operation that we have developed 
in our financial markets over the years will help us to successfully meet these challenges. I 
also  would  like  to  extend  thanks  to  my  own  colleagues,  the  management  and  staff  of  the 
Financial  Markets  Department. Their  hard  work and  dedication  during  a  rather  challenging 
year for the department has been exemplary. They continue to make the Reserve Bank and 
the country proud. I would also like to thank colleagues from other departments within the 
SARB,  many  of  which  are  present  tonight,  who  work  closely  with  the  Financial  Markets 
Department on a daily basis.  
Thank  you  also  to  the  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Conference  Centre  for  once  again 
arranging this function for us.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
