Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – new frontiers in financing the 
economy 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
EU-Malaysia  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry’s  (EUMCCI)  Quarterly  Financial  Panel 
Discussion 2012 “Islamic finance – new frontiers in financing the economy”, Kuala Lumpur, 
8 March 2012. 
 In this new phase of globalisation in which economies and financial systems are increasingly 
becoming more interconnected, we are seeing the emergence of several new trends in trade 
and  investment  flows.  While  there  has  been  a  slower  expansion  in  world  trade  and 
investment  flows  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  cross-border  trade  and 
investment activities among emerging economies have been increasing significantly. Asia is 
very much part of this changing pattern in world trade and investment activity. In Asia, strong 
domestic  demand,  supported  by  resilient  financial  systems  and  well  developed  financial 
markets have well intermediated these international flows.  
The most pressing challenge confronting the current global economy is to generate growth 
and  employment.  It  is  particularly  important  for  the  crisis-affected  economies  that  growth 
resumes and is sustained, while addressing fiscal imbalances, public and private sector over-
indebtedness and the financial sector impairment, the solutions to which will most likely result 
in slower growth. While supportive domestic policies will thus be necessary to support the 
growth, also important is the potential growth that can be gained from trade and investment 
with other parts of the world. 
For  the  countries  in  the  ASEAN  region,  the  partnership  with  the  EU  region  has  expanded 
steadily over time, and has continued to evolve and strengthen. There is significant potential 
to expand such trade and investment links between both the EU and ASEAN regions. Global 
corporations,  including  the  EU  and  ASEAN  multinational  corporations  (MNCs),  have 
contributed to maximising the mutual benefits from such relationships. In Malaysia there are 
currently  more  than  a  thousand  multinational  corporations  from  more  than  30  countries. 
Many  are  from  the  EU  region.  Initiatives  that  continue  to  lower  the  barriers  between  our 
respective regions are also set to strengthen the growth of such strategic partnerships.  
It is my pleasure to be here at this Quarterly Financial Panel Discussion, organised by the 
EU-Malaysia Chamber of Commerce and Industry, to speak on the role that Islamic finance 
might have on facilitating greater trade and investment between our regions. Islamic finance, 
which  was  previously  domestic-centric,  is  now  increasingly  providing  financial  solutions  for 
cross-border 
the 
internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance.  This  has  been  reinforced  by  the  dynamic  pace  of 
innovation in Islamic finance that has widened the range of financial products and services. 
Islamic finance has thus become an increasingly important channel for the efficient allocation 
of funds across borders and the diversification of risks. 
investment.  Progressive 
liberalisation  has 
trade  and 
facilitated 
Islamic finance: financial solutions for international business 
Despite  an  increasingly  more  challenging  environment,  Islamic  finance  has  continued  to 
expand its potential as a sustainable and stable form of financial intermediation. Its emphasis 
on the close link between financial transactions and economic activity has positioned Islamic 
finance  to  be  well-anchored  to  serve  the  real  economy.  The  adoption  of  profit-  and  risk-
sharing,  transparency  and  disclosure,  and  the  universal  ethical  values  of  fairness  which  is 
implicitly  embedded  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  provides  the  internal  checks  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
balances.  Embraced  in  its  entirety,  it  enhances  the  prospects  for  sustainable  economic 
growth and financial stability.  
The resilience of the Islamic financial system is also further strengthened by the international 
prudential standards and best practices that have now been introduced. These include the 
standards issued by the Islamic Financial Services Board since 2002 in the areas of capital 
adequacy,  risk  management,  governance,  and  the  conduct  of  business  and  supervisory 
process. The industry is also guided by international accounting standards that have been 
developed  by  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
since its establishment in 1990. In enhancing liquidity management in the Islamic financial 
system,  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM),  which  was 
established  in  2010,  is  putting  in  place  the  mechanism  that  will  facilitate  effective  liquidity 
management  solutions  through  the  periodic  issuance  of  short-term  Shariah-compliant 
financial instruments. 
As the Islamic financial system transitions to becoming more diversified and comprehensive, 
it provides the spectrum of financial solutions that meet the different needs of the economy. 
Such financing products offered in Islamic finance also include syndicated financing, equity 
financing  and  venture  capital.  There  are  also  a  wide  range  of  investment  and  treasury 
instruments,  as  well  as  fund  and  wealth  management  products  for  the  management  of 
portfolios of businesses. In terms of takaful, there is also a broad range of products, including 
takaful coverage for physical properties and assets of businesses, as well as protection for 
employees. 
The  growing  significance  of  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  in  this  recent 
decade has witnessed its increasing role in bridging economies through the mobilisation and 
channelling  of  funds  to  productive  investment  activities  across  borders.  Despite  the 
challenging global environment and the increased uncertainties, the Islamic finance industry 
has  continued  to  experience  the  double  digit  growth  of  21  percent,  and  total  Shariah-
compliant  assets  have  surpassed  the  USD1  trillion  mark.  There  are  now  more  than 
600 Islamic financial institutions operating in more than 75 countries in both Muslim and non-
Muslim  jurisdictions.  The  emergence  of  new  financial  centres  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East 
and their increased connectivity has strengthened the foundations for intra- and inter-regional 
linkages in trade and investments.  
More recently, Islamic finance is also being introduced in the EU region. The establishment 
of  Islamic  finance  in  key  financial  centres,  namely  London  and  Luxembourg,  presents 
opportunities for businesses in the EU to raise funds using Islamic financial instruments such 
as  the  sukuk,  and  to  diversify  investment  portfolios  with  Islamic  fund  and  wealth 
management products. The development of Islamic finance has also been initiated in several 
other  European  economies.  Malaysia  has  entered 
into  a  number  of  collaborative 
arrangements  in  the  areas  of  talent  development  and  expertise,  business  linkages,  and 
infrastructure development. To date, Malaysia has signed Memorandums of Understanding 
in the area of Islamic finance with the UK, France and Luxembourg. 
The now well-developed existing Islamic financial markets, including the sukuk and Islamic 
money  markets,  have  been  particularly  instrumental  in  intermediating  funds  in  the  Islamic 
financial system. It is fast becoming an important platform for international fund raising and 
investment activities that are generating increased cross-border flows. From an outstanding 
amount of USD33 billion in 2006, the sukuk market has expanded to USD180 billion as at 
end-2011. 
The  sukuk  market  brings  with  it  many  attractive  value  propositions  for  both  issuers  and 
investors. A central merit of the sukuk structure is that it is based on underlying assets that 
have  an  income  stream.  This  therefore  discourages  over-exposure  of  the  financing  facility 
beyond the value of the underlying asset, given that the issuer cannot leverage in excess of 
the  asset  value.  In  addition,  with  the  requirement  that  the  financing  must  be  channelled 
towards productive purposes, the risk exposure in sukuk is therefore to the project and not to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  corporate  sector 
the  uncertainties  or  activities  that  have  no  economic  benefits.  This  element  not  only 
contributes  towards  financial  stability,  but  also  offers  investors  another  asset  class  for 
investment.  
The demand for sukuk currently exceeds the supply, as the high level of surplus savings in 
Asia  and  the  Gulf  region  spurs  the  strong  demand.  Although  the  size  of  the  market  may 
seem modest by global standards, the sukuk market has been registering an average annual 
growth  of  40  percent.  The  growth  of  the  Islamic  bond  market  in  particular,  in  the  current 
environment  also  reflects  its  cost  effectiveness.  An  increasing  number  of  multilateral 
agencies,  Government  agencies  and 
including  multinational 
corporations have relied on the sukuk market as a source for raising financing. In Malaysia, 
Shell MDS Sdn. Bhd. issued the world’s first ringgit-denominated corporate sukuk in 1990, 
amounting to RM125 million. The issuance of a RM3.5 billion programme sukuk by TESCO 
Stores  in  2007  witnessed  the  first  sukuk  issuance  by  a  British  owned  MNC,  while  Toyota 
Capital Services, a Japanese MNC, issued a RM1 billion programme in 2008. There has also 
been  a  growing  trend  for  multi-currency  sukuk  issuances  in  Asia,  with  the  latest  landmark 
issuance of the world’s first renminbi sukuk issuance in 2011 being issued in the Malaysian 
market. These multi-currency issuances have attracted international investors to participate 
in this market.  
As an asset class, there are now a wide range of structures, size and different maturities. 
Recent  examples  in  Malaysia  include  the  PLUS  Berhad’s  issuance  of  a  record  size  of 
RM30.6 billion or equivalent to USD9.7 billion programme, with maturities ranging from 5 to 
27 years. This also facilitates the potential for diversification of portfolios. The Islamic capital 
market has also been an avenue for businesses to raise equity financing globally. Shariah-
compliant corporations that are listed in major global Islamic stock market indices, such as 
the  Dow  Jones  Islamic  Market  Indices  and  the  FTSE  Global  Islamic  Index,  are  able  to 
enhance  their  profiles  among  the  prospective  investors,  including  those  with  inclination 
towards  socially  responsible  investment.  In  Malaysia,  similar  listing  opportunities  are 
available  through  the  FTSE  Hijrah  Shariah  index  and  the  FTSE  Bursa  Malaysia  EMAS 
Shariah index for Shariah-compliant investment, that has been designed to provide a broad 
benchmark for investors that wished to invest in Shariah-compliant stocks. 
Malaysia operates a dual financial system that comprises the conventional and the Islamic 
financial system.  Businesses  are  able  to  select  the  financial  offerings that  best  serve  their 
requirements.  While  Malaysia  has  progressively  liberalised  our  financial  system,  the 
liberalisation of the Islamic financial system has been at a more rapid pace. The motivation 
for this is to forge greater international economic and financial linkages. Liberalisation of the 
conventional  sector  has  been  more  gradual  and  sequenced  to  ensure  that  the  financial 
system promotes balanced growth while remaining stable and sustainable. The robust legal 
and regulatory framework, together with the availability of a large and diverse pool of talent 
and  expertise  in  Islamic  finance,  forms  the  solid  components  in  the  system  to  meet  the 
requirements of businesses. 
There  is  also  Shariah  certainty  in  Islamic  finance  through  a  robust  Shariah  governance 
framework,  which  comprises  Shariah  committees  at  the  industry  level  and  the  Shariah 
Advisory  Council  at  the  regulatory  level.  Malaysia’s  supportive  framework  and  process  for 
sukuk  origination  and  sukuk  listing  also  facilitates  the  issuance  process  of  ringgit  or  non-
ringgit denominated sukuk in our market. Efforts to deepen the sukuk market have provided 
significant  opportunities  for  participation  in  this  market,  with  the  size  of  the  Malaysian 
sovereign and corporate sukuk outstanding growing threefold from a total of RM120 billion in 
2005  to  RM353  billion  as  at  end-2011.  The  market  has  also  drawn  the  interest  of  foreign 
participation for their financing and investment activities. Key in the development of Islamic 
finance in Malaysia has been its progressive internationalisation and the introduction of more 
innovative Shariah-compliant financial solutions that meet the increasingly more complex and 
diverse international business requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  In  serving  the  needs  of  the  real  economy,  Islamic  finance 
offers  a  comprehensive  and  competitive  solution  in  meeting  funding  and  investment 
requirements  of  businesses.  Given  its  international  outreach  and  dimension,  and  ability  to 
provide  a  total  financial solution,  Islamic  finance  is  now  at  the  frontier  in  which  it presents 
new  opportunities  to  support  the  economy  and  overall  financial  stability.  Today’s  dialogue 
session would serve to provide a greater understanding and appreciation on Islamic finance 
and its potential for the intermediation of finances for international businesses.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
