Andreas Dombret: The present state of the euro-area sovereign debt 
crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Bank  of  America  Merrill  Lynch  Global  Macro  Conference,  London, 
12 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Having  joined  the  Board  of  the  Bundesbank  only  two  years  ago  after  a  long  career  in 
banking,  I  am,  once  again,  delighted  to  address  senior  market  participants.  I  am  acutely 
aware of the importance to exchange information on the euro-area sovereign debt crisis not 
only among central bankers and policymakers but also with the markets. 
First of all, before commenting on the sovereign debt crisis, I would like to remind you of a 
success  story.  More  than  330  million  people  in  the  euro  area  are  benefiting  today  from  a 
single currency, which was introduced in 1999. The euro is not only our most visible symbol 
of European integration. While the motivation for its introduction was predominantly political, 
the euro has been a success in economic terms, too. Since its introduction, its internal value 
has been at least as stable as the earlier national currencies. The average inflation rate has 
stood at 2%. I call this a true success. 
That is all well and good, you may say, but some of you may be wondering whether such a 
positive verdict has not been refuted by the most recent upheavals in the euro area. Indeed, 
some  investors  are  sceptical  about  the  euro,  and  more  than  just  a  few  are  predicting  the 
break-up of the currency union, or at least the departure of individual member states. 
In plain language, the central question in my remarks today is “Can the euro make it, and 
how?” The answer to the first part of this question is crystal clear: “Yes, it can and it will.” To 
answer  the  “how”,  I  shall  proceed  in  two  stages:  first,  by  explaining  how  the  crisis  came 
about and, second, by describing Europe’s response so far and, to our mind, future actions 
needed. 
Analysis of the crisis  
2. 
There is no doubt that the euro-area sovereign debt crisis, which was triggered by the global 
financial  and  economic  crisis,  has  been  the  greatest  challenge  ever  faced  by  European 
Monetary  Union.  The  European  Monetary  Union  is  certainly  at  a  crossroads.  The  more 
pressing question, though, is what European Monetary Union will look like over the medium 
to long term. Will monetary policy, for example, be able to deliver price stability as it did in the 
past? And how should it be organised in order to do so? 
When it comes to solving the current crisis, it is essential to take account of the root causes 
as well as of the particular features of European Monetary Union. 
The root causes of the crisis are well known by now, so I shall be brief on this. 
The convergence of long-term interest rates at low levels attracted large capital flows to the 
peripheral countries of the euro area. Yet, those member states failed in many respects to 
put these funds to productive use. Instead, they spent the cheap money on public or private 
consumption  –  as  in  Greece  and  Portugal  –  or  they  allowed  their  residential  construction 
sectors to boom, which eventually led to oversized and vulnerable banking sectors – as in 
Ireland and Spain. Sharp reversals of credit booms or persistent losses in competitiveness 
can very easily put the solvency of governments at risk – which is exactly what happened. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
losses 
to  offset 
their  exchange 
in  competitiveness  by  devaluing 
And this is of particular relevance in a monetary union, since member states are no longer 
capable 
rates. 
Higher-than-average  rises  in  unit  labour  costs  therefore  require  internal  and  often  painful 
adjustments  in  order  to  regain  price  competitiveness  in  international  goods  and  services 
markets. In a nutshell, several member states failed to meet the requirements of European 
Monetary Union membership. They did not implement the necessary adjustments. 
The  inherent  risk  of  monetary  union  was  recognised  right  from  the  outset,  however. 
Specifically,  the  combination  of  a  single  monetary  policy  with  national  fiscal  policies 
distinguishes the euro area from federal republics like the United States or unitary countries 
like  the  United  Kingdom.  This  setup  increases  the  deficit  bias  and  implies  the  incentive  to 
take advantage of central bank balance sheets to mutualise sovereign debt in one way or 
another among the taxpayers of different nations. 
The  founding  fathers  of  European  Monetary  Union  had  these  disincentives  very  much  in 
mind when  they agreed on the institutional arrangements. First of all, the eurosystem was 
mandated with a single primary objective, namely maintaining price stability in the euro area 
as a whole. Moreover, the no bail-out principle, the prohibition of monetary state financing by 
the eurosystem, and the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact were all put in place to 
prevent idleness on the part of member states. 
Nevertheless, the crisis also made obvious the shortcomings of the institutional framework of 
European Monetary Union. The set of rules did not prevent the member states from making 
the errors I mentioned. Implementation of the fiscal rules was too lax. Moreover, the fiscal 
rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were,  in  effect,  relaxed  some  two  years  before  the 
financial crisis broke out in 2007, following a strident campaign by Germany and France to 
make the pact “smarter”. Furthermore, the designers of the framework turned a blind eye to 
the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances and their risks to fiscal sustainability as well 
as to financial stability. 
3. 
Europe’s response to the crisis 
Crisis resolution in the short run 
3.1 
Euro-area fiscal and monetary policymakers have taken extraordinary measures to contain 
the crisis and maintain financial stability. First of all, the euro-area member states and the 
IMF supported Greece with bilateral loans. Then, a temporary stabilisation mechanism was 
established,  the  EFSF.  As  you  know,  its  beneficiaries  have  been  Ireland,  Portugal  and, 
including a second adjustment programme, Greece. Over the course of the sovereign debt 
crisis, the effective lending volume of the EFSF has been increased, the lending conditions 
have  been  relaxed,  and  the  toolbox  of  the  EFSF  has  been  extended.  A  permanent 
mechanism,  the  ESM,  with  a  more  resilient  funding  structure,  has  been  established;  it  is 
scheduled to replace the EFSF in summer of this year and to operate temporarily alongside 
the EFSF. Recently, the euro-area finance ministers agreed to raise the ceiling for combined 
ESM and EFSF lending to €700 billion. Moreover, the IMF member countries pledged over 
$430 billion in new loans to the Fund in order to erect a global firewall. 
The European and global firewalls alike have been substantially strengthened over the past 
two years. Are their levels now sufficient? Or should European leaders increase their volume 
even further? 
My  opinion  in  this  regard  is  that  policymakers  should  refrain  from  a  wild  goose  chase  in 
pursuit  of  ever  higher  firewalls.  Making  the  firewalls  higher  and  higher  will  not  resolve  the 
crisis. Instead, policymakers should care that firewalls do not fall into a credibility trap owing 
to unavoidable political or financial constraints. 
Generally  speaking,  a  firewall  cannot  extinguish  a  fire.  It  only  buys  time  until  sustainable 
measures become effective. Therefore, the fire has to be extinguished by other means. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy cannot extinguish the fire either. This is not to deny that the monetary policy 
of the eurosystem has helped to stabilise the financial system of the euro area and beyond. 
Our  policy  stance  remains  rather  accommodative.  In  effect,  monetary  policy  is  more 
expansive than the key interest rate of 1% might suggest. Owing to excess liquidity, market 
rates  are  well  below  that  margin.  The  large  excess  liquidity  results  from  the  non-standard 
policy measures of the eurosystem. These include an extended list of eligible collateral, the 
full allotment policy and the provision of very long-term refinancing operations with maturities 
of up to three years. The Securities Markets Programme and the Covered Bond Purchasing 
Programme are additional non-standard eurosystem measures. All these measures, I wish to 
emphasise, are temporary in nature. 
The  recent  setback  in  equity  and  credit  markets,  along  with  still  strong  flight-to-safety  and 
flight-to-liquidity  flows  in  sovereign  bonds,  are  mainly  the  result  of  political  uncertainty  in 
Europe.  This  reminds  European  governments  that  they  cannot  afford  to  ease  off  in  their 
reform and consolidation efforts. 
But  let  me  also  point  to  the  inherent  risks  and  side  effects  of  the  central  bank  measures. 
Over the medium to long term, continued provision of ample liquidity might, through various 
channels, de-anchor inflation expectations, which would translate into higher inflation risks. It 
could also pave the way for new asset bubbles, thereby sowing the seeds of the next crisis. 
Pointing out the risks and side effects of crisis measures does not imply that the Bundesbank 
wishes  to  obstruct  the  stabilisation  of  the  euro.  Quite  the  opposite.  We  are  aiming  to 
strengthen the framework of the euro and to ensure that we continue to have a stable euro in 
the  future.  Recurring  suggestions  to  the  contrary,  for  example  by  George  Soros,  are 
therefore ill-advised. 
A  disintegration  of  the  currency  union  would  be  linked  to  extremely  high  costs  and  risks. 
That’s why such a scenario cannot be anyone’s goal. Yet this does not imply that Germany 
becomes  open  to  blackmail  and  promises  guarantees  without  control.  This  would  indeed 
erode the stability basis of the currency union. 
Some argue, of course, that the eurosystem needs to do whatever it takes to maintain the 
euro – particularly those who consider the ECB and the national central banks to be the “last 
men  standing”.  However,  it should  be  borne  in mind  that  it makes  a  substantial  difference 
whether a non-monetary union central bank – such as the Fed or the Bank of England – or 
the  eurosystem  uses  its  balance  sheet  as  a  policy  instrument.  In  the  latter  case, 
balance-sheet policies and the implicit risk of losses would imply a shift of burdens among 
the taxpayers of different member states. But since it is taxpayers’ money, it is up to national 
parliaments and not central banks to decide on such a shift. 
Hence, monetary policy must not sacrifice its stability orientation and its credibility in fighting 
inflation, the more so as monetary policy cannot resolve the crisis anyway. Addressing the 
sovereign debt crisis is and remains, first and foremost, a fiscal policy task. 
Nevertheless, the fiscal and economic policy reforms needed to bring about a lasting solution 
are, in the short run, costly – both politically and economically. Therefore, a major challenge 
for monetary policy is that its unconventional measures and the temporary relief they afford 
are not seen as an excuse to delay, or even reverse, these reforms. Otherwise, monetary 
policy risks being taken hostage by fiscal policy. This would do lasting damage – to central 
banks’  credibility,  to  their  ability  to  maintain  price  stability,  and  to  public  acceptance  of 
monetary union as a whole.  
Sustainable crisis resolution 
3.2 
But  what  fiscal  and  economic  policy  action  is  needed  to  achieve  a  lasting  solution  to  the 
current crisis and to prevent future crises? In my view, three conditions have to be met. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is 
first  of 
1. 
2. 
the  rigorous 
these  conditions 
implementation  of  budgetary 
The 
consolidation  and  growth-enhancing  structural  reforms  in  the  member  states  of 
European Monetary Union. 
The second is a reform of the framework of the European Monetary Union that takes 
recent experience into account. 
The third condition is further progress in financial regulation. 
3. 
Financial  regulation  is  a  far-reaching  and  complex  field,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  go  into  that 
today.  But  please  allow  me  to  highlight  just  two  points.  The  first  is  that,  when  European 
Monetary  Union  was  established,  financial  markets  were  expected  to  act  as  an  additional 
corrective  measure  against  unsound  fiscal  policies.  History  has  taught  us,  however,  that 
because of low risk awareness, markets have not worked effectively as a timely sanctioning 
mechanism – and once they finally became aware of the risks, the response was quick and 
fierce. Nevertheless, the watchdog function of financial markets – of all of you here today – is 
indispensable.  To  be  effective,  financial  regulation  has  to  encourage  investors  to  become 
aware of the risks and to signal them at an earlier stage. The second point I would like to 
mention is the painful lesson that contagion, via the financial system, has proven to be the 
Achilles heel of European Monetary Union. Hence, improving the resilience of the financial 
system, even though it is a major policy goal across the world, is particularly important in the 
context of our monetary union. 
But  let  me  now  elaborate  on  the  first  and  the  second  requirements  of  the  euro  area  for 
overcoming the crisis – fiscal and structural reforms in the member states as well as a better 
framework for European Monetary Union. Significant progress has already been made with 
regard to budget consolidation and, to a lesser extent, in terms of structural reforms. This is 
true of the programme countries which have to comply with the conditions of the respective 
adjustment  programmes.  And  it  is  also  true  of  Italy  and  Spain,  the  third  and  fourth-largest 
euro-area  economies,  which  have  seen  a  significant  rise  in  their  bond  yields.  Their 
governments have embarked on labour market reforms and spending cuts. But there is no 
room  for  complacency.  Flagging  eagerness  or  too  little  disclosure  of  looming  risks  will  be 
penalised immediately. We have to bear in mind that market pressure – together with political 
pressure – has fostered reforms and hopefully keeps them on track. 
By the same token, however, investors should have some patience for reform measures to 
unfold. True, we are now in the third year of the sovereign debt crisis, and too often precious 
time has been wasted. But we should not forget that the adverse developments that led to 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis  emerged  over  a  decade.  Clearly,  they  cannot  be  reversed  in  a 
matter of weeks. The road to recovery is long and uneven; backlashes are to be expected. 
Looking  at  Spain,  the  country  on  which  markets  are  focusing  presently,  I  wish  to 
acknowledge  that  the  government  has  already  taken  bold  steps  to  address  structural 
weaknesses, for example by overhauling some of the rigid labour rules. Yet it has become 
clear  that  the  Spanish  banking  system  needs  more  capital.  Therefore,  I  appreciate  the 
intention  of  the  Spanish  government  to  seek  financial  assistance  from  euro  area  member 
states. The financial assistance will be provided by the EFSF/ESM for the recapitalisation of 
Spanish financial institutions. Funds would not be provided directly to the banks but, in line 
with  current  EFSF/ESM  rules,  be  channelled  through  the  Spanish  state,  in  this  case  the 
restructuring  fund  FROB.  I  am  optimistic  that  this  package  will  effectively  mitigate  the 
negative feedback loops between the banks’ deleveraging and the real economy. But quick 
and decisive action is now warranted in Spain, and any further delay should be avoided, as 
the longer one waits, the more expensive it is likely to get. Conditionality only applies to the 
banking sector, but this makes it all the more important that the Spanish government itself 
pushes vigorously ahead with the reforms to tackle the structural problems of the Spanish 
economy. 
It is definitely not the task of the eurosystem to substitute for national fiscal policies. This is 
true with regard to Spain, and it is particularly true with regard to Greece. Greece must do 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
everything in its power to strengthen its competitiveness. The country needs to stick to the 
agreed  austerity  and  structural  reform  measures  –  no  ifs,  no  buts.  There  is  no  basis  for 
external aid without the agreed reform program. There can be no exception for Greece in this 
regard,  as  this  would  inevitably  undermine  the  balance  of  give-and-take  in  other  program 
countries, too. The repeat elections will show whether the Greek voters still support this way 
forward.  If  not,  Greece  must  be  aware  that  it  puts  further  aid  at  risk.  The  consequences 
would be severe, and most severe for Greece itself. 
As  the  Bundesbank  has  stressed  time  and  again,  the  way  Europe  deals  with  the  crisis  in 
Greece will have far-reaching implications for the nature of European Monetary Union as a 
stability  union.  This  is  a  deeply  political  question,  and  we  have  come  to  a  point  where 
policymakers  can  no  longer  avoid  taking  sides.  Attempting  to  dodge  this  decision  and 
muddling through as before no longer is an option. Rather, a further muddling through would 
also  be  an  –  implicit  –  response,  and  one  of  the  least  desirable  ones,  both  from  the 
perspective of a stability-oriented monetary policy and with regard to overcoming the crisis. 
A crucial question with regard to public finances in European Monetary Union is whether the 
right cure is to prescribe frontloaded consolidation for all euro-area countries. A considerable 
number of  experts are  vehemently  opposed to this approach. Paul Krugman, for example, 
sees the euro area spiralling into disaster. And George Soros is accusing many − including 
the Bundesbank, with its emphasis on frontloaded consolidation − of destroying the euro. 
It will hardly come as a surprise to you that I do not share such views. Rather, I suggest that 
dragging out fiscal adjustment would have major negative effects. Of course, it is correct to 
say that, in normal times, consolidation dampens economic growth. Current circumstances, 
however,  are  anything  but  normal,  and  it  is  an  illusion  to  believe  that  backloading 
consolidation  would  help  to  restore  confidence.  The  current  crisis  is  essentially  one  of 
confidence.  On  the  other  hand,  one  should  not  exaggerate  the  risks  of  a  more  restrictive 
fiscal  policy  stance,  all  the  more  so  as  the  rescue  packages  and  the  extremely 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  do  help  to  cushion  the  adjustment.  The  long-term 
benefits of frontloaded consolidation, I am convinced, will significantly exceed the short-run 
negative effects. 
Nevertheless, there is an ongoing discussion on whether the euro area should shift its focus 
from austerity towards growth. Indeed, the crisis cannot be overcome without growth. This is 
very much undeniable. What is now being hotly disputed is the question of what constitutes 
the right approach to stimulating growth. 
After ECB President Mario Draghi proposed a growth compact, he was getting applause from 
all quarters as long as he did not spell out what such a growth compact should comprise. He 
was not promoting a relaxation of the austerity course – either in programme countries or in 
countries  facing  close  market  scrutiny,  nor  in  countries  that  are  considered  to  have  more 
fiscal leeway. On the contrary: He denied the existence of a contradiction between the goals 
of  consolidation  and  growth.  Instead,  he  pointed  to  the  need  for  structural  reforms  in  all 
member  states  of  the  euro  area,  in  particular  concerning  product  markets  and  labour 
markets.  In  this  sense,  I  appreciate  the  Portuguese  Prime  Minister’s  support  for  Mario 
Draghi. He was quoted as saying: “There are no overnight structural reforms and the effects 
do  not  show  up  immediately,  but  we  know  that  our  capacity  to  grow  depends  on  these 
reforms. They are the ones we are implementing.” This could not have been expressed any 
better and clearer. 
And I am confident that, once the implementation of structural reforms has started, investors 
will  return  even  before  the  effects  of  these  reforms  have  fully  unfolded.  Those  who  are 
currently short in European sovereign debt and the euro will have to decide when the right 
time has come to go long again. 
The  second  requirement  for  a  lasting  solution  to  the  current  crisis  and  the  prevention  of 
future crises is the much needed strengthening of European Monetary Union’s institutional 
framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
For  me,  right  now,  it  has  become  evident  that  European  Monetary  Union’s  constitutional 
setting  is  far  from  being  sustainable.  To  make  European  Monetary  Union  sustainable  two 
paths can be followed that I will briefly discuss subsequently: truly improving the Maastricht 
Treaty or building the foundations of a fiscal union. 
With respect to the shortcomings that I have mentioned, we have already seen a number of 
accomplishments.  The  fiscal  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  have  been  reinforced. 
The introduction of a reversed majority rule, for example, makes it more difficult for countries 
with excessive deficits to avoid sanctions. Second, member states have agreed to launch a 
Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  in  the  euro  area.  The  purpose  of  macroeconomic 
surveillance  is  to  identify  potential  risks  early  on,  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  harmful 
imbalances,  and  to  correct  excessive  imbalances  that  already  exist.  Third,  the  Heads  of 
State and Government of the euro-area countries have agreed to “move towards a stronger 
economic  union”  and  have  announced  a  fiscal  compact.  The  key  component  of  the  fiscal 
compact is a further strengthening of the commitment to bring the budgets of the member 
states at least close to balance in structural terms. To this end, fiscal rules will be tightened 
further  at  the  EU  level,  and  new  rules  will  be  introduced  nationally.  The  UK  has, 
unfortunately, not agreed to the fiscal compact. However, I appreciate that the Irish voters 
have given their clear “yes”. 
While the fiscal compact is certainly a major step in the right direction, it is far from being the 
cornerstone of a “fiscal union” in the euro area. The fiscal compact aims at strengthening the 
current framework, but its success will hinge crucially on the member states’ willingness to 
implement and apply the rules. European authorities are not equipped with a supranational 
right to intervene in national budgets when member states do not apply the rules properly. 
Therefore, the fiscal compact – which has not been ratified by all member states yet – does 
not justify calls for monetary policymakers to further extend central banks’ balance sheets. 
Nor does it substantiate any extensive joint liability. 
Against  this  background  the  recent  proposals  of  a  so  called  banking  union  appear  to  be 
premature.  Such  a  banking  union,  potentially  comprising  a  euro  area  deposit-guarantee 
system, a euro area resolution fund and common euro area supervision for the largest and 
systemically important banking groups could very well represent a sensible step forward. Yet 
it  has  to  follow  a  deeper  fiscal  union  as  it  would  imply  significantly  increased  risk  sharing 
amongst  countries.  Introducing  a  banking  union  without  having  established  a  genuine, 
democratically legitimated fiscal union would risk undermining the no bail-out clause and the 
disciplining  effects  of  financial  markets  on  fiscal  policy.  From  a  formal  perspective  it 
necessitates amending the EU Treaty – meaning it is very unlikely to be a short-term fix to 
the current challenges mainly related to recapitalisation needs in some banking systems, to 
political risks and to contagion effects within the euro area. 
The  same  is  true  regarding  the  proposed  introduction  of  eurobonds.  This  is  where  I 
respectfully  disagree  with  Olivier  Blanchard,  the  IMF  chief  economist,  who  was  quoted  as 
saying: “… the Germans had good reason to reject bearing the brunt of irresponsible policies 
by other states. But now we have a fiscal treaty.” And he concluded: “The Germans should 
accept that the eurozone is going by way of eurobonds.” Under the current framework, the 
issuance  of  commonly  guaranteed  sovereign  bonds  would  actually  increase  the  existing 
mismatch  between  liability  and  control.  I  think,  that,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  euro-area 
governments have been reluctant to surrender their fiscal autonomy to a European authority. 
Conclusion 
4. 
The  euro  area  consists  of  independent  member  states.  Each  member  state  has  its  own 
constitutional  tradition  which  has  to  be  respected  by  its  government.  To  some  extent,  the 
status of the euro area is similar to the Articles of Confederation drawn up in the late 1770s, 
which legally established the United States of America and served as its first constitution. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We do not necessarily have to become a United States of Europe. It is quite possible that a 
reformed Maastricht framework of truly self-responsible member states – in other words, the 
European Monetary Union as it was planned to be – will guide us to a sustainable monetary 
union. Or the peoples of Europe might indeed make the leap to a substantial deepening of 
European integration, particularly in terms of economic and fiscal policies. Both options are 
viable. 
The decisions taken up to now do not yet indicate which direction Europe will take. However, 
there  is  absolutely  no  doubt  as  to  the  political  will  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  European 
Monetary  Union.  Especially  to  observers  from  outside  the  euro  area,  and  given  the  often 
slow decision-making processes, the strength of this commitment is underestimated. 
We in the euro area believe in the continuity of the euro. And if the euro area embarks on the 
necessary  reforms  that  I  have  outlined  today,  it  will  emerge  from  the  crisis  stronger  than 
ever. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
