Mark Carney: Bank note launch 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at the launch of the new 50 dollar bank note, Québec City, Québec, 
26 March 2012. 
 Hello and welcome. It is a pleasure to be here to announce the launch of the new 50 dollar 
bank  note.  This  bank  note  features  a  symbol  of  Canadian  innovation  and  scientific 
excellence: the Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker and research vessel, the Amundsen.  
Today is also a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Coast Guard. So we find ourselves 
in an ideal location, in Québec, a city with a rich maritime heritage. 
Icebreakers are an important part of the Coast Guard’s fleet, and it is entirely fitting to feature 
one on our currency. These new 50 dollar polymer bank notes, the second of our Frontiers 
series, will become available in banks throughout the country as of today. 
This series of bank notes is called “Frontiers” for two reasons. First, each bank note includes 
images  that  represent  Canada’s  exploits  and  achievements,  particularly  those  in  the 
sciences, technology or exploration. The image on this note is an example of expanding the 
frontiers of knowledge and understanding of the Arctic. 
The bank notes themselves have crossed a technological frontier. There is simply no other 
currency  like  it.  These  new  notes  feature  a  unique  combination  of  transparent  elements, 
holographic images, and other security features. They are the result of innovative technology 
and  Canadian  ingenuity,  including  research  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  excellent 
collaboration  among  physicists,  chemists,  engineers  and  other  experts  in  the  bank  note 
industry. 
Thanks  to  greatly  enhanced  security  features  and  efforts  undertaken  by  police  forces, 
especially  the  Sûreté  du  Québec  and  the  RCMP,  as  well  as  the  support  of  financial 
institutions and retailers, counterfeiting rates have been reduced by 90 per cent since 2004. 
Issuing this new series of bank notes enables us to continue to stay ahead of counterfeiters. 
In  addition  to  impressive  security  features  to  combat  counterfeiting,  these  notes  will  last 
longer than those made from paper – at least two-and-a-half times longer – and will therefore 
be more economical and have a smaller environmental footprint. When they are eventually 
withdrawn from circulation, they will be recycled into other products here in Canada. 
Safer, cheaper, and greener: indeed, these new bank notes are a 21st century achievement 
of which all Canadians should be proud and in which they can have full confidence. 
This last point is very important. According to Bank of Canada research, when Canadians 
shop, they use cash for more than half of their transactions. They need a currency they can 
trust and the bank notes of this series are the most secure ever developed in the history of 
the Bank of Canada. 
Let us move now to the images that are on these bank notes; the Bank consulted citizens 
throughout  their  development.  It  was  Canadians  who  told  us  they  liked  the  new  polymer 
material. And these citizens also gave us the ideas for themes. 
On the 50 dollar note you will see an image of the Amundsen, an icebreaker that keeps our 
oceans open to navigation. The Amundsen also undertakes search and rescue missions in 
the far north and serves as a research base where scientists from around the world come to 
work together. 
I  think  that  Roald  Amundsen,  the  great  Norwegian  explorer  of  both  poles,  would  be  very 
proud of the spirit of adventure, scientific excellence, and collaboration that are so apparent 
on the ship that bears his name. 
Thank you everyone for coming today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
