Yaseen Anwar: International regulatory initiatives to enhance global 
financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  9th  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  Summit,  hosted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, Istanbul, 16 May 2012. 
 Mr. Chairman, the Secretary General IFSB, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen!  
It is a pleasure and an honor to join you at this 9th IFSB Summit. I am greatful to IFSB for 
inviting  me  to  share  my  views  on  “international  regulatory  initiatives  to  enhance  global 
financial stability” with this esteemed audience. In my remarks today I will briefly discuss the 
events that lead to recent reforms, importance of regulatory initiative introduced so far and 
Pakistan’s standing.  
The  crises  that  hit  the  global  financial  landscape  during  2007  remains  the  worst  since  the 
great  depression  of  1930s.  Though  originating  from  financial  markets  and  innovative 
“opaque”  financial  products,  it  impacted  virtually  every  aspect  of  the  world  economy  with 
consequences affecting the masses. The instruments that were meant to disperse financial 
risks instead allowed financial institutions in general and the banking system in particular to 
become highly leveraged that ultimately lead to financial meltdown. As a result, it not only put 
the innovations in the financial markets under  the spotlight, but also singled-out regulatory 
and  supervisory  weaknesses  in  assessing  the  risks  associated  with  financial  institutions, 
markets  and  innovative  financial  products.  The  Euro  region  still  faces  the  effects  of  the 
financial  turbulence  in  the  form  of  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  fragile  GDP  growth  and  the 
unemployment data in the UK, USA and other crisis hit advanced economies still falls short 
of the pre-crisis level. 
On  a  positive  note,  the  financial  crisis  provided  valuable  lessons  for  improving  the 
effectiveness  of  financial  system  regulation  and  supervision.  To  policymakers,  it  reminded 
that the present state of the international financial system requires a complete overhaul of 
the functioning of the markets and institutions. From supervisory perspectives, it showed that 
the available prudential regulations are simply  not effective and prudent enough to ensure 
financial system stability.  
The lessons learnt from the financial crisis signify the far-reaching changes in the structure 
and functioning of the financial systems and institutions. The international regulatory bodies 
including Financial Stability Board (FSB), IMF and BIS along with national supervisory bodies 
have  developed  a  set  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms  that  aim  at  increasing  the 
effectiveness  of  financial  sector  supervision.  Furthermore,  the  G-20  leaders  at  various 
Summits have endorsed the policy framework recommended by FSB and BCBS, which has 
made countries reach a consensus on the selection of a reforms agenda. Much of the focus 
of  the  reforms  is  on  improving  the  soundness  of  the  banking  system,  addressing  the 
Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs), developing macroprudential policy tools, 
strengthening  accounting  standards,  disclosure 
resolution 
framework.  
We know that excessive leveraging by the banking sector, particularly in advanced countries 
was one of the key reasons that lead to the recent crisis. Banks took excessive on and off-
balance sheet exposures while maintaining an inferior quality of capital base with insufficient 
liquidity  buffers.  In  order  to  avoid  such  situations  in  the  future,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  introduced  fundamental  reforms  in  the  Basel  II  capital 
adequacy  regime  by  issuing  a  number  of  reforms  and  enhancements  of  the  existing  the 
Basel  framework.  These  enhancements  commonly  referred  to  as  Basel  III  are  aimed  at 
requirements  and  crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
raising  the  level  and  quality  of  capital,  introduction  of  leverage  ratio,  capital  conservation 
buffer, counter cyclical capital buffer and liquidity coverage and net stable funding ratios.  
Similarly,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  national  supervisory  authorities  and  small  and  medium 
sized banks and to avoid a sudden credit crunch in already fragile economies, the BCBS also 
set a rather relaxed timeline from 2013 to 2019 for the adoption of Basel III. It is therefore 
expected  that  increased  capital  requirements  and  further  consolidation  in  international 
banking  will  prove  to  be  a  major  step  towards  promoting  financial  stability.  However  since 
Basel III only affects banks, the regulators of other financial sectors such as insurance are 
expected to encourage the implementation of solvency II for insurance companies in order to 
reduce the presence of shadow banking and restrict the risk to move towards less regulated 
entities or creating regulatory arbitrage.  
In recent times, an important reforms measure being pursued is to improve regulation and 
oversight  of  Shadow  Institutions,  so  as  to  limit  arbitrage  opportunities,  arising  from  the 
transfer of risk to relatively less regulated areas/sectors. The regulators therefore, are now 
focusing on minimizing the regulatory gaps in the shadow banking framework. To bridge this 
gap, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) is working closely on the development of an effective 
regulatory regime for shadow banking system that would largely focus on a) mitigating any 
spill-over between regular and shadow banking as banks are part of the intermediation chain 
of the shadow banking sector, b) reducing buildup of leverage in shadow banking through 
securitization,  c)  assessing  systemic  risk  posed  by  shadow  banking,  d)  reducing  pro-
cyclicality  incentives  posed  by  secured  lending  (REPOs)  and  e)  reducing  vulnerability  of 
Money Market funds to possible runs. 
While focusing on improving the soundness of financial institutions, the reforms emphasized 
heavily  on  the  global  and  national Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs)  and 
the moral hazards they pose while being vulnerable. Since the initiation of reforms, there has 
been  considerable  debate  on  the  identification  of  SIFIs  and  the  institutions  that  have  the 
capacity to become SIFIs. Factors such as institution size, suitability and interconnectedness 
including “time varying judgment based assessments” have been prescribed for identification 
of SIFIs. Under the new reforms agenda, emphasis is on changing Too Big To Fail (TBTF) 
status  of  SIFIs  and  for  devising  a  resolution  regime  as  well  as  a  safe  exit  mechanism  for 
these entities. Further, supervisory authorities are focusing on enhanced supervision of SIFIs 
to  mitigate  the  financial  risks  propagated  by  them  through  interconnectedness  with  other 
institutions  that  cause  system-wide  distress.  Similarly  a  multipronged  strategy  has  been 
adopted for addressing the risks posed by G-SIFIs (Global SIFIs) that comprise development 
of  a  new  international  standard  for  resolution  regimes,  more  intensive  and  effective 
supervision,  and  requirements  for  cross-border  cooperation,  recovery,  and  resolution 
planning.  The  reforms  also  impose  a  cost  on  the  SIFIs  in  the  form  of  increased  capital 
requirements ranging from 1% to 2.5% of Risk Weighted Assets for enjoying economies of 
scale  and  scope  and  to  have  higher  loss  absorbing  capacity.  As  per  FSB  and  BCBS 
assessment, the long term economic benefits of this additional capital requirement in terms 
of greater resilience of these institutions far exceed the modest temporary decline of GDP 
over the implementation horizon.  
Another  significant  regulatory  initiative  in  the  post-crisis  period  has  been  greater  focus  on 
adopting a macroprudential framework along with traditional inflation targeting and monetary 
policy  models.  Central  banks  and  regulatory  bodies  who  traditionally  have  been  using 
microprudential  tools  to  ensure  financial  system  stability  are  now  increasingly  using 
macroprudential  tools  along  with  traditional  microprudential  tools  to  ensure  the  soundness 
and stability of the financial system. The scope of the macroprudential policy framework is 
very broad and includes (a) identifying, monitoring and limiting systemic risks, (b) designing 
and  calibrating 
for  executing  macroprudential  policies  and  (c)  building 
institutional and governance arrangements. 
instruments 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Though  at  initial  stage,  the  macroprudential  framework  has  already  started  delivering  key 
results including broader coverage of central bank financial stability analysis and monitoring 
of systemic risks. Furthermore, much work is done in closing data gaps and coming up with 
techniques  to  assess  systemic  risks  and  development  of  new  macroprudential  tools  that 
have  the  capacity  to  identify  systemic  risk  in  a  forward-looking  way.  The  stress  testing 
frameworks  have  also  been  redesigned  by  the  regulators  that  incorporate  extreme  shocks 
(tail risk) to capture systemic risk and to identify the effects of macroeconomic vulnerabilities 
on individual institutions as well as on the overall financial system. However, the challenging 
task of building institutional and governance arrangements call for additional debate among 
policy makers. 
The post crisis reforms also stress the need to improve and bring uniformity in international 
accounting standards.  In  this  regard,  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB) 
and  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  initiated  a  convergence  project  of 
their  accounting  standards  and  practices.  The  FSB  made  recommendations  for  converged 
accounting standards of IASB and FASB in four areas including lending activities, impairment 
of financial assets, addressing valuation uncertainty in fair value measurement guidance and 
offsetting/netting  of  financial  instruments.  Accordingly,  the  IASB  and  the  FASB  are  jointly 
developing a common impairment model to assess and record the impairment in the value of 
financial assets/instruments. Both Boards have also agreed to expand the scope of their joint 
project  of  financial  instruments  to  address  netting  financial  assets  and  liabilities  on  the 
statement of financial position. 
Furthermore, disclosure requirements have also been revisited in the reforms agenda. Much 
of  the  focus  has  been  on  improved  disclosures  on  structured  credit  products,  instruments 
and  exposures  taken  in  Special  Purpose  Entities  (SPEs),  and  on-  and  off-  balance  sheet 
items of banks. Similarly, Basel III also improved its disclosure requirements for exposures in 
securitization,  off-balance  sheet  exposures  and  exposures  in  asset-backed  papers  and 
mortgage-backed securities. In a recent survey organized by the FSB it was found that the 
disclosure  recommendations  have  improved  the  disclosure  practices  in  certain  OECD 
countries. However, it is felt that the disclosure on SPE securitization and exposure before 
and after hedging need certain improvements.  
The financial crisis resolution framework has also been revisited in the post-crisis period and 
its scope has been enhanced to an integrated crisis management and resolution framework. 
Similarly,  the  FSB  has  put  forward  the  principles  for  cross-border  cooperation  on  crisis 
management that includes effective coordination amongst the national supervisory agencies, 
central  banks  and  government  finance  ministries  for  making  advanced  preparations  for 
managing the financial crises.  
In  the  backdrop  of  the  recent  Global  Financial  Crises,  the  remuneration  of  Directors  and 
Executives  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  have  lately  come  under  scrutiny  around  the 
globe. In order to put things in the right direction, there has been a growing effort globally to 
address  the  issues  related  to  rationalization  of  compensation  in  the  financial  sector. 
Institutions like BIS, FSB and many national regulators like FSA, APRA and HKMA, among 
others, have made purposeful attempts to bring the issue of excessive remunerations to the 
forefront  and  make  it  more  transparent  and  fair,  not  only  by  making  enhanced  disclosure 
requirements,  but  also  drawing  a  detailed  structure  of  requirements  and  guidelines  for 
determining  the  remuneration  and  compensation  of  executives.  FSB  issued  “Principles  for 
Sound  Compensation  Practices”  in  April  2009  and  relevant  “Implementation  Standards”  in 
September  2009. Both these documents were later adopted in a consolidated form by the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in January 2010.  
Pakistan is a small, open economy, with domestically an active financial sector with limited 
interconnectedness with advanced economies. Like many other developing countries, it did 
not face the direct impact of the crisis on its banking system and financial markets. In terms 
of banking concentration, top 5 banks (all locally incorporated) account for 51% of industry 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
assets;  while  foreign  assets  of  the  system  are  10.4%  of  total  assets.  Moreover  locally-
incorporated  banks  and  most  foreign  branches  don’t  have  significant  exposures  to  the 
complex  financial  assets  that  caused  the  financial  meltdown  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe.  SBP 
has  always  required  banks  to  meet  higher  capital  and  liquidity  standards,  exceeding 
international norms in several areas. More importantly, we have a strong legal framework, 
which  has  been  tested  for  effectiveness  during  the  last  decade  and  half.  SBP  has 
successfully restructured a number of banks, successfully demonstrating the problem bank 
resolution regime.  
SBP  being  the  regulator  of  the  banking  sector,  has  introduced  and  implemented  key 
regulatory reforms and prudential measures to ensure financial system stability. Further, in 
order  to  align  its  regulatory  framework  with  international  regulatory  standards  and  best 
practices, it regularly reviews and evaluates the standards issued by them for their possible 
implementation keeping in view our own local legal, regulatory and economic environment.  
Similarly, SBP has taken steps to improve the effectiveness of macroprudential supervision 
by  revising  its  prudential  regulations  like  rationalization  of  loan  classification  and  loan  loss 
provisioning  requirements  whereby  the  loan  loss  provisioning  framework  was  made  more 
stringent  during  economic  booms  and  relaxed  during  stressed  economic  conditions.  In 
addition, SBP has devised a stress testing mechanism that not only stress tests the solvency 
and liquidity profile of the banking system under various extreme scenarios but also conducts 
macroeconomic stress testing under which macroeconomic indicators are set to influence the 
financials and solvency and liquidity profile of the banks.  
We are also working on the subject of Consolidated Supervision of Conglomerates having 
direct  or  indirect  holdings  or  influence  on  banks  through  shareholdings  as  well  as  large 
exposures. A legal framework is being formulated in consultation and coordination with the 
regulator of the non-banking sector i.e., Securities and Exchange Commission. We believe 
that  this  framework  will  provide  an  overarching  supervisory  control  over  the  major 
stakeholders  of  the  financial  services.  Additionally,  the  disclosure  standards  for  banks  are 
being revised to make performance of the banks more transparent and management of the 
banks more accountable. 
While  the  regulatory  reforms  agenda  being  pursued  vigorously  by  policy  makers  and 
regulatory  bodies  across  the  globe  is  likely  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  and  may 
possibly be instrumental in preventing financial crisis in the foreseeable future, history says 
that  reforms  initiated  after  each  crisis  could  not  prevent  the  next  crisis  and  each  time  the 
nature  and  dimension  of  the  crisis  was  different  from  the  earlier  ones.  This  suggests  that 
there may be fundamental and structural problems with the financial system like risk transfer 
rather  than  risk  sharing,  development  of  speculative  products  in  the  name  of  risk 
management instruments (derivatives), allowing unprecedented growth of the financial sector 
without any comparable growth in the real sector etc. Incidentally, these are some of the key 
features and principles of Islamic Finance as it believes in risk sharing, encourages growth of 
the  financial  sector  in  tandem  with  the  real  sector  and  prohibits  investment  in  speculative 
activities.  I  would  thus  suggest  that  national  and  international  supervisory  authorities  to 
objectively  evaluate  the  potential  of  Islamic  Finance  principles  in  mitigating  the  existential 
risks  faced  by  the  financial  system.  I  would  also  request  Islamic  Finance  scholars  and 
practitioners to reach out to their conventional counterparts to highlight the potential of the 
Islamic Finance system addressing the issues faced by the financial system.  
Finally, I will reiterate that every crisis brings an opportunity, and it is upon us how we benefit 
from  it.  Let  this  crisis  be  the  one  whose  lessons  help  us  in  improving  the  soundness  and 
stability of international and domestic financial systems.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
