Andreas Dombret: Global rules for global financial markets 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  as  a  response  to  the  Note  of  the  Pontifical  Council  of  Justice  and  Peace, 
Frankfurt am Main, 19 September 2012. 
 I  was  asked  to  share  my  views  today  on  the  note  of  the  Pontifical  Council  of  Justice  and 
Peace on reforming the international financial and monetary system. 
Lack of global financial regulation 
I highly welcome the general tone of the Pontifical Council’s note which stresses the need for 
the financial sector to serve the overall economy and, accordingly, the common good. With 
respect to financial regulation, the note rightly points to the lack of truly global regulation for 
global  financial  markets  as  a  key  factor  for  the  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2007.  While 
financial  markets  around  the  globe  became  more  and  more  integrated and  interconnected 
over  past  decades,  financial  regulation  remained  largely  national  –  despite  of  ongoing 
coordination efforts in international committees and groupings. The crisis highlighted some 
inefficiencies of international coordination in financial regulation and necessitated numerous 
ad-hoc interventions by public authorities. Those events made clear that although rules and 
regulations  were  partly  agreed  on  internationally,  their  transition  into  national  rules  and 
legislation  was  fragmented  and,  at  times,  even  inconsistent.  Not  surprisingly,  financial 
institutions  had  a  strong  incentive  to  engage  in  regulatory  arbitrage.  An  internationally 
coordinated regulatory response is therefore warranted.  
Minimum body of internationally agreed rules 
I agree with the conclusion of the Pontifical Council that we need a minimum, shared body of 
rules and regulations for global financial markets. But one size does not fit all. Accordingly, 
and in line with the principle of subsidiarity, the rules should be set at the international level 
but allow for sufficient flexibility to adapt them to peculiarities of national financial systems. 
However, I do not see the need to create a new “global authority” for that purpose. Over the 
past years, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has emerged as the central body coordinating 
the  international  financial  sector  reform  agenda  set  in  train  by  G20  Leaders  at  their 
Washington Summit in 2008 and further developed at subsequent meetings. The FSB brings 
together international institutions and standard-setting bodies as well as regulators, central 
bankers  and  finance  ministers  from  advanced  and  emerging  economies  with  the  most 
important financial sectors globally. In the meantime, the FSB has gained a track record and 
several important cornerstones of the reform agenda have been set in place. Take the policy 
framework for dealing with systemically important financial institutions or the new regulatory 
standard  for  bank  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  –  commonly  termed  as  Basel  III  –  as 
examples. G20 Leaders, in late 2011, agreed to further strengthen the FSB’s role in order to 
enable  it  to  keep  pace  with  its  growing  role  in  promoting  the  development  and 
implementation of regulation. Accordingly, in June 2012, G20 Leaders endorsed the FSB’s 
recommendations  on  strengthening  its  capacity,  resources  and  governance.  I  strongly 
support  the  further  development  of  the  FSB  because  I  am  convinced  that  it  will  further 
improve  the  elaboration  of  international  rules  and  regulations  as  well  as  international 
cooperation in regulation and supervision and help to achieve an international level playing 
field. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Rigorous monitoring of national implementation 
While rule-making at the international level is a necessary condition for financial stability, it is 
by no means sufficient. For the rules to be effective, they have to be translated in national 
laws  and  regulations  in  a  timely  and  consistent  manner.  Therefore,  we  need  to  strictly 
monitor  implementation,  disclose  the  respective  findings,  and  let  peer  pressure  work  its 
magic.  The  FSB  and  international  standard-setting  bodies  have  jointly  developed  a 
coordination framework  for  implementation  monitoring  to  ensure  consistent  implementation 
of  the  reform  agenda.  As  another  important  part  of  implementation  monitoring,  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  together  with  the  World  Bank  is  regularly  assessing  the 
adherence  of  its  member  countries  to  international  standards.  Thereby,  the  Fund  is 
promoting  international  monetary  cooperation  and  exchange  rate  stability.  In  response  to 
weaknesses detected during the financial crisis, the Fund initiated various reforms with the 
aim  of  strengthening  its  internal  governance  as  well  as  its  analytical  capabilities.  I  highly 
welcome those reforms which will further improve the Fund’s work. 
To sum up, I regard strengthening existing bodies in the field of global financial regulation 
and the international monetary system as the right way forward for two main reasons. Firstly, 
it  allows  building  upon  the  substantial  expertise  gathered  in  existing  institutions.  Secondly, 
jurisdictions are obviously reluctant to further cede national sovereignty to a supra-national 
level. The enduring debate about the creation of a fiscal union in Europe is providing just one 
vivid example in this regard. Accordingly, the creation of a global regulatory authority does 
not seem to be practical at this point in time. Moreover, I regard the current practice of setting 
rules  for  the  global  financial  markets  as  appropriate.  In  a  first  step,  set  the  rules  at  the 
international level. As a second step, rigorously monitor their translation in national laws and 
regulations to ensure consistency and a global level playing field. As I have pointed out, we 
have adequate institutions at the global level to fulfill these tasks, so currently I do not see 
the need to create new authorities for that purpose. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
