Hirohide Yamaguchi: European debt problem and its impact on Asia 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
8th Tokyo-Beijing Forum, Tokyo, 2 July 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving me  an  opportunity to  speak  at the  8th  Tokyo-Beijing Forum. Today, I 
will  talk  about  the  European  debt  problem’s  spillover  to  Asia  and  measures  taken  to 
address it. 
Essence of the European debt problem 
I. 
The  European  debt  problem  is  a  rapid  correction  process  of  three  things  which  emerged 
under  the  unified  currency  euro,  namely,  excessive  financial  expansion,  profligate  fiscal 
spending, and ineffective economy. 
In  the  process,  in  the  European  Union  (EU),  mainly 
in  Southern  European  countries, 
financial contraction, fiscal austerity, and economic stagnation occurred simultaneously, and 
an adverse feedback loop has been formed among the three. That adverse feedback loop is 
the essence of the European debt problem and when and how the loop can be cut off are 
the key to solving the problem. 
Future of the European debt problem 
II. 
While  fiscal  integration  and  financial  integration  have  been  under  discussion  within  the 
EU toward a fundamental solution of the European debt problem, the discussions are likely 
to have a long and bumpy way to go. 
There  seems  to  be  two  risks  to  the  way. One  is  the  so-called  tail  risk  of  international 
financial  and  capital  markets  tumbling  into  turmoil  and  the  global  economy  deteriorating 
substantially.  The  other  is  strains  in  financial  and  capital  markets  might  continue,  albeit 
intermittently,  and  the  global  economy  might  not  recover  solidly.  Of  course,  given  the 
efforts by the countries concerned, the first risk can hardly manifest itself. However, there is 
not a remote possibility that the second risk will become a reality. 
In the wake of the agreement reached at the EU summit, international financial and capital 
markets are regaining stability for now. However, the fundamental solution of the problem is 
yet to be achieved. There still seems to be a jittery sentiment at the root of the markets. 
European debt problem’s spillover to Asia 
III. 
In Europe, the adverse feedback loop among private finance, public finance, and economic 
activity has  been  at  work and financial  and  capital markets  have  still  basically been  jittery. 
Needless to say, such a situation has been affecting the Asian region including Japan and 
China. 
First, economic stagnation in Europe has led to put downward pressure, directly or indirectly, 
on economic activity in the form of a decline in exports from Asian to European countries. In 
particular,  there  seems  to  be  not  a  small  impact  on  China,  which  relies  heavily  on 
exports to European countries. 
Second, the effects of financial contraction in Europe, especially deleveraging of European 
financial  institutions,  are  a  matter  of  concern. While  the  presence  of  European  financial 
institutions is not so large in Japan and China, there are some other Asian countries that rely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
heavily  on  those  institutions. At  this  stage,  as  the  pace  of  deleveraging  by  European 
financial institutions has been moderate and Japanese financial institutions have partly been 
substituting such deleveraging, funding conditions of Asian firms have not been deteriorating 
substantially. However, changes in Europe might change the situation drastically. 
Third,  moves  in  international  financial  and  capital  markets.  A  decline  in  stock  prices 
contains  private  consumption  and  other  forms  of  economic  activity  through  the  negative 
wealth effect. Changes in foreign exchange rates, for example, a substantial yen appreciation 
might, especially for Japan’s economy, worsen corporate profits and put downward pressure 
on  economic  activity.  In  addition,  it  is  very  likely  that  a  jittery  market  sentiment  itself  will 
make Asian economic entities’ sentiment cautious, thereby containing their spending. 
Japan’s and China’s efforts 
IV. 
Like that, the European debt problem has been affecting substantially both the Chinese and 
Japanese  economies. Therefore,  for  both  China  and  Japan,  it  is  extremely  important  that 
the  European  debt  problem  will  be  fundamentally  solved  as  soon  as  possible. Toward 
achieving fiscal soundness and financial system stability, I believe it  necessary to urge the 
EU to further accelerate their efforts. 
Meanwhile,  from  a  viewpoint  of  minimizing  the  spillover  of  the  European  debt  problem  to 
Asia,  first  of  all,  each  Asian  country has  to  make  policy responses  properly on  both  fiscal 
and  financial  fronts  to  cope  with  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity.  In  addition,  in 
order  to  maintain  the  financial  facilitation  in  Asia,  I  believe  there  is  not  a  small  role 
Japanese  financial  institutions  should  play. In  fact,  based  on  such  judgment,  Japanese 
major  banks  have  been  actively  providing  loans. If  those  responses  are  smoothly  carried 
out,  a  risk  that  economic  entities’  sentiment  becomes  substantially  cautious  could  be 
reduced. 
Of course, from  a long-term  perspective, it will be necessary to consider a  case  that, if by 
any chance, an extremely large negative shock emerges from Europe. In Asia, trading ties 
have  been  further  deepened,  along  with  the  development  of  supply  chains. It  also  means 
that, as revealed during the earthquake disaster in Japan and the flooding in Thailand, once 
the supply chains are disrupted for some reasons, there will be a large negative impact on 
economic activity in Asia as a whole. As already seen in some firms, it will be critical to take 
action including diversifying supply chains. 
In  addition,  preparations  should  be  made  for  possible  massive  capital  outflows. While  a 
safety  net  has  been  improving  in  recent  years  through  various  initiatives  including  Chiang 
Mai  Initiative,  it  is necessary to  continue to think  very hard  about how to promote regional 
cooperation in order to enhance the robustness of financial markets and financial systems. 
In  that  regard,  I  realize  that  a  viewpoint  of  ensuring  stability  of  the  settlement  system  has 
become more important than ever before. Japan and China are required to take the role of 
leading various efforts. 
Concluding remarks  
I  have  talked  about the European  debt  problem’s  spillover  to  Asia  and  measures taken  to 
address it. In conclusion, let me add that fiscal sustainability will be a solid basis for ensuring 
economic stability in a country or a region, and, from a central bank’s standpoint, the stability 
of the financial system will be extremely important. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
