Peter Pang: Launch of the new cross-border collateral management 
service 
Remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary,  at  the 
cross-border  collateral  management  service  signing  ceremony  and  press  conference, 
Hong Kong, 20 June 2012. 
 Mr. Grimonpont, Mr. Bhatia, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  afternoon.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  signing  ceremony.  The  bilateral 
agreements  that  I  shall  sign  on  behalf  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  with  the 
Euroclear  Bank  and  J.P.Morgan  today  will  pave  the  way  for  the  launch  of  the  new 
cross-border collateral management service, a critical building block of the cross-border bond 
investment and settlement platform launched in March 2012. 
The  new  service,  which  will  commence  on  25  June,  will  bring  significant  benefits  to  the 
contracting partners and the money market as a whole. For Hong Kong, it will advance the 
development of our repo market, enhance the stability of our financial system and strengthen 
further Hong Kong’s role as the global hub for offshore renminbi business. 
The repo market is a key component of major international financial centres. It serves as the 
link  between  the  money  and  capital  markets,  and  is  vital  to  the  well  functioning  of  the 
financing  channels.  By  providing  credit  enhancement  through  the  use  of  securities  as 
collateral,  the  repo  market  also  serves  as  the  lubricant  that  keeps  the  financial  engine 
running  particularly  during  times  of  risk  aversion.  The  new  collateral  management  service, 
with  its  cross-border,  cross-system,  cross-time  zone  and  cross-currency  capabilities,  will 
provide an efficient repo infrastructure that will help develop the repo market in Hong Kong. 
The importance of the repo market as a financing channel has assumed added prominence 
since the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008. Due to a combination of the large 
inflows of funds into Hong Kong in late 2008 and early 2009 and heightened risk aversion, 
the  interbank  money  market  has  been  less  active  in  recent  years  and  financial  institutions 
have  been  more  careful  in  lending  funds  to  each  other  on  an  uncollateralized  basis.  The 
average daily turnover of the uncollateralized interbank market has dropped significantly, by 
71%  from  HK$286  billion  in  November  2007  to  HK$83  billion  in  March  2012.  The  higher 
frequency of flight to quality, and resultant tightness in the global supply of US dollar, has 
also affected turnover in the currency swap market. The average daily turnover of the Hong 
Kong dollar swap market also reduced notably by 32% from HK$263 billion to HK$179 billion 
in the same period. While the Hong Kong banking sector is now faced with ample liquidity, 
the situation will not be permanent and we will need to find new ways to facilitate efficient 
interbank borrowing. Development of the repo market will help to activate the money market 
by addressing the credit risk through the collateralized arrangement. 
The  cross-border  funding  issue  is  particularly  important  to  Hong  Kong  given  its  role  as  an 
international banking centre. 139 of the 199 authorized institutions in Hong Kong are either 
branches or subsidiaries of banking groups incorporated outside of the territory. An important 
function of the new service is to enable financial institutions to make use of securities held in 
one  of  the  partner  systems  as  collateral  to  conduct  secured  borrowing  in  the  Hong  Kong 
dollar  or  renminbi  in  Hong  Kong.  As  an  example,  a  bank  in  Europe  can  make  use  of  its 
securities held with Euroclear Bank or J.P. Morgan to borrow Hong Kong dollar to meet the 
liquidity  needs  of  its  Hong  Kong  subsidiary.  The  enhanced  capability  of  authorized 
institutions to manage the liquidity needs in the local currency, no doubt, will help to maintain 
financial stability in Hong Kong.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The facility will also substantially strengthen Hong Kong’s role as the global hub for offshore 
renminbi  business.  Being  the  first  mover  in  developing  offshore  renminbi  business,  Hong 
Kong  has  the  largest  offshore  renminbi  liquidity  pool,  amounting  to RMB  674  billion  at  the 
end of April 2012, and has developed a vibrant CNH market and the largest offshore RMB 
bond market. More foreign banks are either choosing to have a base in Hong Kong or are 
using RMB correspondent banking services provided by banks in Hong Kong. As at the end 
of May 2012, there were 196 banks participating in Hong Kong’s renminbi clearing platform. 
Of these, 170 are foreign-owned or located overseas. At the same time, over 1,100 renminbi 
correspondent accounts were maintained by overseas banks with banks in Hong Kong. The 
amount  due  to  and  due  from  such  overseas  banks  amounted  to  RMB  128  billion  and 
RMB 146 billion respectively. This is a clear indication that banks from around the world are 
using Hong Kong’s robust platform and large liquidity pool to offer renminbi services to their 
customers at home.  
As more and more companies and financial institutions conduct business and transactions in 
the renminbi, we will see an increasing number of financial centres offering offshore renminbi 
business in different parts of the world. These centres can benefit significantly from having 
an access to the offshore renminbi platform and liquidity pool in Hong Kong. The HKMA is 
taking proactive steps to aid the private sector in this endeavour. The private sector led Hong 
Kong  –  London  Forum  is  an  excellent  example  of  this  effort.  The  Forum  just  held  its  first 
meeting in Hong Kong in May this year, and agreed on a number of joint actions in the areas 
of  renminbi  liquidity,  payment  and  settlement  arrangements  and  development  of  products 
and services, to bring mutual benefits to the growth of offshore renminbi business in Hong 
Kong  and  London.  One  of  the  key  action  points  agreed  at  the  Forum  is  to  expand 
cross-market  renminbi  funding  activities  through  the  cross-border  collateral  management 
arrangement  that  will  be  launched  jointly  by  the  HKMA,  Euroclear  and  J.P.  Morgan  on 
25 June. 
The HKMA is delighted to work with Euroclear Bank and J.P.Morgan, the two premier global 
tripartite repo system operators, to bring this concept to fruition. With security pools valued at 
EUR 10.8 trillion and US$ 17.9 trillion respectively, both institutions provide a huge reservoir 
and  a  highly  sophisticated  platform  to  support  cross-border  cross  currency  lending  with 
ample choices of securities as collateral. Linked up by the HKMA’s Central Moneymarkets 
Unit  (CMU)  as  an  agent,  CMU  members  will  be  able  to  enjoy  the  collateral  management 
service  of  the  global  repo  operators  which  include  functions  like  auto-selection  and 
auto-substitution  of  collateral,  collateral  eligibility  filters,  daily  mark-to-market  and  prudent 
haircut  execution,  all  of  which  will  help  financial  institutions  in  their  collateral  management 
processes. 
As a further development, we are working with our two partners to expand the repo service to 
allow financial institutions in Hong Kong to use their securities kept with the CMU, Euroclear 
and J.P. Morgan as collateral to obtain foreign currency liquidity such as US dollars from the 
global broker dealers in the second half of 2012. This will help local companies and financial 
institutions to obtain foreign currency liquidity as they expand their business overseas. 
Finally,  the  HKMA  has  a  long  term  vision  for  repo  financing  to  become  a  more  important 
source of funding for companies and banks in Hong Kong. It is in Hong Kong’s and Asia’s 
long-term  interest  to  promote  further  development  of  the  repo  market,  underpinned  by  a 
closer  integration  with  overseas  markets  to  enable  a  wider  variety  of  collateral  to  be 
mobilized  across  borders  and  currencies.  In  this  regard,  the  HKMA  will  continue  to  work 
closely with the industry to advance the repo market with a dual aim to provide a safe and 
more resilient source of funding, as well as to foster financial stability of the region.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
