Erdem Başçi: Latest economic outlook and macroeconomic 
developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the January 2012 Inflation 
Report press conference, Istanbul, 31 January 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome  to  the  press  conference  held  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the  January 
2012 Inflation Report. As required by our new communications policy, we will hold two of the 
four  inflation  report  press  conferences  in  Istanbul,  all  of  which  used  to  be  held  in  Ankara 
before.  I  will  now  present  an  overview  of  the  first  inflation  report  of  2012,  which  will  be 
published on our web-site shortly.  
The Report summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, shares 
our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term  inflation 
forecasts which have been revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along with 
our  monetary  policy  stance.  Moreover,  the  Report  includes  eleven  boxes  which  entail 
interesting and up-to-date analyses on various topics. For instance, there is an analysis on 
the functioning of our recent liquidity management policy and its effects on financial markets. 
There is also a box exploring the sources of changes in inflation forecasts in the previous 
year, which is a topic included in the first inflation report every year. Another box examines 
the base effects that will play a major role in the course of inflation in 2012. Also, there is a 
box that scrutinizes the steps taken to solve the debt problem in the euro area, which points 
out to the role of structural problems such as the marked divergence in member countries’ 
competitiveness in hindering stable growth in the euro area. There is also a box exploring the 
rebalancing  process  in  domestic  and  external  demand  thanks  to  the  policies  implemented 
last  year.  Titles  of the  boxes  are  shown  on  the slide.  All  of these  boxes  include  important 
analyses. They will be published on our web-site shortly and I strongly recommend that you 
read them. 
Considering  the  ongoing  major  role  of  the  developments  in  the  global  economy  on  our 
policies, I would like to start with the global economic outlook. 
Since  the  publication  of  the  October  2011  Inflation  Report,  concerns  over  sovereign  debt 
sustainability across the euro area have continued to weigh on the global economic outlook 
despite  the  implementation  of  various  policy  measures.  Growth  forecasts  were  revised 
downwards  at  a  global  scale  particularly  in  the  euro  area  economies  (Chart  1).  Thus, 
perceptions  for  a  further  delay  in  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies grew stronger. Notwithstanding a relative improvement in the risk appetite as of 
the  onset  of  2012,  uncertainties  regarding  the  solution  of  euro  area  problems  persist. 
Coupled with the increased risk of contagion, this feeds into the fragility in global financial 
markets, highlighting the significance of a flexible monetary policy framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 1.  
Revisions to Growth Rate Forecasts in Advanced 
and Emerging Economies* 
(Percent, GDP-Weighted Average) 
 * Dashed lines show the forecasts using the expectation figures in 
the  previous  quarter  while  the  dotted  lines  show  the  revised 
forecasts  using  the  updated  expectation  figures.  Advanced 
Economies: U.S.A., EU, and Japan. Emerging Economies: China, 
India,  Brazil,  South  Korea,  Mexico,  Russia,  Turkey,  Poland, 
Indonesia,  South  Africa,  Thailand,  Malaysia, 
Israel,  Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Colombia, Philippines. 
Source: Consensus Forecasts, CBRT. 
Monetary Policy Developments and Monetary Conditions 
1. 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) has aimed at engineering the economy 
gradually towards a more balanced growth composition against the macro financial risks that 
aggravated  in  the  first  half  of  2011.  Accordingly,  with  the  support  of  other  institutions, 
necessary  measures  were  taken  to  bring  loan  growth  rates  to  reasonable  levels. 
Furthermore,  policies  were  geared  towards  preventing  exchange  rates  from  moving  away 
from economic fundamentals excessively on either side (Charts 2 and 3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 2. 
TL and Emerging Market 
Currencies*  
(Against the USD, Value of 
01.10.2010 = 1) 
Chart 3. 
Loan Growth Rate*  
(13-Week Moving Average, 
Annualized, Percent) 
  *  Average  of  emerging  market  currencies 
including  Brazil,  Chile,  Czech  Republic, 
Hungary,  Mexico,  Poland,  South  Africa, 
Indonesia,  South  Korea  and  Colombia, 
against  USD.  Increases  denote  depreciation 
of the currency.  
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
*Adjusted for the exchange rate effect. 
 Source: CBRT. 
Data  released  for  2011  point  that  the  desired  rebalancing  process  in  the  economy  has 
already started. Accordingly, the contribution of net exports to growth increased notably, and 
the current account balance posted a noteworthy improvement in the second half of the year 
(Chart 4). 
Chart 4. 
Current Account Balance  
(Seasonally Adjusted, Billion USD) 
* Estimate for December.  
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Despite  the  attainment  of  favorable  outcomes  regarding  macro  financial  risks,  soaring 
inflation  in  the  last  quarter  required  a  revision of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The ongoing 
deterioration in the global risk appetite as of August led to an excessive depreciation in the 
Turkish  lira  posing  risks  on  the  inflation  outlook.  In  addition,  sizeable  price  adjustments  in 
administered products in October led the short-term inflation to increase above forecasts. In 
order to not to allow inflation expectations to deteriorate, the CBRT delivered an important 
tightening  in  monetary  policy  since  October.  Accordingly,  the  interest  rate  corridor  was 
widened upwards and the amount of the Turkish lira funding through one-week repo auctions 
was adjusted and the average funding cost was raised significantly (Chart 5). 
Chart 5. 
CBRT Policies 
CBRT Policy Rates and Overnight Repo 
Rates 
CBRT Funding and Average Interest 
Rate 
Source: CBRT. 
 Source: CBRT. 
 The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  believes  that  the  tight  monetary  policy  stance  should  be 
maintained for a while to ensure that the inflation outlook is consistent with the medium term 
targets. Moreover, due to the ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy, we are of 
the opinion that maintaining a flexible monetary policy will be appropriate.  
The downward slope of the current yield curve signifies a tight monetary policy stance (Chart 
6). Additionally, loan interest rates have recorded a notable increase since October (Chart 7). 
As  a  consequence,  loan  growth  rate  declined  to  more  reasonable  levels  towards  the 
yearend (Chart 3). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6. 
Yield Curve* 
Chart 7. 
Consumer and TL Business Loan 
Rates*(Percent) 
  Calculated by the return on bonds quoted on the 
ISE  
*Flow data. 
Bonds  and  Bills  Market  using  the  Extended 
Nelson-Siegel (ENS) method. 
**4-week moving average. 
Source: CBRT. 
Source: ISE, CBRT. 
Overall, the last quarter of 2011 was marked by ongoing tightening in monetary and financial 
conditions and a pronounced deceleration in loans. 
Macroeconomic Developments and Main Assumptions 
2. 
Having climbed to 10.45 percent at end-2011, inflation was significantly above the target. As 
you all know, the Article 42 of the Central Bank Law stipulates that in the case of a significant 
breach of the inflation target, we are required to report to the Government and announce to 
the public the reasons behind the breach of the target and the necessary measures to be 
taken. I would like to announce that we will publish the Open Letter that will be sent to the 
Government today on our web-site at 12 a.m. 
Now, I will touch upon the macroeconomic outlook and our assumptions which constitute the 
basis  for  our  forecasts.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
compare the short term forecasts in the October Inflation Report with the actual inflation data 
regarding the fourth quarter of 2011. 
There  were  a  few  developments  in  the  interreporting  period  which  led  inflation  to  deviate 
significantly  from  October  forecasts.  More-than-envisaged  increases  in  unprocessed  food 
prices were an important cause of this deviation. The ongoing depreciation in the Turkish lira 
amid  the  deterioration  in  the  risk  appetite  was  another  factor  leading  to  a  deviation  in 
short-term forecasts (Chart 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
October 2011 Inflation Forecasts and Realizations 
Chart 8. 
 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the 
forecast. 
Owing  to  the  lagged  effects  of  the  exchange  rate  pass-through,  core  inflation  indicators 
remained  at  elevated  levels  during  the  final  quarter  (Chart  9).  This  mainly  stemmed  from 
soaring  core  goods  prices,  while  the  moderate  course  of  the  underlying  trend  of  services 
inflation indicated a benign outlook in terms of second round effects (Chart 10). 
Chart 9. 
Core Inflation Indicators 
SCA-H and SCA-I  
(Seasonally Adjusted, 3-Month Average, 
Annual Percent Change) 
Chart 10. 
Prices of Core Goods and Services  
(Seasonally Adjusted, 3-Month Average, 
Annual Percent Change) 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
  We see that economic activity remained robust in the second half of 2011, despite a slight 
deceleration.  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  data  pointed  that  domestic  demand  proved 
stronger  in  the  third  quarter  of  2011  compared  to  the  outlook  presented  in  the  October 
Inflation  Report  (Chart  11).  Thus,  we  revised  our  output  gap  forecasts  for  this  period 
upwards.  Growth  composition  became  much  more  balanced  as  we  expected  (Chart  12). 
Despite the weak course of the global economy, exports continued to increase, whereas the 
demand for imported goods and services maintained a downward trend. Consequently, the 
contribution  of  net  external  demand  to  growth  has  been  positive  for  the  first  time  after  a 
protracted period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 11.  
Final Domestic Demand  
(Seasonally Adjusted, 2008Q1=100) 
Chart 12.  
Exports and Imports of Goods and 
Services  
(Seasonally Adjusted, 1998 Prices, 
Billion TL) 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
* Estimate. 
  Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
Indicators regarding the last quarter of 2011 point that final domestic demand remains flat 
and  the  rebalancing  process  in  the  economy  is  going  on  as  envisaged.  Owing  to  the 
monetary  tightening,  the  growth  rate  of  final  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain 
moderate in the forthcoming period, as suggested by the recent loan and orders data (Chart 
13). Accordingly, our inflation forecasts are based on the assumption that domestic demand 
will decelerate further during early 2012. 
Chart 13.  
Chart 14.  
Growth Rates of Business and 
Consumer Loans  
3-Month Ahead Expectations for 
Orders 
(13-Week Average, Adjusted for Exchange 
Rate Effect, Annual Percent Change) 
(Up-Down, Seasonally Adjusted, Percent) 
Source: CBRT. 
 Source: CBRT. 
 As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  global  growth  forecasts  have  been  revised  significantly 
downwards  since  the  publication  of  the  October  Inflation  Report  mainly  owing  to  the  euro 
area. Thus, projections for export-weighted global growth index for Turkey also pointed to a 
lower  pace  of  growth  for  external  demand  (Chart  15).  Hence,  we  based  our  inflation 
forecasts on an outlook of weaker external demand compared to the previous period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 15.  
Export-Weighted Global Economic Activity 
Index* (2009Q1=100) 
For  methodology, 
* 
Box 2.1 “Foreign Demand Index for Turkey”. 
see 
Inflation  Report 
 2010–II,
Source: CBRT, Bloomberg, Consensus Forecasts 2011 October 
and 2012 January Bulletins. 
In sum, we revised our output gap forecasts upwards for the second half of 2011 considering 
the  stronger-than-expected  economic  activity  in  the  third  quarter.  Meanwhile,  due  to  the 
deterioration in the global growth outlook, we estimate that aggregate demand conditions will 
provide  a  stronger  support  to  disinflation  in  the  medium  term  compared  to  the  previous 
reporting period. 
We also revised our assumptions for commodity and oil prices slightly upwards. Considering 
the  recent  developments  and  futures  prices,  we  revised  our  assumptions  for  oil  prices 
upwards  from  USD  100  to  USD  110  per  barrel  for  2012  and  to  USD  105  for  2013. 
Accordingly, our assumptions for import prices were also subject to a slight upward revision 
(Chart 16). In addition, we preserved our assumptions for the annual rate of increase in food 
prices at 7.5 percent throughout the forecast horizon. 
Chart 16. 
Revisions in the Assumptions for Oil and Imports Prices 
 Oil Prices (USD/Barrel) 
Import Prices (2003=100) 
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
Source: CBRT, TurkStat. 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Inflation and Monetary Policy Outlook 
3. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our inflation  and  output  gap  forecasts based  on  the  outlook I 
have  described  so  far.  When  forming  our  forecasts,  we  assumed  that  the  tight  monetary 
policy stance will be sustained for a while; and consequently, annualized loan growth rate will 
hover  around  15  percent  and  the  Turkish  lira  will  display  a  mild  appreciation  trend. 
Accordingly,  inflation  is  expected  to  be,  with  70  percent  probability,  between  5.1  and 
7.9 percent  with  a  mid-point  of  6.5  percent  at  the  end  of  2012,  and  between  3.3  and 
6.9 percent with a mid-point of 5.1 percent at the end of 2013. We expect inflation to stabilize 
around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 17). 
Chart 17.  
Inflation and Output Gap Forecasts 
*  Shaded  region  indicates  the  70  percent  confidence  interval  for  the 
forecast. 
 Overall,  although  demand  and  cost  conditions  have  not  changed  notably  since  the 
publication of the October Report, we revised our inflation forecasts for end-2012 upwards 
due  to  higher  initial  point  (the  initial  point  referring  to  the  latest  inflation  data  before  the 
forecast period) resulting from higher-than-expected inflation during the past three months. 
As  elaborated  on  in  the  Report  as  well,  cumulative  increases  in  the  exchange  rate  and 
commodity  prices  coupled  with  soaring  unprocessed  food  prices  and  the  developments  in 
administered  prices  pushed  inflation  to  high  levels  in  2011.  We  estimate  that  inflation  will 
remain  flat  in  the  first  quarter  and  exhibit  a  gradual  downtrend  starting  from  the  second 
quarter (Chart 17). Our tight monetary policy stance since October prevents a deterioration in 
the price setting behavior by keeping inflation expectations under control. Thus, we expect 
that inflation will follow a downward trend as the accumulated effects of the temporary price 
movements  on  annual  inflation  gradually  fade  away.  Thus,  we  estimate  that  inflation  will 
display a notable decline particularly in the last quarter of 2012. 
Before moving on to the risks regarding the inflation outlook, there is a particular subject I 
would like to touch upon. As you might have noticed, I have given an inflation forecast that 
exceeds  our  end-year  inflation  target  of  5  percent.  This  is  because  we  think  that  pulling 
inflation towards the target by end-2012 would prove to be quite costly. Reducing inflation 
from  the  current  level  of  10.45  percent  to  5-percent-target within  12  months  would  lead  to 
unfavorable fluctuations in economic activity; accordingly we think that it is more reasonable 
to  bring  inflation  back  to  the  target  in  one  and  a  half  year.  Thus,  our  baseline  scenario 
envisages  inflation  to  reach  the  target  of  5  percent  by  mid-2013  (Chart  17).  However,  the 
target might be attained by the end of 2012, should the risk appetite improve markedly in the 
forthcoming period and the capital flows towards emerging economies re-accelerate, leading 
to a stronger appreciation of the Turkish lira than assumed in our baseline scenario. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  any  new  data  or  information  regarding  the 
inflation outlook may lead to a change in the monetary policy stance. Therefore, assumptions 
regarding  the  monetary  policy  outlook  underlying  our  inflation  forecasts  should  not  be 
perceived as a commitment on behalf of the CBRT. 
Risks and Monetary Policy 
4. 
In the last part of my speech, I would like to share our assessment of the risks on inflation 
outlook. The first of these risks is the possibility of second round effects that might stem from 
inflation  hovering  at  high  levels  in  the  short  term.  Three-month  accumulated  increase  in 
consumer  prices  in  the  final  quarter  of  2011  was  5.66  percent.  This  will  stay  in  annual 
inflation figure for another three quarters. Therefore, it is highly likely that annual inflation will 
stay  significantly  above  the  target  until  the  last  quarter  of  the  year,  even  if  the  underlying 
trend  in  the  forthcoming  period  eases  to  levels  consistent  with  the  target.  Although  the 
monetary  tightening  delivered  by  the  CBRT  since  October  has  reduced  the  possibility  of 
second  round  effects,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  inflation  expectations  and  pricing 
behavior  will  be  monitored  closely  and  necessary  measures  will  be  taken  to  keep 
medium-term inflation outlook consistent with the target. 
Ongoing  uncertainties  regarding  the  global  economy  call  for  a  continuation  of  a  flexible 
approach  in  monetary  policy.  The  medium  term  outlook  presented  in  the  Report  assumes 
that  problems  in  the  euro  area  will  be  resolved  gradually  and  the  global  outlook  will  not 
deteriorate  further.  However,  the  probability  that  the  solution  of  the  problems  may  take  a 
more protracted and painful process poses downside risks regarding the global growth and 
risk appetite. On the other hand, perceptions regarding the global economic outlook may turn 
more  favorable  than  expected,  should  the  measures  taken  towards  the  solution  are 
completed  sooner  and  more  decisively  than  envisaged.  Such  a  situation,  coupled  with  the 
ongoing quantitative easing policies pursued by the central banks of advanced economies, 
may  improve  risk  appetite  and  re-accelerate  capital  flows  towards  emerging  economies. 
Overall, ongoing problems in the euro area and uncertainties regarding the effectiveness of 
measures aimed at solving these problems suggest that global financial markets will continue 
to be volatile in the forthcoming period. These conditions necessitate a flexible approach in 
monetary policy, which utilizes multiple instruments. I would like to underline once more that 
the  CBRT  will  continue  to  monitor  global  developments  closely  and  take  the  required 
measures promptly. 
Another  risk  on  the  inflation  outlook  is  the  uncertainty  regarding  oil  prices.  Although  weak 
global outlook dampens commodity prices, rising problems of oil supply have recently posed 
upside risks on energy prices. I would like to reiterate that should such a risk materialize, the 
CBRT will not respond to temporary price movements, yet will not tolerate any deterioration 
in expectations. 
We  will  continue  to  monitor  fiscal  policy  developments  closely  while  formulating  monetary 
policy. In this respect, our baseline forecasts take the Medium Term Program as given and 
thus assume that fiscal discipline will be maintained. A revision in the monetary policy stance 
may  be  considered,  should  the  fiscal  stance  deviate  significantly  from  this  framework  and 
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
We  will  continue  to  focus  on  price  stability  in  the  formulation  of  the  monetary  policy  while 
preserving  financial  stability  as  a  supplementary  objective.  To  this  end,  we  will  carefully 
assess the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the CBRT and other institutions 
on the inflation outlook. We are of the opinion that strengthening the structural reform agenda 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit would 
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability 
and financial stability in the medium term. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary 
policy  and  contribute  to  social  welfare  by  keeping  interest  rates  of  long-term  government 
securities  at  low  levels.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  end  my  remarks  reminding  you  the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
importance of the steps towards implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program. 
Thank you very much for your participation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
