Anand Sinha: IT and governance in banks – some thoughts 
Address by Mr. Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Program for 
Independent Directors of Banks organized by IDRBT, Hyderabad, 15–16 June 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Mr. P K Chophla is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  Sambamurthy,  Director,  IDRBT;  Shri  Prabhakar,  Chairman  and  Managing  Director, 
Andhra  Bank,  Shri  Rao,  Managing  Director,  SBH,  Shri  Siva  Kumar,  member  of  faculty, 
IDRBT, distinguished fellows of IDRBT; other members of the faculty; and directors on the 
Boards of banks. Wish you all a very good morning. 
Independent directors are looked upon by both the stakeholders and regulators as important 
contributors to the value additive and ethically positive oversight of executive management 
activities. The organization of this programme, by IDRBT and its Director, Mr. Sambamurthy, 
which focuses on IT governance, Information Security and the role of Board therein, is very 
timely  as  these  factors  have  assumed  critical  importance  in  the  sphere  of  corporate 
governance in general and bank governance in particular. 
While talking about this programme organized by IDRBT, it would be appropriate to recall, in 
brief,  that  this  institution,  conceptualized  in  1994  and  established  in  1996  by  the  RBI  to 
function  as  a  centre  for  research  and  development  in  banking  technology,  has  been 
commendably  striving  to  meet  its  objectives.  It  has  to  its  credit  several  achievements  like 
launch  of  Structured  Financial  Messaging  System  (SFMS)  and  National  Financial  Switch 
(NFS)  management;  besides  publication  of  guidance  on  best  practices  and  a  number  of 
research papers on topics of contemporary relevance to the Indian banking industry. Now, 
with the reviewed and redefined goals, the Institute is all set to support the banking Industry, 
by  working  at  the  intersection  of  banking  and  technology,  mainly  in  the  areas  of  financial 
networks  and  applications,  electronic  payments  and  settlement  systems,  security 
technologies for the financial sector, financial information systems and business intelligence. 
I  am  sure  the  institute  will  continue  to  enrich  the  banking  Industry  in  the  times  to  come 
through its good work. 
Corporate governance 
Coming  to  the  theme  of  this  programme,  I  would  dwell,  first  of  all,  on  the  concept  of 
governance. At the core of corporate governance is the principle of fiduciary duty, centered 
on oversight of management functioning in order to optimize stakeholder interests, within the 
limits of legal and regulatory compliance. This had its origin and basis in the need to balance 
the powers of executive management and the interests of diffused owners, i.e. shareholders, 
through an oversight process. This dominant view of governance comes from Agency theory, 
which  emphasizes  monitoring  and  control 
this  perspective,  directors’ 
responsibilities  take  two  forms:  ensuring  accountability  to  minimize  downside  risks  and 
enabling managerial entrepreneurship to reap upside potential. 
Over a period of time, the optimization of shareholders’ interest objective has broadened to 
include  strategic  efficiency  and  social  responsibility.  Connotation  of  oversight  has  changed 
and  expanded,  to  mean  effective  leadership  in  guiding  the  management  in  strategic 
decisions,  creation  of  suitable  structures  and  processes  for  effective  implementation  and 
monitoring of managerial performance; and ensuring compliance with laws and regulations. 
The scope of oversight has undergone further change with implied inclusion of an ethic that 
transcends strict response to regulations. This interpretation of the meaning of governance 
and role of the Board has gained greater currency in the wake of some big ticket events like 
collapse  of  Enron,  WorldCom,  HIH  insurance,  and,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  recent  crisis, 
functions. 
In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
where a large part of the blame was attributed, inter alia, to unethical conduct by banks and 
market  participants.  Over  all,  the  concept  of  governance  has  come  to  signify  strategic 
leadership  support  and  objective  oversight  by  the  Board  to  ensure  optimized  resource 
utilization, effective compliance and robust management. 
It is in this overall context of governance that IT governance has evolved as an area of great 
contemporary  interest.  Information  technology  has  grown  from  a  mere  enabler  to  an 
essential component of business processes in the banking industry  where information and 
data  are  considered  most  valued  resources.  IT  is  a  critical  asset,  not  simply  in  enabling 
organizational success but also in providing opportunities for competitive advantage. 
IT and Indian banking 
Banking in India, as all of us know, has traversed a long way from the days of manual work 
processes to  mechanization, followed  by  word  processing  on  standalone  PCs  and  onto  IT 
based applications and so on. As things stand today, it would be difficult to imagine a bank of 
any significance which does not have some or most of the key processes being run on IT 
based applications. Most of the customer related functions in banks, be it account opening, 
transaction processing or account and data maintenance, are all run on IT enabled systems. 
It is the reach and capacity of information technology that has facilitated banks to transcend 
the  limitations  of,  geographical  spread,  burgeoning  transaction  volumes  and,  to  an  extent, 
human  resources.  Banks  are  expanding  their  size  and  services  to  cater  to  fast  increasing 
customer needs through technology enabled payment systems, internet based access and 
innovative service delivery modes. 
Other important business activities of banks such as participation in securities, currency and 
money markets, besides compliance functions like reserve maintenance, regulatory reporting 
etc. are all having processes heavily dependent on information technology. Even in case of 
internal  work  processes  having  large  component  of  manual  processing,  dependence  on 
computers and IT based communication mechanism is increasingly felt. 
Overall, banks are dependent on IT based systems for almost all of their activities, although 
the level of sophistication and refinement in such systems may vary from bank to bank or 
across activities or banking Industry segments (commercial banks, cooperative banks etc.). 
Reasons  for  this  are  not  far  to  seek.  Technology  has  become  essential  component  for 
customer  related  and  market  related  activities  and  participant  banks  cannot  meet  the 
requirements  imposed  by  timelines  or  volumes  without  leveraging  on  technology.  Even  for 
backend and internal work processes, cost and time constraints are pushing banks to lean 
upon  technology.  It  may  not  be  possible  to  store  and  retrieve  huge  amounts  of  customer 
data,  transaction  data  and  business  information,  but  for  the  power  of  technology  based 
systems.  More  so,  the  globalization,  competition  and  compliance  requirements  make  it 
imperative for banks to increasingly use IT based platforms and applications for most of their 
activities. It has become necessary for banks to use modern marketing as well as customer 
service  tools  to  survive  in  a  competitive  environment;  which  involve  large  scale  data 
collection, analysis and efficient communication which are not possible without the help of IT. 
IT and financial inclusion 
IT has a great role to play in furthering the financial inclusion drive, involving expansion of 
banking  access  to  remote  locations  in  a  cost  effective  way.  Reaching  banking  to  the 
excluded segments has been the focus of regulatory agenda and many initiatives have been 
taken in this regard. Of the 74,414 villages with a population of more than 2000 identified as 
unbanked, 74,199 (99.7 per cent) villages have already been provided with banking services, 
on the back of concerted efforts of the banking fraternity encouraged by the Government and 
Reserve Bank of India. In the next stage, it has been proposed to cover unbanked villages 
with population less than 2000. Considering the vast geographical expanse of the country, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
such a gigantic task would not be possible at all without the help of technology. Technology 
has  the  potential  to  cut  down  the  costs,  bring  down  the  barriers  and  make  the  financial 
inclusion a viable business proposition. 
Financial  inclusion,  apart  from  its  social  welfare  enhancing  role,  should  make  a  lot  of 
business sense for banks in as much as they can get a large stable pool of retail deposits 
which  will  contribute  very  significantly  to  the  robustness  of  the  individual  banks  and  to 
financial  stability  at  the  systemic  level.  Additionally,  there  would  be  small  value  but  large 
volume  of  lending  and  other  business.  What  is  constraining  the  full  realization  of  this 
business potential is the comparatively large transaction costs. Several technological efforts 
and innovations have been made for increasing the reach which has reduced the transaction 
costs. However, much more needs to be done to make the financial inclusion an attractive 
and profitable business for banks. 
IT in banking – concerns 
While  the  increased  deployment  of  IT  certainly  has  its  own  benefits  in  terms  of  enabling 
banks to meet the business requirements and enhance their service delivery capacity, such 
IT  usage  and  dependence,  however,  bring  in  some  new  challenges  and  concerns.  These 
challenges keep on getting more complex and qualitatively different, as technology keeps on 
evolving  rapidly.  For  instance,  technologies  like  cloud  computing  bring  in  advantages  and 
efficiencies along with new risks which have to be managed. Any delay in adoption of new 
technologies would only let the competition pass by the laggard institutions. 
Cloud  computing  is  an  innovative  concept  which  enables  participants  to  leverage  on 
collaborative sharing of resources, which not only brings down costs but also facilitates the 
participants  to  concentrate  more  on  their  core  activities,  leaving  the  management  of  IT 
resources  to  the  service  providers.  This  facility,  by  making  the  sophisticated  applications 
affordable,  has  the  potential  to  enable  even  the  marginal  players  to  make  use  of  the 
technology  and  develop  their  businesses.  However,  this  being  a  new  technology  data 
integrity and confidentiality seem to be a major concern at this stage. Further, if too many 
participants  rely  on  a  single  service  provider,  it  may  lead  to  a  risk  of  over-concentration 
inasmuch as the failure of the service provider will be catastrophic. Banks will have to assess 
the pros and cons of new technologies and put in place adequate safe guards while adopting 
them. 
As regulator and supervisor of the banking system in India, inter alia, its many other roles, 
RBI is concerned about the soundness of the financial system in general and banking system 
in particular. While IT usage contributes to efficiency, it brings, along with it, certain issues 
such  as, 
financial  and  compliance 
considerations;  process  management  to  ensure  cost  effective  and  timely  service  delivery; 
security  of  customer  and  business  data  at  access,  storage  and  retrieval  level,  as  also  the 
accuracy  of  data  and  information  for  internal  and  external  reporting.  Important  issues  and 
concerns in this context have been flagged by RBI in the IT vision document 2011–17 and 
the  recent  Monetary  Policy  statement  (April  2012). These  concerns mainly  revolve  around 
the areas of governance, information security and MIS/ reporting and banks have to address 
these issues, on priority. 
technology  selection  with  strategic, 
issues  of 
Technology and information security 
Information  security  is  an  area  that  needs  constant  and  continuing  attention,  considering, 
particularly, the operational risks associated with the use of technology. Security and integrity 
of  data,  communication  and  storage  has  acquired  challenging  dimensions  as  all  of  these 
activities are carried out over technology enabled systems. Internet and remote access are 
necessities  today,  while  threats  through  these  modes  come  in  newer  forms  each  day. 
Privacy  and  confidentiality  of  customer  as  well  as  business  data  are  at  stake.  Denial  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
service, disruption, permanent data loss and even data manipulation are risks that cannot be 
ignored. The IT management systems and processes in banks, therefore, have to be robust 
enough to meet these challenges effectively, on continuing basis. Any lapse in this regard 
can  lead  to  several  kinds  of  risks  to  the  bank,  its  customers  as  well  as  other  market 
participants, depending on the size and significance of the institution as well as magnitude of 
risk event. 
Regulatory reporting and MIS 
Another area of significant importance to the top managements, regulators and shareholders 
is the quality and efficiency of data reporting. Indian banking, even today, has housekeeping, 
MIS and reporting processes which are largely interspersed with manual intervention. This 
has implications for the quality, consistency and timeliness of data, with the risk of subjective 
interpretation, manipulation and delays, leading to potential adverse consequences in many 
forms.  Even  where  the  information  collection  and  submission  process  is  largely  IT  based, 
process design itself has to be in sync with information and reporting requirements. The top 
management,  Board,  regulators,  the  shareholders  and  customers  may  not  get  correct  or 
timely information and disclosures due to inadvertent or deliberate action on the part of those 
compiling or submitting information. There have been instances of process design facilitating 
manipulation of data, with serious implications. So, it is imperative that information systems 
are designed and managed in a way that data and information are efficiently and accurately 
compiled and reported. Automated data flow (ADF) initiative by RBI is a step in this direction. 
Banks are being exhorted to ensure ADF implementation at the earliest, not only as a matter 
of regulatory comfort but also in their own interest. Benefits for banks in such implementation 
are  many.  One,  reduction  in  the  number  of  procedures  and  sub-processes  in  procuring 
information, leading to enhanced efficiency on cost and time parameters. Two, more efficient 
internal  monitoring,  review  and  managerial  decision  making,  reducing  the  scope  for 
misreporting.  Three,  accurate  and  timely  regulatory  reporting  leading  to  reduced  risk  of 
adverse regulatory action and timely support for course correction, where required. I would 
urge the Independent Directors to provide an oversight in their banks to this project so that 
the complete switchover to ADF is achieved in a timely and efficient manner. 
Regulatory compliance and single view of information 
As we all know, banking regulation across the globe is being tightened in the wake of recent 
financial  crisis.  Both  Basel  II,  which,  for  large  banks,  focusses  on  internal  processes  for 
measuring  and  managing  risks  and,  Basel  III,  have  enhanced  the  need  for  continuous 
monitoring  of  data  on  several  parameters  to  ensure  continuing,  rather  than  “point  in  time” 
compliance.  There  are  new  regulatory  provisioning  requirements  as  well,  which  can  be 
complied with, only by proper data collection, compilation, and analysis and reporting. It is 
mandated that business decision making and regulatory reporting processes use the same 
data and information. Any lapse in this regard is increasingly being viewed adversely by the 
markets,  customers,  shareholders  and  regulators.  It  may,  in  fact,  become  highly  time  and 
cost intensive proposition for banks to collect, compile and report on the basis of voluminous 
data  on  diverse  parameters  through  processes  having  manual  interventions.  The  time 
criticality,  even  for  internal  reporting,  is  further  amplified,  by  the  fact  that  in  a  severely 
competitive market environment, quick information dissemination and decision making is an 
absolute requirement for growth and, may be for survival itself. Risks and opportunities have 
to be recognized quickly, followed by swift action to avoid being swamped by events. So, it is 
in the interest of all stakeholders to ensure that there is a single view of information and data 
in the banks with automated/ straight through processing for internal and external reporting. 
As recent events have shown, ability to identify the risks in time and manage them effectively 
differentiates  successful  institutions  from  the  unsuccessful  ones.  To  survive  in  the  fast 
changing  environment,  institutions  are  required  to  have  complete  handle  on  the  risks  they 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
face  which  helps  them  in  taking  corrective  action.  For  this  they  need  to  have  robust  IT 
systems  which  can  collect  risk  information  from  across  different  business  segments  and 
different geographical locations in a timely and comprehensive manner. The systems should 
be able to process data and provide necessary reports to the management to enable quick 
action  where  necessary.  Building  of  such  systems  involves  significant  investments  and, 
therefore, requires, a dedicated focus from the Board and the top managements. 
Weak and ineffective governance has been a very important contributory factor to the current 
crisis  and  clearly  this  is  an  area  which  needs  considerable  improvement.  In  this  context, 
maintaining  robust  risk  information  technology  (IT)  systems  that  can  generate  timely, 
comprehensive,  cross-geography,  and  cross-product  information  on  exposure  is  of  vital 
importance and, therefore, needs closer attention of the Board. Let me quote from a recent 
G-30  document  “Toward  Effective  Governance  of  Financial  Institutions”  which  succinctly 
emphasises the role of risk information technology in financial Institutions and the critical role 
Boards can play in implementing them. 
Ultimately, the quality of risk information that FI boards and management teams 
receive depends largely on the quality of the organization’s IT systems. Ideally, 
FIs  need  risk  IT  systems  that  can  gather  risk  information  quickly  and 
comprehensively, producing global, cross-product, cross-legal entity estimates of 
their exposures promptly. Unfortunately, few global FIs are capable of this. They 
are  hampered  by  legacy  systems  that  are  inefficient,  costly,  and  burdensome. 
Boards  are  well  advised  to  press  management  to  maintain  –  and  where 
necessary increase – investment in risk IT systems, both as a short-term priority 
and as part of a long-term strategic initiative. 
Risk IT investments must not be sidelined by necessary upgrades to finance and 
customer data systems. Instead, they must be integrated and prioritized. Given 
that for many large firms, necessary investments will run to several billion dollars 
over the coming years, boards may need to rethink their approach to evaluating 
management’s  investment  in  core  IT  spending.  While  some  firms  still  have  the 
audit  or  risk  committee  review  IT  investments,  others  have  established 
committees  dedicated  to  IT  oversight.  That  is  an  interesting  trend,  and  worth 
further consideration. 
IT governance 
Coming to IT governance, there are two ways to look at it. One is to view it as a sub-set of 
overall  corporate governance  and  the  other  is to  see  it  as  a  distinct concept/  discipline  by 
itself. There are arguments on both sides, but the former looks more appropriate. Corporate 
governance, with its holistic definition covering fiduciary, strategic leadership/ guidance and 
ethics related roles, is inclusive of IT strategy and IT management oversight as IT systems 
and  information  are  as  valuable  as  any  other  resource  for  a  bank,  and  may  be  more. 
Dependence  on  these  resources  and  systems  make  it  imperative  that these  are  managed 
and  governed  through  an  appropriate  IT  governance  framework  (ITG).  There  are  several 
alternative  ITG  frameworks  (over  14  as  per  a  2009  research),  with  many  more  evolving, 
suitability of which depends on the overall ecosystem in which a bank operates. 
In an early research on governance, IT governance mechanisms were categorized into three: 
decision  making,  alignment  processes  and  communication  approaches.  Some 
ITG 
frameworks like Cobit (Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies), COSO 
(Committee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Commission) and ITIL (Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library) provide guidance from micro level onwards. AS 8015, the 
Australian standard for ICT governance, is targeted at strategic level. However, there is no 
single  dominant  approach  for  ITG.  Some  recent  research  has  conceived  ITG  as  having: 
(i) defensive  or  (ii)  strategic  approach  where  defensive  approach  refers  to  preventing  or 
mitigating disasters while strategic approach aims to create sustainable shareholder value by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
either  reducing  costs  or  creating  a  sustainable  competitive  advantage.  In  practice,  holistic 
understanding of legal, regulatory, business and internal ethic environment contexts should 
determine the suitability of the framework for a particular bank. What is important is that ITG 
achieves  its  applicable  objectives,  both  defensive  and  strategic,  and  enhances  the  overall 
corporate governance in a bank, by facilitating maximization of benefits and minimization of 
risks  emanating  from  IT  deployment.  It  focuses  specifically  on  information  technology 
systems, their performance and risk management. 
Role of board and independent directors 
While we have discussed about governance in general and, IT governance in particular, one 
aspect  which  remains  to  be  mentioned  is  the  importance  of  the  role  that  independent 
directors on the Boards of banks are expected to play. Banks, basically, are organizations 
which  mainly  have  roles  of  intermediaries  as  well  as  financial  market  participants.  Their 
soundness and stability has potential impact much beyond their own well being. So, the role 
of  Board  in  banks  is  more  focused  on  compliance,  organizational  ethic  and  strategic 
guidance. In the Indian banking context, Boards have a lot to contribute to strategic ITG as 
the  IT  implementation  is  still  evolving  and  structures  for  robust  oversight  on  acquisition, 
deployment  and  management  of  IT  systems  and  information  security  mechanisms  need 
closer  attention  and  strengthening.  Investments  required  in  acquisition,  maintenance  and 
regular upgradation of technology systems in banks, along with the need to have appropriate 
human  resource,  are  significant,  and,  therefore,  require  appropriate  management  controls 
and accountability framework under a watchful Board. 
Regulations and laws do contribute, but do not constitute the whole story about governance, 
as recent global events have shown. Governance landscape, including IT governance, has 
much  more  to  be  covered  by  quality  of  Board  oversight  than  mere  compliance  with  the 
written  word.  Good  governance  should  be,  and  is  often,  the  result  of  endogenous  factors 
those  that  emerge  from  within,  not  without.  Governance  is  not  about  what  decisions  get 
made  –  that  is  management  –  but  it  is  about  who  makes  the  decisions  and  how  they  are 
made.  Independent  directors,  with  an  assumption  of  higher  level  of  objectivity  and 
professionalism,  are  expected  to  guide  the  banks  in  a  manner  that  our  banks  as  well  as 
customers reap the fruits of IT deployment while the risks are contained through appropriate 
assessment and mitigation measures. 
Aristotle said “it is better for a city to be governed by a good man than good laws”. Board and 
its Directors can contribute towards governance, including IT governance, more than the law 
under which it is constituted, and that is what is expected of them. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  exhort  the  independent  directors  to  perform  their  role  at  a  level 
expected of them, so as to benefit the Industry, economy and society and once again convey 
my thanks to IDRBT for organizing the program. 
I wish the program great success. Thank you. 
References: 
EI  Sawy,  Omar  A;  Pavlou,  Paul,  A:  IT  enabled  Business  Capabilities  for  Turbulent 
Environments (2008) 
Filatotchev, 
complementarities, Journal of Management Studies (2007) 
Group of Thirty: Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institutions 
ITGI: Board Briefing on IT Governance (2003) 
Parent, M; B.H. Reich – Governing IT Risk: California Management review (2009) 
I  –  Corporate  Governance  and  Firms  Dynamics:  Contingencies  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Picou, A; Rubach, MJ – Does Good governance matter to Institutional Investors (2006) 
Richard Briesbois, Greg Boyd, Ziad Shadid; Office of the Auditor General of Canada – What 
is IT Governance? And why it is important for the IS Auditor 
Shailer, GEP: An introduction to Corporate Governance in Australia (2004) 
Syaiful Ali, Peter Green, Michael Parent – The role of compliance in Information technology 
Governance (2009) 
Weill,  P;  Ross  J.W.:  IT  Governance:  How  top  performers  manage  IT  Decision  rights  for 
superior results – HBS Press (2004) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
