Mojmír Hampl: The EU banking industry 
Speaking  points  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the 
European  Economic  Congress  “Section:  Banking  Industry  in  the  EU”,  Katowice,  15  May 
2012. 
 “Dzen dobry” – this is unfortunately the only thing I can credibly say in Polish, so the rest will 
be in my imperfect English. 
Thanks  to  the  organizers  for  the  invitation  and  for  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  such  a 
distinguished panel. It is my first time here and I can only hope not the last one after I finish 
my presentation. Given the time constraints I will focus on a just a couple of quick points to 
stimulate the debate. 
My key point is: Let’s not repeat the same mistakes again and again. What I mean is this: 
Since  the  onset  of  the  current  crisis  there  has  been  a  constant  push  for  a  more 
pan-European, or “federal-like”, approach to the regulation, supervision and potentially also 
resolution  of  the  financial  industry  in  the  EU.  The  famous  de  Larosière  report  and  all  its 
consequences,  such  as  the  three  new  pan-European  supervisory  agencies,  are  just  direct 
results of this push and this way of thinking. 
Some may recall that the Czech authorities were quite reluctant to accept this approach and 
also the final compromise which brought these agencies into existence, and we believe we 
had good reasons for this. 
Despite  all  the  European  convergence  and  integration,  financial  systems  in  different 
EU member states still look and work very differently. Trying to administer them from a single 
centre according to a single set of rules might be like trying, say, to feed all the animals in a 
zoo with a single type of food. 
As an illustration: the recent ECFIN Retail Banking Survey says: 
 
in  Austria  almost  100%  of  house  purchasing  loans  feature  variable  interest  rates, 
while in France the share is only about 10%. 
countries differ substantially in the share of owner-occupied housing and therefore in 
the importance of the mortgage market; 
they differ in how intensively they use electronic means of payment; 
in the significance of building societies and credit unions; 
in tax and other incentives that the government provides for certain types of financial 
transactions; 
in the extent to which local banks trade in various non-plain vanilla products such as 
derivatives; 
in the share of subsidiaries and branches of foreign financial institutions and, more 
generally, in ownership structure 
in  the  loan-to-deposit  ratio,  which  varies  from  roughly  70%  in  some  countries  to 
more than 200% in others; 
in the degree of local market concentration; 
 
etc. 
There are many more examples, some of them influenced by long-term developments, some 
by entrenched behavioural differences and habits. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To apply – or even try to apply – a federal or pan-European approach to such a diversified 
financial  system  requires,  in  my  eyes,  a  key  precondition:  to  have  a  functioning  European 
federation in the first place. If that is not possible then we should not try to create half-baked 
pan-European  solutions  here  in  the  area  of  banking  –  an  area  which  is  arguably  more 
sensitive in many aspects than that of fiscal policy and fiscal transfers. 
If we are not careful enough, we risk repeating the difficulties of the single currency project. 
The euro is a currency without a state. This means nobody knows who should pay what to 
whom in bad times. It is for good times only. And we now all know very well that this is the 
biggest shortcoming of the whole project. 
Some believe that cross-border integration is good per se, without any conditions. I tend to 
believe  –  not  least  because  of the  current crisis  –  that cross-border  integration  of national 
financial  systems  is  welcome  only  if  EACH  of  the  national  systems  alone  is  and  can  be 
sufficiently sound and stable. 
That’s why we at the Czech National Bank are so nervous about this tendency to continue 
separating the powers of supervisory and regulatory authorities from their responsibilities in 
the area of financial regulation. These powers are gradually shifting in small steps towards 
those who have no direct responsibility and no pots of money to pay should things go wrong 
in the future. And such a system is not sustainable for future bad times. 
I believe this is a concern shared by policy-makers not only in our country, but also in other 
EU countries (such as here in Poland) and I hope that the coalition of like-minded states has 
the potential to grow over time. 
So let me repeat: until we have a full-fledged EU federation we should not build a half-baked 
one  in  the  area  of  EU  banking.  And  I  strongly  advise  paying  attention  to  the  rules  being 
prepared by the European Commission (for instance the Crisis and Resolution Mechanisms), 
which have the potential to be out of line with this proposed approach. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
