Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Managing external debt, a move to ensure 
economic growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the launch of the Foreign Loan Approval and Registration System 
(FLAReS), Manila, 20 March 2012. 
 I wish to thank everyone for joining us today for the launch of FLAReS or the Foreign Loan 
Approval and Registration System. This is the newest BSP electronic innovation and is part 
of our continuing efforts to enhance the delivery of services to our stakeholders.  
The vision 
Through the years, the BSP has consciously and progressively adopted measures to move 
towards  a  paperless  system.  Taking  advantage  of  the  prevalence  of  the  internet  and  the 
robustness of the PhilPass, the FLAReS project certainly takes us another step closer to this 
vision. 
As  you  saw  from  the  presentation  of  the  operational  highlights,  FLAReS  will  facilitate  the 
submission of applications for approval and registration of loans via the internet… Payment 
of processing fees will likewise be more convenient, using the branch network of participating 
banks…. Finally, participants will be able to monitor the status of applications online… It is 
our expectation therefore that FLAReS… in addition to improving operational efficiency… will 
also move us towards greater transparency in our delivery of services to stakeholders.  
Today,  FLAReS  is  realized  because  of  the  active  partnership  of  a  select  group  of  
banks – Banco De Oro, Bank of the Philippine Islands, Land Bank of the Philippines and the 
Philippine National Bank. …. I would also like to express our appreciation to the public and 
private sector borrowers who provided useful feedback and cooperated in the pilot testing of 
FLAReS.  ….Of  course,  this  project  would  not  be  possible  without  the  creative  ideas  and 
critical support of the officers and staff of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas who collaborated to 
see the project to its completion, particularly the International Operations Department under 
the  International  Sub-Sector,  the  Information  Technology  Sub-Sector,  the  Payments  and 
Settlements Office, and the Financial Accounting Department. 
The reason  
The launch of FLARes is indeed quite timely, in light of all the developments in external debt 
dynamics across the globe. While I don’t believe the Philippines is about to enter any kind of 
external debt crisis… any time soon….I believe now is a good time to take stock… and be 
reminded  (through  the  experiences  in  other  jurisdictions)  of  the  possible  consequences  
– both intended and otherwise – of a country’s cumulative decisions and actions with respect 
to debt…  
It is also wise for a country to institutionalize governance practices that would precisely avoid 
such a crisis… during a time when such is the least of the country’s concerns. 
The season 
The  Philippines  is  in  a  good  spot  today.  As  can  be  gleaned  from  major  external  debt 
indicators, the BSP has been successful in its debt management efforts. Key ratios such as 
Gross  International  Reserves  to  Short-term  Debt,  Outstanding  Debt  to  Gross  National 
Income  and  Debt  Service  to  Foreign  Exchange  Receipts  have  consistently  strengthened, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
indicating  the  country’s  sustained  and  improving  ability  to  meet  maturing  obligations.  We 
have recently announced that our gross international reserves have reached an all-time high 
of  US$77.7  billion  as  of  February  2012.  Relative  to  short-term  debt,  our  current  GIR  can 
cover  nearly  11  times  our  short-term  debt  under  the  original  maturity  concept,  and  about 
7 times using the residual maturity concept.  
At 27.5pct, our external debt to GDP has been on a downtrend during the past decade. It is 
now less than half its high over the 10-year period of 68.6pct in 2003. 
Likewise, the maturity of our external debt has been lengthened, with close to 90 percent of 
our external debt being long-term. .. The average maturity is now about 22 years. 
The  debt  service  ratio  (or  the  amount  of  principal  and  interest  payments  due  relative  to 
exports of goods and receipts from services and income) has droppedfrom 15.7 percent in 
2001 to only 8.4 percent by November 2011, or less than 10 cents per dollar of income.  
By all indicators, therefore, the Philippines is well-positioned to adopt these changes.  
The champion 
You  may  ask,  why  is  the  BSP  taking  on  FLAReS?  Well,  quite  simply,  external  debt 
management is part of our mandate as the central monetary authority.  
The Bangko Sentral is mandated by the Philippine Constitution and other pertinent laws to 
manage  the  country’s  external  debt.  Our  objective  is  to  keep  outstanding  obligations  at 
prudent levels so that these can be comfortably serviced by the economy in an orderly and 
timely manner.  
 In pursuit of this mandate, the Bangko Sentral coordinates with other government agencies, 
and  employs  various  debt  management  tools.  These  tools  include  an  approval  and 
registration process which is being implemented by the International Operations Department, 
and  is  instrumental  in  directing  externally-sourced  funds  to  priority  areas  for  development 
and influencing the impact of borrowings on the profile and structure of total external debt.  
A continuing review of Bangko Sentral regulations governing external debt and other foreign 
exchange transactions is likewise undertaken to keep our rules attuned with current global 
and domestic conditions and to foster a regulatory environment that supports the objective to 
achieve inclusive growth for the country. 
In all these undertakings, a good monitoring system is indispensable. FLAReS allows us to 
perform all these with relative ease and accuracy.  
Conclusion 
I have, on a number of occasions in the past, said that the Philippines managed to “survive” 
today’s crisis, because we purposed to invest in the reforms yesterday…. And today, ladies 
and gentlemen, we add FLAReS to the list of governance reforms we have instituted.  
As  we  enlist  public  and  private  sector  entities  to  enroll  in  FLAReS  and  encourage  more 
banks  to  participate,  it  is  my  hope  that  FLAReS  would  indeed  help  us  better  manage  our 
external debt. In turn, I hope this will ensure and protect our desired trajectory of sustained 
higher economic growth. 
Maraming salamat sa inyong pagdalo at pakikinig.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
