Duvvuri Subbarao: Touching hearts and spreading smiles 
Oration by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, as part of the IOB 
Platinum Jubilee Oration Series, Chennai, 4 July 2012. 
 I  am  deeply  touched  by  the  invitation  to  deliver  this  oration  as  part  of  Indian 
1. 
Overseas Bank’s Platinum Jubilee celebrations. I know that some very distinguished people 
have given orations in this series, and it is an honour for me to add my name to that very 
select list. 
IOB – Origins and legacy 
2. 
At the outset, my congratulations to the CMD Shri Narendra, all the officers and staff 
of IOB on this very special occasion. I browsed through the history of IOB and am struck by 
the vision and ambition of late M. Ct. M. Chidambaram Chettyar who founded this bank way 
back in 1937 to provide foreign exchange facilities for Indian traders in South-East Asia. That 
as a young man of barely 30, MCt, as he came to be known, chose to start a bank, and that 
too one specializing in external trade at a time when banking was in a turmoil following the 
Great  Depression,  is  a  tribute  to  his  youthful  enthusiasm,  global  outlook  and  remarkable 
foresight.  Successive  generations  of  IOB  management  and  staff  have  done  that  legacy 
proud. All of you can justifiably take pride in your bank’s record of contribution to the financial 
sector, its pioneering spirit, customer orientation and zeal for innovation. 
3. 
A Platinum Jubilee is an occasion for celebration; it is also a time for introspection – 
to  look  back  on  what  you  have  achieved  and  to  look  ahead  to  the  agenda  on  the  way 
forward. I note that as part of the celebrations you have set yourselves an ambitious vision 
“to scale newer heights and serve the country with renewed vigour”, and that you have also 
drawn up plans to operationalize that vision. My compliments to you for that ambition and for 
that commitment. 
RBI & IOB – Touching hearts and spreading smiles 
4. 
As Governor of the Reserve Bank, I accept quite a few speaking commitments. Most 
of the time, I struggle to determine what I should focus on. In this case, however, I zeroed in 
relatively easily. I was, impressed by IOB’s slogan “Touching Hearts and Spreading Smiles” 
which  captures  the  essence  of  what  we  should  endeavour  to  do  as  central  bankers  and 
commercial  bankers.  As  Mahatma  Gandhi  said,  the  test  of  every  public  policy  decision 
should be, “how is this decision going to affect the poorest person in the country?”, which is 
the  same  as  asking  yourself,  “is  this  decision  that  I  am  taking  “going  to  touch  hearts  and 
spread smiles” among the less privileged people in the country.” 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  responsibilities  include  bank  regulation  and  supervision  and 
5. 
oversight of banks’ customer service. Our endeavour in fulfilling these responsibilities is to 
support  growth  and  enhance  welfare  –  in  other  words  “touch  hearts  and  spread  smiles”. 
What I thought I would do for this oration is to review some of the important policy initiatives 
of the Reserve Bank over the last two years in the area of bank regulation and supervision 
and  explain  how  they  have  been  informed  by  the  goal  of  touching  hearts  and  spreading 
smiles.  Given  the  limitations  of  time,  I  will  restrict  myself  to  just  five  of  the  several  policy 
actions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Micro-finance  
6. 
When it started off in the 1980s, the development of the micro-finance sector was 
primarily  led  by  the  bank-SHG  (Self-Help  Group)  model,  with  the  SHGs  operating  as 
collective liability vehicles with responsibility for maintaining credit standards and enhancing 
credit discipline among the members.  
7. 
The  SHG  model  was  handicapped  by  inherent  scalability  issues,  and  thereby 
yielded  the  “last  mile”  space  to  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  which  represent  a  more 
formal, structured and profit oriented approach. In some ways, the growth of the microfinance 
sector has been a remarkable success story of recent years; in some other ways, that very 
growth has also raised concerns about the quality of income generation support MFIs were 
offering. In particular, allegations about usurious interest rates, coercive recovery practices 
and multiple lending led the Government of Andhra Pradesh, a state that accounted for as 
much  as  40 per  cent  of  the  total  microfinance  activity  in  the  country,  to  promulgate  an 
ordinance in October 2010. The ordinance, subsequently converted into an act, requires all 
MFIs operating in the state to register on an annual basis with the State Government. The 
law  stipulates  that  the total  interest  cost  cannot  exceed  the  principal,  and  seeks to further 
protect  borrowers  from  getting  enticed  into  an  unviable  debt  burden  by  restricting  multiple 
lending by MFIs.  
The Andhra Pradesh law brought the MFI activity in that state to a stand still; several 
8. 
other  states  began  considering  if  they  too  should  clamp  down  on  the  activities  of  the  MFI 
sector. On the other side, both the MFIs and the banks that loaned funds to the MFIs were 
agitated about the security of the funds already lent, and more generally about the prospects 
for MFI activity in general.  
9. 
In  October  2010,  the  Central  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  discussed  the  policy 
impasse  arising  out  of  this  situation  and  decided  to  constitute  a  sub-committee  under  the 
chairmanship  of  one  of  the  Board  members,  Shri  Y.H.  Malegam,  to  study  the  issues  and 
concerns in the MFI sector. The Malegam Committee submitted its report in January 2011; 
its  important  recommendations  were:  (i)  creation  of  a  separate  category  of  NBFC-MFIs; 
(ii) continuation  of  priority  sector  status  to  bank  loans  to  MFIs  which  comply  with  the 
regulation laid down for NBFC-MFIs; (iii) a margin cap and an interest rate cap on individual 
loans;  (iv)  transparency  in  interest  charges;  (v)  lending  by  not  more  than  two  MFIs  to 
individual  borrowers; 
information  bureaus; 
(vii) establishment of a proper system of grievance redressal by MFIs; and (viii) creation of 
one or more “social capital funds”. 
10. 
The  Reserve  Bank  accepted  the  broad  framework  of  recommendations  by  the 
Malegam Committee. A separate category of NBFCs – Non-Banking Financial Company – 
Micro  Finance  Institution  (NBFC-MFI)  –  was  created.  Further,  regulatory  instructions  were 
issued mandating the following. For an entity to qualify as a MFI, the aggregate amount of 
loan extended by it for income generating activity should not be less than 75 per cent of its 
total  loans.  Bank  credit  to  micro  finance  institutions  extended  on  or  after  April  1,  2011  for 
on-lending  to  individuals  and  also  to  members  of  SHGs/JLGs  would  be  eligible  for  priority 
sector  status  only  if  not less  than  85  per  cent  of  total  assets  of  MFI  were  in  the  nature of 
“qualifying assets”. To qualify as an asset under priority sector lending, banks should ensure 
that  the  interest  rate  charged  by  MFIs  on  final  borrowers  is  capped.  Further,  to  protect 
borrowers from usurious rates of interest, the interest rate that a MFI can charge a customer 
has been pegged at 12 per cent over the rate at which it borrows from the bank subject to a 
maximum of 26 per cent.  
11. 
The more effective regulation imposed by the Reserve Bank – particularly by way of 
a cap on interest rate and transparency in MFI  operations – has restored calm to the MFI 
sector.  The  sentiment  of  investors  too  has  improved,  and  some  MFIs  are  also  reportedly 
attracting venture capital funds.  
(vi)  creation  of  one  or  more  credit 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
12. 
Nevertheless,  the  roll  out  of  the  new  regulatory  regime  has  run  into  some 
bottlenecks.  Some  MFIs  are  unable  to  comply  with  the  qualifying  asset  criterion  for 
registering as a NBFC-MFI, and therefore banks are reluctant to make fresh loans to them as 
such loans do not qualify as priority sector lending. Small MFIs are also not able to meet the 
₹50 million entry point capital to be eligible to register as NBFC-MFI. In particular, the Andhra 
Pradesh based MFIs, saddled with huge losses, large NPAs and eroded capital, are facing 
an  especially  acute  problem  in  complying  with  the  capital  and  provisioning  norms.  The 
Reserve Bank is working on resolving these issues so that MFI operations can get back on 
track. 
13. 
Reflecting  the  lessons  of  the  agitation  in  the  microfinance  sector,  Government  of 
India is considering a central legislation to comprehensively cover the regulation of the MFI 
sector. The important features of the Micro Finance Institutions (Development & Regulation) 
Bill 2011 are: (i) the Reserve Bank will be the regulator of all MFIs irrespective of their size 
and organizational structure; (ii) the minimum entry point capital for a MFI will be ₹500,000; 
(iii) MFIs  will  be  permitted  to  collect  thrift;  (iv)  both  Government  of  India  and  the  Reserve 
Bank will enjoy concurrent power to frame rules; and (v) there will be an ombudsman for the 
MFI sector. 
14. 
Even  as  MFIs  should  be  brought  back  on  track,  albeit  under  more  effective 
regulation, there is another issue that banks need to ponder. By and large banks have largely 
outsourced the “last mile” to intermediaries such as MFIs, SHGs etc. This is a model that has 
worked, and one that we should pursue, and refine. Nevertheless, the question is, “is there a 
business case for banks to do some of the last mile themselves?” Can banks rely entirely on 
outsourcing? Isn’t there valuable experience to be gained by banks by “dirtying their hands” 
more and reoccupying the last mile?  
Priority sector lending 
15. 
The second issue I want to address is “priority sector lending” (PSL). PSL is by far 
the  longest  standing  affirmative  action  programme  pursued  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The 
objective of the programme, as is obvious, is to ensure flow of credit to certain productive 
sectors of the economy which may, in the normal course, be handicapped in accessing such 
credit. The current stipulation is that all domestic banks must ensure that at least 40 per cent 
of their total advances go to the priority sectors. The prescription in respect of foreign banks 
is 32 per cent.  
16. 
Is  such  “directed  lending”  good?  Evidence  from  development  experience  from 
around the world is mixed. From a purely efficiency point of view, it can be argued that the 
decision  on  where  to  lend  and  at  what  interest  rate  should  be  left  to  the  banks,  and  that 
superimposition  of  a  regulatory  prescription  on  top  of  that  would  lead  to  misallocation  of 
resources.  On  the  other  hand,  the  argument  in  support  of  directed  lending  is  that  given 
information  asymmetries,  a  laissez  faire  regime  will  not  necessarily  guarantee  efficiency. 
Besides, the pursuit of inclusive growth demands that public policy must manage the balance 
between equity and efficiency.  
17. 
Even  as  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  committed  to  the  broad  objectives  of  PSL,  it 
nevertheless received suggestions and requests from several quarters on the need to revisit 
the guidelines on PSL, especially as banks are increasingly using intermediaries in directing 
credit to the priority sector, and there is growing incidence of misclassification of non-priority 
sector  accounts  as  priority  sector.  The  Malegam  Committee  on  Microfinance  had  also 
recommended  a  review  of  the  PSL  guidelines  on  the  arbitrage  argument  –  that  tightened 
regulation on microfinance without corresponding tightening of other intermediaries that route 
priority sector credit may bias the flow towards the lightly regulated sectors. 
18. 
In response, the Reserve Bank appointed a Committee under the chairmanship of 
Shri M.V.  Nair,  former  Chairman  of  the  Union  Bank  of  India,  to  reexamine  the  existing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
(ii) 
(v) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
classification and suggest revised guidelines  with regard to PSL classification. In its report 
submitted  in  February  2012,  the  Nair  Committee  reaffirmed  the  need  to  continue  with  the 
PSL scheme on the argument of lack of access to credit for a vast segment of the society. 
The Committee advised that the PSL target for domestic commercial banks be retained at 
40 per cent of their Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) and that the positive bias in favour of 
foreign banks be done away with by raising the target for them too from 32 to 40 per cent.  
19. 
The  thrust  of  the  Nair  Committee  Report  was  to  recommend  changes  in  the 
allocations  to  various  sectors  within  the  aggregate  target.  Important  among  these 
recommendations are the following:  
(i) 
The distinction between direct and indirect agricultural lending be done away with by 
making  “agriculture  and  allied  activities”  a  composite  sub-sector  within  the  priority 
sector.  
A sub-target for small and marginal farmers “within agriculture and allied activities”, 
equivalent to 9 per cent of adjusted net bank credit (ANBC) or credit equivalent of 
off-balance sheet exposures (CEOBE), whichever is higher, be achieved in stages 
by  2015–16.  Similarly,  within  the  MSE  sector,  a  sub-target  for  micro  enterprises 
equivalent to 7 per cent of ANBC or CEOBE, whichever is higher, be achieved in 
stages by 2013–14.  
Loans  for  construction/purchase  of  one  dwelling  unit  for  an  individual  up  to 
₹2.5 million may be treated as PSL.  
Limits  under  priority  sector  loans  for  studies  in  India  be  increased  to  ₹1.5  million 
from the existing limit of ₹1 million, and for studies abroad to ₹2.5 million from the 
existing ₹2 million.  
Bank  loans  to  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  (NBFI) for  on-lending  to  specified 
segments may be reckoned for classification under priority sector up to a maximum 
of 5 per cent of ANBC or CEOBE, whichever is higher.  
The  interest  rate  on  the  PSL  shortfall  amount  deposited  by  defaulting  banks  in 
specified funds with NABARD/SIDBI/NHB be benchmarked to the reverse repo rate. 
20. 
The Nair Committee Report has since been placed on the Reserve Bank’s website 
for  feedback  and  comments.  Pending  that,  a  decision  has  been  taken  to  index  both  the 
interest  paid  to  banks  on  the  deposits  they  make  into  specified  funds  on  account  of  PSL 
shortfall and the interest charged to states on their borrowing from the RIDF to the Bank Rate 
which, in turn, is indexed to the repo rate.  
21. 
There  are  two  open  ended  issues  relating  to  priority  sector  lending  that  I  want  to 
raise.  The  first  relates  to  a  scheme  of  Priority  Sector  Lending  Certificates  (PSLCs) 
recommended by the Raghuram Rajan Committee. The idea is to allow banks to fulfill their 
PSL target by buying off PSL assets from other institutions through a PSLC. It is argued that 
the PSLC system will enhance efficiency as it will allow banks with a comparative advantage 
in PSL to exploit that advantage by overachieving on their target and selling the “surplus” to 
other banks which have a comparative disadvantage.  
22. 
The PSLC Scheme has some merits. The most obvious is that since it is a market 
based  mechanism  that  leverages  on  comparative  advantage,  it  could  be  efficiency 
enhancing.  Second,  it  could  lower  interest  rates  for  final  borrowers  provided  the  efficiency 
gains on account of PSLCs are passed on to them. However, on the flip side it is argued that 
there  may  likely  be  reduction  in  aggregate  PSL  from  the  banking  system  and  of  its 
contribution to the RIDF to the extent PSLCs are acquired from non-bank institutions such as 
MFIs, NBFCs which currently have no PSL obligation.  
23. 
The Nair Committee accepted the concept of PSLC, but recommended that in the 
first instance only a restricted PSLC, non-tradable and open only to commercial banks and 
RRBs,  be  introduced.  A  more  broad  based  PSLC,  tradable  and  open  to  all  institutions 
(vi) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
involved  in  PSL,  the  Committee  felt,  could  be  considered  on  the  experience  of  the  pilot 
experiment.  
24. 
The second  issue  relates  to  the  expansion  of the  list  of  eligible  sectors under  the 
PSL scheme. Almost every interest group in the economy wants its sector to be accorded 
priority sector status in the hope and expectation that this will provide easier access to credit 
at a lower cost. The lower cost issue is a clear misunderstanding since there is no regulatory 
interest rate ceiling on PSL. Expectation of easier access too is misguided. The more sectors 
we  include  in  PSL,  the  more  they  will  compete  for  the  same  fixed  pool  of  resources  and 
crowd each other out. Priority sector can deliver on its promise only if the eligible sectors are 
restricted to a select few which are important from the perspective of improving livelihoods.  
Lending interest rate system  
25. 
Let me now move on to the Reserve Bank’s policy initiative on the Lending Interest 
Rate  System.  The  benchmark  prime  lending  rate  (BPLR)  was  introduced  by  the  Reserve 
Bank  in  2003  to  serve  as  a  benchmark  rate  for  pricing  of  loans.  It  was  expected  that  this 
method of determining interest rate with reference to a benchmark will make loan pricing fair, 
transparent and contestable. In the event, the BPLR system failed to fulfil these objectives. 
26. 
Under the BPLR system, banks were allowed to lend at rates below the BPLR, but 
such lending was expected to be at the margin. However, in actual practice, banks started 
doing the  bulk  of their  business  below  the  BPLR.  In  2009,  as much  as  65  per  cent  of  the 
advances were made at sub-BPLR rates; for private sector banks, the proportion was as high 
as 83 per cent. The lack of transparency in the system encouraged some perverse cross-
subsidization. Loans to priority sectors such as agriculture and SME sectors were overpriced 
so as to lend below the BPLR to presumably preferred customers such as large corporates. 
The  lack  of transparency  in  the  operation  of  the  BPLR  also  made  it  difficult  to  assess the 
effectiveness of monetary transmission from the policy rate of the Reserve Bank to lending 
rates by banks.  
27. 
In order to correct the situation, the Reserve Bank appointed a committee under the 
chairmanship  of  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director.  As  per  the  recommendations  of  the 
Committee, the BPLR system was replaced by a base rate system effective July 1, 2010.  
28. 
Under the new system, each bank is mandated to determine a base rate of interest 
to  include  those  cost  elements  which  can  be  clearly  identified  and  are  common  across  all 
borrowers – cost of deposits, cost of maintaining the statutory liquidity ratio and cash reserve 
ratio,  cost  of  operations,  and  the  profit margin.  Banks  are  allowed  to  determine  the  actual 
lending  rate  they  charge  on  loans  and  advances  by  topping  up  the  base  rate  with  other 
customer specific charges such as product specific operating costs, credit risk premium and 
tenor premium. Since the base rate is the minimum rate for all loans, banks are not permitted 
to do any lending below the base rate, save for specified exceptions such as DRI advances, 
loans to banks’ own employees, loans to banks’ depositors against their own deposits and 
loans where borrowers enjoy subvention. As banks, in general, are not allowed to lend below 
the  base  rate,  the  stipulation  of  BPLR  as  the  ceiling  rate  for  loans  up  to  ₹200,000  was 
rescinded in the expectation that with the freedom to determine the interest rate, banks will 
be encouraged to actively step into this large volume-low value business segment.  
29. 
The  base  rate  system  is  expected  to  enhance  the  allocative  efficiency  of  the 
financial  intermediation  process,  permit  an  assessment  of  the  relative  efficiency  and  cost 
structure of banks and improve monetary transmission from the Reserve Bank’s policy rate 
to the bank’s lending rates. 
It is satisfying to note that banks have made a smooth adjustment to the base rate 
30. 
system.  Also,  base  rates  of  major  banks  have  converged.  The  base  rate  system  has 
improved transparency and transmission of policy rate changes to banks’ lending rates. For 
instance, between September 2010 and December 2011, the Reserve Bank raised the policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
rate  by  250  basis  points.  During  the  same  period,  the  average  base  rate  and  weighted 
average lending rate of scheduled commercial banks increased by a similar magnitude. After 
the Reserve Bank reduced policy rate by 50 basis points in May 2012, 26 banks responded 
with a reduction in their base rates evidencing more efficient monetary policy transmission in 
both upward and downward directions.  
31. 
One problem that has persisted even after the introduction of the base rate system 
relates  to  the  lack  of  transparency  in  the  customer  specific  spread  charged  to  a  borrower 
over the base rate. There have been complaints that the spread charged to a customer has 
been revised upwards without any apparent change in her risk profile. Also, where floating 
rate  loans  are  concerned,  existing  customers  have  been  disadvantaged  vis-à-vis  new 
customers with similar credit ratings, resulting in complaints about discrimination. In order to 
address this malady, the Reserve Bank constituted a working group under the chairmanship 
of  Deputy  Governor  Anand  Sinha  to  determine  the  principles  that  must  govern  proper, 
transparent and non-discriminatory pricing of credit. The working group is expected to submit 
its report by August 2012.  
Savings deposit Interest rate  
32. 
The next on my list of issues is Savings Deposit Interest Rate. Up until 1990, India 
ran a repressed financial system with a complex plethora of administered interest rates on 
both  deposit  and  lending  sides.  An  important  element  of  the  early  1990s  financial  sector 
reforms was to deregulate the interest rate structure to spur competitive impulses, improve 
allocative  efficiency  and  strengthen  monetary  transmission.  The  savings  deposit  rate, 
however, continued to be regulated; it remained unchanged at 3.5 per cent since March 1, 
2003  (revised  to  4  per  cent  in  May  2011)  even  as  other  deposit  rates  moved  in  either 
direction in response to the Reserve Bank’s policy rate calibration.  
The  advisability  of  deregulating  this  last  vestige  of  administered  interest  rate 
33. 
structure continued to be debated. Several benefits were argued in favour of freeing up the 
savings deposit rate – competitive pricing, product innovation, more efficient price discovery 
and improved monetary transmission. The arguments against deregulation were that it would 
hurt  the  asset-liability  management  of  banks  which  had  built  up  a  dependence  on  the  low 
cost,  large  volume  and  fairly  stable  savings  deposits  and  that  the  adjustment  to  a 
deregulated  regime  would  set  off  an  unhealthy  competition  among  banks,  potentially 
impairing  their  balance  sheets.  There  was  also  an  apprehension  that  deregulation  would 
militate  against  financial  inclusion  as,  in  the  business  of  servicing  small  customers,  banks 
might see the costs exceeding the benefits. 
34. 
On two separate occasions – first in 2002/03 and again 2006/07 – the Reserve Bank 
considered deregulation, and on both occasions deferred the issue perceiving the time to be 
as yet inopportune.  
35. 
The Reserve Bank revived the issue in 2011 by placing a Discussion Paper on the 
pros  and  cons  of  deregulating  the  savings  bank  deposit  interest  rate  on  its  website,  and 
following that up by generating an active debate. After careful consideration of the feedback, 
effective  October  25,  2011,  the  savings  bank  deposit  interest  rate  was  deregulated1.  To 
protect small customers whose knowledge levels and bargaining power are low, banks were 
mandated to provide a uniform rate for accounts upto  ₹100,000 while enjoying flexibility in 
the rates and charges for accounts over ₹100,000.  
                                                
1  With this, the task of interest rate deregulation has been brought to a logical closure. Interest rate on FCNR 
accounts of NRIs continues to be regulated for purposes of external sector management. Also, the lending 
rate by NBFC-MFIs has since been regulated as per the rationale explained earlier. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
36. 
Belying  earlier  apprehensions,  the  adjustment  to  the  deregulation  has  been  fairly 
smooth. Following the deregulation, seven relatively small private banks raised their saving 
bank  deposit  rates  and  expectedly  improved  their  share  of  this  market  segment.  The  big 
banks  have  yet  to  respond  to  this  but  it  is  expected  that  whenever  that  happens,  the 
adjustment will be smooth. 
37. 
In conclusion of this section, let me also add that the Reserve Bank looks forward to 
more  active  play  in  the  Saving  Bank  segment  with  banks  coming  out  with  some  customer 
friendly innovations especially aimed at attracting low income households, presently outside 
the banking sector.  
to  enhance  banking  penetration  and  promote  financial 
Liberalization of the branch authorization policy 
38. 
The  fifth  and  last  issue  is  Liberalization  of  the  Branch  Authorization  Policy.  The 
thrust  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  branch  expansion  policy  since  1962,  when  banks  were  first 
mandated  to  open  branches  in  unbanked/banked  centres  in  the  ratio  of  2:1,  has  been  to 
ensure banking penetration into the underbanked areas of the country. The precise formula 
has been continuously tweaked to reflect the changing scenario, but the underlying objective 
has all along been to link branch licences in urban/metropolitan areas to branches set up in 
disadvantaged semi urban/rural areas.  
39. 
Till  2005,  the  practice  was  for  RBI  to  issue  licences  for  individual  branches.  In 
September  2005  the  policy  was  liberalised,  importantly  shifting  from  branch  licensing  to 
branch authorisation. The new policy replaced the practice of licences for individual branches 
from  time  to  time  by  an  aggregate  annual  approval  through  a  consultative  and  interactive 
process.  Banks’  branch  expansion  strategies  and  plans  over  the  medium-term  would  be 
discussed  by  the  RBI  with  individual  banks. The  medium  term framework  and  the  specific 
proposals would cover opening, closing, shifting, merger and conversion of all categories of 
branches.  
By 2009, there was a growing consensus that further liberalization would be in order 
40. 
especially  so  as 
inclusion. 
Accordingly,  in  May  2009,  a  working  group  under  the  chairmanship  of  Executive  Director 
Vijaya  Bhaskar  was  constituted  to  review  the  Branch  Authorisation  Policy  with  a  view  to 
providing greater flexibility to banks in opening branches.  
41. 
Based on the recommendation of the working group, in December 2009, the case by 
case approval process was given up and domestic banks were given general permission to 
open branches in Tier 6 to Tier 3 centres (population up to 49,999) and in rural, semi urban 
and urban centres in the north eastern states and Sikkim. In November 2011, this general 
permission was further liberalized to opening of branches in Tier 2 centres (population up to 
99,999).  Thus  presently,  only  opening  of  branches  in  Tier  1  centres,  largely  urban  and 
metropolitan centres with population of 100,000 and above, requires prior RBI approval. In 
respect of the north-east states and Sikkim, laissez faire operates even for Tier 1 centres.  
42. 
In  2010,  a  roadmap  was  drawn  up  to  provide  access  to  formal  banking  to  every 
village  with  a  population  over  2,000.  Under  the  roadmap,  about  74,000  villages  with 
population  above  2,000  were  identified  as  unbanked.  These  villages  were  allocated  to 
various banks, including regional rural banks, for providing banking services by March 2012. 
Further,  in  July  2011,  banks  were  advised  that at  least 25  per  cent  of the  total  number of 
branches proposed to be opened during a year should be  in unbanked rural centres. Last 
month (June  2012),  the  process  was  refined further  by  advising  all  banks to  prepare  road 
maps covering all unbanked villages with population of less than 2000 with banking services 
especially to facilitate transfer of state benefits (EBT).  
43. 
This  is  the  long  established  carrot  and  stick  policy.  As  an  incentive  for  their 
outreach,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  indicated  that  banks  will  get  licences  for  branches  in 
urban/metropolitan centres (Tier 1) equal in number to the branches opened in underbanked 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
districts of underbanked states. To ensure that financial inclusion is “meaningful”, banks have 
also  been  advised  that  their  application  for  licences  will  be  evaluated  on  the  basis  of  the 
quality of their outreach – the extent of their penetration to unbanked areas, flow of credit to 
priority sectors, customer service to small account holders particularly by rolling out customer 
friendly products and innovative use of technology.  
44. 
One of the issues that comes up in financial inclusion is the deployment of Business 
Correspondents (BCs). Since the operation of a brick and mortar branch is expensive, banks 
have  found  the  BC  model  to  be  a  cost-effective  way  of  expanding  access  to  the  formal 
financial sector. Latest figures indicate that there are over 110,000 BCs deployed across the 
country  as  of  now.  Benefitting  from  accumulated  experience,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
liberalized the eligibility norms for appointment as BCs by including retired employees, kirana 
shops, NGOs, societies, post offices, Section 25 companies and also large corporates who 
have a marketing penetration. Recently, we have allowed interoperability of BCs to enable 
remittance and electronic benefit transfers. Even as the BC model has consolidated by now, 
two caveats are in order. First, banks should not neglect the importance of brick and mortar 
branches, and in their financial inclusion plans, should maintain a fair ratio between brick and 
mortar branches and BCs. Indeed, I think there is a strong case for a much larger effort on 
innovating  a  cost  effective  village  branch  model.  Second,  it  is  important  that  all  BCs  are 
trained  in  the  use  of  technology,  knowledge  of  bank  products  and  processes,  and 
importantly, in customer service.  
45. 
Even as branch authorization has been substantially liberalized, several challenges 
remain. The biggest challenge, as always in India, is in the numbers. In 1969 when banks 
were nationalized, there were 8321 branches with an average population per branch office 
(APPBO) of about 64000. That has improved to 97180 branches with an APPBO of about 
13000 by March 2012. But in a country with over 600,000 villages, these numbers, while both 
impressive and commendable, serve to highlight what remains to be done. In the first index 
of financial inclusion prepared by the Indian Council for Research on International Economic 
Relations (ICRIER) to determine the extent of reach of banking services in 100 countries of 
the world, India has been placed at the 50th spot, below China, Kenya and Morocco.  
46. 
The  second  big  challenge  lies  in moving  beyond  numbers  and  looking at  how  we 
actually  make  a  difference.  There  is  a  disappointingly  large  number  of  cases  of  bank 
branches  with  low  customer  footfalls;  BCs  who  drift  off  after  a  few  months  and  “no  frills 
accounts”  which  remain  largely  inoperative.  This  is  where  issues  of  perception  come  in. 
Unless  banks  are  convinced  that  reaching  out  to  the  common  man  is  not  just  a  forced 
regulatory imperative but a potential business opportunity, the numbers will remain without 
life.  The  Reserve  Bank  looks  forward  to  competition  among  banks  to  develop  business 
models for such small, low staff and low cost branches. 
Conclusion  
47. 
I have so far covered five specific areas: (i) microfinance; (ii) priority sector lending; 
(iii) lending interest rate system; (iv) savings deposit interest rate; and (v) liberalization of the 
branch authorization policy, to illustrate how the Reserve Bank’s regulatory and supervisory 
policies  are  guided  by  the  belief  that  financial  inclusion  is  a  necessary  prerequisite  for 
inclusive growth.  
What financial  inclusion  requires  most  of  all  is  efficient  and  sympathetic customer 
48. 
service by banks. No amount of regulation, rules, policies and plans will deliver sustainable 
results unless banks serve their customers with efficiency, empathy and courtesy.  
49. 
Many  of  you  are  aware  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  outreach  programme  which  is  an 
effort to connect with people in the villages. I know that many commercial banks, including 
IOB, have their own versions of the outreach programmes. These programmes give us all a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
first  hand  exposure  to  the  needs  and  aspirations  of  less  privileged  people  and  also  an 
understanding of their problems and concerns.  
50. 
In addition to the outreach, I have also included a frontline managers conference in 
my annual schedule. This is a conference where we bring frontline bank branch managers, 
MFIs, SHGs and some low income households together for a one day intensive, free flowing 
and informal discussion on the problems in the supply and demand of banking services to 
the poor. The last such conference was held in Pune in March. Several of the participants 
narrated their tales of woe to me – bank managers have no time for them; they have to wait 
long hours at the end of which they are asked to come some other time; the documentation 
required of them is not indicated to them all at once, but done piecemeal, frustrating them 
and multiplying the transaction costs; the paper work is exacting; they discover hidden costs 
only after the transaction is completed; the attitude of the bank staff is unsympathetic if also 
uncivil.  The  general  impression  I  got  is  that  frontline  branch  managers  treat  “no  frills” 
accounts as a “nuisance” and low income households as an intrusion into their time and their 
business. This is disappointing to say the least.  
51. 
As  I  have  said  on  several  previous  occasions,  banks  should  look  upon  financial 
inclusion  not  as  an  obligation  but  as  an  opportunity  to  build  “fortune  at  the  bottom  of  the 
pyramid”. I am also conscious that the bulk of our effort so far has been from the supply side 
– opening branches, appointing BCs and opening accounts that remain largely inoperative. If 
this is all that happens, the entire effort is both futile and wasteful. We need to supplement 
that  supply  side  effort  by  a  demand  side  effort  –  by  reaching  out  to  people  left  behind, 
inspiring their trust and confidence in the banking system and supporting them in improving 
the  quality  of  their  lives.  Such  a  change  in  mindset  is  very  important  if  we  are  to  achieve 
meaningful  financial  inclusion.  In  other  words,  “touching  hearts  and  spreading  smiles” 
requires both a smart mind and a kind heart. 
52. In conclusion, my best wishes to the CMD, directors on the board, officers and staff of 
IOB  on  this  historic  occasion  of  your  bank’s  platinum  jubilee.  I  wish  you  every  success  in 
your endeavour of “touching hearts and spreading smiles”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
