Subir Gokarn: The Second International Research Conference – genesis, 
motivation and theme 
Welcome remarks by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Second  International  Research  Conference  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Mumbai, 
1 February 2012. 
 Members  of  the  central  banking  fraternity,  participants  from  the  financial,  academic  and 
media communities, other distinguished guests: on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, let 
me welcome you all to this Second International Research Conference. 
Genesis of the conference 
The Reserve Bank of India’s First International Research Conference was held in 2010. In 
that  year,  The  Reserve  Bank,  which  commenced  operations  on  April  1,  1935,  entered  its 
75th year. A series of knowledge-sharing events such as seminars, special memorial lectures, 
outreach programmes were organised on this occasion, culminating in the First International 
Research Conference. 
The First Conference focussed on “Challenges to Central Banking in the Context of Financial 
Crisis”.  At  the  Conference,  two  broad  themes  were  covered.  The  first  was  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  during  crisis,  including  financial  stability  as  an  objective  and  the  second 
related  to  the  challenges  posed  to  the  central  banking,  including  that  to  regulation  and 
supervision,  by  globalisation  and  market  failures.  Five  specific  challenges  were  discussed, 
namely : (a) managing national monetary policy decisions in a globalizing environment, given 
the  growing  complexity  in  the  interactions  between  external  developments  and  domestic 
variables,  (b)  redefining  the  mandate  of  central  banks,  given  the  pre-crisis  attraction  of 
inflation targeting and the post-crisis debate on the role of central banks in relation to asset 
prices,  (c)  responsibility  of  central banks  towards  financial stability,  particularly  beyond  the 
conventional Lender of the Last Resort (LOLR) function, (d) managing the costs and benefits 
of  regulation,  in  view  of  the  difficulty  in  drawing  a  fine  balance  between  regulation  and 
financial innovations, and (e) the autonomy and accountability of central banks, particularly 
during  exit  from  the  crisis.  The  Conference  had  brought  together  central  bankers, 
academicians, policy makers, financial regulators and supervisors and private sector experts 
to a common platform. There were very important lessons to take from that Conference and 
that is why we are here to repeat it as a biennial event. 
In dealing with the crisis of 2008, while we deliberated on the pros and cons of each potential 
response at length, the uncertainty was large and risks were inherent in each of the actions 
we  took.  Often,  our  judgments  left  us  with  a  feeling  that  we  were  at  times  acting 
subconsciously.  This  reinforced  our  view  that  it  was  necessary  to  enhance  the  role  of 
research for policy making. This Conference series was one step in that direction. Through 
this Conference, the Reserve Bank intends to bring together central bankers, academicians, 
policy makers, financial regulators and supervisors and private sector experts to a common 
platform  to  share  their  thoughts  and  to  evolve  solutions.  The  Conference  will  hopefully 
provide  a  useful  forum  for  the  economists  across  the  globe  to  exchange  their  views  and 
research  findings  on  issues  relevant  from  a  central  bank’s  perspective,  which  will,  in  turn, 
provide valuable insights for policymakers. 
Motivation behind the Second International Research Conference 
The  world  has  moved  a  great  deal  since  the  First  Conference,  but  without  resolving  its 
financial problems. As a result, the sustainability of the recovery is in doubt. At the time of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fragilities  stayed  unresolved. 
First Conference, we were seeing green shoots of revival and were hoping that recovery may 
well  strengthen  in  due  course.  Since  then,  growth  in  emerging  markets  rebounded  but 
inflation  surged.  By  contrast,  recovery  in  advanced  economies  was  relatively  subdued. 
Inflation remained largely benign, but nevertheless did climb up from extremely low levels, 
posing  some  difficulties.  Financial 
In  spite  of  some 
deleveraging,  risks  abounded  and  were  compounded  as  public  sector  balance  sheets 
weakened with weaker growth and private sector bailouts. 
Clearly,  new  dimensions  of  financial  crisis  have  emerged  since  the  first  Conference.  The 
nature  of  the  crisis  has  changed  with  fragilities  of  the  private  sector  balance  sheets 
transmitting  to  the  fragilities  of  the  sovereign  balance  sheets.  There  appears  to  be  no 
solution  till  the  burden  sharing  problem  amongst  various  state  and  non-state  actors  are 
resolved.  Sovereign  debt  sustainability  poses  the  biggest  threat  to  sustainability  of  the 
recovery,  while  coming  into  potential  conflict  with  the  central  banking  objectives  of  price 
stability  and  financial  stability.  Any  crisis  resolution  strategy  needs  to  accord  priority  to 
resolution  of  sovereign  debt  problems,  but  there  is  a  lack  of  clarity  on  what  roles  central 
banks can perform in this. A case could be made that it would be better that central banks 
focus on their main jobs, while let Governments handle their debt problems. However, at the 
present  juncture  there  are  significant  spillovers.  Monetary  authorities’  actions  impinge  on 
markets’  ability  to  refinance  debt  and  fiscal  authorities’  actions  constraints  monetary 
responses. 
Central banks were seen as partly responsible for the current crisis, but they were also at the 
forefront  of  unprecedented  public  policy  response  that  was  put  in  place  swiftly,  using  a 
combination  of  conventional  and  unconventional  measures,  to  contain  the  severity  of  the 
crisis and stimulate recovery towards resumption of normal growth. While responding to the 
crisis, the RBI recognised that learning right lessons from the global crisis to strengthen its 
crisis prevention and management frameworks was critically important for the RBI to be able 
to  perform  more  effectively  the  multiple  roles  it  plays,  including  in  the  realm  of  financial 
stability. 
In the decades before the crisis, financial stability steadily lost its importance as an explicit 
central bank policy objective. The question, therefore, was how to focus on financial stability 
along  with  monetary  policy.  What  was  it  that  the  central  banks  needed  to  do  differently? 
Move away from hard inflation targeting to a more diverse role? Accordingly, the theme of 
the  first  conference  was  “Challenges  to  Central  Banking  in  the  Context  of  the  Financial 
Crisis”. Since the FIRC, the challenges for central banks have only increased. Apart from the 
central  banks  needing  to  consider  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  they  now  had  to 
grapple with sovereign debt sustainability – something they do not have core competency in, 
but need to get involved with so as to preserve financial and macroeconomic stability. 
In  essence,  the  central  banks  of  advanced  economies  now  face  a  new  trilemma,  i.e.  the 
need  to  simultaneously  ensure  price  stability,  financial  stability  and  sustainable  sovereign 
debt, which may not be possible if monetary policy accommodates on a sustained basis the 
needs of the financial systems and sovereigns. This trilemma is also faced in many emerging 
market economies, albeit in a somewhat different way. These economies confront a much 
stronger inflationary environment and, therefore, the conflict between price stability and the 
other two objectives are much sharper. 
Theme of the Second International Research Conference (SIRC) and its relevance 
The pre-crisis policy environment was characterized by growing preference for separation of 
price  stability  centric  monetary  policy  from  financial  stability  and  debt  management,  even 
though  country  practices  varied.  In  response  to  the  financial  crisis,  central  banks  went 
beyond the conventional “lender of last resort” role, and also recognised that price stability 
does not guarantee financial stability. With the return of financial stability objective to central 
banks, along with additional tools in the form of either micro-prudential regulation/supervision 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
or  macro-prudential  regulation,  or  both,  central  banks  have  to  deal  with  any  apparent 
conflicts  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  objectives,  while  aiming  generally  to 
maximize the complementarities and synergies between the two. 
Besides the monetary policy response to the crisis, the fiscal stimulus used across countries 
to bailout the financial systems and to support economic growth has led to large build up of 
sovereign  debt,  and  in  some  countries  the  levels  look  unsustainable.  In  several  countries, 
sustained slowdown in growth has also magnified fiscal pressures, arising from both weak 
revenue realization and the need for more stimulus. Sovereign risk concerns have impacted 
financial  market  conditions  adversely,  and  central  banks  are  increasingly  being  seen  as 
“sovereign lenders of last resort”, even when they resort to OMOs aimed at improving the 
liquidity and financial market conditions necessary for better monetary policy transmission. In 
some  countries,  the  debt  levels  are  so  large  that  return  to  sustainable  levels  may  take 
decades,  and  without  the  tacit  backing  of  central  back  accommodation,  financing  of 
government  deficits  and  addressing  the  debt  stock  concerns  may  become  increasingly 
difficult. As a result, even if central banks do not perform the debt management function, they 
will have a major role in the resolution of the sovereign debt problem. Previous episodes of 
large debt overhang suggest that inflation has often been the saviour. The risk of sacrificing 
“price  stability”  goal  with  greater  responsibility  on  financial  stability  and  sovereign  debt 
provides a setting, which could be characterised as typical of a trilemma for a central bank.  
Accordingly, the theme of the SIRC is “Monetary Policy, Financial Stability and Sustainable 
Sovereign Debt – The New Trilemma”. We have three technical sessions at the Conference 
to  deal  with  each  of  the  three  goals  –  price  stability,  financial  stability  and  sovereign  debt 
sustainability  –  and  see  how  they  conflict  with  other  goals.  The  first  session  deals  with 
“Conducting  Monetary  Policy  Post-Crisis:  Challenges  to  Transmission  Mechanism  and 
Operating  Framework”.  The  second  covers  the  “Impact  of  Crisis  on  Sovereign  Debt: 
Implications for Macro-economy and Inter-linkages with other Policies”. The third focuses on 
“Financial  Stability:  Evolving 
the  context  of  Post-Crisis 
Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Developments”.  Each  of  these  three  topics  is  important  in 
understanding  the  New  Trilemma.  Following  these,  we  also  would  have  two  Governor’s 
panels discussing specific policy questions relating to the new trilemma and the interactions 
between the new and old trilemmas. 
Issues  and  Challenges 
in 
The papers at the conference 
Let me now briefly touch upon the papers that we have received at the Conference. We have 
nine very good papers spread equally over the three sessions. Many of them will find a place 
in the frontier literature. All of them address some very important policy questions and will 
surely enhance our understanding from a central banking policy point of view. Importantly, in 
discussing the new trilemma, these papers have not neglected the question of growth that is 
central to central bank objectives. It needs to be emphasized that the central banks pursuit of 
price  stability  is  not  devoid  of  the  growth  objective,  but  is  the  very  basis  of  achieving 
sustainable  long-term  growth.  Some  papers  at  the  Conference  directly  address  questions 
such as the link between finance and growth or the link between debt overhang and growth. 
There are others that investigate aspects of the three pillars of macroeconomic policies that 
define the New Trilemma by dealing with one or more of these pillars. Most of these have 
also gone into the impact of policy choices on growth. Political economy questions relating to 
policy-making  and  policy  implementation  have  also  been  raised  in  some  papers,  making 
them that much more appealing from a practioners’ viewpoint. 
The  choice  of  techniques  used  in  these  papers  is  quite  varied.  Some  of  them  use  panel 
regressions sifting through cross-country data, while others time series techniques such as 
vector  auto  regression  and  impulse  response  functions.  There  are  some  that  have  been 
developed in the framework of overlapping generations (OLG) models with sticky prices and 
solved  analytically.  However,  the  richness  in  all  the  papers  lies  more  in  raising  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
questions and addressing them in a meaningful way. So the proceedings of this conference 
could be expected to provide us useful guidance on the post-crisis policy framework in the 
context of the new trilemma, and the challenges new trilemma may pose for managing the 
old trilemma. 
Some questions for the conference 
The  three  nodes  of  the  new  trilemma  represent  three  pillars  of  a  sound  macroeconomic 
environment. Price stability, financial stability and sustainable sovereign debt are necessary 
for sustainable high growth. You will hear about the policy conflicts relating to the pursuit of 
these three pillars at the same time from Governor Subbarao, who will be delivering his key 
note address shortly. But before that I would raise some specific questions in the context of 
the Conference theme. 
Should pre-crisis monetary policy be held responsible for the crisis? 
Some have argued that policy rates in advanced economies were kept at levels lower than 
what would have been necessary had the central bank followed a rule-based policy, such as, 
the Taylor rule. Other, however, would suggest that monetary policy was not the reason for 
the crisis as the “forecast of inflation as well as inflation expectations” were low, indicating 
that the threat to price stability from developments in macro economy and financial markets 
were largely absent. 
Has the response of monetary policy to the crisis been appropriate? 
Use  of  both  conventional  and  unconventional  policy  was  unprecedented  in  recent  history. 
Have  these  measures  been  effective?  Some  would  say  but  for  these  measures,  another 
Great  Depression  would  have  become  unavoidable.  Others,  however,  sustained  weak 
growth and employment conditions as evidence of policy measures not paying off as yet. 
What are the lessons from the crisis for monetary policy framework? 
They are many. Price stability does not ensure financial stability, and the costs of cleaning up 
after a financial crisis are very high. Asset price bubbles potentially could be more risky than 
thought  earlier,  but  direct  monetary  policy  response  may  still  have  to  be  avoided.  Macro-
prudential tools may be more suitable for that. Imbalances grow in good times, as during the 
great  moderation,  and  preventing  the  build-up  of  imbalances  in  good  times  would  require 
unpleasant timely policy actions. 
What constrains effective transmission of monetary policy? 
The  effectiveness  of  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  has  been  constrained  by 
the process of intense deleveraging in the advanced economies. Deflationary headwinds and 
zero  lower  bound  (ZLB)  for  nominal  rates  are  harder  to  deal  with  than  demand  induced 
inflationary  pressures.  The  surfeit  of  liquidity  in  the  global  system  has  resulted  in  sharp 
increases in global commodity prices as well as capital flows induced asset prices in EMEs, 
exerting thereby inflationary pressures. EMEs face a different transmission challenge, when 
the inflation process is driven by supply shocks, to which interest rate actions may not  be 
most appropriate. 
I  hope  I  have  provided  you  with  the  broad  context  behind  the  theme  of  this  Conference. 
Governor Subbarao will now take you through some specifics, laying out what is meant by 
trilemma, how it differs from the Old trilemma, the various conflicts that might arise and how 
best we can attempt to manage these. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
