H R Khan: Outward Indian FDI – recent trends & emerging issues 
Address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bombay 
Chamber of Commerce & Industry, Mumbai, 2 March 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri. R. Rajagopalan, Shri. Rajan Goyal, Shri, Rajeev Jain and 
Shri. Surajit Bose, Reserve Bank of India. 
In recent years, emerging market economies (EMEs) are increasingly becoming a source of 
foreign investment for rest of the world. It is not only a sign of their increasing participation in 
the  global  economy  but  also  of  their  increasing  competence.  More  importantly,  a  growing 
impetus for change today is coming from developing countries and economies in transition, 
where a number of private as well as state-owned enterprises are increasingly undertaking 
outward expansion through foreign direct investments (FDI). Companies are expanding their 
business  operations  by  investing  overseas  with  a  view  to  acquiring  a  regional  and  global 
reach. 
A. 
Factors providing momentum to outward foreign investments 
According  to  UNCTAD’s  World  Investment  Report  2011,  the  stock  of  outward  FDI  from 
developing economies reached US$ 3.1 trillion in 2010 (15.3 per cent of global outward FDI 
stock), up from US$ 857 billion (10.8 per cent of global outward FDI stock) 10 years ago. On 
flow basis, outward FDI from developing economies has grown from US$ 122 billion in 2005 
to US$ 328 billion in 2010 accounting for around a quarter of total outward FDI witnessed at 
global level.  
FDI  is  a  natural  extension  of  globalisation  process  that  often  begins  with  exports.  In  the 
process,  countries  try  to  access  markets  or  resources  and  gradually  reduce  the  cost  of 
production  and  transaction  by  expanding  overseas  manufacturing  operations  in  countries 
where certain ownership-specific advantages can help them to compete globally. Adoption of 
such strategies helps them to catch up with competing economies.  
A significant uptrend in outward FDI has also been observed in the case of India in recent 
years. Since globalisation is a two-way process, integration of the Indian economy with the 
rest of the world is evident not only in terms of higher level of FDI inflows but also in terms of 
increasing level of FDI outflows. 
The overseas investment of domestic corporate sector through FDI has provided them better 
access to global networks and markets, transfer of technology and skills and also enables 
them  to  share  research  and  development  efforts  and  outcomes.  It  can  also  be  seen  as  a 
corporate strategy to promote the brand image and utilisation of raw materials available in 
the host country. In the Indian context, overseas investments have been primarily driven by 
either resource seeking or market seeking or technology seeking motives. Of late, there has 
been a surge in resource seeking overseas investments by Indian companies, especially to 
acquire energy resources in Australia, Indonesia and Africa. 
It is against this background that I intend to speak on recent trends and emerging issues in 
relation to Indian outward FDI. I am thankful to Bombay Chamber of Commerce for choosing 
this topical subject for today’s discussion. In my presentation, I would briefly talk about the 
evolution of outward FDI policy in India, trends and analysis of outward FDI, funding pattern 
of  outward  FDI,  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  Government  of  India, 
emerging issues and end with some thoughts on way forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
B. 
Evolution of outward foreign investment policy in India 
Change  in  policy  environment  across  the  economies  has  greatly  influenced  the  outward 
investment pattern in the global economy. Nonetheless, recognising the concerns of capital 
outflows,  governments 
in  different  countries,  particularly  emerging  and  developing 
economies,  have  been  relatively  more  circumspect  on  undertaking  policy  liberalisation  of 
outward investment. Therefore, it is important to highlight how the Indian policy in this regard 
has evolved over time.  
In  the  Indian  context,  overseas  investments  in  joint  ventures  (JV)  and  wholly  owned 
subsidiaries  (WOS)  have  been  recognised  as  important  channels  for  promoting  global 
business  by  the  Indian  entrepreneurs.  The  broad  approach  has  been  to  facilitate  outward 
foreign direct investment through joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries and provision 
of  financial  support  to  promote  exports  including  project  exports  from  India.  With  a  steady 
rise in capital inflows, particularly in the second half of 2000s, the overall foreign exchange 
reserve  position  provided  comfort  to  progressive  relaxation  of  the  capital  controls  and 
simplification  of  the  procedures  for  outbound  investments  from  India.  Three  distinct 
overlapping  phases  as  under  can  be  discerned  in  the  evolution  of  the  Indian  outward  FDI 
policies.  
Phase I (1992 to 1995): Period of Liberalization of Indian economy 
Guidelines  on  outward  FDI  were  in  place  before  the  process  of  liberalisation  and 
globalisation  of  Indian  economy  in  1991–92.  Policy  changes  since  1992  were  undertaken 
keeping in view the changing needs of a growing economy. Understandably, the rules were 
quite restrictive and subject to conditions of no cash remittance and mandatory repatriation of 
dividend  from  the  profits  from  the  overseas  projects.  In  1992,  the  “automatic  route”  for 
overseas investments was introduced and cash remittances were allowed for the first time. 
Nonetheless,  the  total  value  was  restricted  to  US$  2  million  with  a  cash  component  not 
exceeding US$ 0.5 million in a block of 3 years. 
Phase II (1995 to 2000): Creation of a Fast Track Route  
In 1995, a comprehensive policy framework was laid down and the work relating to approvals 
for overseas investment was transferred from Ministry of Commerce to the Reserve Bank of 
India to provide a single window clearance mechanism. The policy framework articulated a 
cohesive approach that was flexible enough to respond to likely future trends. It reflected the 
need for transparency, recognition of global developments, capturing of Indian realities and 
learning of lessons from the past. The basic objectives of the policy, inter alia, was to ensure 
that such outflows, were determined by commercial interests but were also consistent with 
the macroeconomic and balance of payment compulsions of the country, particularly in terms 
of the magnitude of the capital flows. In terms of the overseas investment policy, a fast track 
route  was  adopted  where  the  limits  were  raised  from  US$  2  million  to  US$  4  million  and 
linked to average export earnings of the preceding three years. Cash remittance continued to 
be restricted to US$ 0.5 million. Beyond US$ 4 million, approvals were considered under the 
“Normal Route” approved by a Special Committee comprising the senior representatives of 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (Chairman)  and  the  Ministries  of  Finance,  External  Affairs  and 
Commerce (members). Investment proposals in excess of US$ 15 million were considered 
by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Special  Committee  and  were 
generally approved if the required resources were raised through the global depository route 
(GDR) route. 
In  March  1997,  exchange  earners,  other  than  exporters,  were  also  brought  under  the  fast 
track  route.  Indian  promoters  were  allowed  to  set  up  second  and  subsequent  generation 
companies, provided the first generation company was set up under the Fast Track Route. A 
series of measures to encourage the software industry in India to expand capacity, reduce 
costs,  improve  quality  and  also  invest  abroad  were  put  in  place.  As  part  of  the  reforms 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
process  preceding  the  introduction  of  FEMA,  the  neutrality1  condition  attached  to  the 
Overseas  Direct  Investment  was  done  away  with  in  1999.  The  scope  for  outward  FDI, 
however, expanded significantly after the introduction of the Foreign Exchange Management 
Act (FEMA) in June 2000.  
Phase III (2000 till date): Liberalized framework under FEMA 
In  2002,  the  per  annum  upper  limit  for  automatic  approval  was  raised  to  US$100  million. 
Such upper limit was, however, discontinued when the automatic route for outward FDI was 
further liberalised in March 2003 to enable Indian parties2 to invest to the extent of 100 per 
cent of their net worth. Since then the limit of outward FDI has been gradually increased to 
400 per cent. The ceiling of 400 per cent of net worth, however, is not applicable for  
a) 
investments made out of balances held in the Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency 
(EEFC)  account  of  the  Indian  party  or  out  of  funds  raised  abroad  through 
ADRs/GDRs.  
Indian companies engaged in the energy and natural resources sectors, such as, oil, 
gas, coal and mineral ores, though they would require prior approval of the Reserve 
Bank of India. 
b) 
Overseas  investments  in  unincorporated  entities  in  oil  sector  (e.g.  by  way  of  taking  up 
participation  interest)  by  Navaratna  Public  Sector  Undertakings  were  allowed  under  the 
automatic route and subsequently the facility was extended to other Indian entities as well. 
Further,  in  2004,  the  External  Commercial  Borrowing  policy  was  modified  and  funding  of 
JVs/WOS abroad was included as a permissible end-use of the funds raised.  
At present, any Indian party can make overseas direct investment in any bona-fide activity 
except  certain  real  estate  activities  {i.e.,  buying  and  selling  of  real  estate  or  trading  in 
Transferable Development Rights (TDRs)} and banking business (which are considered by 
an  inter-Ministerial  group)  that  are  specifically  prohibited.  For  undertaking  activities  in  the 
financial services sector, certain conditions as specified by the Reserve Bank, however, need 
to be adhered to. Access to international financial markets was also progressively liberalised 
for the Indian corporate sector and they were allowed to use special purpose vehicles (SPVs) 
in international capital markets to finance their cross-border acquisitions. The impact of policy 
liberalisation is now reflected in cross-border acquisitions by Indian corporate growing at an 
accelerated pace.  
C. 
Trend analysis of outward FDI  
Even though policy changes undertaken in respect of overseas investment have facilitated 
the growing cross-border acquisitions by the Indian corporate sector, other structural reforms 
undertaken since 1992, such as, industrial deregulation, trade liberalisation and relaxation of 
regulations  governing  inward  FDI,  led  to  major  restructuring  in  the  Indian  industry.  In  fact, 
many  of  the  leading  companies  owe  their  competitiveness  to  the  reform  process.  Greater 
exposure  to  internal  as  well  external  competition  proved  to  be  instrumental  in  building 
confidence  among  the  Indian  companies  to  compete  with  foreign  competitors  in  world 
market. Apart from liberalised policy environment for overseas investment, India has gained 
ground as an important investor on the back of (a) rapid economic growth, (b) easy access to 
                                                 
1  Neutrality refers to a condition that the amount of outward investment should be repatriated in full by way of 
dividend, royalty, etc. within a period of five years. 
2  An  Indian  Party  is  a  company  incorporated  in  India  or  a  body  created  under  an  Act  of  Parliament  or  a 
partnership  firm  registered  under  the  Indian  Partnership  Act  1932  and  any  other  entity  in  India  as  may  be 
notified by the Reserve Bank. When more than one such company, body or entity makes investment in the 
foreign entity, such combination will also form an “Indian Party”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
financial  resources  and  (c)  strong  motivations  to  acquire  resources  and  strategic  assets 
abroad. 
One should not assume that overseas investment by Indian companies is a phenomenon of 
1990s.  In  fact,  Indian  firms  began  to  invest  overseas  in  the  1960s,  but  India’s  restrictive 
policies for overseas investment limited them to small, minority joint ventures in developing 
economies.  First  major  overseas  Indian  venture  was  a  textile  mill  set  up  in  Ethiopia  in 
1959 by the Birla Group of companies (Authkorala, 2009)3. Overseas investment operations 
were, however, geographically concentrated in West and East Africa, Middle East, and South 
and East Asia with which India shared a colonial heritage and historical linkages. Sustained 
growth  in  Indian  overseas  investment  could  be  seen  starting  during  1970s  when  the 
industrial licensing system was more stringent.  
Trend of outward investments during the past one decade 
A trend analysis shows that the level of outward FDI from India has increased manifold since 
1999–2000. The level of net outward FDI flows (on BoP basis), however, recorded a sharp 
uptrend  at  US$  74.3  billion  during  the  second  half  of  2000s  (2005–06  to  2009–10)  as 
compared  to  US$  8.2  billion in  the  first  half  of  2000s  (2000–01  to  2004–05).  Even  though 
trend in India’s outward FDI was moderately affected during crisis year of 2009–10, a sharp 
rebound was seen in 2010–11 (Table 1).  
 
In  recent  years,  outward  FDI  continued  to  be  mainly  financed  through  equity  and  loans. 
Although  guarantees  issued  have  been  rising,  their  invocation  has  been  negligible  during 
2009–10  and  2010–11.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  number  of  outward  FDI  proposals 
under the Automatic Route during 2000s has also been on the rise (Table 2) indicating the 
growing appetite of the Indian corporates to establish their foot prints abroad and the liberal 
regulatory regime.  
                                                 
3  Athukorala,  Prema-chandra  (2009),  “Outward  Foreign  Direct  Investment  from  India”,  Asian  Development 
Review, Vol. 26, No.2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Position of India in the global context 
Outward FDI from India has mainly been by way of equities and loans (Table 1). According to 
UNCTAD’s World Investment Report 2011, based on the magnitude of FDI outflows, India 
was  placed  21st  in  the  world.  In  terms  of  value  of  net  purchases4  (i.e.,  cross  border 
acquisition deals) by Indian companies in 2010, India was placed fifth in the World after the 
US, Canada, Japan and China. 
Investment trends of Indian transnational companies  
Importantly,  scale  of  overseas  investment  by  domestic  companies  has  also  expanded  as 
India was placed second in 2010 only after China in terms of average size of net purchase 
deals (US$190 million in India as compared to US$ 197 million in China). Similarly, India also 
figures  among  the  top  five  emerging  and  developing  economies  whose  state  owned 
enterprises  are  increasingly  becoming  transnational  corporations.  It  is  not  surprising  as  in 
recent years, India’s Public Sector Units (PSUs), viz. NTPC, GAIL, ONGC and NALCO have 
undertaken significant overseas green-field investments. 
Sectoral investment trends 
Sectoral pattern of outward FDI during 2006–07 to 2010–11 shows that it has been mainly 
invested  in  services  and  manufacturing  sector.  In  2010–11,  within  manufacturing,  major 
sub-sectors  which  attracted  outward  FDI  from  India  included  agriculture  machineries  and 
equipments, basic organic chemicals, drugs, medicines & allied products, refined petroleum 
products, indigenous sugar, etc. Similarly, within services sector, a majority of outward FDI 
had  gone  into  business  services,  data  processing,  financial  services,  architectural  and 
engineering, engine architectural and other technical consultancy activities (Table 3). 
                                                 
4  Net cross-border M&A purchases by a home economy imply purchases of companies abroad by home-based 
TNCs netted by sales of foreign affiliates of home-based TNCs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 
Since late 1990s, Indian outward FDI began to be in more high-tech and trade supporting 
sectors. Many Indian IT firms like Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys, WIPRO, and Satyam 
acquired  global  contracts  and  established  overseas  offices  in  developed  economies  to  be 
close to their key clients. In addition, other sectors which have attracted significant share of 
outward FDI from India in the recent years included extraction of crude petroleum, oil and 
gas field services and services incidental to mining. 
Investments trends for acquisition of natural & strategic resources 
Sectoral  pattern  suggests  that  greater  outward  investment  by  the  Indian  corporate  sector 
seems  to  have  been  motivated  by  long-term  strategic  considerations  rather  than  by 
short-term profitability. For instance, ONGC Videsh Ltd., a fully-owned subsidiary of ONGC, 
presently has overseas assets in 33 projects in 14 countries of Middle East, Africa, CIS & Far 
East and Latin America. Oil India Limited has presence in eight countries mainly in terms of 
exploration blocks in Libya, Gabon, Iran, Nigeria and Sudan. Similarly, Coal India Limited has 
formed a subsidiary Coal Videsh Ltd. to acquire coal assets abroad and also set up a joint 
venture  company  International  Coal  Ventures  Ltd  with  other  companies  to  acquire 
metallurgical  and  thermal  coal  assets  outside  India.  Overseas  investment  by  Indian 
companies  in  extractive  industries  assumes  importance  as  it  is  required  to  support  rapid 
economic growth, industrialisation and urbanisation in the domestic sector and guarantee a 
long-term, stable supply of natural resources to the country against a background of rising 
commodity prices.  
Such trend has also been observed in the case of other major emerging market economies, 
especially  other  members  of  BRIC  group.  In  fact,  number  of  companies  investing  abroad 
from the BRIC group in the FT 500 list has increased from 20 in 2006 to 62 in 2008 (The 
Economist,  September  10,  2011),  reflecting  their  growing  overseas  business  operations. 
Common  feature  is  that  domestic  companies  in  BRIC  economies  have  been  seeking  to 
enhance their access to supplies of raw materials and moving into new segments of strategic 
commodities  and  move  up  the  value  chain.  Nonetheless,  oil  and  gas  and  other  natural 
resource-based industries are relatively less prominent in Indian outward FDI compared to 
that by Brazil and China.  
Other major overseas acquisitions in recent years by Tata Steel, Hindalco, Bharti Airtel, etc 
have also been a part of their inorganic growth strategies. In these cases, acquisitions were 
specifically  undertaken  to  attain  global  size  and  status,  and  to  build  new  competitive 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
advantages  by  combining  the  best  international  technology  with  low-cost  Indian  labour 
(Satyanand and Raghavendran, 2010).5  
Destinational investment trends  
Direction of outward FDI shows that it is getting more diversified across countries. Diverting 
from  the  past  trend  (i.e.  pre-1990s)  when  Indian  companies  were  investing  in  countries 
where  there  was  little  technological  competition,  the  more  recent  trend  shows  that  Indian 
overseas  investment  is  increasingly  flowing  to  developed  economies  (Table  4),  partly 
reflecting growing confidence of the Indian corporates and availability of overseas assets at 
competitive rates.  
 Trend of using SPV or M&A route for investments abroad 
Indian  companies  going  for  overseas  investments  have  largely  used  either  their  overseas 
locally-incorporated  subsidiaries  or  have  set  up  holding  companies  and/or  special  purpose 
vehicles  (SPVs)  in  offshore  financial  centres  or  other  regional  financial  centres.  In  2005, 
Indian  companies  were  allowed  to  float  SPVs  in  international  capital  markets  to  finance 
acquisitions  abroad  facilitating  the  use  of  leveraged  buy-outs.  Since  then,  SPVs  set  up  in 
off-shore  financial  centres,  such  as,  Mauritius,  Singapore  and  the  Netherlands,  have  been 
mainly used as conduits to mobilise funds and invest in third countries mainly keeping in view 
the  business  and  legal  consideration,  taxation  advantages  and  easier  access  to  financial 
resources in the countries.  
While overseas investment in developed economies is going mainly through M&As, mode of 
entry into developing economies is observed to be mainly through green-field investments. 
One  of  the  reasons  for  Indian  companies  to  adopt  M&As  route  for  foreign  investment  in 
developed  countries  is  that  markets  in  these  economies  tend  to  be  mature  and  saturated 
and,  therefore,  companies  prefer  to  gain  market  share  through  acquisitions  rather  than 
green-filed investments. A recent article published in “The Economist” (September 10, 2011) 
points out that big acquisitions by companies like Tata were a way of reaching the required 
scale  quickly.  Today,  Tata  Group  companies  are  reportedly  the  biggest  manufacturer  and 
employment provider in the UK.  
                                                 
5  Satyanand, P. N and P. Raghavendran (2010). “Outward FDI from India and its policy context”, Columbia FDI 
Profiles issued by Vale Columbia Center on Sustainable International Investment, September 22 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
D. 
Funding pattern of outward FDI  
As far as policy regarding the funding of overseas investments is concerned, it is allowed in a 
number of  ways. These sources mainly include (i) purchase of foreign exchange on-shore 
from  an  authorised  dealer  in  India,  (ii)  capitalisation  of  foreign  currency  proceeds  to  be 
received from the foreign entity on account of exports, fees, royalties or any other dues from 
the  foreign  entity  for  supply  of  technical  know-how,  consultancy,  managerial  and  other 
services,  (iii)  swapping  of  shares  of  Indian  entity  with  those  of  overseas  entity,  (iv)  use  of 
balances held in the Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency (EEFC) accounts of Indian entity 
maintained with an authorised dealer, (v) foreign currency proceeds through ECBs/FCCBs, 
and (vi) exchange of ADRs/GDRs issued in accordance with the scheme for issue of Foreign 
Currency Convertible Bonds.  
A recent study by Virtus Global Partners (April 2011) based on US bound Indian investments 
has  confirmed  that  internal  accruals  were  the  major  financing  option  used  by  Indian 
companies  in  2010.6  It  also  found  that  half  of  Indian  acquisitions  in  the  US  in  2009  and 
2010 were buyouts of distressed assets, whose parent companies were severely impacted 
by 
in  overseas  markets,  many 
acquisition/investment deals (e.g. S Kumar - Hartmax, Cadila’s - Novavax, Piramal - RxElite, 
and 3i - NRLB, etc.) were struck by Indian companies during 2009.  
the  global  crisis.  Seizing 
these  opportunities 
Role of Indian banks 
Although  normally  banks  in  India  are  not  permitted  to  fund  the  equity  contributions  of  the 
promoters, financial assistance to Indian companies by the domestic banks for acquisition of 
equity in overseas joint ventures/wholly owned subsidiaries or in other overseas companies, 
new  or  existing,  as  strategic  investment  has  been  permitted.  Such  policy  should  include 
overall  limit  on  such  financing,  terms  and  conditions  of  eligibility  of  borrowers,  security, 
margin, etc. While the Board of the bank may frame its own guidelines and safeguards for 
such lending, such acquisition(s) should be beneficial to the company and the country. 
In order to facilitate such financial support of Indian business abroad, the Reserve Bank has 
enhanced the prudential limit on credit and non-credit facilities extended by banks to Indian 
Joint Ventures (where the holding by the Indian company is more than 51 per cent) /Wholly 
Owned  Subsidiaries  abroad  from  the  existing  limit  of  10  per  cent  to  20  per  cent  of  their 
unimpaired capital funds (Tier I and Tier II capital). Banks in India were also allowed in May 
10, 2007 to extend funded and / or non-funded credit facilities to wholly owned step-down 
subsidiaries of subsidiaries of Indian companies (where the holding by the Indian company is 
51  per  cent  or  more)  abroad.  Banks,  however,  have  to,  among  others,  ensure  that  the 
JV/WOS is located in a country which has no restriction on obtaining such foreign currency 
loan  or  repatriation  of  loan/interest  and  they  can  create  legal  charge  on  overseas 
securities/assets securing such exposures. 
Role of the Exim Bank 
Exim  Bank  has  been  involved  in  supporting  Indian  direct  investment  overseas  since  its 
inception  and  its  role  has  been  unique  in  this  regard,  given  its  mandate.  The  Overseas 
Investment Finance (OIF) programme of Exim Bank seeks to cover the entire cycle of Indian 
investment overseas including the financing requirements of Indian Joint Ventures (JV) and 
Wholly  Owned  Subsidiaries  (WOS)  with  a  suite  of  financing  instruments,  which  include 
(a) finance  for  Indian  company’s  equity  participation,  (b)  direct  finance  to  the  overseas 
JVs/WOS,  (c)  finance  for  acquisition  of  overseas  business/companies  including  leveraged 
buyouts  and  (d)  direct  equity  investment.  As  on  December  31,  2011,  Exim  Bank  has 
                                                 
6  US-Bound Acquisitions by Indian Companies, Analysis of 2010 Transactions, April 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
approved  credit  aggregating  to  (cid:31)  240.92  billion  for  374  ventures  set-up  by  over 
298 companies in 69 countries. 
Role of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited (ECGC) 
While  some  of  the  overseas  acquisitions  have  been  hugely  successful,  some  investments 
have been fully written off within a short span of time. There are a number of reasons for 
failure  but  the  inability  to  withstand  adverse  changes  in  the  operating  economic  and 
regulatory environment has been the most predominant one. This is a pointer to the need for 
adequate risk mitigants in the process of investments abroad. 
In 1980, ECGC introduced the Overseas Investment Insurance scheme. Since inception of 
the scheme, only 61 insurance covers with an aggregate value of  ` 5.73 billion have been 
issued.  One  plausible  explanation  given  for  the  low  popularity  of  the  scheme  is  the 
perception that the cost of insurance cover is high (which is between one to 2.5 per cent per 
annum depending on country and tenure of investment). It is, however, important to realize 
the spectrum of coverage the scheme offers by providing insurance coverage to investments 
against  political  risks  including  war,  expropriation  and  foreign  exchange  repatriation 
restrictions.  Thus,  the  Indian  companies  who  intend  to  make  investments  in  politically 
vulnerable  countries  would  benefit  from  such  insurance  covers  more  that  those  having 
investments in developed countries. 
SPV route for leveraged buy outs 
Existing  WOSs/JVs  or  SPVs  are  being  used  to  fund  acquisitions  through  leverage  buyout 
route  which  reduces  the  risk  on  the  domestic  balance  sheet.  A  substantial  portion  of 
investment has taken place through the SPVs set up for the purpose abroad. The funding is 
often  arranged  through  overseas  banks  backed  either  by  shares  or  assets  of  the  target 
company and/or guarantees by the Indian parent. So far companies have largely used a mix 
of their retained earnings (internal source) and borrowings (external source) to finance their 
overseas acquisition. This is in quite contrast to what is generally seen in the context of many 
other countries’ cross-border M&As where share swapping is a popular option of financing. 
Share  swaps  have  not yet  emerged  as  a  favored  payment  option in  India  except  in  a  few 
large  transactions  in  the  software  industry7.  During  the  post-reform  period,  Indian  capital 
market has been significantly liberalised. As a result, the market capitalisation of stocks of 
Indian  companies  has  also  substantially  improved  over  the  years.  This,  in  turn,  seems  to 
have  facilitated  greater  access  to  overseas  capital  markets  for  financing  their  overseas 
investments. Further, sustained growth in corporate earnings has improved the  profitability 
and  strengthened  the  balance  sheets  of  Indian  companies  which  also  helped  them  to 
undertake cross-border acquisitions through internal resources.  
E. 
Measures taken by the Reserve Bank of India 
The  liberalisation  of  the  overseas  investment  policy  since  the  year  2003  has  been 
substantial,  given  the  improvement  in  macro  fundamentals,  and  bias  towards  calibrated 
relaxation of the policy towards capital account rules. Commensurate with the build-up of the 
foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  country,  there  has  been  a  larger  opening  up  of  the 
overseas  direct  investment  avenues  resulting  in  the  enhancement  in  the  quantum  of 
overseas direct investment to 400 per cent of the net worth as mentioned earlier. Similarly, 
the  aggregate  ceiling  for  overseas  investment  by  mutual  funds,  registered  with  SEBI,  was 
enhanced from US$ 4 billion to US$ 5 billion in September 2007. This was further raised to 
US$ 7 billion in April 2008. Apart from raising the financial limits, the Reserve Bank has also 
                                                 
7  Overseas  investments  by  Indian  companies  –  evolution  of  policy  and  trends  :  keynote  address  by  Ms 
Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the International Conference on Indian 
cross-border presence/acquisitions, Mumbai, 19 January 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
automated  the  entire  process  of  allocation  of  Unique  Identification  Number  (UIN).  The 
automation  through  a  web  based  application  has  enabled  efficient  processing  which  has 
reduced the time taken for processing the applications and also improved the management 
information system. 
It  may  thus  be  observed  that  keeping  in  view  the  changes  in  the  business  environment 
across the world, Reserve Bank has been proactive in aligning the policies relating to foreign 
exchange transactions to suit the dynamic business environment (Exhibit 1). In June 2011, 
the  Reserve  Bank  allowed  Indian  parties  to  disinvest  their  stake  abroad  without  prior 
approval,  where  the  amount  repatriated  on  disinvestment  is  less  than  the  amount  of  the 
original  investment,  subject  to  certain  conditions.  Since  July  2011,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
been disseminating the data in respect of outward FDI on a monthly basis. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Registered  trusts  and  societies  engaged  in  the  manufacturing/education/hospital  sectors 
have  since  been  permitted  to  establish  JV/WOS  engaged  in  these  sectors  with  prior 
approval.  Further,  proprietary/unregistered  partnership  firm  (recognized  star  export  house 
with proven track record) are permitted to set up JV/WOS abroad with prior approval from 
Reserve Bank.  
Further,  considering  the  need  for  allowing  individuals  to  benefit  from  the  liberalized  FEMA 
framework as a valuable adjunct to India’s globalization efforts as also recognising the fact 
that economies were getting coupled, the overseas investment policy was modified to allow 
individuals  to  acquire  shares  under  the  ESOP  scheme  by  removing  the  existing  monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
ceilings, allotment of shares of foreign entities on account of professional services rendered 
and a general permission to acquire foreign securities as qualification/rights shares was also 
accorded. 
F. 
Measures taken by Government of India 
Recognizing  the  need  for  promoting  overseas  investments,  the  Government  of  India  has 
drafted  strategic  plans  aimed  at  supporting  smaller  players.  The  Department  of  Industrial 
Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has identified South East Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa as 
zones where Indian companies would be encouraged to acquire assets as well as buy-out of 
companies. Also, in 2011, the Government of India approved a policy to support raw material 
asset  purchases  made  by  select  public  sector  undertakings  (PSUs)  abroad.  Under  the 
revised policy, the investment limit for “Navratna” firms has been raised to ` 30 billion from 
`10  billion  for  any  asset  buy-out  and  for  the  “Maharatna”  firms,  the  limit  has  been  set  at 
`50 billion.  Government  approval  would  be  needed  for  any  additional  amount  beyond  this 
limit. PSUs in agriculture, mining, manufacturing and electricity sectors having a three-year 
record of making net profits are eligible under this policy. The Ministry of External Affairs and 
Indian  missions  abroad  would  be  associated  right  from  the  beginning  of  the  process  for  a 
buyout. The government is currently evaluating proposals to facilitate acquisition of strategic 
assets, particularly the energy sector, through a special investment vehicle or through cash 
rich PSUs in the field. 
G. 
Emerging issues in outward FDI  
Use and abuse of multi-layered structure 
One  contentious  issue  which  needs  to  be  addressed  for  providing  a  transparent  policy 
framework  for  outward  FDI  relates  to  multi-layered  structures.  The  motivations  range  from 
genuine business/commercial considerations to taxation benefits which are available to any 
global investors. On the flip side at times the underlying motive could be to create opacity 
through a labyrinth of structures for reasons unjustified on business grounds or from the point 
of view of home country’s interest. Hence, there is a need to have a greater clarity in our 
approach in this regard. 
Controlled Foreign Companies under Direct Tax Code 
To  incentivize  the  overseas  investments,  in  the  last  Union  Budget,  Government  had 
announced  a  50  per  cent  reduction  in  the  tax  rate  in  respect  of  dividend  inflows  from 
JV/WOS.  Taxation  in  respect  of  overseas  investments  under  the  “Controlled  Foreign 
Companies” (CFC) norm of the proposed Direct Tax Code (DTC) would have implications for 
Indian  outward  FDI.  It  may,  however,  take  a  few  years  before  we  come  to  any  definitive 
conclusions on their implications after DTC is introduced. 
Impact on current account deficit 
The build-up in the foreign exchange reserves had supported the initiatives of liberalisation of 
many  of  the  capital  controls  including  the  outward  FDI  from  India.  India  being  a  current 
account deficit (CAD) economy, there is a need to closely monitor the capital outflows going 
from  the  country.  We  need  surplus  on  capital  account  to  finance  India’s  growing  current 
account deficit and also have to keep the level of foreign exchange reserves at a comfortable 
level  given  several  demands  on  the  reserves.  Therefore,  unlimited  capital  outflows  for 
outward FDI could have significant implications for sustainability of India’s CAD and external 
debt profile.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
investments  have 
Impact on domestic investments 
Another important factor that warrants close monitoring of capital outflows is implication for 
domestic investment. It needs to be ensured that overseas investment by Indian companies 
do  not  crowd-out  domestic  investments.  Even  though  both  domestic  capital  formation  and 
overseas  FDI 
in  recent  years,  potential 
implications of rising trend in outward FDI for domestic investment, growth and employment 
need  to  be  examined  against  the  benefits  that  domestic  companies  derive  elsewhere  in 
terms of expanded market base, backward and forward vertical integration and cheap skilled 
labour. 
In  a  globalised  business  environment,  establishing  an  overseas  presence  becomes 
inevitable on account of a country’s policy on outsourcing, emphasis on on-shore presence, 
protectionism,  etc.  Hence,  the  Indian  companies  have  to  balance  the  need  for  domestic 
business expansion with the compulsions of overseas investments.  
increased  concomitantly 
Likely impact of devolvement of contingent liabilities 
It  has  been  observed  that  in  the  recent  years,  the  non-fund  exposure  in  the  form  of 
guarantees issued by Indian companies towards their JVs/WOS has been rising (Table 1). 
Given the uncertain global environment, exponential rise in issuance of guarantees could be 
a potential concern for banks (who often provide back to back guarantees) and the Indian 
companies concerned. 
Impact of economic downturn of foreign economies 
Another important aspect that has to be borne in mind is that the overseas business model 
could go awry due to a variety of reasons, such as, sudden downward trend of the economy 
as  experienced  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  and  the  Eurozone  sovereign  debt 
crisis.  Such  events  may  adversely  impact  the  financials  of  the  Indian  companies  with  a 
spill-over effect on the domestic corporates and banking sectors. During the periods of global 
crisis, Indian companies may face challenges to their overseas investments. This would be 
on  account  of  moderation  in  internal  accruals and  also  due  to  the  funding  constraints  that 
maybe faced by Indian JVs/WOS arising out of faced by the multinational investment banks 
and  financing  institutions.  Indian  corporates  who  had  acquired  overseas  assets  at  much 
higher  premium  in  a  bullish  phase  of  business  cycle  or  did  not  undertake  intensive  due 
diligence  before  such  acquisitions  in  anticipation  of  future  growth,  potentially  risk  huge 
valuation loss during the downturn. 
Ensuring security through strategic acquisitions 
The  emerging  economies  are  becoming  increasingly  conscious  of  ensuring  security  in  the 
fields of energy, commodity and food for the future generations. This has led to a spate of 
strategic acquisitions in the recent past, notable among them being acquisition of coal mines, 
oil fields etc. Proposals for acquisition of overseas assets, particularly in the energy sector 
through  special  purpose  fund  or  through  the  PSUs  in  the  related  field  are  now  being 
discussed for long term strategic benefit of the country. Various options of funding are also 
being debated. Given the nature of our foreign exchange reserves, which have not been built 
out of surplus, strains visible on the external sector and various other demands being placed 
on the reserves, funding of such ventures out of reserves does not seem a viable option. The 
other  alternatives  including  overseas  borrowing  against  sovereign  backing  or  domestic 
resource  raising  through  special  cess  and  utilization  of  private  sector  resources  in  a  PPP 
model need to be evaluated for this purpose. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
H. 
Way forward 
Investments by individuals & LLPs 
Today, we have an enabling regulatory environment for encouraging overseas investments 
by individuals. We, however, need to examine the existing caps and link it to the monetary 
ceilings  applicable  under  the  Liberalized  Remittance  Scheme  (LRS)  (remittance  of 
US$ 200,000  for  permitted  current  and  capital  account  transactions).  Some  of  the  ceilings 
which may require rationalization include ceiling to acquire qualification shares and shares of 
a  foreign  entity  in  part/full  consideration  of  professional  services  rendered  to  the  foreign 
company or in lieu of Director’s remuneration, to acquire shares offered through an ESOP 
scheme globally, on uniform basis, in a foreign company which has an equity stake, directly 
or  indirectly,  in  the  Indian  company.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  consultation  with  the 
Ministries concerned has since decided to  
a) 
remove  the  existing  cap  of  one  per  cent  on  the  ceiling  for  resident  individuals  to 
acquire qualification shares and to link the same to the monetary ceiling under the 
LRS; 
to  grant  general  permission  to  resident  individuals  to  acquire  shares  of  a  foreign 
entity  in  part/full  consideration  of  professional  services  rendered  to  the  foreign 
company or in lieu of Director’s remuneration with monetary ceiling as per the limit 
prescribed under LRS; and 
to  grant  general  permission  to  Indian  resident  employees  or  Directors  to  acquire 
shares  through  an  ESOP  scheme  globally  on  uniform  basis  in  a  foreign  company 
which has an equity stake, directly or indirectly, in the Indian company. 
b) 
c) 
Issues relating to allowing individuals to set-up JVs/WOS abroad under a transparent policy 
framework within the LRS ceiling are also being examined. 
The extant regulations allow registered partnership firms to invest abroad. With the passing 
of  the  LLP Act,  there  is  a  need  to review  the  regulation  and  examine  if  LLPs can  also  be 
permitted to invest in JV/WOS abroad. 
Approach towards multi-layered structures 
In the context of multi layered structures, taxation remains a contentious issue and a subject 
of debate. This issue, euphemistically, referred to as “Treaty Shopping” or “Tax planning” or 
“Tax  Avoidance”,  has  implications  for  outbound  FDI.  We  need  to  have  clearer  policy 
prescriptions  on  the  issue  after  considering  the  legal/business  requirements  of  the  various 
jurisdictions  before  embarking  on  any  policy  that  may  either  facilitate  or  restrict  such 
investment  motives.  Reserve  Bank  in  consultation  with  the  government  and  all  the 
stakeholders would like to examine the issues involved in a holistic manner.  
Risks from global business cycles 
Success  of  outward  investment  projects  would  also  depend  on  the  business  cycles  in  the 
global economy. An outward FDI project undertaken during upswing phase of business cycle 
may  not  remain  viable  during  downward  phase.  For  instance,  MNCs  operating  in  sectors, 
viz., automotives, metals and chemicals proved to be quite sensitive to adverse shocks of 
recent  global  crisis  (UNCTAD,  2009)8.  Hence,  even  though  direct  investment  is  generally 
undertaken  with  lasting  interest  in  the  host  economy,  companies,  need  to  recognise  the 
degree of sensitivity of their business activity to the global business cycle as well. 
                                                 
8  UNCTAD (2009), World Investment Prospects Survey 2009-2011, United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, New York and Geneva. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I.  Concluding Remarks  
follows  a  calibrated  approach 
There  exists  a  school  of  thought  which  apprehends  that  overseas  investment  by  Indian 
corporate is at the cost of on-shore investment. One of the discernible reasons acting as an 
obstacle for companies to undertake on-shore investment could be the policy and procedural 
constraints.  Any  economy  which 
to  capital  account 
convertibility may also impose certain controls in allowing outflows. To the extent that such 
obstacles  are  in  the  interest  of  the  economy,  this  will  have  to  be  considered  as  policy 
prescriptions.  As  the  Indian  corporate  becomes  increasingly  competitive,  they  may 
aggressively explore globalisation opportunities as part of their future growth plans. Outward 
FDI related to acquisition of strategic resources, expansion of market base, leveraging new 
technologies for local markets, etc. would facilitate long-term growth in India and absorption 
of technology by Indian corporates along with improvements in the managerial skills. At the 
same time, through such overseas investments, Indian companies would play a critical role 
in  the  developed  as  well  as  developing  countries  by  rejuvenating  the  economies  and 
providing employment.  
According to a recent Report by PricewaterhouseCoopers (2010), India might be the largest 
source of emerging market multination enterprises (MNEs) by 2024.9 By this period, number 
of MNEs in India would be higher than China by 20 per cent, and over 2,200 Indian firms are 
likely to invest overseas in the next fifteen years. The Report also expects that there will be 
further  shift  away  from  intra-regional  investment  in  other  emerging  nations  and  towards  a 
greater share of new multinationals going directly to the advanced countries. In particular, the 
Report  projects  that  India  MNEs  are  likely  to  make  a  niche  in  business  services  and  high 
value manufacturing sectors. 
It is, thus, imperative that all the stakeholders including the government, the Reserve Bank, 
professional  bodies  like  yours  and  Indian  corporates  bring  together  their  collective 
experience  and  wisdom  to  constantly  review  the  policies  and  procedures  including  Home 
Country  Measures  (HCMs)  that  would  further  facilitate  our  globalization  efforts  through 
outward  FDI  without  adverse 
its 
macro-economic stability. 
for  vast  domestic  economy  and 
implications 
                                                 
9  PricewaterhouseCoopers  (2010),  “Emerging  Multinationals:  The  rise  of  new  multinational  companies  from 
emerging economies”, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
