Guy Debelle: Bank funding 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Australian DCM Summit 2012, Sydney, 22 March 2012. 
 I thank Chris Stewart and Cameron Deans for their help.  
As  you  may  be  aware,  last  week  the  Reserve  Bank  published  a  Bulletin  article  that 
documented recent developments in the structure and costs of the funding of the Australian 
banking system.1 The Bank has published an article on this topic annually for a few years 
now, and also reports regularly on developments in the various components of bank funding 
in its quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy.  
Today, I am going to talk to that article and highlight some of its main findings.  
The  discussion  around  bank  funding  costs  can  get  confused  at  times.  It  is  often  unclear 
whether a participant in the debate is referring to movements in levels or in spreads, and if 
the  latter,  what  exactly  the  spread  is  relative  to.  The  article  and  my  speech  today  provide 
some facts that can serve as a common foundation for discussion.  
The main points I want to highlight are:  
 
The level of the cash rate set by the Reserve Bank is a primary determinant of the 
level  of  intermediaries’  funding  costs  (and  hence  the  level  of  lending  rates). 
However,  there  are  other  significant  influences  on  intermediaries’  funding  costs, 
such as risk premia and competitive pressures, which are not directly affected by the 
cash rate.  
Over  the  past  year,  funding  costs  have  fallen  in  absolute  terms  but  have  risen 
relative to the cash rate.  
Deposit pricing, particularly for term deposits, has been the major driver of recent 
changes  in  funding  costs,  reflecting  the  strong  competition  for  deposits.  This  has 
obviously been welcomed by the savers in the population.  
There has been a rise in the spreads on wholesale debt issued by banks reflecting 
investors’ concerns about the global banking industry. While spreads have narrowed 
recently, they are still higher than they have been over the past couple of years.  
   Let  me  start  with  the  first  point.  The  cash  rate  set  by  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  is  the 
short-term  interest  rate  benchmark  that  anchors  the  broader  interest  rate  structure  for  the 
domestic  financial  system.  It  is  the  front  end  of  the  risk-free  yield  curve  off  which  other 
financial assets are generally priced. When the cash rate is adjusted up or down, the whole 
structure of interest rates in the economy moves up and down, with the effect most direct at 
shorter maturities.  
But the cash rate is clearly not the only determinant of the rate structure in the economy. To 
use three examples:  
 
As one moves out along the term structure of the risk-free curve, term premia play 
an increasing role.  
Risk  premia  are  an  important  component  of  borrowing  costs  for  private  sector 
entities, including the banks.  
                                                  
1  Deans C and Stewart C (2012), “Banks’ Funding Costs and Lending Rates”, RBA Bulletin, March pp 37−43. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Competitive pressures play an important role in deposit pricing.  
 
These sorts of determinants of the rate structure are not directly affected by movements in 
the cash rate.  
As I will discuss shortly, over the past few years, competitive pressures in the deposit market 
and risk premia for the banking sector globally have risen substantially. These have had a 
material  impact  on  the  cost  to  banks  of  funding  their  lending  books.  While  these 
developments  are  not  the  result  of  movements  in  the  cash  rate,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board 
takes  these  developments  into  account  in  its  setting  of  the  cash  rate  to  ensure  that  the 
structure of interest rates in the economy is consistent with the desired stance of monetary 
policy. Moreover, the link between movements in the cash rate and lending rates in Australia 
is much tighter than in many other countries. In the US, for example, movements in the Fed 
funds rate have a much less direct influence on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.  
Composition of banks’ funding 
The funding structure of the Australian banking system has changed markedly over the past 
few years (Graph 1). Deposits have become a much larger share of overall funding, rising 
from  a  little  under  40 per cent  in  2007  to  52 per cent  currently.  The  rise  in  the  share  of 
deposit funding has come at the expense of a decline in the share of short-term wholesale 
funding from around 30 per cent to 20 per cent currently.  
Graph 1  
 The structure of funding shown in Graph 1 is for the banking system as a whole, not that of 
any particular financial institution. Similarly, the analysis presented is for the cost of funding 
this  aggregate  structure  and  will  certainly  differ  institution  by  institution.  For  example,  the 
regional  banks  generally  fund  a  larger  share  of  their  books  via  deposits,  and  have 
significantly  decreased  their  use  of  securitisation.  Credit  union  and  building  societies 
continue to raise the vast majority of their funds via deposits.  
The  major  change  in  the  funding  structure  of  the  larger  banks  has  been  the  switch  from 
short-term  wholesale  funding  to  deposits,  although  they  have  also  recently  increased  their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
use  of  long-term  secured  issuance,  particularly  in  the  form  of  covered  bonds.  While  the 
covered  bond  issuance  has  had  little  effect  on  the  composition  of  banks’  funding  at  this 
stage, given the large stock of existing funding, it has allowed the major banks to achieve 
funding at longer tenors than has been the case previously. Covered bonds have generally 
been issued for terms of 5 to 10 years, whereas unsecured bank bonds are generally issued 
with maturities of up to 5 years.  
Within banks’ deposit funding, there has been a marked shift towards term deposits, which 
pay higher interest rates than other forms of deposits. Indeed, term deposits have accounted 
for  most  of  the  growth  in  bank  deposits  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis.  They  now 
account for about 44 per cent of the major banks’ deposits, up from 30 per cent in the middle 
of 2007 (Graph 2).  
Graph 2  
 The  increase  in  the  share  of  deposits,  particularly  term  deposits,  reflects  a  number  of 
interrelated factors:  
 
 
First, banks have offered relatively attractive rates to depositors.  
Second,  strong  business  profits  have  resulted  in  larger  corporate  cash  holdings, 
which  have  been  increasingly  invested  in  deposits  rather  than  other  financial 
instruments, particularly short-term bank paper.  
Third,  households  have  significantly  increased  their  term  deposits  placed  directly 
with banks, instead of investing in other financial assets. There has also been a rise 
in deposits placed via superannuation and managed funds.  
 Some part of the second and third of these factors reflects as much a change in name as a 
fundamental shift in funding structure. Instead of holding an exposure to the banking system 
that is called short-term wholesale debt, some corporates and superannuation funds hold the 
very  same  exposure  in  the  form  of  a  term  deposit  (of  comparable  maturity).  This  reflects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pressures  from  regulators,  ratings  agencies  and  the  market  for  financial  institutions  to  be 
more deposit funded, because deposits are assessed to be more stable, even though, in this 
instance, the behavioural response of the investor is probably not materially different.  
For banks, term deposits have the advantage of generally being a relatively stable funding 
source.  The  average  contractual  maturity  of  term  deposits  is  fairly  short,  at  somewhere 
between four and seven months. But these term deposits are typically rolled over a number 
of times so that the effective maturity is more around a few years.  
From the banks’ point of view, the rates on new term deposits can also be adjusted quickly to 
influence  the  growth  in  this  source  of  funding.  However,  because  term  deposits  have  a 
relatively  short  contractual  maturity,  changes  in  the  pricing  flows  through  the  whole  term 
deposit book quickly. Hence movements in these rates can be one of the biggest short-run 
influences on changes in overall funding structure.  
While  most  of  the  competition  among  banks  has  been  for  term  deposits,  banks  have  also 
offered  more  attractive  transaction  and  savings  accounts.  They  are  paying  higher  interest 
rates on these accounts and are offering greater functionality. The increase in the value of 
funds  invested  in  these  deposits  has  largely  been  placed  in  online  saver  accounts  and 
accounts  with  introductory  bonuses  and/or  bonuses  for  regular  deposits.  Banks  have 
reported little growth in the value of low-interest transaction-style deposit accounts.  
At-call online saver accounts are generally assessed to have more rapid run-off rates under 
the Basel III liquidity standards, so they will not be particularly attractive from the banks’ point 
of view once those liquidity standards take effect from the beginning of 2015. That does not 
seem to have affected the pricing of these products yet, but it will be interesting to see how 
that evolves both in terms of pricing and product design as we approach that date.  
Cost of funding 
Having discussed the structure of funding, I will now turn to the cost of that funding.  
The Reserve Bank uses a wide range of sources to derive our estimates of banks’ funding 
costs.  We  use  data  reported  by  financial  institutions  to  APRA  and  banks’  regular  profit 
statements to the market to track the composition of funding. We monitor the prices offered 
on various forms of deposit accounts, and maintain a comprehensive database of wholesale 
funding,  which  is  updated  issue  by  issue.  We  supplement  all  of  this  with  extensive 
consultations with financial institutions, big and small.  
The  analysis  presented  contains  our  best  estimates.  But  there  remains  a  degree  of 
imprecision around them. Moreover, as I mentioned earlier, our estimates are for the system 
as a whole, not for any particular financial institution.  
That said, in summary, our estimate is that the absolute level of banks’ funding costs fell from 
mid  2011  to  February 2012,  but  by  less  than  the  reduction  in  the  cash  rate.  There  were 
particularly pronounced increases in the cost of term deposits and long-term wholesale debt 
relative to the cash rate as financial market conditions deteriorated in late 2011.  
Deposits 
Competition for deposits, which had moderated somewhat in early 2011, intensified again in 
late  2011.  Consequently,  our  estimate  is  that  while  the  cash  rate  has  fallen  by  50 basis 
points  since  mid  2011,  the  major  banks’  average  cost  of  deposits  has  declined  by  about 
25 basis points. In other words, while the average interest rate on deposits has indeed fallen, 
it has risen relative to the cash rate.  
The  average  spread  above  market  rates  on  the  major  banks’  advertised  term  deposit 
“specials” has increased by about 35 basis points over the past year (Graph 3). Furthermore, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
an  increase  in  the  share  of  deposits  written  at  rates  higher  than  the  rates  advertised  by 
banks has meant that the average rate on outstanding term deposits has not fallen as quickly 
as  benchmark  rates,  as  term  deposits  have  been  rolled  over.  That  is,  banks  have  been 
increasingly paying customers more than the rate advertised in the window if the customer 
asks for it, reflecting competitive pressures. Moreover, there has been some shortening in 
the  average  maturity  of  term  deposits  recently  given  the  inverted  yield  curve,  which  has 
meant that changes in pricing have passed through more quickly.  
Graph 3  
The  average  advertised  rate  on  at-call  savings  deposits  rose  by  around  20 basis  points 
relative  to  the  cash  rate  over  2011.  Again,  in  absolute  terms,  the  interest  rate  declined. 
Taking into account an increase in the proportion of savings deposits earning bonus rates, 
the  average  rate  on  these  deposits  is  estimated  to  have  increased  by  between  35  and 
50 basis points relative to the cash rate.  
Interest rates on transaction accounts have not fallen in line with the cash rate as many only 
pay very low nominal interest rates. Hence, as the cash rate falls, there is no scope to lower 
the interest rates on these accounts.  
 Wholesale debt 
The  absolute  cost  of  issuing  new  unsecured  wholesale  debt  fell  during  2011  (Graph 4). 
Relative to risk-free benchmarks, however, the cost of issuing wholesale debt has increased 
since  mid  2011.  The  increase  in  spreads  on  banks’  wholesale  funding  reflects  global 
investors demanding more compensation for taking on bank credit risk, although the rise for 
Australian  banks  has  been  less  marked  than  it  has  been  for  other  banks  globally.  This 
widening in spreads was at its peak at the beginning of the year but over recent weeks these 
spreads have narrowed noticeably.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 4  
 There has also been an increase in the costs associated with hedging the foreign exchange 
risk on new foreign-currency denominated bonds. This rise in the basis swap reflected the 
dearth  of  Kangaroo  issuance  earlier  in  the  year  at  a  time  when  the  banks  were  raising 
foreign-currency  debt.  The  pick-up  in  Kangaroo  issuance  in  recent  weeks  has  alleviated 
some of that pressure.  
Spreads  on  banks’  new  wholesale  debt  have  come  down  somewhat  following  the 
ECB’s 3-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  However,  they  still  remain  higher  than  in 
mid 2011 (Graph 5).  
Graph 5  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 While  the  relative  cost  of  new  long-term  wholesale  funds  is  currently  higher  than  that  of 
maturing  funds,  this  has  had  only  a  moderate  effect  on  the  major  banks’  average  bond 
funding costs relative to the cash rate to date. This reflects the fact that it takes at least 3 to 
4 years for the major banks’ existing stock of bond funding to be rolled over. Since spreads 
began to rise sharply in August 2011, the major banks’ issuance of new bonds amounts to 
about  an  eighth  of  their  outstanding  bonds.  As  a  result,  the  cost  of  the  major  banks’ 
outstanding long-term wholesale debt is likely to have risen by about 25 basis points relative 
to the cash rate over the past year.  
The  increase  is  smaller  if  fixed-rate  wholesale  debt  is  assumed  to  be  swapped  back  into 
variable-rate obligations. The extent of the rise in relative costs for individual banks varies 
according to each bank’s use of interest rate derivatives.  
Short-term wholesale debt is mainly priced off 1- and 3-month bank bill rates. While these 
rates generally fell (in terms of level) over the latter half of 2011 due to the sharp fall in the 
expected  cash  rate  over  this  period,  there  was  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  short-term  debt 
relative to the expected cash rate as measured by the bank bill to OIS spread over the same 
period (Graph 6).  
Graph 6  
 The increase in this spread also contributed to a higher average cost of long-term wholesale 
debt, relative to the cash rate, given that most of this debt is benchmarked to short-term bank 
bill  swap  rates.  These  pricing  conventions  ensure  that  changes  in  the  cash  rate,  and 
expectations  about  its  future  level,  have  a  direct  effect  on  both  short-  and  long-term 
wholesale funding costs. Since the start of the year, the spread between bank bills and OIS 
has  narrowed  noticeably.  The  reduction  in  the  spread  reflects,  in  part,  the  reduction  in 
short-term issuance because of a higher level of term wholesale issuance.  
Short-term issuance is somewhat of a buffer for the major banks. When global markets are 
dislocated, they tend to issue more onshore short-term debt. This tends to drive up the cost, 
which may also be rising at the same time because of the tensions which are causing the 
dislocation  globally.  Conversely,  when  conditions  improve  and  term  wholesale  issuance 
picks up, short-term issuance declines, reducing the spread with further downward pressure 
from the improved market sentiment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
If the lower spread between bank bills and OIS is maintained, this should alleviate some of 
the upwards pressure, relative to the cash rate, on the cost of funding banks’ aggregate loan 
books.  
Overall cost of funding 
Taking  the  costs  of  individual  funding  sources  noted  above,  and  weighting  them  by  their 
share of total bank funding, provides an estimate of the overall change in the cost of funding 
banks’ aggregate loan books.  
Compared  to  mid  2007,  the  average  cost  of  the  major  banks’  funding  is  estimated  to  be 
about 120–130 basis points higher relative to the cash rate (Graph 7). Most of the increase 
occurred during 2008 and early 2009 when the financial crisis was at its most intense. Since 
the  middle  of  2011,  however,  there  has  been  a  further  increase  in  banks’  funding  costs 
relative  to  the  cash  rate  of  the  order  of  20–25 basis  points.  The  graph  shows  that  a  fairly 
large part of this increase comes from the pricing of deposits.  
Graph 7  
The  increase  in  funding  costs,  relative  to  the  cash  rate,  differs  across  institutions  given 
differences in their funding compositions and the pricing of different liabilities. The available 
evidence suggests, for example, that the overall increase in the regional banks’ funding costs 
since the onset of the financial crisis has been larger than that experienced, on average, by 
the major banks. This mainly reflects the larger increase in the cost of the regional banks’ 
deposits and a more significant shift in their funding mix.  
 Banks’ lending rates  
I  have  primarily  focused  on  funding  costs  today,  but  in  closing  I  will  briefly  touch  on 
developments in lending rates. The Bulletin article goes into this in more detail.  
The cost of funding is the most important factor that influences the lending rates banks set. 
But there are a number of other factors that affect pricing including: the credit risk associated 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with  the  various  types  of  loans,  the  liquidity  risk  involved  in  funding  long-term  assets  with 
short-term liabilities, and choices about growth strategies in different markets.  
For close to a decade prior to the global financial crisis, banks’ overall cost of funds followed 
the cash rate closely, as risk premia in markets were low and stable. Accordingly, interest 
rates on business and housing variable-rate loans tended to adjust in line with the cash rate.  
Nevertheless, over this period there was a gradual decline in the spread between average 
interest rates paid on loans and the cash rate. For example, the spread between the average 
mortgage  rate  paid  and  the  cash  rate  declined  from  275 basis  points  in  1996  to  around 
125 basis points in 2007 (Graph 8).  
Graph 8  
 Since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  banks  have  increased  the  spread  between  lending 
rates  and  the  cash  rate  for  all  loan  types.  The  increases  have  varied  across  the  different 
types  of  loans,  partly  reflecting  differences  in  the  reassessment  of  the  riskiness  of  those 
loans and expectations regarding loss rates.  
But the primary factor driving the increase in the spread between lending rates and the cash 
rate  has  been  the  increase  in  the  relative  cost  of  funding  that  I  have  described  above. 
Financial institutions have increased their lending rates in the face of the increase in costs to 
maintain their net interest margins within the range observed in recent years.2 In turn, this 
has been with the aim of maintaining profitability.  
Without  seeking  to  answer  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  these  movements  in  lending 
rates  have  been  “appropriate”,  the  aim  of  my  speech  today,  and  the  Bank’s  recently 
published analysis, has been to provide some facts to help in that discussion.  
                                                 
2  As  noted  in  Deans  and  Stewart  (2012),  there  are  a  number  of  other  factors  which  affect  the  reported  net 
interest margin in addition to movements in lending rates and funding costs. And similarly, there are additional 
factors which affect the translation of net interest margins to profitability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
