Masaaki Shirakawa: The Bank of Japan’s efforts toward overcoming 
deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan  National  Press  Club,  Tokyo, 
17 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to have the opportunity to speak to you today at the prestigious 
Japan National Press Club. This is my third time speaking here, having initially done so in 
May 2008 – my first public speech after becoming Governor of the Bank of Japan – and then 
again in May 2010, around the time when the European debt problem triggered by the crisis 
in Greece started to overshadow the global financial markets. Given that today happens to 
be  just  a  few  days  after  the  Bank  implemented  measures  to  further  enhance  monetary 
easing,  this  is  my  first  opportunity  to  provide  a  thorough  explanation  of  this  latest  policy 
decision. The previous two speaking events before the Club were valuable opportunities for 
me, because they resulted in my being presented with many thought-provoking opinions and 
questions  and  provided  the  chance  to  put  my  own  thoughts  in  order.  With  that  in  mind,  I 
really look forward to exchanging views with you after delivering my speech. 
As I have just mentioned, the Bank decided the following three measures this week, at the 
Monetary Policy Meeting on the 14th, with a view toward clarifying its monetary policy stance 
and  to  further  enhance  monetary  easing  in  order  to  overcome  deflation  and  achieve 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability  (Chart  1).  First,  the  Bank  introduced  a  numerical 
expression of price stability in the form of “the price stability goal in the medium to long term.” 
Second, as for its conduct of monetary policy for the time being, the Bank stated that it will 
“continue pursuing powerful monetary easing with the aim of achieving the goal of 1 percent 
in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) until it judges 
that the 1 percent goal is in sight.” And third, the Bank increased the total size of the Asset 
Purchase Program introduced in the fall of 2010, from about 55 trillion yen to about 65 trillion 
yen, by adding another 10 trillion yen earmarked for the purchase of Japanese government 
bonds (JGBs). 
Today, I will first explain the aim of and thinking behind these decisions. In the second half of 
my  speech,  I  will  focus  on  the  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation,  which  is  the  goal  of  the 
aforementioned  measures,  and  discuss  the  causes  of  deflation  as  well  as  our  thinking  on 
necessary policy actions. After short-term interest rates in major economies including Japan 
declined to virtually zero, the scope of the operational tools of monetary policy has expanded 
from  a  traditional  way  of  “raising  and  cutting  interest  rates”  to  the  area  of  unconventional 
policy tools such as the purchase of various financial assets. Therefore, please forgive me if 
some parts of my speech inevitably become somewhat technical. 
I. 
“The Price Stability Goal in the Medium to Long Term” 
Numerical Expression of Price Stability 
I will begin with “the price stability goal in the medium to long term.” This is the inflation rate 
that the Bank judges to be consistent with price stability sustainable in the medium to long 
term.  The  Bank  judges  it  to  be  “in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower  in  terms  of  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI” and, more specifically, has set “a goal at 1 percent 
for the time being.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy  based  on  the  Principle  of  Currency  and  Monetary 
Control as clearly stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act; namely, that the policy shall be aimed 
at  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national 
economy.”  In  doing  so,  the  price  stability  must  be  of  the  sort  that  is  sustainable  in  the 
medium  to  long  term.  Then,  what  kind  of  state  does  this  “price  stability”  refer  to? 
Conceptually, we can express it as “a state where economic agents such as households and 
firms may make decisions regarding economic activities without being concerned about the 
fluctuations in the general price level.” In the conduct of monetary policy, price stability needs 
to  be  expressed  in  numerical  terms.  Individual  central  banks  express  price  stability  in 
numerical  terms  within  the  context  of  each  country’s  situation  and  name  the  expression 
differently. Examples of such numerical expressions include the Bank of England’s “target,” 
“definition of price stability” adopted by the European Central Bank and the Swiss National 
Bank, and the U.S. Federal Reserve’s previously adopted “longer-run projection,” as well as 
the “longer-run goal” it introduced recently. 
“Understanding,” “Goal,” and “Target” 
Six  years  ago,  in  March  2006,  the  Bank  introduced  its  own  framework  under  which  it 
expressed  price  stability  in  numerical  terms,  named  “an  understanding  of  medium-  to 
long-term  price  stability.”  After  undergoing  a  series  of  changes  in  expression,  the  Bank’s 
recent  “understanding”  was  “a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  centering  around 
1 percent” on the basis of a year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. 
The  word  “understanding”  was  chosen  for  a  definite  reason.  Back  then,  the  Bank  was 
approaching the exit from its quantitative easing policy, which had lasted for the five years 
since 2001, and the Policy Board members had a wide range of views with regard to price 
stability in the coming new phase. At the same time, all the members recognized the need to 
publish, as the Policy Board, the basic idea of price stability in numerical terms. As a result, 
the  decision  was  made  to  ask  individual  Policy  Board  members  to  present  their  own 
understanding of price stability in specific inflation rates and issue numerical expressions in 
the  form  of  a  range  covering  the  presented  rates,  and  this  was  published  as  the 
“understanding.”1 
Over  time,  however,  a  growing  number  of  voices  began  to  be  heard,  pointing  to  the 
difficulties in understanding the Bank’s judgment from a collection of individual views held by 
each member. Others expressed the view that connotations of “understanding” did not allow 
for  smooth  interpretations  of  the  Bank’s  policy  stance  in  its  efforts  toward  achieving  price 
stability, and in overcoming deflation in light of the current situation. The Bank’s decision to 
introduce  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  also  took  into  account  such 
various  views.  Let  me  summarize  the  differences  between  the  “goal”  and  the  former 
“understanding.” First, the “goal” introduced represented “a judgment by the Bank” and not 
“the views of individual Policy Board members.” Second, while judging that the “goal” was “in 
a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI,” 
the Bank clarified this by setting it at a more specific 1 percent for the time being (Chart 2). 
And  third,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  so-called  “policy  duration  effects,”  the  goal  is  more 
clearly linked to the Bank’s policy commitment on the duration of powerful monetary easing 
including the virtually zero interest rate policy, which I will explain in more detail later. 
Based  on  my  explanation  to  this  point,  the  question  of  why  the  Bank  did  not  choose 
alternatives such as “target” might arise. The basic idea of the “goal” introduced is largely in 
line with the basic thinking held by some central banks abroad with regard to using the word 
“a  target,”  in  that  it  expresses  the  inflation  rate  the  Bank  judges  to  be  consistent  with  the 
                                                 
1  For more details, please refer to "The Bank's Thinking on Price Stability" (March 10, 2006) and Minutes of the 
Monetary Policy Meeting on March 8 and 9, 2006. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mission of a central bank and is one that the Bank aims to achieve in the medium to long 
term.  In  Japan,  however,  it  is  still  often  the  case  that  “inflation  targeting”  is  mistakenly 
considered equivalent to conducting monetary policy in an automatic manner in pursuit of a 
certain inflation rate. In reality, in many countries, including those adopting inflation targeting, 
monetary policy is conducted not in such an automatic manner but with an emphasis on price 
and economic stability in the medium to long term, as I will explain in more detail later. The 
Bank  judged  that  the  Japanese  wording  of  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long 
term” would be the most appropriate name for the actual conduct of monetary policy. 
In the case of Japan, while inflation rates have remained low over a protracted period, the 
sustainable levels of such rates could rise gradually in the future if efforts to strengthen the 
economy’s  growth  potential  bear  fruit.2  In  view  of  the  high  uncertainty  surrounding  future 
developments,  including  possible  structural  changes  in  Japan’s  economy  and  the  global 
economic  environment,  the  Bank  judged  it  appropriate  to  attach  the  term  “goal”  to  the 
inflation  rate  that  the  Bank  aims  to  achieve  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  instead  of  the 
expression of “target” that gives a rigid impression, and to review it once a year in principle. 
II. 
Strengthening of Policy Duration Effects 
Clarification of Determination to Pursue Monetary Easing 
Next,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  second  step  taken  at  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
Meeting – the strengthening of policy duration effects. In order to generate the policy duration 
effects, central banks make a commitment to the future course of monetary policy based on 
certain  conditions.  When  short-term  interest  rates  almost  hit  zero,  leaving  little  room  for  a 
further decline, there is a need to introduce measures that influence the entire yield curve, 
including the longer end, in place of the traditional operation of controlling short-term interest 
rates.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  formulated  based  on  the  expected  future  path  of 
short-term interest rates and risk premiums. Therefore, if market participants believe that a 
central bank’s commitment to monetary easing will continue for a long period of time and that 
a short-term interest rate that is a policy rate will stay low for an extended period, then this 
will exert a downward force on long-term interest rates. 
The Bank has made the best use of the policy duration effects while engaging in maintaining 
the  zero  interest  rate  policy  since  1999  and  quantitative  easing  policy  since  2001.  More 
recently,  based  on  the  “understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  that  I 
explained, the Bank made it clear that it would “continue the virtually zero interest rate policy 
until it judges that price stability is in sight.” Although this commitment had played a certain 
role  in  encouraging  the  stable  formation  of  long-term  interest  rates,  the  Bank  made  two 
changes  this  time,  with  the  aim  of  further  clarifying  its  policy  stance  toward  overcoming 
deflation. First, the condition for policy duration is now more clearly specified based on the 
1 percent  inflation  rate  that  is  set  as  a  price  stability  goal  for  the  time  being.  Second,  the 
Bank  judged  that  it  was  more  appropriate  to  express  the  policy  stance  on  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in a more active manner; that is, not only acknowledging the continuation of 
the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  but  also  pointing  to  other  policy  measures  that  have 
actually been taken. For this reason, it introduced a new policy commitment, which says “For 
                                                 
2 
In the "Economic and Fiscal Projections for Medium to Long Term Analysis" released by the Cabinet Office in 
January 2012, the following two figures are provided as estimates of the rate of increase in the CPI for the 
medium to long term: (1) around 1 percent (an average of 1.1 percent for the period until fiscal 2020) under 
the assumption that economic developments at home and abroad require vigilance, and (2) around 2 percent 
(an average  of 1.7 percent for the period until fiscal 2020) if measures proposed in the "Basic Strategy for 
Revitalizing Japan" are steadily implemented amid robust economic developments at home and abroad and 
the average growth rates for the period until fiscal 2020 rise to about 2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the time being, the Bank will continue pursuing powerful monetary easing by conducting its 
virtually  zero  interest  policy  and  by  implementing  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  mainly 
through the purchase of financial assets, with the aim of achieving the goal of 1 percent in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI until the goal is in sight.” At the same 
time,  based  on  the  experiences  of  the  forming  and  bursting  of  a  bubble  in  Japan  and  the 
global financial crisis following bubbles in recent years, a condition to the above commitment 
was set that, even when price stability is maintained, the Bank checks to see whether any 
significant risk is materializing, including the accumulation of financial imbalances, from the 
viewpoint of ensuring sustainable economic growth (Chart 2).3 
Commitment of Timing and Commitment of Conditions 
This kind of policy commitment aimed at generating policy duration effects is also adopted by 
central banks abroad. One way of doing this is to refer to a specific duration or timing of an 
exit,  just like  the  U.S. Federal  Reserve  does. According  to  its statement,  the  U.S.  Federal 
Reserve currently anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant an exceptionally 
low level of its policy rate “at least through late 2014,” but holds significant reservations with 
regard  to  such  anticipation  being  subject  to  change  depending  on  economic  and  price 
outlooks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bank  of  Japan  makes  its  commitment  on  a  “condition” 
based on the CPI inflation rate, instead of a specific “timing” of an exit from monetary easing. 
The  Bank  judged  it  better  to  present  a  condition  in  terms  of  an  inflation  goal,  rather  than 
specifying  the  timing  of  an  exit  from  monetary  easing  to  gain  a  greater  “credibility  of 
commitment,”  and  consequently  more  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  given  the  high 
uncertainty surrounding the economic and price outlooks in Japan at this juncture. As long as 
economic  and  price  outlooks  entail  high  uncertainty,  it  is  impossible  to  specify  the  exact 
timing of an exit from monetary easing, but there is no uncertainty with regard to the Bank’s 
policy  stance  to  pursue  monetary  easing  until  it  sees  the  exit.  Given  the  current  state  of 
Japan’s economy, the Bank believes that this type of policy commitment is more effective in 
showing its strong determination to pursue policy aiming at overcoming deflation. 
Relation to Inflation Targeting 
I have explained that the Bank recently introduced the combination of “the price stability goal 
in the medium to long term” and “strong policy commitment based on the CPI inflation rate.” 
How is this related to the so-called “inflation targeting?” 
I would like to note at the outset that, after going through a bubble in Japan and experiencing 
the recent financial crises, the monetary authorities around the world have made efforts to 
improve their frameworks for the conduct of monetary policy by learning from each other’s 
lessons in the wake of those crises, and consequently have converged to share the following 
three elements in such frameworks.  
First,  they  published  specific  inflation  rates  considered  to  be  consistent  with  their 
responsibility. As I have already explained, although the wording differs, such as between the 
Bank  of  England’s  “target,”  “definition”  used  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Swiss 
National Bank, the U.S. Federal Reserve’s “goal,” and the Bank’s “medo (in English, ‘goal’),” 
their characteristics are basically same. 
Second, and more importantly, they have placed increasing emphasis on economic and price 
stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  instead  of  the  short  term,  when  using  the  numerical 
expression of price stability in their conduct of monetary policy. In many cases, bubbles are 
                                                 
3  During the bubble period in Japan, the rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food, after adjusting for 
the effect of a consumption tax hike) was 0.4 percent in fiscal 1987, 0.6 percent in fiscal 1988, and 1.6 percent 
in fiscal 1989. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
formed  when  the  economy  enjoys  price  stability  and  their  bursting  results  in  significant 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity  and  prices  later.  Even  if  the  authorities  try  to  control  the 
effect of supply shocks such as volatility in crude oil prices in the short run, economic activity 
suffers  a  significant  burden  and  price  stability ultimately  is  endangered  in  the  long  run.  All 
these  kinds  of  experiences  in  recent  years  underscore  the  importance  of  pursuing  price 
stability  sustainable  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the 
monetary policy framework is called inflation targeting, the actual conduct of monetary policy 
is increasingly aimed at achieving the inflation target in the medium to long term while paying 
attention to economic and financial stability, instead of achieving the target at all costs in the 
short term. 
Third,  and  related  to  the  second  element,  major  central  banks  have  come  to  publish  their 
economic and price outlooks covering a longer period. Having said that, the longer the period 
of forecasts, the greater their inevitable decline in terms of reliability. Therefore, these central 
banks increasingly emphasize the medium- to long-term perspectives in showing their basic 
thinking on the mechanism behind the outlook and assessing risks, instead of focusing too 
much on highlighting the forecast numbers themselves. 
Given  that  the  monetary  policy  frameworks  of  major  central  banks  have  converged  as 
described, I think it no longer important to play with the taxonomy of which one is inflation 
targeting or not. In fact, while Chairman Bernanke made it clear that the newly introduced 
longer-run goal does not mean the introduction of inflation targeting, some nevertheless do 
call it inflation targeting. If the new monetary policy framework adopted by the U.S. Federal 
Reserve  can  be  called  inflation  targeting,  a  similar  view  could  be  taken  in  the  case  of  the 
Bank’s new framework. 
III. 
Expansion of the Asset Purchase Program 
10 Trillion Yen Increase in the Purchase of JGBs 
Now I would like to touch upon the third step taken at the latest Monetary Policy Meeting. 
That is, the expansion of the Asset Purchase Program (Chart 3). 
As  part  of  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing  introduced  in  October  2010,  the  Bank  has 
purchased  various  types  of  financial  assets  through  the  Program.  Using  the  newly 
established segregated fund on its balance sheet, which is also used for the funds-supplying 
operations  over  the  longer  term,  the  Bank  has  purchased  JGBs  -  both  short-term  and 
long-term – and, in an exceptionally unusual practice for a central bank, risk assets including 
commercial  paper,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-trade  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  The  purpose  of  this  operation  is  to  encourage  a  decline  in 
longer-term market interest rates and a reduction in various risk premiums so that financial 
conditions surrounding the ultimate borrowers of funds, such as firms and households, will 
become more accommodative. In the process of enhancing monetary easing, the total size of 
the Program had been increased repeatedly, from the initial 35 trillion yen in October 2010 to 
55  trillion  yen,  and  the  Bank  made  a  decision  to  further  increase  it  to  65  trillion  yen  by 
earmarking  another  10  trillion  yen  for  the  purchase  of  JGBs  at  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
Meeting. The cumulative increase in the total size of the Program is about 30 trillion yen. 
In addition to this Program, the Bank regularly purchases JGBs at the pace of 1.8 trillion yen 
per  month,  or  21.6  trillion  yen  per  year,  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  stable  long-term 
demand for funds. Adding up the purchases through such operation and those through the 
Program, the Bank is going to purchase a large amount of JGBs until the end of this year at 
the pace of 3.3 trillion yen per month, or about 40 trillion yen per year. At the end of last year, 
the  amount  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  was  66.1  trillion  yen,  representing  14.2  percent  of 
nominal  GDP.  Although  you  may  have  the  impression  that  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  has 
aggressively  purchased  government  bonds,  its  holdings  at  the  end  of  last  year  were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
10.8 percent  of  nominal  GDP.  The  holdings  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  started 
making such purchases in 2010, represented 2.2 percent of nominal GDP. 
Such a significant scale of government bond purchases entails risk, to which more attention 
needs  to  be  paid.  More  specifically,  once  the  purchase  of  government  bonds  by  a  central 
bank  is  perceived  as  financing  government  debt  and  not  conducted  for  the  purpose  of 
monetary  policy,  this  could  instead  invite  a  hike  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  lead  to 
financial  market  instability.  The  Bank  has  repeatedly  cautioned  about  this  risk  and  rigidly 
maintains  its  policy  of  not  conducting  purchases  of  JGBs  for  the  purpose  of  financing 
government debt. 
Ensuring Accommodative Financial Conditions 
As a result of the comprehensive monetary easing consisting of the aggressive purchase of 
financial assets and the virtually zero interest rate policy, financial conditions in Japan have 
become  extremely  accommodative  (Chart  4).  More  specifically,  interest  rates  –  including 
longer-term ones – in short-term money markets where financial institutions lend and borrow 
funds have stayed at very low levels, and credit spreads have been stable at low levels in 
corporate  bond  and  commercial  paper  markets.  Bank  lending  rates  have  already  reached 
significantly low levels but continue to decline gradually. According to various surveys, firms 
see  their  financial  position  and  financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes  as  being  on  a  clear 
improving trend. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  period  after  the  Lehman  shock,  an  increase  in  quantitative 
indicators  such  as  the  size  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  and  the  monetary  base  –  money 
provided by a central bank – has been moderate compared to that in the United States and 
in  Europe,  sometimes  inviting  the  misunderstanding  that  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing  is 
insufficient. When interest rates decline to extremely low levels, people tend to hang on to 
money. This situation is called a “liquidity trap.” Once caught in this, it is no longer possible to 
measure the degree of monetary easing by simply looking at quantitative financial indicators. 
In fact, when we ask business managers about confronting challenges, few complain about a 
shortage of on-hand liquidity and many point to a lack of demand or business. In any case, in 
such  a  situation,  what  is  more  important  is  the  easiness  of  financial  conditions  in  a  broad 
sense,  such  as  developments  in  short-term  and  long-term  funding  rates  for  firms  and  risk 
premiums as well as funding conditions of firms and households. In the case of the United 
States  and  Europe,  a  significant  expansion  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  was 
indispensable to restoring stability in financial markets that had suffered significant damage 
to their functioning after the Lehman shock. Once provided to financial markets, the funds 
remained  piled  up  in  deposits  with  central  banks  because  of  negligible  opportunity  costs 
amid extremely low interest rate levels. On the other hand, in the case of Japan, damage to 
the functioning of financial markets was relatively limited and financial system stability was 
maintained  even  at  the  time  of  the  Lehman  shock.  Therefore,  without  having  quantitative 
expansion on the scale seen in the United States and Europe, the Bank could realize more 
accommodative 
financial  markets 
heightened  again  last  year  due  to  the  European  debt  problem,  the  Bank  has  managed  to 
firmly  maintain accommodative financial conditions in Japan. It is expected that the recent 
determined  increase  in  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  earmarked  for  JGBs  will  further 
strengthen the easing effects by affecting the entire yield curve, including the longer end. 
financial  conditions.  Although 
in  global 
tensions 
IV.  Our Thinking on Deflation and Needed Actions 
Cause of Deflation 
So far, I have explained the Bank’s new policy steps, which aim at overcoming deflation and 
bringing  the  economy  back  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  Conducting 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary  policy  in  this  way,  how  significant  of  an  effect  can  be  expected  in  terms  of 
achieving  the  goal  of  overcoming  deflation?  Put  differently,  what  kinds  of  measures  are 
needed for Japan’s economy as a whole to ensure that this goal will be achieved? Using the 
time left for today’s remarks, I would like to share with you our thinking on deflation. A good 
starting point is to have an accurate understanding of the fundamental cause of deflation in 
Japan. 
The various causes of deflation in Japan have been provided and discussed for years. For 
example,  for  some  time,  downward  pressures  on  prices  came  from  deregulation  and  the 
streamlining of distribution systems, which were pursued under the policy initiatives to reduce 
international price differentials. In Japan, both employers and employees tend to make wage 
adjustments  for  the  sake  of  securing  employment.  As  a  result,  even  under  the  severe 
economic conditions, the unemployment rate in Japan did not rise compared to that in the 
United States and in Europe, while the declining trend for wages became more evident. Such 
a declining trend of wages is one of the factors explaining deflation in Japan. 
In the meantime, there is an argument that deflation has continued because of an insufficient 
amount of money – in other words, insufficient monetary easing by the Bank. However, such 
an argument needs to be properly fact-checked (Chart 5). Let’s take the typical example of 
money stocks, which are cash and deposits held by firms and households. The Marshallian 
k is the ratio of money stocks to nominal GDP that is used to measure the size of money 
stocks  in  relation  to  economic  activity.  In  Japan,  the  ratio  had  been  about  1.1  until  the 
mid-1990s, which means that money stocks and nominal GDP were almost same size. Since 
then, the ratio has continued to rise against the background of prolonged monetary easing 
and is now about 1.7 – in other words, the amount of money stocks is about 805 trillion yen 
while  nominal  GDP  is  about  467  trillion  yen.  This  ratio  of  1.7  is  the  highest  among  major 
economies. Conducting a similar exercise with the monetary base and the size of the central 
bank  balance  sheets  results  in  the  same  conclusion  that  the  ratio  of  Japan  is  the  highest 
among major economies.  
As  I  have  stated,  the  Bank  has  managed  to  maintain  accommodative  financial  conditions 
despite  the  rising  tensions  in  global  financial  markets  against  the  background  of  the 
European debt problem. Viewed in this way, it appears that the problem of Japan’s economy 
is  not  a  lack  of  money  but  rather  a  lack  of  business  chances  and  growth  opportunities  to 
make the best use of money. 
Ultimately, deflation is a decline in the general price level, and therefore must be caused by a 
deterioration in the supply and demand balance of the macro economy – i.e., a shortage of 
demand  against  supply.  An  output  gap  –  an  indicator  for  supply  and  demand  balance 
estimated  on  the  basis  of  certain  assumptions  –  has  continued  to  indicate  a  shortage  of 
demand since 2000 with the exception of a very short time period. 
Looking back at real GDP growth rates in Japan from a relatively long viewpoint, the rates 
have gradually declined from 4.4 percent in the 1980s, to 1.5 percent in the 1990s, and to 
0.6 percent  in  the  2000s  (Chart  6).  There  are  several  reasons  for  this  decline.  First,  the 
negative  legacy  of  the  bubble  bursting  had  continued  to  weigh  on  the  economy  since  the 
beginning  of  the  1990s.  To  be  more  specific,  while  firms  and  financial  institutions  were 
tackling the challenge of balance-sheet repair, Japan’s economy as a whole failed to adjust 
to  a  changing  environment,  such  as  increasing  globalization  and  a  rapid  aging  of  the 
population. In particular, the effects of the population aging at a much greater speed in Japan 
than  in  the  rest  of  the  world  have  become  more  evident  since  entering  the  2000s.  The 
aforementioned  widening  of  an  output  gap  certainly  means  a  shortage  of  demand  against 
supply capacity, but in the current conjuncture it is specifically a shortage of demand against 
the  supply  capacity  of  existing  goods  and  services.  Rather,  it  might  be  interpreted  as  a 
widening mismatch of demand and supply in a sense that the supply side fails to sufficiently 
meet new demand in the new environment, such as demand from seniors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
In  any  case,  when  growth  rates  trend  down  in  this  way,  households  increasingly  grow 
concerned  about  future  income;  this  results  in  stagnant  consumption  and  the  corporate 
sector restrains investment in future business. If these events occur, this will lead to a vicious 
cycle in which contraction of expenditure by firms and households drags down actual growth 
rates and growth expectations. 
The relationship between economic activity and prices could be compared to that between 
fundamental physical strength and body temperature. In order to raise the body temperature 
to a normal level, it is necessary to improve the fundamental physical strength. Likewise, we 
need  to  face  the  reality  that,  in  order  to  raise  prices  appropriately,  it  is  indispensable  to 
strengthen  Japan’s  growth  potential  and  growth  expectations,  and  deflation  cannot  be 
overcome without such efforts. Of course, there are some cases where only an increase in 
prices takes place without changes in growth. The two oil shocks in the 1970s and the 1980s 
are typical examples. However, it also should be noted that a temporary increase in prices 
will not improve the performance of firms or quality of people’s lives, as you can easily see in 
the case where crude oil price hikes are transmitted to general prices, and we certainly do 
not wish to see such a situation materialize. The bottom line is that it is important to realize 
desirable inflation rates in proper sequencing so that improvement in economic activity leads 
to a rise in prices in a natural manner. 
Efforts toward Strengthening Growth Potential 
Strengthening growth potential is an extremely difficult challenge for Japan, especially given 
the constraint it faces – namely, the rapid aging of the population. Let me provide you with a 
rough calculation. The economic growth rate consists of two components: the rate of growth 
in  the  number  of  workers  and  the  GDP  per  worker  –  or  the  rate  of  growth  in  productivity 
(Chart 6).4 Of these two components, the rate of growth in the number of workers started to 
decline in the 2000s and decreased at an annual rate of 0.3 percent on average during that 
decade.  Based  on  long-term  projections  of  demographic  trends  recently  released  by  the 
National  Institute  of  Population  and  Social  Security  Research,  the  rate  of  decline  in  the 
number of workers will increase further to 0.7 percent in the 2010s, 0.8 percent in the 2020s, 
and  1.2  percent  in  the  2030s.  Meanwhile,  although  the  rate  of  growth  in  productivity  has 
fluctuated due to the effects of the Lehman shock, the recent trend is 1 percent on average in 
the past twenty years and about 1.5 percent on average for the period in the 2000s before 
the Lehman shock. The rate of growth in productivity in Japan itself is comparable to those of 
other G-7 economies and was highest in the period in the 2000s before the Lehman shock. 
However,  adding  this  rate  of  growth  in  productivity  to  the  rate  of  decline  in  the  number  of 
workers  leaves  us  with  a  grim  outlook;  that  is,  not  only  will  the  annual  rate  of  economic 
growth in the 2010s remain around 0.5 percent, but it may decline further in the longer run. 
How can we strengthen the economy’s growth potential? First, while it is difficult to induce a 
dramatic increase in the number of workers, it is still possible to slow the pace of decline in 
the number by making it easier for elderly people and women to participate in the workforce. 
Nevertheless,  the  key  to  strengthening  growth  potential  lies  in  efforts  to  raise  productivity 
growth.  In  doing  so,  firms’  efforts  to  capture  global  demand  and  cultivate  new  diversifying 
domestic demand become necessary. On the policy front, it is important to take measures 
such  as  deregulation  in  order  to  create  an  environment  that  encourages  firms  to  take  on 
these challenges. Financial institutions’ expertise in identifying good business opportunities 
and providing risk money also become important with regard to providing financial support to 
                                                 
4  As  for  various  measures  for  the  rate  of  growth  in  productivity,  see  Chart  13  of  Masaaki  Shirakawa, 
"Deleveraging and Growth: Is the Developed World Following Japan's Long and Winding Road?," Lecture at 
the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science  (Co-hosted  by  the  Asia  Research  Centre  and 
STICERD, 
LSE), 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012 
/data/ko120111a.pdf 
January 
2012. 
10, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
firms in the course of making such efforts. Above all, it will be vital for society as a whole to 
realize  the  harsh  reality  and  critical  issues  facing  Japan’s  economy  and  share  a  sense  of 
values,  which  should  include  acceptance  of  change  as  well  as  the  need  to  improve  the 
economic metabolism. 
The most significant contribution that a central bank could make in terms of strengthening 
growth potential is to maintain accommodative financial conditions and support firms from the 
financial side by creating an environment that makes it easier for them to explore new growth 
strategies. The Bank will continue to pursue powerful monetary easing, taking full account of 
“the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  I  have  discussed  today.  It  is  also  an 
essential role of the Bank to make efforts to minimize the effects on the financial market and 
the  financial  system  in  Japan,  and  do  its  utmost  to  ensure  stability  even  in  the  event  that 
some kind of destabilizing factor arises overseas amid high uncertainty surrounding global 
financial  developments, 
in  an 
extraordinary  measure  for  a  central  bank,  the  Bank  has  been  proceeding  with  a  new 
fund-provisioning measure to provide support for strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth.  This  is  aimed  at  encouraging  firms  to  explore  new  growth  strategies  by  taking 
advantage of financial institutions’ expertise in identifying good business opportunities. 
In any event, there is no magical wand that can be used to strengthen growth potential. It is 
important for business firms, financial institutions, the government, and the central bank to 
continue  making  efforts  in  their  respective  roles  as  they  face  changes  in  the  environment 
surrounding Japan’s economy – such as globalization and the aging of the population. The 
goal  of  overcoming  deflation  will  be  achieved  through  such  efforts  to  strengthen  growth 
potential and support from the financial side. 
the  European  debt  problem.  Furthermore, 
including 
Economic and Price Developments and Outlooks 
V. 
Lastly, let me brief you on recent economic and price developments as well as the outlook for 
Japan’s  economy,  in  order  to  show  how  much  progress  has  been  made  in  terms  of 
overcoming deflation. 
Japan’s  economic  activity  experienced  a  sharp  rebound  from  a  plunge  caused  by  the 
earthquake  disaster  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  Recently,  economic  activity  has  been 
more  or  less  flat,  reflecting  downward  forces  deriving  from  the  effects  of  a  slowdown  in 
overseas  economies  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  as  well  as  upward  forces  stemming 
from firm domestic demand, such as in terms of private consumption. Although this state of 
the economy is expected to continue for the time being – beyond early spring – the economy 
is  expected  to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas 
economies  picks  up,  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  as 
reconstruction-related  demand  after  the  earthquake  disaster  gradually  strengthens.  The 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to remain at around 0 percent for the time 
being but gradually increase to around 0.5 percent in the next two years or so. According to 
the Bank’s projections released last month of the economic and price outlooks through fiscal 
2013, the real GDP growth rate is expected to be –0.4 percent in fiscal 2011, 2 percent in 
fiscal 2012, and 1.6 percent in fiscal 2013. As for the CPI, the year-on-year rate of increase 
is expected to gradually rise, from –0.1 percent in fiscal 2011, to 0.1 percent in fiscal 2012, 
and 0.5 percent in fiscal 2013 (Chart 7). 
Looking  back,  the  rate  of  decrease  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  marked  a  low  of 
–2.4 percent in mid-2009, recording the largest decline in recent years. Thereafter, amid the 
economic recovery trend, albeit a moderate one, and the narrowing of the negative output 
gap,  the  rate  of  decrease  in  the  CPI  has  been  slowing  and  finally  reached  almost  zero 
percent on a year-on-year basis. In this sense, we have been making progress in our steps 
toward overcoming deflation. We admit, however, that the inflation rate still has a long way to 
go before it reaches the 1 percent goal that the Bank has set for the time being, as indicated 
in “the price stability goal in the medium to long term.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
In  addition,  the  environment  surrounding  Japan’s  economy  is  attended  by  various 
uncertainties.  We  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  future  developments  in  the  European 
debt problem will spill over to Japan’s economy through strains in the global financial market. 
In  terms  of  domestic  factors,  there  are  still  many  uncertainties  regarding  the  supply  and 
demand balance of electricity and the effects of the yen’s appreciation, as well as the pace of 
strengthening  in  reconstruction-related  demand.  At  the  same  time,  however,  we  must  not 
overlook the fact that positive signs have recently begun to appear among developments at 
home and abroad. Tensions in global financial markets regarding the European debt problem 
have abated somewhat since around the end of 2011. Some improvement has recently been 
observed in the U.S. economy, mainly in the employment situation, despite the burdens of 
balance-sheet repair. Shifting our focus to Japan’s economy, reconstruction-related demand 
has begun to materialize in both public works and private demand, and private consumption 
has  recently  been  firm  due  in  part  to  a  recovery  in  demand  that  had  been  temporarily 
restrained after the earthquake disaster last year. 
The  Bank  has  decided  to  further  enhance  monetary  easing,  through  the  measures  I  have 
discussed,  with  the  aim  of  supporting  the  recent  positive  developments  from  the  financial 
side.  The  Bank  will  continue  making  its  utmost  efforts  in  order  to  overcome  deflation  and 
achieve sustainable growth with price stability. At the same time, I would like to repeat that, 
in  order  to  strengthen  the  foundation  of  Japan’s  growth  potential,  there  is  a  need  to 
concentrate all the efforts made by concerned parties. Firms and financial institutions need to 
make  efforts  in  an  aggressive  manner  to  make  the  best  use  of  accommodative  financial 
conditions,  and  government  measures  to  support  such  initiatives  in  the  private  sector  are 
required.  In  doing  so,  given  that  our  economy  is  facing  the  frontline  challenge  of  a  rapid 
aging of the population, our responses in tackling this challenge must be at the cutting edge. 
We need to determinedly pave the way by ourselves, recognizing that it is not possible to find 
case studies for solutions and best practices in other countries. If we succeed in overcoming 
this challenge by ourselves, our country can provide the rest of the world with a new type of 
economic  and  social  norm  for  the  first  time  since  we  presented  the  high-growth  economic 
model.  I  would  like  to  finish  my  remarks  by  stressing  the  importance  of  solving  problems 
through using our own wisdom and will. 
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 
Chart 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 3 
Chart 4 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
Chart 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
Chart 7 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
