Philip Lowe: Developments in the mining and non-mining economies 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to 
the ADC Future Summit, Melbourne, 14 May 2012. 
 Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today. It is a pleasure to be in Melbourne 
again.  
As  you  are  all  no  doubt  aware,  the  Australian  economy  is  currently  going  through  some 
major structural adjustments. It is adjusting to a once-in-a-century boom in mining investment 
and the terms of trade, and to a very high exchange rate. It is also adjusting to a return to 
traditional patterns in household spending and borrowing after more than a decade in which 
both consumption and debt grew much faster than household income.  
These changes are occurring in an economy that has, over recent times, performed much 
better  than  other  advanced  economies.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Australia  remains  low, 
output is continuing to expand, inflation is contained, the banking system is strong and public 
finances  are  in  much  better  shape  than  in  other  advanced  economies.  Yet  the  structural 
changes that are taking place are creating a sense of unease for many in the community, 
particularly amongst those who are not benefiting directly from the mining boom.  
So this morning, I would like to touch on three interconnected issues, all of which are related 
to structural change.  
The  first  of  these  is  the  recent  GDP  growth  and  inflation  outcomes  and  what  they  tell  us 
about the evolving balance of demand and supply in the economy.  
The second issue, and one that the Bank staff have been grappling with for some time, is the 
different growth paths for the mining-related and non-mining-related parts of the economy. A 
particular question here is what rate of output growth in the non-mining-related part of the 
economy is likely to be consistent with low inflation during the once-in-a-century investment 
boom that we are now experiencing.  
And the third issue that I would like to touch on is the recent decisions on monetary policy 
and the Reserve Bank’s latest forecasts.  
GDP growth and inflation  
A  year  ago,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  central  forecast  was  for  aggregate  output  in  Australia  to 
increase by around 4¼ per cent over 2011. Our forecast for aggregate demand growth was a 
bit  higher  than  this,  with  some  of  the  very  strong  growth  in  demand  being  met  by  even 
stronger growth in imports.  
As things turned out, the outcome for aggregate demand was pretty close to the expected 
outcome – at an above-trend rate of 4½ per cent compared with the forecast 4¾ per cent. In 
contrast,  growth  in  aggregate  output  –  at  a  below-trend  rate  of  2¼ per  cent  –  was  slower 
than we had expected.  
When we look at why output growth over 2011 was not as strong as forecast, well over half 
of  the  difference  is  accounted  for  by  unexpectedly  weak  growth  in  exports,  particularly  of 
coal. It has taken longer than was originally expected to remove water from the flooded coal 
mines  and  for  firms  to  take  advantage  of  increases  in  port  and  rail  capacity.  As  a  result, 
despite  all  the  talk  about  Australia’s  resources  boom,  the  volume  of  resource  exports 
increased by only 1 per cent over 2011. A much stronger outcome than this is likely both this 
year and next.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But exports are, by no means, the full story. Other factors were also at work, with more of the 
strong  growth  in  domestic  demand  being  met  through  overseas  production  –  rather  than 
domestic production – than was originally expected. An important factor here has been the 
composition of the growth in demand.  
As I mentioned a moment ago, growth in aggregate demand was pretty close to what was 
expected. However, the composition of that growth contained a few surprises. In particular, 
while the Reserve Bank had long expected a very large lift in investment in the resources 
sector  in  2011  –  and  this  indeed  occurred  –  the  increase  was  even  larger  than  had  been 
forecast. As one indication of the very strong outcome, the ABS estimates that engineering 
investment increased by almost 50 per cent over 2011. On the other hand, growth in demand 
not directly related to mining investment was not as strong as was forecast.  
The  biggest  surprise  was  probably  in  terms  of  home  building.  We  had  expected  dwelling 
approvals to pick up gradually over 2011, but this pick-up did not eventuate. One possible 
explanation for this is that it is one of the side effects of a return to more traditional savings 
and borrowing behaviour by households. This change in behaviour is having ripple effects 
through  the  economy,  including  through  a  lowering  of  expected  capital  gains  on  housing. 
This  has  made  developers,  financiers  and  households  less  willing  to  commit  to  new 
construction despite rising rental yields, lower prices relative to income and ongoing growth 
in population. While, at some point, the improving fundamentals should generate a pick-up in 
home building, the recent forward-looking indicators do not suggest that this is imminent.  
Another other area that was weaker than expected was private business investment outside 
the resources sector. This partly reflects the decline in business confidence over the year, 
with a number of factors, including renewed concerns about the fiscal problems in Europe, 
adding  to  uncertainty.  Public  demand  was  also  weaker  than  was  expected.  In  contrast, 
consumption  growth  –  at  around  3½ per cent  –  was  in  line  with  our  forecasts,  with  total 
consumption increasing broadly at the same rate as household income.  
This  composition  of  demand  growth  –  with  its  heavy  weight  on  mining-related  investment 
which tends to be very import intensive – has contributed to very strong growth in aggregate 
imports. Or put a little differently, it has meant that the strong growth in aggregate demand 
that we have seen has, at least to date, not boosted domestic production in the same way as 
might  have  occurred  in  the  past.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  less  pressure  on  domestic 
capacity than earlier expected.  
One consequence of this is that the inflation pressures that were evident in the beginning of 
2011  have  moderated.  At  the  beginning  of  last  year,  underlying  inflation  looked  to  have 
reached a low point of about 2¼ per cent and was starting to rise and was expected to be 
close to 3 per cent by the end of 2011. As things turned out, inflation did pick up in the June 
quarter  last  year,  but  it  then  began  to  moderate,  with  the  latest  readings  for  underlying 
inflation over the year to the March quarter being in the lower part of the medium-term target 
range of 2–3 per cent.  
Not surprisingly, the prices data reflect the particular composition of aggregate demand that 
has been witnessed over recent times. In parts of the resources sector, costs remain under 
upward pressure, with very strong demand for some intermediate inputs and for a range of 
occupations,  predominately  in  engineering  and  science,  but  also  in  accounting,  legal  and 
human  resources.  In  contrast,  in  a  number  of  other  parts  of  the  economy,  the  subdued 
demand  growth  is  putting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  In  the  latest  CPI,  there  were,  for 
example, declines in the prices of most goods, the price of domestic holidays, and for the 
price of new dwellings. These are all areas where demand growth has been soft and firms’ 
margins are under downward pressure.  
So, to summarise, the overall picture is one in which aggregate demand has grown strongly, 
and is expected to continue to do so. However, a higher-than-average share of that growth in 
demand is being met through imports, not only because of the high exchange rate but also 
because of the heavy weight of resource sector investment in overall demand. Partly as a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
result of this, as well as the direct effects of the exchange rate appreciation on the prices of 
imported goods, the recent inflation outcomes have been subdued.  
The mining and non-mining economy  
I would now like to turn more directly to the second issue – that is the size and growth rates 
of the mining-related and non-mining-related parts of the economy.  
While for many decades, the ABS has published separate data on farm and non-farm GDP, it 
does not publish separate data for mining and non-mining GDP. The ABS does, however, 
publish  gross  value  added  of  the  mining  sector.  This  is  currently  equivalent  to  a  little  less 
than 10 per cent of the output of the economy as a whole. But this figure does not include the 
very  significant  inputs  into  the  mining  sector  produced  by  other  domestic  industries,  and 
given  this  we  have  found  it  helpful  to  consider  broader  measures  of  the  mining-related 
economy.  
The  main  approach  we  have  used  is  to  start  with  the  expenditure  components  of  GDP, 
summing resource exports and investment in the resources sector and then subtracting the 
imported component of that investment. To this, is added resource production for domestic 
consumption, less the imported inputs that go into that production. This gives an estimate of 
total  expenditure  on  resources  production  and  investment  that  is  satisfied  by  domestic 
activity. To complement this analysis, we have also used the input-output tables published by 
the ABS to understand the linkages from demand for mining output and investment to activity 
in  other  domestic  industries.  Not  surprisingly,  this  analysis  shows  that  mining  investment 
draws significantly on construction activity, which in turn generates activity in industries such 
as business services, manufacturing, transport and wholesale trade.  
This  work  suggests  that  the  resources  sector  accounts  for  around  16  to  17 per cent  of 
current  GDP.  Of  course,  different  approaches  and  assumptions  could  generate  either  a 
higher of lower number, although most alternatives deliver estimates in the 15 to 20 per cent 
range.  
The  approach  that  we  have  adopted  here  includes  the  output  of  workers  who  indirectly 
provide inputs to the mining sector. Defined this way, mining-related employment accounts 
for around 8 per cent of total employment, although only around 2¾ per cent of the workforce 
is  employed  directly  in  mining  and  resource  processing.  The  rest  of  the  8 per cent  are 
involved  in  a  wide  range  of  activities  related  to  the  mining  boom,  including  construction, 
utilities, project management, legal services, surveying, leasing etc.1  
Based  on  these  figures,  mining-related  activity  is  estimated  to  have  expanded  by  around 
12 per cent over the past year and similar growth is expected over the next couple of years. 
If this expected growth eventuates, the mining-related sector’s share of GDP will continue to 
increase  and  there  will  be  strong  jobs  growth  both  directly  in  resource  extraction  and 
processing and in a wide range of ancillary activities. Indeed, it would not be surprising if, 
over the next few years, growth in mining-related employment, broadly defined, was as high 
as one-half of the total growth in the Australian workforce.  
If these broad forecasts for the mining-related sector come to be realised, then employment 
growth  in  the  non-mining-related  part  of  the  economy  averaging  around  ¾  to  1 per cent  a 
year is likely to be needed to maintain the unemployment rate around its current level. The 
rate of growth in output in the non-mining-related economy would then depend upon the rate 
                                                 
1  These figures exclude the boost to Australia’s real income, as opposed to output, from the rise in the terms of 
trade.  If  this  rise  had  not  occurred  and  instead  the  terms  of  trade  over  recent  years  were  equal  to  their 
average during the 1990s, real income in Australia would be around 15 per cent lower than it currently is. This 
is  a  very  big  effect  and  it  is  in  addition  to  the  current  boost  to  output  that  is  occurring  because  of  the 
investment phase of the boom. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of  productivity  growth.  If,  for  example,  growth  in  labour  productivity  were  to  average  1  to 
1¼ per cent  per  annum,  then  non-mining  output  might  be  expected  to  grow  by  around 
2 per cent per year on  average. This is above the recent rate of growth of the non-mining 
economy  –  which  we  estimate  to  be  a  bit  less  than  1 per cent  –  but  below  the  long-term 
average of a bit over 3 per cent.  
There are, of course, a wide range of other scenarios and these calculations are best thought 
of  as  a  guide  to  what  broad  configuration  of  output  growth  might  be  possible  given  the 
supply-side  constraints.  Inevitably,  there  are  a  number  of  uncertainties,  foremost  amongst 
which are the future rate of productivity growth in the non-mining economy and the ability of 
the labour market to effectively match workers with the new employment opportunities that 
are being created. These are both issues that we will need to watch carefully over the period 
ahead as we continue to assess the balance between supply and demand in various parts of 
the economy.  
The overall conclusion from this work is that given the huge pipeline of mining investment 
and the current relatively low unemployment rate, it is likely that conditions will continue to 
vary  significantly  across  industries  for  some  time  to  come.  This  work  also  serves  as  a 
reminder that improving productivity growth remains the key to strong output growth in the 
non-mining-related  parts  of  the  economy.  It  also  suggests  that  there  is  some  scope  for 
non-mining-related demand to grow a little more quickly than has been the case in the recent 
past.  
Monetary policy  
I  would  like  to  draw  all  this  together,  with  a  few  remarks  about  monetary  policy  and  the 
Reserve Bank’s latest forecasts.  
In  the  first  half  of  2011,  our  judgement  was  that  strong  growth  in  demand,  together  with 
evidence that inflation had picked up, required mildly restrictive financial conditions. As the 
year  progressed  though,  and  it  became  evident  that  this  strong  demand  growth  was  not 
putting  the  expected  pressure  on  domestic  capacity  and  thus  prices,  the  Board  eased 
monetary policy, lowering the cash rate in both November and December. And then following 
the  recent  CPI  data  which  provided  confirmation  of  the  subdued  inflation  pressures,  the 
Board  lowered  the  cash  rate  by  a  further  50  basis  points,  bringing  the  cumulative  decline 
since  November  to  a  full  percentage  point.  Over  this  period,  most  lending  rates  in  the 
economy have fallen by around three-quarters of a percentage point and are now at slightly 
below-average levels.  
The Bank’s latest inflation forecast is for underlying inflation, abstracting from the effects of 
the carbon price, to stay close to its recent rate over the next one to two years. Given that the 
disinflationary impact of the appreciation of the exchange rate on prices of imported goods is 
likely  to  lessen  over  time,  this  forecast  incorporates  some  moderation  in  domestically 
generated  inflation  pressures.  In  particular,  it  is  based  on  an  expectation  that  productivity 
growth will pick up somewhat as firms respond to the difficult trading environment that many 
currently face. It is also based on an expectation that the current pressures on margins being 
experienced  by  many  firms  in  the  non-mining-related  parts  of  the  economy  will  work  their 
way up the production chain, leading to some moderation in growth in input costs, including 
in the cost of labour.  
In terms of output, overall GDP growth is expected to return to around trend over the forecast 
horizon, with the recent reductions in the cash rate providing some boost to demand in the 
non-mining-related parts of the economy. However, it does seem likely that growth in some 
sectors  will  remain  below  the  average  experienced  over  the  past  couple  of  decades.  How 
things develop will depend importantly on the ability of firms to improve their productivity and 
on the ability of the labour market to match workers with the new jobs being created.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally, as we work our way through these myriad of issues, it is important that we do not 
lose sight of the considerable benefits to Australia from the lift in the prices of our key exports 
and the unprecedented level of investment that is taking place. This morning I have talked 
about how these developments are changing the structure of the economy. I have also talked 
about the challenge that they pose for assessing the balance between supply and demand. 
Yet  for  all  this,  the  high  commodity  prices  and  high  investment  provide  Australia  with 
tremendous  opportunities  –  opportunities  that  many  other  countries  wish  they  had.  As  our 
society works out how best to take advantage of these opportunities, the job of the Reserve 
Bank is ensure that inflation remains low and stable and that the overall economy remains on 
an even keel. The medium-term inflation-targeting arrangements that have been in place for 
nearly two decades now provide a strong framework in which to do this.  
Thank you for listening and I look forward to your questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
