Jörg Asmussen: The Irish case from an ECB perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Institute of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 12 April 2012. 
 Dear Mr Halligan, 
dear Mr. O’Ceallaigh, 
dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Introduction 
Coming to Ireland yesterday was a very short journey for me, leaving my office in Frankfurt at 
3 pm and arriving in downtown Dublin at 6 pm. On the way from the airport my Counsellor, 
who is accompanying me today, remarked that Ireland, however, has apparently come a long 
way compared to the time when she visited Ireland for the first time as a backpacking student 
almost  20  years  ago  in  the  early  1990s.  While  she  recalled  that  her  first  impression  of 
travelling  from  the  airport  downtown  was  rather  sad,  with  run  down  warehouses  and  poor 
residential  buildings,  the  picture  has  completely  changed:  modern  office  buildings  and 
residential areas line the streets on the short trip from the airport to downtown nowadays. 
This  is  anecdotal  evidence,  of  course,  but  I  think  it  depicts  in  a  nutshell  Ireland’s  truly 
remarkable economic development over the last 20 years. Ireland managed to find a unique 
selling proposition in the European context and made use of the instruments the European 
Union offers to foster economic development and growth such as the structural and regional 
funds in a very smart and sustainable way.  
Nevertheless,  the  Celtic  tiger  was  not  immune  to  the  challenges  that  the  financial  crisis 
posed to many of the world’s advanced economies. On the contrary: Ireland has had to deal 
with more severe challenges than most. Much has been written about how Ireland arrived in 
this position. 
But  let  me  state  this  right  at  the  beginning:  Ireland  is  not  the  only  country  that  needs  to 
reform. Fiscal consolidation and growth enhancing structural reforms are needed everywhere 
in  Europe  to  remain  competitive  on  a  global  marketplace. Ireland  is,  however,  one  among 
several countries with more severe adjustment needs. 
Our view is that to set the correct course, we must be clear-headed about the reasons why 
we are where we are. To frame the issue somewhat bluntly, the Irish State and people woke 
up  to  a  painful  new  reality  when  the  Irish  housing  bubble  burst  at  the  onset  of  the 
international financial crisis in 2007. Extraordinarily high growth in the run up to the crisis had 
gone hand-in-hand with the build-up of economic and financial imbalances.  
The path back to full fitness has been enormously difficult and entailed wrenching economic, 
financial and social change. And the path has not been smooth. Indeed, about one-and-a-
half years ago the economy was close to cardiac arrest. The patient required life support – 
kept alive with the substantial assistance from international lenders, as well as the continued 
levels of extraordinary support from the Eurosystem. But progress since then has been good: 
the programme is on track. So far, Ireland has delivered. I am confident it can be a “success 
story”. 
Nonetheless,  substantial  challenges  remain.  Ambitious  structural  and  financial  reforms  are 
still  needed:  to  put  unemployment  on  a  downward  trajectory;  to  ensure  that  government 
finances are put on a sustainable path; and to secure a banking sector that can stand on its 
own feet again and support the Irish economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
And  that  last  item  –  financial  sector  repair  –  is  absolutely  crucial.  The  support  from  the 
Eurosystem in the form of monetary policy and emergency liquidity loans to Irish banks has 
been extraordinary by any measure. 
With these considerations in mind, I would like today to start by considering, first, the origins 
of  the  crisis.  I  will  then  discuss  some  macro-fiscal  aspects  of  the  adjustment  process. 
However,  I  want  to  spend  the  majority  of  my  remarks  discussing,  thirdly,  financial  sector 
issues  and the  role  of  the  ECB.  I would  like  to  present  a  clear  view  on  how  the ECB  has 
supported  Ireland  through  the  adjustment  process,  working  as  a  true  partner  to  help  this 
country resolve its problems. 
The origins of the crisis 
1. 
A somewhat colloquial, description is that when the bubble burst, the economy was lacking 
competitiveness, that it was unfit and overweight. Is that really a fair description of the Irish 
economy around 2007? It is perhaps a little harsh – it clearly misses some of the important 
strengths that still underpin the Irish economy and which will be crucial components of the 
recovery in the years to come. Yet we can see many elements of the Irish situation in the 
years 2007 and 2008 in that description. 
Lacking competitiveness: clearly, wages and prices had risen much too fast since the start of 
monetary  union.  From  2000  until  2008  wages  (compensation  per  employee)  in  Ireland 
increased on average by nearly 6% per year, more than twice the rate seen in the euro area. 
This eroded Ireland’s competitive position. Unit labour costs had risen by 50% between 1998 
and 2008 while they had risen by only 19% in the euro area during the same time.  
Unfit, in various aspects of its national economic and especially supervisory policies. All of 
this made it not well equipped to counteract the emerging imbalances at an early stage and 
to  match  the  challenges  facing  the  economy  when  the  crisis  took  hold.  Ireland’s  current 
account deficit was 5.3% in 2007 and accounted for 5.6% in 2008. 
And certainly overweight, in some sectors at least. Ballooning credit and spending excesses 
had overheated the economy and misdirected resources. In 2007 Ireland was an economy 
that  had  become  dangerously  dependent  on  construction  and  housing  as  a  source  of 
economic growth and tax revenue. Overly optimistic expectations both in the private and the 
public  sector  played  a  major  role.  An  over-sized  and  lightly-regulated  financial  system  not 
only fed on these excesses but actively supported them. And government expenditures had 
been set on a clearly unsustainable course, based on the false assumption that very high tax 
receipts  stemming  from  the  booming  housing  sector  and  exceptional  real  growth  where  a 
lasting feature of the Irish economy. For example, from 1998 to 2010 nominal public wages 
per government employee increased by more than 90%, significantly outpacing public wage 
increases in most other euro area countries by 40 or more percentage points. Only Greece 
saw larger increases than Ireland.  
The adjustment process 
2. 
As anyone who has ever undergone the grinding process of recovering fitness will attest, the 
process can be long and painful. And so it has proved. Domestic demand has shrunk. This 
was unavoidable as both public and private spending had increased to levels well above the 
sustainable productive capacity of the economy. Unemployment has strongly increased.  
Programme milestones 
I  would  identify  three  major  milestones  of  the  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  adjustment 
programme: 
 
First, a return to growth, already in 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Second, the progressive return to market funding well in advance of the end of the 
programme in 2013. 
Third, reaching a fiscal deficit of 3% in 2015.  
 
Measured  against  these  milestones,  I  must  admit  that  I  am  truly  impressed  by  the  way 
Ireland  has  handled  its  tough  challenges,  especially  since  the  beginning  of  last  year:  the 
economy is well on the way to restoring competitiveness, reducing the fiscal deficit (–10.6 in 
2011;  –8.6  goal  for  2012),  overhauling  the  institutional  framework  and  restructuring  the 
banking sector. It is the only programme country that has managed to close its trade deficit 
and to return to growth last year, even if at modest rates (0.7% in 2011; projections: 0.5% in 
2012; 2.0% in 2013). This turnaround would not have been possible without Ireland’s biggest 
asset: a talented, well-educated workforce. This strength is maybe most clearly reflected in 
the fact that the export sector has continued to attract foreign investment in the midst of one 
of the worst crises to hit the world economy in the last century. 
Structural reforms 
True, structural reforms are helping to restore competitiveness and flexibility, and Ireland, all-
in-all, benefited from a much more flexible labour market than, for example, Greece or Spain. 
It is true that some of the structural reforms will take time to show full effect, but their capacity 
to improve the situation for ordinary citizens should not be underestimated. Just to give you 
some examples: the market for legal and medical services is currently being deregulated and 
made more competitive. This is something that will lower prices for Irish consumers, expand 
activity  and  increase  employment.  In  the  labour  market,  an  important  overhaul  of 
employment contracts has been announced. This should lead to a more modern and flexible 
system  to  align  wages  to  productivity  in  particular  sectors  or  firms.  This  will  improve 
prospects for domestic firms to hire staff. 
A long way to go… 
But  we  must  remain  honest  with  ourselves:  even  though  considerable  progress  has  been 
made,  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  before  the  situation  normalises.  House  prices  have 
continued to fall. The domestic economy remains fragile. And there is still considerable work 
to do on fiscal and structural reform. This is of course very demanding for Irish households 
who have already seen their disposable income and wealth decline a lot over recent years. It 
is thus important that also the relatively rich and wealthy carry a fair share of the adjustment 
burden. Worst of all, perhaps, is the fact that a large portion of the population is currently out 
of work. This makes job creating structural reforms so important. 
The  deep  recession,  high  levels  of  public  spending,  a  narrow  tax  base  and  the  burden  of 
supporting the financial sector have all have put stress on the fiscal position of the State. As 
a result, the fiscal deficit has surged. The government has therefore rightly embarked on a 
path of progressively cutting expenditures while taxes have had to be increased. 
But  here  there  are  no  easy  solutions  either.  Whether  inside  or  outside  a  monetary  union, 
fiscal  consolidation  would  be  required,  in  the  best  interests  of  the  country.  Put  simply,  a 
government cannot for long periods spend substantially more than it receives in revenues. 
Too often, I think the debate misses this simple but crucial point. Fiscal consolidation is also 
not simply a consequence of the banking collapse. The financial crisis has clearly added to 
the Irish debt burden, but we must not lose sight of the continued high deficits run in Ireland, 
which must be brought under control. 
Let  me  briefly  put  my  remarks  on  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  Ireland  in  a  broader 
European context: At the European level, the crisis revealed clear gaps in the framework for 
fiscal and economic governance in the EU. The reform effort to close these gaps, have been 
substantial  with  the  six  pack,  the  two  pack  and  the  fiscal  compact,  to  use  Brussel-style 
acronyms.  All  initiatives  aim  at  one  goal  which  is  to  establish  fiscal  rules  and  achieve  a 
degree of fiscal co-ordination which lives up to the requirements of a monetary union. In our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
view, the steps taken so far are necessary, but they will not suffice in the long term. Further 
steps towards a fiscal union are ultimately needed. But enhanced fiscal co-ordination does 
not  necessarily  imply  and  must  not  be  confused  with  further  fiscal  centralisation  on  the 
European  level.  There  are  many  ways  to  organise  fiscal  co-ordination  in  a  decentralised 
manner,  Germany,  Switzerland,  the  US,  Canada  and  India  are  examples  of  how  a  fiscal 
union can be organised in different ways. 
I would like to make it very clear that I by no means have the intention to lecture an Irish 
audience  on  the  best  way  forward  for  Ireland  as  regards  the  fiscal  compact.  This  is  to  be 
decided by the Irish voters in the upcoming referendum at the end of May. 
From  an  ECB  perspective,  a  crucial  element  in  overcoming  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in 
Europe is to regain confidence of market participants in the sustainability of public finances. 
Therefore we believe it to be of utmost importance that all euro area members adopt – and 
implement – the fiscal compact.  
For the Irish economy to achieve full fitness it is of course also necessary to heal the wounds 
that  caused  so  many  of  today’s  problems.  Let  me  therefore  turn  attention  to  Ireland’s 
financial sector. 
The financial sector and the role of the ECB 
3. 
The  role  of  the  Eurosystem  in  Ireland  over  recent  years,  and  more  specifically  that  of  the 
ECB, has often been misunderstood. Sometimes, it has been misrepresented. I would like to 
take this opportunity to set the record straight. 
Relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy,  no  other  euro  area  country  has  received  so  much 
support from the Eurosystem. And no other institution has provided more help to Ireland than 
the ECB. EU/IMF programme finances combined are EUR 67.5 billion in total. Eurosystem 
liquidity support – to all of Ireland’s eligible banks – has often been more than double that 
amount. And let me recall that Eurosystem loans currently carry much lower interest rates 
than the loans from the IMF and EU Member States. 
To be clear: ECB support and IMF / euro area member state support are not on an equal 
footing. They are no substitutes and for good reasons there is a distinction between central 
bank funding and fiscal financing. 
By the time the programme of financial support was agreed with the international lenders in 
late  2010,  the  ECB  had  already  been  providing  extraordinary  levels  of  support  for  several 
years. To continue the analogy, the Eurosystem was providing life-sustaining transfusions to 
the banking system. While this support was fully in line with the general rules applied by the 
ECB to all euro area countries, Ireland benefited more than any other country as its banking 
sector imbalances were particularly large. 
The ECB was thus an established key partner of the Irish authorities in staving-off the worst 
effects of the crisis, well before the EU/IMF programme was designed. This state of affairs is 
a far cry from the claims that the ECB “bounced” Ireland into the programme in late 2010. By 
that time, we had already been standing for quite some time with Ireland, and that remains 
the case today. This support would, of course, not have been possible had Ireland not been 
in the euro area. 
Before  the  EU/IMF  programme  was  agreed,  the  total  Eurosystem  loan  support  for  Ireland 
(combining  monetary  policy  operations  to  all  eligible  banks  and  emergency  liquidity 
assistance from the Central Bank of Ireland) amounted to about 100% of Irish GDP. Our total 
loan provision now stands at above EUR 125 billion.  
There are however statutory limits to what the Eurosystem can do, and a clear dividing line 
between the tasks of a State and the tasks of a central bank. There can also be no doubt that 
the current amount of liquidity support extended by the ECB and the Central Bank of Ireland 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to Ireland’s banks needs to be substantially reduced over time, and we expect that the Irish 
authorities and the banks are working hard to achieve this. For Ireland’s economy to recover, 
its banking system must be sound and fully functioning. A virtuous cycle must blossom. That 
will  be  difficult  to  instil  with  banks  that  remain  dependent  on  Eurosystem  support.  With 
measures in place to break this dependency, the conditions will be in place for recovery. 
The foundation for this recovery has already been laid. In late 2010, the ECB played a key 
role  in  mitigating  the  challenges  facing  the  banking  system,  and  in  designing  programme 
measures to reverse the situation. I hope you share my view that these measures achieved 
their initial aims: the stabilisation of the banking system. 
I know that the decisions concerning the repayment of bondholders in the former Anglo Irish 
Bank  have  been  a  source  of  controversy.  Decisions  taken  by  the  Irish  authorities  such  as 
these  are  not  taken  lightly.  And  the  consequences  of  subsequent  actions  are  weighed 
carefully. It is true that the ECB viewed it as the least damaging course to fully honour the 
outstanding senior debts of Anglo. However unpopular that may now seem, this assessment 
was  made  at  a  time  of  extraordinary  stresses  in  financial  markets  and  great  uncertainty. 
Protecting the hard-won gains and credibility from the early successes in 2011 was also a 
key consideration, to ensure no negative effects spilled-over to other Irish banks. Determined 
action  and  a  willingness  to  take  tough,  even  controversial  decisions,  has  placed  Ireland’s 
financial system on a steadier footing. 
A necessary step for Ireland to emerge from this crisis will be to ensure the long-term viability 
of  the  banking  system  as  a  pillar  of  the  Irish  economy.  Doing  so  will  further  enhance 
confidence  in  the  system  and  limit  the  burden  that  the  banking  system  places  on  the 
taxpayer.  Any  proposal  to  reorganize  and  strengthen  the  Irish  banking  sector,  and  in  this 
context to replace promissory notes with support from the EFSF must meet important criteria, 
including  that  it  should  improve  the  chances  of  both  the  State  and  the  banks  returning  to 
market-based  funding,  and  of  the  banks  reducing  their  extraordinary  reliance  on  the 
Eurosystem. The ECB is ready to work with the Irish authorities on such proposals. 
I  understand  the  strong  desire  of  the  authorities  to  minimise  the  costs  associated  with  the 
banking sector rescue, including costs incurred to date, and those still to come. Let me make 
some comments in this area. When the programme for Ireland was designed, the costs of 
the  banking  sector  measures  already  in  place,  including  the  promissory  notes,  were  fully 
factored in. The annual cash repayments of promissory notes is thus financed by programme 
resources.  That  programme  is  on  track.  Any  deviation  from  that  programme  should  be 
considered  very  carefully  indeed.  The  perceptions  that  have  built-up  around  Ireland’s 
successes in the programme should not be jeopardised. It has been hard-won and it is worth 
fighting  for.  Therefore,  the  ECB  remains  of  the  opinion  that  Ireland  should  honour  its 
commitments stemming from the promissory notes, as foreseen. This in our view is the best 
way to regain sustainable market access. 
I frequently hear in the Irish debate the sense that the debt resulting from the bank rescue is 
not  Ireland’s  debt.  I  can  understand  this  sentiment  and  how  many  people  feel  about  this 
situation.  But  what  must  be  understood,  is  that  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  insufficient 
domestic  policies  (banking  supervision  and  economic  policies)  played  a  major  role  in 
excessive credit growth and risk management failures in the Irish banking sector, the bubble 
in the housing market and the loss of competitiveness. 
The ECB has no supervisory responsibilities, despite claims to contrary. However, the ECB 
had  warned  years  before  the  crisis  that  imbalances  were  building  up  in  a  number  of  euro 
area  countries.  Moreover,  from  a  market  perspective,  those  debts  associated  with  the 
banking crisis are not differentiated from other sovereign debt. With the guarantee of 2008, 
large parts of the debt of Irish banks became a debt of the State, and any desire to offload 
this debt could have dire consequences. Furthermore, to suggest that debt-relief should be 
considered  risks  undermining  the  programme  by  inferring  that  it  is  needed,  when  as  I 
mentioned,  the  programme  is  on  track  and  Ireland  has  very  good  chances  to  return  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
markets  before  the  end  of  the  programme,  secure  debt  sustainability,  and  along  with  it,  a 
bright future. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude, Ireland has received unprecedented support from other European Member 
States.  The  Eurosystem  has,  within  the  limits  of  its  mandate,  been  very  supportive  of  the 
Irish banking sector, and thus of the programme for Ireland.  
Eurosystem financial support provides a good example about the difficult balancing act which 
policymakers currently face: wean the patient off the support too quickly and we might set 
back  the  recovery.  Leave  it  too  long  and  we  risk  dependency,  undermining  efforts  for 
adjustment and impeding the return to full fitness.  
The  ECB  is  obliged  and  can  be  trusted  to  always  fulfil  its  role  and  deliver  on  its  Treaty 
mandate, and this is above all to secure price stability in the euro area as a whole, which 
consists of 17 countries. And there are clear limits to what the central bank is entitled or even 
able  to  do.  It  is  impossible  for  the  ECB  to  provide  guarantees  or  assurances  concerning 
future funding amounts or interest rates over the medium term. Certain tasks should and can 
in Europe only be dealt with by the Member States, and not by the ECB or the Central Bank 
of Ireland. Our common objective therefore must be to reduce over time the reliance of Irish 
banks on central bank funding and in particular on the emergency liquidity assistance. 
The Irish government has the capacity to further consolidate and implement the necessary 
reforms, so that there will be no lingering doubts about the sustainability of government debt. 
I am thus confident that Ireland will continue to fully implement the necessary adjustment and 
reforms,  and  that  on  this  basis,  Member  States  will  continue  to  show  solidarity  towards 
Ireland. 
I  understand  that  Minister  Noonan  has  said  that  champagne  corks  will  be  popped  on  the 
night the Troika leaves Dublin. As long as Ireland continues to implement fully its programme 
and  preserves  its  credibility  as  a  State  that  honours  all  its  obligations,  I  think  that  day  will 
come in the not too long future, at the end of this programme in 2013. And what will the ECB 
be doing on the day the troika returns home? Well, we won’t perhaps be engaging in similarly 
wild celebrations – we are central bankers, after all. But I suspect that I, and my fellow board 
members, may raise a quiet toast to the achievement of a country in so admirably fighting its 
way back to solvency and stability. I wish you continued success in meeting that goal and we 
stand ready to work with you in achieving this goal. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
