Mario Draghi: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Süddeutsche 
Zeitung,  conducted  by  Mr  Alexander  Hagelüken  and  Mr  Markus  Zydra  on  11 September 
2012, published on 14 September 2012. 
 SZ: After the decision to buy bonds of troubled euro area countries without any limitations, 
did fellow Italians congratulate you for opening up the wallets of taxpayers in Germany and 
other countries? 
Draghi:  No!  Actually,  the  reactions  were  diverse.  In  parts  of  Germany,  the  echo  was 
negative; in parts of southern Europe, it was not entirely positive either, because of the strict 
and effective conditionality. The rest of the world complimented us.  
SZ: The Secretary General of the conservative CSU has called you a “forger of coins”. 
Draghi: I trust that he will change his opinion, when he sees the results. There have already 
been positive results. The announcement of the facility has contributed to raising confidence 
in the euro area, and in the euro across the world. Fund managers are bringing their money 
back to Europe. This is good for the euro area economy.  
SZ: Are you really optimistic that the euro area debt crisis will be resolved? 
Draghi: We are certainly on a good path. We see extraordinary progress in reforms in Spain 
and  Italy,  particularly  if  you  consider  what  they  have  done  over  the  last  six  months  in 
comparison  with  what  they  did  not  do  for  many  years.  The  direction  of  policies  in  many 
countries was flawed and needed to be corrected. This process is currently under way. But 
much  still  needs  to  be  done.  And  this  is  also  why  adherence  to  strict  and  effective 
conditionality  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  Governing  Council  to  consider  outright  monetary 
transactions. 
SZ:  Many  Germans  fear  the  risk  of  a  central  bank  spending  money  on  an  unprecedented 
scale. 
Draghi: What was the situation? The risk of self-fulfilling prophecies was increasing: rising 
sovereign bond yields were seen as aggravating the situation, which was driving yields even 
higher. There was a risk of a vicious circle that warranted central bank action because good 
economic  policies  alone  may  not  necessarily  be  enough  for  countries  to  free  themselves 
from what we call a “bad equilibrium”. 
SZ: To a lot of people, "unlimited bond buying" sounds like unlimited risk that they will have 
to pay for sooner or later.  
Draghi: The obligations that the countries have to meet are the best insurance against risk. 
The  risks  are  well  managed.  And,  in  our  assessment,  doing  nothing  poses  even  greater 
risks.  
SZ: If a country defaults on its bonds, the ECB and thus the tax payers lose a lot of money. 
Draghi:  This  is  why  conditionality  is  so  important.  Moreover,  the  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions will focus only on the shorter term, in particular on bonds with a maturity of one 
to three years. 
SZ: But 42% of the German population distrust you as the ECB’s President. 
Draghi: That is a hindrance for our work. I will have to do more to explain our actions. We 
will start with this interview. But you always have to weigh the options. 
SZ: Which are? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Draghi: Of course, you could say “Nein zu allem”, but that is not constructive. For example, if 
we  had  not  decided  to  conduct  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs),  we  would 
have seen a severe credit crunch across large parts of the euro area. Under such conditions, 
and I have said this time and again, we would not be able to deliver what everybody expects 
us to deliver: price stability over the medium term. So, we have to help avoid such conditions. 
SZ: How serious is your threat? It is hard to believe that you would stop buying bonds and let 
Spain or Italy plunge into disaster. 
Draghi: If a given country does not comply with conditionality, the ECB cannot improve the 
monetary policy transmission in that country. Any attempt to do so in such a situation would 
be ineffective because it would be offset by the country’s policy failure.  
SZ: Why didn’t you make it mandatory that ESM/EFSF first buy bonds on the primary market 
before the ECB steps in? 
Draghi:  The  key  for  us  is  strict  conditionality  and  effective  monitoring.  The  possibility  of 
primary market purchases by the EFSF/ESM should be sufficient to ensure that.  
SZ: Can the euro area now be saved after the ruling of the German constitutional court on 
the ESM?  
Draghi:  The  ESM  is  an  important  measure  in  the  crisis  management  toolbox.  However, 
coping with the crisis does not depend only on having a stabilisation mechanism in place; in 
particular,  we  need  determined  actions  at  the  level  of  individual  Member  States.  And, 
collectively, Member States have to complete Economic and Monetary Union. We at the ECB 
will conduct monetary policy independently so as to safeguard price stability.  
SZ:  You  keep  saying  the  euro  is  irreversible.  Mr  Draghi,  you  speak  like  the  Chancellor  of 
Europe. 
Draghi: I am communicating this message as the President of the ECB to all stakeholders, 
citizens, businesses and markets. Investors need a long-term vision because they undertake 
long-term commitments. For them, it is very important that our leaders and governments are 
determined  to  keep  the  euro  irreversible.  So,  if  I  say  this,  I  am  saying  what  our  political 
leaders are fundamentally saying.  
SZ: So you are covering up the failure of politics? 
Draghi: Again, I am saying it because it is important to do so. Markets should know that the 
euro is irreversible. That helps them to properly price euro area assets and it helps us in the 
conduct of our monetary policy.  
SZ: Have you ever wanted to become a politician? 
Draghi (laughs): No. 
SZ: Why not? 
Draghi: Because you do the things you like to do. 
SZ: Before us, you had a visit from the Greek Prime Minister, Antonis Samaras. Greece has 
not met the deficit limit of 3% of GDP even once. How can such a country stay in the euro 
area?  
Draghi: By changing. The country has to fundamentally change its policies. And this is what 
everybody is telling them to do.  
SZ: But Greece is seeking further help, after all the help it has already received. It is said that 
Samaras wants a cut on the billions of euro due on the Greek bonds the ECB holds. 
Draghi: We haven’t discussed this, but – anyway – I’m against it.  
SZ: Your new bond purchasing programme reminds us of Italy in the 1970s, when the central 
bank helped the state out in its financing, which only increased the problems. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Draghi: That was something completely different. It took place decades ago, when the Italian 
central  bank  wasn’t  independent  from  the  state.  In  Italy  things  have  changed  completely 
since then. Banca d’Italia has now been independent for decades, and has not financed any 
government deficit. We have to move away from clichés of the past if we want to address the 
future!  
SZ: The Bundesbank has a different view: Jens Weidmann fears that the ECB’s monetary 
policy is financing fiscal deficits. 
Draghi:  No,  the  Governing  Council  disagreed  with  that  view. What  has been  decided  is  a 
monetary policy measure. There is a fundamental difference between buying on the primary 
market, which is forbidden because the money would go to the government, and buying on 
the secondary market where the money does not go to the government but to bond holders. 
Article 18 of the Statute states that the ECB may “buy and sell […] marketable instruments” 
as part of its mandate, if necessary to achieve price stability, of course always respecting the 
Treaty’s Article 123 on the prohibition of monetary financing.  
SZ: Where does the German opposition come from? 
Draghi: It comes from the history of the country and the fear of inflation. But it has to be clear 
that  in  the  case  of  EFSF/ESM  support,  the  parliaments  of  the  euro  area  countries  will  be 
involved.  
SZ: But the parliaments do not decide on the amounts that the ECB is going to risk …  
Draghi: No, because monetary policy has to remain independent, and it is a prerequisite for 
the Governing Council to consider the specific monetary policy measures.  
SZ:  Many  Germans  were  against  the  euro,  because  they  had  doubts  about  the  economic 
policies of countries like Greece or Italy. Now they feel that they were right. 
Draghi:  The  euro  has  delivered  price  stability  to  an  entire  continent.  It  has  removed 
exchange  rate  risk,  fostered  economic  cohesion,  employment  and  growth.  Germany  has 
benefited  greatly  from  all  these  accomplishments,  as  well  as  from  price  stability  that  is 
greater than in the years before the euro. 
SZ: The ECB will be getting even more power by supervising the European banking industry. 
So, will the ECB always bail out ailing banks by printing money? 
Draghi:  No,  we  have  to  organise  ourselves  and  keep  banking  supervision  and  monetary 
policy  strictly  separate.  This  has  been  done  in  many  central  banks.  We  are  not  mixing 
anything; fundamentally, there will be a Chinese wall. 
SZ: Chinese walls in regular banks have collapsed. 
Draghi: Not in central banks.  
SZ: How can the ECB do a better job than the German Bafin? 
Draghi: It is not about doing a better job; it is about making sure that uniform supervisory 
practices  are  applied  across  the  whole  single  currency  area.  The  more  detached  you  are 
from national government, the more objective you will be in your decision-making. We don’t 
want to control every small bank directly; we will work together with national supervisors.  
SZ: According to the  plans, the  ECB  will  have  to report  on  its supervision  business to the 
European Parliament once a year. Is that enough? 
Draghi:  We  surely  need  substantial  democratic  accountability  here,  and  it  is  up  to  the 
legislators to establish what they consider necessary.  
SZ: Do you personally know people who have suffered from the euro crisis? 
Draghi: I have visited many SMEs whose credit was cut in the crisis and who have gone out 
of business. And I am not talking about only Italian businesses.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
SZ: How uncomfortable do you feel in the country of the Bundesbank? 
Draghi:  I  have  often  said  that  the  Bundesbank  is  a  great  institution,  and  I  respect  it  very 
much. It would be great if we could always work together. We have done that many times, 
but at the moment, we have different opinions on the best way to react to the crisis. We all 
share  the  same  objective  of  delivering  on  price  stability,  but  we  are  not  in  full  agreement 
about the best way to achieve that. 
SZ: And the German people? 
Draghi: We  need  to  explain  what  we  do  better  in  Germany,  which  our  intentions  are  and 
what precautions we are taking.  
SZ: You could speak to the Bundestag. 
Draghi: It would be an opportunity to explain what we do in greater detail. If I am invited, I 
would be very happy to go there. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
