Glenn Stevens: Australia’s economy against the background of recent 
global developments 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 24 August 2012. 
 Since the meeting we had in February, assessments of the global and local economies have 
waxed  and  waned.  In  February,  sentiment  about  the  international  financial  system  was 
recovering somewhat, after a scare late in 2011. The actions of the European Central Bank 
in extending its liquidity provision to euro area banks had taken major re-funding hurdles out 
of the picture for a time. This was a critically important action that bought time. It was clear 
that the European economy had slowed, that the United States was still growing, but at only 
a modest pace, and that China’s growth was moderating to something more sustainable. But 
high-frequency  indicators  of  the  global  business  cycle  were  stabilising.  So  even  though 
forecasts for global growth were at that stage being marked down a bit, we did not seem to 
be  seeing  a  slump  of the  kind  seen  in  late  2008.  Subsequently,  there were  actually  some 
small upward revisions to global growth forecasts.  
But, as we said at the last hearing, sorting out the problems in the euro area is likely to be a 
long, slow process, with occasional setbacks and periodic bouts of heightened anxiety. We 
saw  one  such  bout  of  anxiety  in  the  middle  of this  year,  when  financial  markets  displayed 
increasing nervousness about the finances of the Spanish banking system and the Spanish 
sovereign.  The  general  increase  in  risk  aversion  saw  yields  on  bonds  issued  by  some 
European sovereigns spike higher, while those for Germany, the UK and the US declined to 
record  lows.  This  “flight  to  safety”  also  saw  market  yields  on  Australian  government  debt 
decline to the lowest levels since Federation. Meanwhile, many European economies saw a 
further contraction of economic activity. Share markets declined sharply.  
Over the past couple of months, assessments of near-term global growth, having gone up a 
bit  between  February  and  May,  have  been  marked  back  down.  Bodies  such  as  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  are  forecasting  world  GDP  growth  of  about  3½ per  cent  this 
year,  before  picking  up  a  little  next  year.  These  seem  reasonable  estimates  at  this  stage, 
although the risks still seem weighted to the downside. It is worth noting that we still have not 
seen, thus far, the sort of collapse in production and trade across a wide range of countries 
that was observed in 2008. The global slowing we have seen has, so far at least, been of the 
more ordinary variety. That is not to make light of these developments, only to keep them in 
some sort of perspective. The kind of growth envisaged for the world as a whole is close to 
its long-run average.  
Of importance to Australia, and as we noted at the February hearing, the Chinese economy 
looks  like  it  has  slowed  to  a  pace  of  growth  that  is  likely  to  be  more  sustainable.  This  is, 
though, clearly below the pace seen for much of the recent past and the implications of this 
new  pace  of  growth  for  the  trajectory  of  demand  for  various  commodities  are  still  being 
worked through in the relevant markets. Commodity prices have declined. Australia’s terms 
of trade peaked about a year ago. However, they remain high in comparison with most of the 
past century. Overall, the developments in key commodity prices do not seem out of line with 
what we can observe about the progress of the global economy.  
Of late, financial market sentiment has again recovered somewhat. This is seen most clearly 
by share prices in most markets recovering the losses seen in mid-year, while interest rates 
on  “peripheral”  European  debt  have  fallen.  It  could  not  be  said  that  confidence  is  strong: 
uncertainty  is  high  and  much  of  this  stems  unavoidably  from  the  situation  in  Europe. 
European policymakers have continued their efforts both to stabilise the immediate situation, 
and to craft stronger pan-European structures for financial management so as to provide a 
more  enduring  stability.  Their  actions  and  commitments  to  future  actions  have  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
important  but  expectations for further progress are  high.  Realistically,  it  will  be  quite  some 
time before the Europeans will be able to say these problems have been put behind them, 
even if things go well.  
Turning to the domestic economy, the sequence of changes in assessment has tended to be 
the obverse of what we have seen internationally. At the previous hearing we believed, on 
the  basis  of  the  available  data,  that  overall  growth  had  been  close  to  trend  over  2011. 
Subsequently we could not avoid revising that view downwards a bit, as there seemed to be 
some emerging evidence that growth had been weaker than that. The most recent data, on 
the other hand, are suggestive that the earlier assessment may, in fact, have not been too far 
off the mark. As recorded, domestic final demand rose by 5 per cent in real terms over the 
year to the March quarter, even with a small contraction in public spending. The strongest 
growth was by business investment in the resources sector but even consumption spending 
by households rose by about 4 per cent, according to the national accounts. A good deal of 
the  growth  in  demand  was  supplied  from  abroad  but,  nonetheless,  output  is  recorded  as 
having  expanded  by  a  little  over  4  per  cent  over  the  year  to  March.  That  result  includes 
recovery from the flooding of Queensland coal mines in the summer of 2011, so it overstates 
the underlying pace of growth. Even so, and allowing for a more moderate expansion of real 
GDP  in  the  June quarter  than  in the  March quarter,  an  assessment  that  economic  activity 
has been growing “close to trend” over both the second half of 2011 and up to the middle of 
2012 seems reasonable. Consistent with this, the rate of unemployment remains essentially 
unchanged from this time last year.  
Inflation,  at  the  same  time,  has  declined.  The  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  rose  by  just 
1.2 per cent over the past year. This was the lowest result for some years, though it partly 
reflects the unwinding of the large rise in some food prices that occurred in the first half of 
2011 and which had pushed up the CPI. Using the various measures we have for underlying 
inflation, we would put it at about 2 per cent over the past year, which is still down a bit on 
the figure a year earlier. The rise in the exchange rate, most of which occurred over 2009 
and  2010,  has  had  a  significant  impact  on  prices  for  traded  goods  and  services,  but  this 
dampening effect on the rate of change of those prices looks like it has now started to wane. 
As it does, the more moderate growth of domestic costs and prices that we have seen will 
need  to  continue,  in  order  for  inflation  to  remain  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy 
objective. At present our forecast remains that this will be the case.  
In  May  and  June,  the  Board  eased  monetary  policy,  lowering  the  cash  rate  by  a  total  of 
75 basis points, following the two adjustments made last year. These decisions were made 
based on the Board’s assessment of economic conditions and the outlook, and with regard to 
the balance of risks. They have resulted in borrowing rates being a little below their medium-
term averages.  
Since then, with growth close to trend and inflation consistent with the target, but the global 
outlook weaker than it was earlier in the year and confidence a bit on the subdued side, we 
have judged this to remain the appropriate stance. It is too early to tell how much difference 
the sequence of decisions to lower interest rates late last year and in the middle of this year 
has made to the economy, though we can observe that dwelling prices may have stopped 
their earlier gentle decline, and business credit has been growing at its fastest pace for three 
years.  Consumption  spending  has  been  stronger  over  the  first  half  of  the  year,  but  recent 
strength may in part be due to the effects of government compensation payments associated 
with the introduction of the carbon price. The exchange rate remains quite high, even with 
the decline in the terms of trade over the past year.  
Looking back, then, the economy appears to have been recording reasonable overall growth, 
relatively  low  unemployment,  and  low  inflation.  Looking  ahead,  the  peak  of  the  resource 
investment boom as share of GDP – the highest such peak in at least a century – will occur 
within the next year or two. After that the rate of resource investment is likely to decline, while 
the export shipments of the resources themselves will pick up. By then we might expect that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
some  other  sectors  that  have  been  weak  of  late,  like  residential  and  non-residential 
construction, might be starting to pick up. Overall, growth is forecast still to be close to trend, 
albeit  with  a  different  composition  from  that  seen  in  the  past  year  or  two,  and  inflation 
consistent with the target.  
That is the central forecast. It is conditional, of course, on a range of assumptions and there 
are,  as  always,  risks  and  uncertainties,  some  of  which  we  spell  out  in  the  Statement  on 
Monetary  Policy.  At  a  time  of  significant  global  uncertainty,  and  of  important  structural 
changes  in  the  Australian  economy,  the  degree  of  confidence  we  can  attach  to  particular 
forecasts is, unavoidably, reduced. We remain prepared to respond to significant deviations 
from  the  central  outlook,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  prudent  and  possible  to  do  so,  within  the 
framework that aims to foster sustainable growth and inflation at 2–3 per cent over time.  
Madam chair, I feel that it is important for me to make an additional statement, anticipating 
that the Committee will be interested once again in the matters that we have been discussing 
for some time now  in Note Printing Australia (NPA) and Securency, and  which have been 
prominent in the media over the past few days.  
The Reserve Bank condemns corrupt or questionable behaviour of any kind. We have done 
a lot of work to tighten controls in the two companies. We have sought at all times to deal 
appropriately with all the issues that have arisen, and to cooperate with the legal authorities. 
We have also sought to respond honestly to questions from this Committee.  
I have previously given  evidence to the Committee on the sequence of events as  we saw 
them unfold. It is worthwhile to try to draw that together. In so doing, it is important to keep 
clear the distinction between the two companies in that sequence.  
In 2006, following the events at the Australian Wheat Board, the Reserve Bank Board asked 
questions  about  the  policies  for  the  use  of  overseas  agents  by  the  two  companies.  In  the 
case of NPA, the Bank’s questions prompted the company to begin a process of developing 
stronger policies.  
RBA  management  asked  for  an  update  on  progress  at  NPA  in  early  2007,  and  the  NPA 
Board appropriately sought a paper from management on dealings with sales agents. After 
considering that paper, the NPA Board decided that an audit should be undertaken of past 
practices and compliance. That audit raised several very concerning things. It recommended 
that,  apart  from  discontinuing  the  use  of  agents,  the  NPA  Board  undertake  an  urgent 
investigation of the role of relevant management and staff in dealing with agents to ensure 
compliance with Australian law. On receiving this report, the NPA Board took the decision to 
cease  the  use  of  agents,  and  through  a  Board  sub-committee  commissioned  Freehills  to 
provide  an  assessment  of  the  standards  and  compliance  questions.  It  was  while  all  these 
processes were under way that concerns held by a member of NPA’s management over the 
company’s conduct became known to a Reserve Bank Assistant Governor who sat on NPA’s 
Board.  The  NPA  manager  was  asked  by  the  then  Deputy  Governor  to  make  a  written 
statement. This document was part of the material examined by the Freehills team that was 
asked  by  the  NPA  Board  to  examine  the  matters.  I  have  conveyed  these  facts  to  the 
Committee over the course of questioning at previous hearings.  
The document provided by the manager at NPA was held in strict confidence at his request. 
This  was  a  condition  required  by  him,  and  the  Bank  agreed  to  it  because  it  valued  his 
willingness  to  come  forward.  Seeking  professional  legal  expertise  to  assess  the  matters 
contained  in  this  document,  and  the  concerns  raised  in  the  audit,  was  a  mark  of  how 
seriously they were taken.  
The decision to seek an external legal review was an important one. In the Bank’s view, it 
was  imperative  to  establish  a  process  to  investigate  the  issues  thrown  up  by  the  audit 
findings and to ascertain and evaluate the facts regarding the NPA manager’s concerns. This 
required an assessment by qualified experts on the legal questions. The Bank did not believe 
that  it  should  itself  seek  to  make such  an  assessment. There  are many  precedents  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
for  organisations  adopting  similar  processes 
private  and  public  sectors 
in  such 
circumstances.  In  the  Bank’s  view,  this  represented  a  proper,  independent  and  rigorous 
process. That was the intention.  
The  Freehills  report  was  highly  critical  of  NPA’s  practices,  which  were  in  need  of  major 
reform. It also concluded, based on the material then available, that there was no evidence of 
a  breach  of  Australian  law.  That  assessment  was  provided  in  good  faith,  and  relied  on  in 
good faith.  It  was  not  proposed  by  Freehills  or  anyone  else  at  that time  that,  having  been 
through a process that concluded there was no evidence of a breach of the law, the next step 
should be to approach the police. When the Australian Federal Police (AFP) were called in 
2009 by the Chairman of Securency regarding the allegations made about Securency at that 
time,  the  2007  NPA  matters  were  all  disclosed  to  the  AFP  in  a  timely  way.  The  Freehills 
report and audit reports were provided to the AFP when requested. There was no attempt to 
hide any information.  
It has been claimed by some that the written statement by the NPA manager contained clear 
evidence of corrupt behaviour. In 2007, two senior legal practitioners from a leading law firm, 
who received this material directly from the author as part of their review and interviewed the 
author and others, did not view it that way in coming to their conclusion that there was no 
evidence of a breach of the law. Even if it were ultimately to be concluded at some later time, 
with the benefit of hindsight, that the report reached an incorrect conclusion, it is completely 
without  foundation  to  suggest  that  this  process  –  seeking  information,  conducting  audits, 
having an independent legal review, implementing the recommendations from the review and 
the  audits,  and  relying  on  the  independent  advice  received  –  represented  an  attempt  at  a 
“cover up” by anyone in the Reserve Bank.  
I turn now to Securency. The RBA Board asked Securency for its policies on agents in 2006 
and the company put in place additional and stronger policies and procedures. Following the 
audit at NPA in 2007, the Securency Board requested a similar audit and terminated one of 
its agents (which it shared with NPA). That audit found that, unlike NPA, Securency had a 
“good and robust process” in place in relation to overseas agent contracts and payments. A 
follow-up audit was conducted in 2008, which made the same finding.  
It is for this reason that the Securency Board, and the Reserve Bank, had no reason at that 
time  to  discontinue  the  use  of  agents,  as  had  occurred  at  NPA.  With  those  audits  having 
returned those findings, the Reserve Bank was completely surprised by the allegations that 
were published in the middle of 2009. We now know, including from a report conducted by 
KPMG for the Securency Board later in 2009, that critical information regarding the use of 
agents was withheld from the audit teams and the Securency Board in 2007 and 2008.  
Finally, I turn to the question of the provision of materials to this Committee. Currently, there 
are a number of court orders in place that place restrictions on the documents that the Bank 
is  permitted  to  disclose.  The  non-publication  orders  have  been  made  as  a  result  of 
applications by the individuals facing criminal charges and are designed to protect their right 
to a fair trial before an impartial jury. Further non-publication orders have been sought and 
obtained by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and the AFP.  
Among the material subject to such orders is the statement of the NPA manager. I received 
legal advice in relation to whether I could table the statement. The advice was that I could 
not.  
The Reserve Bank is, however, committed to transparency with this Committee and with the 
community. To that end we are compiling a folder of the documents the Bank has in relation 
to these matters, with the intention of tabling it for the Committee at the earliest opportunity. 
This will include relevant excerpts from minutes of meetings of the Reserve Bank Board, the 
NPA  Board  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Audit  Committee  in  the  2006–2007  period,  papers 
prepared for the NPA Board on the use of agents, the audit reports on the use of agents in 
NPA  and  Securency,  the  statement  by  the  NPA  manager  referred  to  above  along  with 
associated documents, the terms of reference for the Freehills review, the Freehills review 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
itself, and the report to the NPA Board by its sub-committee that examined the issue. We are 
taking steps to seek the permission of the Court to allow the Bank to table those materials 
subject to orders.  
To the extent that I can shed further light today, while still respecting the legal processes, I 
am of course more than willing to do so.  
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
