Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Islamic finance developments in Pakistan 
Keynote address by Mr Kazi Abdul Muktadir, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
at the Islamic Finance news (IFN) Roadshow 2012, Karachi, 4 September 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen! Assalam-u-alikum and a very good morning. It 
is my great pleasure to welcome you all in this IFN road show. I would like to congratulate 
and thank Redmoney for organizing the show in Pakistan, which is one of the fastest growing 
Islamic  finance  markets  across  the  globe.  Such  events  not  only  enhance  Islamic  finance 
awareness  and  stimulate  its  demand  but  also  provide  a  platform  to  Islamic  finance 
stakeholders to share their experiences and insights about this fast emerging segment of the 
financial system. I hope that today’s discussions and deliberations would help in addressing 
the key challenges being faced by the industry and contribute towards sustaining the growth 
momentum.  
Ladies  &  Gentlemen!  Since  the  inception  of  modern  Islamic  finance  in  1960’s,  Islamic 
banking has evolved from its relatively modest size to a vibrant industry with an increasing 
global footprint. With a size of US$1.35 trillion (according to Global Islamic Finance Report 
2012)  and  annual  growth  rate  of  more  than  20  percent,  the  Islamic  financial  industry  now 
comprises 430 Islamic banks and financial institutions and around 191 conventional banks 
having Islamic banking windows operating in more than 75 countries. The relative resilience 
and stability of the industry during the financial crisis and its flexibility and responsiveness to 
changing  business  needs  has  helped  the  industry  to  establish  itself  as  a  viable  financial 
system. The tremors and aftershocks of the financial crisis are still on either in the form of 
European debt crisis and/or weakening global economic outlook and the policy makers are 
still looking for answers to fix these issues. Islamic finance, with its roots in a moral economic 
model that supports productive economic activity and discourages excessive leveraging and 
imprudent risk taking, can play an important role in rebuilding the financial system. I believe 
that this is high time for Islamic economists and scholars to highlight the inherent strengths 
and potential of Islamic finance in addressing the existential challenges faced by the global 
financial and economic systems.  
Ladies & Gentlemen! The evolution of Islamic finance industry in Pakistan has followed the 
same trajectory as global Islamic financial industry; with growth mainly intensifying over the 
last  decade.  Despite  having 
including 
amendment in the Banking Companies Ordinance, enactment of Mudaraba Companies and 
Mudarabas  (Floatation  and  Control)  Ordinance  etc,  efforts  for  transformation  of  financial 
system  to  Shariah  Compliant  met  with  limited  success  only.  This  was  primarily  due  to 
unavailability of adequate infrastructure and lack of trained human resources.  
Learning  from  past  experience,  Islamic  banking  was  re-launched  in  2002  with  a  more 
practical  and  gradual  approach  that  allowed  Islamic  banks  to  operate  in  parallel  with 
conventional  banks.  This  time  we  also  introduced  a  comprehensive  Shariah  compliance 
framework to ensure that the operations of Islamic banks are in conformity with the Shariah 
principles;  this  was  necessary  to  give  confidence  to  the  consumers  about  Shariah 
permissibility of Islamic banks’ business and operations. The approach has proved a mega 
success as the industry growing from scratch in 2002 now constitutes over 8 percent of the 
country’s banking system with a network of 964 branches and over 500 windows across the 
country.  The  future  outlook  is  also  positive;  the  Islamic  finance  industry  with  its  rapidly 
growing acceptability both amongst the providers and users of financial services, is likely to 
increase its share in the banking system to 15 percent during next five years. Encouragingly, 
the  sustained  growth  of  Islamic  banking  in  the  country  during  the  last  decade  has  also 
started  catalyzing  growth  and  development  of  Islamic  capital  markets,  Mutual  funds  and 
Takaful  companies  etc;  presently  we  have  5  Takaful  operators,  about  30  Islamic  mutual 
landmark  changes  during  1980s 
introduced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
funds. We have an effective coordination mechanism with SECP – the capital markets and 
NBFIs’  regulator  –  and  I  am  sure  that  the  non-banking  Islamic  financial  services  industry 
would also be growing in tandem with the Islamic banking industry.  
Ladies & Gentlemen! The State Bank of Pakistan fully owns the Islamic banking industry 
and has been taking a number of initiatives to strengthen the legal, regulatory and Shariah 
compliance framework, create awareness amongst the masses and build the industry’s HR 
capacity.  I  will  share  a  few  with  this  audience  today.  The  development  and  issuance  of 
sovereign  Sukuk  for  the  domestic  market,  which  is  an  important  liquidity  management 
instrument was a long outstanding demand of the industry. The SBP in collaboration with the 
industry and the Federal Government developed sovereign Sukuk and you would be pleased 
to know that during last two years sovereign Sukuk of Rs.369 billion (USD 4 billion approx) 
have been issued that has largely addressed the liquidity management issue of the industry. 
The  regular  issuance  of  the  Sukuk,  almost  on  quarterly  basis,  has  improved  market 
confidence and tradability of the Sukuk.  
To  improve  transparency  and  bring  standardization  in  IBIs’  profit  distribution  and  pool 
management  practices,  we  have  developed  a  comprehensive  profit  distribution  and  pool 
management framework in consultation with the industry. The framework will be issued most 
probably within this month and will be instrumental in improving public confidence in Islamic 
banking generally and profit distribution policies and practices of IBIs particularly.  
Similarly  to  further  strengthen  the  Shariah  governance  in  IBIs,  we  are  in  the  process  of 
developing a comprehensive Shariah Governance framework. The framework will explicitly 
define  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  different  organs  of  IBIs  including  the  Board  of 
Directors,  Shariah  Advisors/Committees  and  Executive  Management  for  ensuring  Shariah 
compliance. Presently Shariah compliance is perceived to be the responsibility of the Shariah 
Advisors  only  whereas  Board  of  Directors  and  Executive  Management  assume  no  such 
responsibility. This we believe is contrary to the corporate governance principles as unless 
the BOD and management are not fully aware of the Shariah non-compliance risk, it would 
be difficult for the Shariah Advisor to develop an effective Shariah compliance mechanism in 
IBIs. The proposed framework will fix these and other similar issues.  
Further, the SBP, in collaboration with the industry, will also be developing the strategic plan 
for  the  industry  for  the  next  five  years  ie  2013–2017.  The  plan  will  make  a  detailed 
assessment of the earlier plan (2007–2012) as well as the existing environment and will set 
the  strategic direction for  the  industry. This  is  an  important  project  which  would  define  the 
strategies and action plans to move the industry to the next level of growth and SBP would 
expect active and meaningful involvement of the industry in development of the plan.  
Ladies & Gentlemen! As you all know that SBP has been at the forefront of the initiatives 
and  programs  for  creating  awareness.  Being  the  host  of  today’s  program  is  a  part  of  its 
efforts to improve public understanding of Islamic banking and minimize their apprehensions 
and  confusions.  While  seminars,  conferences,  workshops  are  being  organized  across  the 
country  on  regular  basis,  we  will  soon  be  launching  a  mass  media  campaign  to  create 
awareness  about  Islamic  banking.  The  campaign  we  believe  will  be  instrumental  in 
enhancing public awareness and allaying their apprehensions and confusions about Islamic 
finance and thus would give further boost to the growth momentum.  
Lastly, I would reiterate my optimism about the growth prospects of the industry; I believe the 
growth momentum will not only be sustained but will gather further strength as we will see 
some  more  key  players  entering the  market  with  aggressive  expansion  plans  in  very  near 
future. The challenge will however be to develop suitably qualified and trained HR to man 
this growth; while SBP will be further intensifying its efforts to build the industry’s HR capacity 
through  its  regular  and  specialized  training  programs,  the  IBIs  would  also  have  to 
significantly  increase  their  investment  in  HR  development.  Another  challenge  would  be 
diversification of assets mix and taping non-traditional sectors like agriculture and SMEs to 
deploy the growing deposit base in productive avenues. Presently the IBIs’ exposure in these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sectors  is  nominal  that  needs  to  be  increased  significantly,  which  would  not  only  improve 
their  repute  amongst  the  masses  but  would  also  provide  them  an  attractive  avenue  to 
develop  and  expand  their  assets  portfolios.  SBP  would  be  willing  to  provide  necessary 
support to IBIs to build portfolios in these non-traditional but strategically important sectors.  
My thanks and appreciation again to Redmoney for organizing this event and I hope such 
collaborations will continue in future. I wish all the foreign delegates to have pleasant stay in 
Karachi and a safe journey back home.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
