Patrick Honohan: Speeding up the economic correction 
Remarks  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Irish Economic Association, Dublin, 26 April 2012. 
 After five straight years of decline in, for example, employment and in aggregate personal 
consumption expenditure, the Irish economic correction is proving to be quite long-drawn out. 
Even if, on these indicators the turnaround will come in 2013, as is forecast by most analysts, 
it is not unreasonable to wonder whether more could and should be done to accelerate the 
correction.  Members  of  the  Irish  Economic  Association  are  collectively  well-placed  to 
contribute  to  this  debate  and  for  this  reason  I  would  like  to  take  the  limited  time  at  my 
disposal this evening to touch on three dimensions of the adjustment which might be thought 
to moving slowly: (i) the property market; (ii) the banks and (iii) the fiscal position. Given the 
limited time, I can only be very selective, with the intention to promote debate rather than to 
present settled findings.  
Property prices – taking their time to reach the bottom  
1. 
There are a good number of open questions about the residential property market. Why is it 
that prices have been taking so long to reach their new equilibrium? One reason of course 
relates to the willingness of banks to allow arrears to accumulate without foreclosure. This 
reduces the supply of properties on the market. (Impatient buyers who want to occupy may 
be  prepared  to  buy  even  though  they  know  the  price  is  above  equilibrium.  There  may  be 
more of these than of impatient sellers, given the patience of banks. Patient buyers (waiting 
for  equilibrium  prices)  and  owner/occupiers  availing  of  moratoria  and  who  hope  to  stay  in 
occupation will not transact. The end result: very few transactions and those that do occur 
are disproportionately at above equilibrium prices.)  
Until the March data published today, prices have nonetheless been falling – and in recent 
months faster than before (according to the CSO series on the prices of properties where the 
purchase  is  financed  by  banks,  which  refers  to  loan  drawdown  date  and  as  such  lags 
contracted  prices).  When  will  the  price  equilibrium  be  reached,  and  when  will  transaction 
volumes reach steady state levels? Given elevated levels of uncertainty, will the relative price 
of housing – as a risky asset – converge to a price that undershoots that which would prevail 
in less uncertain times?  
Even if aggregate availability of credit is not constrained by lack of liquidity or lack of capital – 
and the open-handed provision of liquidity by the Central Bank even through the most acute 
phases of the crisis, supported by the ECB, have certainly worked to ensure that there has 
been sufficient liquidity, while the Government has also poured in capital – could it be that 
more  cautious  mortgage  underwriting  (reflected  for  example  in  lower  loan-to-value  ratios 
currently  being  offered  by  those  banks  still  active  in  the  sector)  have  the  effect  in  the 
downturn  of  depressing  prices  below  the  prospective  new  equilibrium  (as  is  assumed  in 
some credit-focused models1), even if the latter is determined more by the fundamentals of 
demand  and  supply  (such  as  incomes,  interest  rates,  demography,  housing  stock, 
construction costs).  
Second-guessing asset prices is not easy, but at least in the case of housing, pricing in non-
boom times is not dominated by speculative considerations. That indeed is why the prices do 
not  snap  quickly  to  a  new  equilibrium.  The  duration  of  price  corrections  after  property 
                                                 
1  Cf. Gerard Kennedy and Kieran McQuinn, “Why Are Irish House Prices Still Falling?” Central Bank of Ireland 
Economic Letter 2012(5), April 2012 forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
bubbles  elsewhere  has  varied  a  lot:  in  Japan,  prices  have  been  falling  for  82  quarters, 
whereas  the  duration  of  decline  in  the  Scandinavian  crises  varied  between  9  and 
20 quarters. The Irish price fall so far is more of an outlier in terms of depth than of duration. 
Probably, the faster prices reach a new equilibrium, the better the outcome for the economy 
as  a  whole.  Wealth  effects  on  consumption  are  one  thing.2
  Also  –  and  this  may  be  a 
psychological  factor  more  than  anything  else  –  there  is  probably  something  in  the 
widespread  view  that  falling  house  prices  increase  uncertainty  leading  to  more  saving  to 
bolster balance sheets and delaying the economic recovery.  
The banks – not yet back in the market.  
2. 
“Decide speedily on loss allocation, remove failed management, insist on prompt and ample 
recapitalization.”  These  are  the  standard  policy  recommendations  for  resolution  of  failed 
banks. Some of these actions were taken very quickly in  Ireland, notably the first. But the 
scale of the banking losses is so high, relative to the capacity of the State, that its ability to 
err on the side of over-recapitalization was limited.  
By as early as mid-2009, it was evident to close observers that the net long-term Exchequer 
cost (given the guarantee), inherently uncertain though it was, could reach €50bn. (I told an 
Oireachtas Committee as much at the time). That figure could still be within most analysts’ 
current range of estimates, not least because it did prove possible in the end to achieve a 
substantial  burden-sharing  with  the  subordinated  debt-holders  as  the  guarantee  on  those 
liabilities expired.  
(As is well known, partner pressure inhibited burden-sharing with the holders of senior Anglo 
Irish / IBRC debt even after the guarantee ran out leaving more than €4 billion unguaranteed. 
This is a point which needs to be borne in mind by those who focus too exclusively on the 
famous night of the guarantee. Though there is much to criticize about that guarantee, it is 
quite clear that, absent the guarantee, similar pressure would have been exerted by external 
partners to ensure that bank creditors were all paid.)  
Nevertheless, getting unassailable estimates in this matter of loan losses has proved to be 
very  challenging.  That  the  NAMA  timeline  of  purchases  would  turn  into  a  drip-feed  of  bad 
news through the middle months of 2010 was clearly unfortunate. My initial idea of stuffing 
the banks with so much capital that they could absorb anything that NAMA pricing and the 
residential  mortgage  market  denouement  could  throw  at  them  was  defeated  by  the  clear 
threat  to  the  State’s  market  access  that  this  would  have  caused  (no  doubt  advancing  the 
need to fall back on the IMF et al.).  
Besides, hard evidence on the exact scale of losses was elusive. Denial at all levels in the 
banks persisted, and, absent sufficient information in the banks’ own systems to make firmly-
based and defensible projections, even the loss estimates embedded in the Central Bank’s 
first (2010) PCAR were robustly challenged by some banks as being too tough. It is amusing 
now to recall that the Central Bank was pressed to agree that the capital requirements would 
be revised downward if subsequent NAMA valuations came in higher than the first tranche.  
Restructuring of the banks as long as the guarantee was in effect was inhibited by the fact 
that any significant restructuring was likely to trigger an immediate entitlement for immediate 
payment in cash of all bondholders under the terms of the guarantee. This reason alone can 
explain why steps to deal definitively with even the two weakest banks were deferred to the 
end of the guarantee period.  
The  slimming-down  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets  is  progressing:  this  is  guided  by  two 
principles: avoid fire-sale losses and protect the core business of the banks (ample liquidity 
                                                 
2  Cf.  Reamonn  Lydon  and  Niall  O’Hanlon  “Housing  Equity  Withdrawal,  Property  Bubbles  and  Consumption.” 
Paper to be read to the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, 17th May, 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to support new lending is assured). The process will reduce their need for wholesale funding, 
but in any case access of the banks and the Sovereign to funding is now closely interlinked.  
Possibly the slowest part of the adjustment so far has been the resolution of the distressed 
residential  mortgages.  On  the  assumption  that  financiers  would  aggressively  pursue 
delinquent  borrowers,  the  Central  Bank’s  initial  priority  here  was  to  protect  the  consumer 
against unfair harassment and to give time for balance sheet repair and adjustment in the 
finances of the distressed households. Some lenders have been aggressive, but overall we 
now feel that the main banks have been too slow to organise themselves sufficiently for the 
very large and complex task of engagement with delinquent borrowers with a view to getting 
their  mortgage  book  back  into  performance,  with  realistic  loan  modifications  where  –  and 
only where – necessary, and not shying away from foreclosures in the BTL segment in cases 
where this proves inevitable. The Central Bank has been working intensively with the banks 
over  the  past  six  months  to  ensure  improvements  here,  something  which  will  definitely  be 
needed when the new insolvency legislation is in place.  
Speed of fiscal adjustment.  
3. 
With  the  economic  downturn  well  under  way,  the  need  for  fiscal  correction  in  Ireland  was 
already clear before September 2008, and the budget of October 2008 got the process away 
to  an  early  start.  Of  course  the  fiscal  pressures  were  greatly  amplified  by  the  over-
dependence on bubble-related sources of taxation which evaporated at the same time as the 
sharp weakness in global export demand of 2008–9. Thus the automatic stabilizers kicked in 
and the deficit increased sharply even as adjustment measures were being implemented.  
Has the Troika programme caused the fiscal adjustment to be protracted? Yes indeed it has, 
and this is fortunate indeed. The programme has allowed the reduction in the fiscal deficit to 
be a gradual one, with the scheduled deficit for this year higher than anywhere else in the 
EU. Without Troika financing, the fiscal adjustment would have had to be much more abrupt 
and disruptive.  
But,  beyond  a  certain  point,  a  longer-drawn  out  adjustment  is  not  necessarily  less  painful. 
After all, the longer you run big deficits, the higher the debt you end up with, prospectively 
implying a long-term drag on the economic recovery as that higher debt has to be serviced 
through higher than otherwise tax levels, or less costly public service. It is for this reason that 
we  at  the  Central  Bank  had  raised  the  question  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  get  the 
adjustment over a bit more quickly, implying a somewhat faster pace of fiscal correction over 
the coming years (not more cuts in total, but not dragging them out quite as long). That way, 
the  duration  of  the  negative  demand  impulse  and  any  associated  uncertainty  would  be 
shortened, in order to speed the resumption of more rapid growth.  
One element of our reasoning here is the consideration that, by now, households and firms 
have made as much preparation as they can hope to weather the downturn. There can be 
different views about this: fiscal adjustment can be too fast as well as too slow. In the end, 
the  Government  has  opted  to  stick  to  the  slower  pace  that  had  been  negotiated  with  the 
Troika.  
Since  Ireland  embarked  on  the  Troika-financed  Programme,  the  Fiscal  Compact  has 
re-opened an old debate among economists about what might be the best form of fiscal rule, 
and to what extent its implementation should allow for circumstantial deviations. Given how 
important access to official funding has been to moderating the fiscal adjustment that would 
otherwise have been forced by the market, and given the fact that Ireland has found itself in 
a  critical  fiscal  position  twice  now  within  a  generation,  is  it  a  forgone  conclusion  that  a 
constitutional rule, as has been agreed in the Fiscal Compact is the way to go? Let’s not be 
too  glib  about  this.  While  the  previous  Irish  crisis  of  the  1980s  was  a  classic  one of  fiscal 
indiscipline, the latest one owes much also to the regrettable socialization of so much bank 
debt. True, the non-banking part of the accumulation of debt since 2007 is the bigger part. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
No simple fiscal rule would have prevented the risky over-dependence on bubble-related tax 
sources.  
Certainly,  the  Fiscal  Compact  does  introduce  a  tighter  set  of  rules  on  future  (post-
Programme) fiscal policy than was embodied in the original Stability and Growth Pact.  
However  –  and  this  is  important  given  the  potential  for  the  unexpected  to  happen  in  an 
economy as globalized as that of Ireland – the operational rules of the Fiscal Compact, which 
are  already  decided  as  part  of  the  so-called  “Six-Pack”,  provide  that  the  European 
Commission’s  operational  assessment  of  whether  an  excessive  deficit  exists  involves 
considerable discretion and judgement. For example, it has to take account inter alia of the 
state of the business cycle; it will be important to ensure that, if needed, such flexibility is fully 
exploited in Ireland’s case.3
  
The scope for operational flexibility helps reassure me that signing up to the Treaty has been 
the  safer  alternative  for  Ireland.  For  the  Government  to  have  done  otherwise  would  have 
been to turn our back on a framework of European cooperation at the heart of what has been 
– despite the recent reversals – Ireland’s very considerable economic progress over the past 
four decades.  
Above all, as has been remarked across the political spectrum in Europe in recent days, that 
cooperation  must  emphasise  a  growth  and  employment  focus  which,  if  successful,  could 
have the effect of dissolving debt and deficit problems faster than anything else. 
                                                 
3  Cf. Council Regulation 1177/2011 of 8 November 2011, Recital 13–14, and Article 1 (2)(b). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
