Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Why Asia? Asia’s prospects and how emerging markets 
shall shape the region’s future 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Management  Association  of  the  Philippines  (MAP)  Luncheon  Seminar:  “Why  Asia?  Asia’s 
prospects and how emerging markets shall shape the region’s future”, Manila, 2 May 2012.  
 It is my great pleasure to be here in Manila to give this luncheon address. Let me thank the 
Management Association of the Philippines for the invitation to speak here today on Asia’s 
future prospects; why Asia and how will emerging Asia shape the region. 
Opportunities  in  Asia  are  now  boundless.  Key  in  generating  these  opportunities  are  the 
economic  flexibility  of  the  region,  the  diverse  nature  of  the  region  that  has  generated  the 
potential to leverage on regional complementarities, and the demographic advantages of the 
region. These opportunities are also being enhanced by the significant payoffs gained from a 
decade of reforms, and the intensification of regional economic and financial integration that 
is now taking place and resulting in a more connected and cohesive region. Despite being at 
different  stages  of  development  and  operating  in  different  economic  systems,  the  benefits 
are  also  increasingly  being  more  widely  shared.  Finally,  the  region  has  also  benefited 
immensely  from  the  resilience  built,  and  more  recently,  from  having  the  policy  flexibility  to 
minimise to the effects of the recent global financial crisis. 
Let me elaborate on these prevailing trends that are shaping emerging Asia’s future. Asia’s 
growth prospect is very much underpinned by the transformative momentum that has, for a 
number  of  decades,  brought  emerging  Asia  to  its  current  growth  trajectory.  The  economic 
flexibility of emerging Asia has enabled most of the economies in the region to adjust to the 
changing  conditions  and  to  shift  resources  to  new  areas  of  comparative  advantage. 
Emerging Asia has demonstrated that it has not been weighed down by structural rigidities 
and impediments. Capital and labour mobility has been strengthened by the economic and 
financial  reforms  that  have  resulted  in  the  shift  towards  greater  market  orientation  and 
liberalisation.  Changing  economic  structures  and  transformation  within  specific  sectors, 
including the participation in cross border production chains, have been gaining significance. 
Emerging  Asia  has  also  been  able  to  leverage  on  technology  to  push  beyond  prevailing 
frontiers. Firms in emerging Asia are also increasingly innovating and allocating resources to 
research  and  development,  and  becoming  leading  players  in  their  various  respective 
industries.  
An  equally  important  economic  shift  that  is  taking  place  in  Asia  is  the  rebalancing  of  the 
economies from being export-dependent to domestic demand becoming an important source 
of  growth.  Rising  incomes,  stable  labour  market  conditions  and  resilient  financial  systems 
have supported private consumption and investment activity. Asia is, therefore, transitioning 
from being just global producers to being global consumers. Asia also has the policy space 
to support and strengthen domestic demand. Asia is becoming a huge cumulative market in 
the global economy. 
Reinforcing the economic flexibility of Asia is the diversity of the region. Asia is one of the 
most  diverse  regions  in  the  world  in  terms  of  size,  stage  of  development,  resources, 
economic structure, degree of openness and market orientation. In harnessing each other’s 
comparative  advantage  and  leveraging  on  the  regional  complementarities,  for  Asia  as  a 
region, the whole has become significantly greater than the sum of its individual economies. 
Over  the recent  decade,  this  has generated  a  significant  expansion  in  intra-regional  trade, 
investment and financial flows. This trend is expected to intensify significantly going forward. 
The diversity of emerging Asia also presents immense opportunities in terms of the growing 
markets across the entire spectrum of products and services.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The third key trend that is shaping the future of the region is its demographic advantages. 
Asia is by far the most populous region of the world, accounting for 60 per cent of the world’s 
population. A vast, growing and young middle class population, with increasing affluence, will 
be  a  key  defining  characteristic,  and  an  underlying  growth  driver  of  Asia.  By  2030,  it  is 
projected that the current 500 million Asian middle class will grow by more than six-fold, to be 
more than 3 billion. This will have significant implications on global consumption and trade 
patterns,  and  on  urbanisation  and  infrastructure  development.  The  scale  is  immense.  The 
Asian  Development  Bank  has  also  projected  that  over  this  decade,  Asia  will  require  an 
investment of over 8 trillion US dollars in infrastructure development. It has been projected 
that every year, 44 million Asians are expected be added to the urban population. 
The opportunities generated by these trends are being further enhanced by greater regional 
economic  and  financial  integration.  The  intensification  in  regional  integration  will  not  only 
contribute  towards  accelerating  Asia’s  growth  momentum,  but  also  further  strengthen  the 
resilience  and  stability  of  the  region.  The  increased  intra-regional  trade  and  investment 
linkages within Asia over this recent decade have strengthened Asia’s economic resilience to 
external shocks. Indeed, the changing patterns of trade have allowed Asia to better withstand 
and  emerge  with  an  earlier  recovery  from  this  recent  global  financial  crisis.  It  has  also 
enabled Asia to be less susceptible to the ongoing deleveraging in the advanced economies. 
The  more  recent  efforts  have  focused  on  strengthening  regional  financial  integration  -  not 
only to sustain regional financial stability, but also to promote more efficient intermediation of 
funds  in  Asia  to  support  the  region’s  growth  prospects.  It  will  allow  for  the  effective 
rechannelling of Asia’s sizeable surplus funds towards productive investments in the region. 
Going  forward,  the  intensification  of  regional  integration  will  mutually  reinforce  the 
strengthening of domestic demand in Asia, thereby enhancing the region’s economic growth 
prospects. 
While regional economic and financial integration will intensify going forward, driven by the 
opportunities  it  presents  and  the  conscious  policies  for  a  more  cohesive  region,  Asia  will 
continue to be integrated with the global economy and the international financial system. The 
external environment for Asia has, however, changed significantly. The protracted weakness 
in  global  demand  can  be  expected  to  persist  over  the  medium  term,  given  the  structural 
nature  of  the  problems  confronting  several  of  the  major  economies.  Any  setback  in  the 
recovery  process,  or  any  severe  economic  contraction  in  any  of  these  economies,  would 
affect Asia through the trade channel. 
In addition, the Asian region is also affected by the significant and continuous global policy 
spillovers. This includes the effects of the implementation by several of the major economies, 
the  fiscal  austerity  measures,  the  unprecedented  quantitative  easing,  the  unintended 
consequences of the regulatory reform, the effects from deleveraging arising from the efforts 
by both the public and financial sectors to reduce their levels of indebtedness, and the effects 
of  resolution  of  stressed  financial  institutions.  These  global  policy  spillovers  are  affecting 
international trade and financial flows. 
How  has  Asia  managed  these  fundamentals  forces  affecting  our  region?  It  is  the  wide 
ranging  actions  that  have  been  taken  by  Asia  during  the  decades  before  that  has  well 
positioned  Asia  to  absorb  and  manage  the  effects  of  these  global  developments.  The 
strengthening  of  domestic  demand,  building  resilient  financial  systems,  and  facilitating 
regional  financial  and  economic  integration  that  has  been  reinforced  by  growth  supporting 
policies, have contributed to particularly mitigate the effects of slower trade on the regional 
economies. 
Similarly, the development of the domestic financial system particularly the domestic financial 
markets,  the  strengthening  of  the  surveillance  system  and  the  legal,  regulatory  and 
supervisory 
to  manage 
consequences  on  access  to  cross  border  financing,  and  from  quantitative  easing, 
deleveraging  activities,  and  financial  sector  resolution  in  the  major  economies.  In  addition, 
the  capacity  and  capability 
frameworks,  have 
increased 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this  has  been  reinforced  by  the  building  of  buffers  during  the  good  times.  Financial 
intermediaries  remain  well  capitalised  with  strong  buffers,  while  the  international  reserves 
remain sufficient to deal with surges and reversals in capital flows. 
A more recent development in this decade is greater regional collaboration and cooperation. 
Asia is well ahead in the areas of surveillance arrangements, financial safety nets, and crisis 
management.  These  frameworks  and  arrangements  have  been  built  up  during  the  good 
times.  Information  sharing  and  the  establishment  of  regional  arrangements  and  platforms, 
including  the  building  of  regional  financial  infrastructures  and  markets,  are  not  only  to 
facilitate  the  efficient  intermediation  of  financial  resources,  but  also  to  safeguard  financial 
stability in the region. This trend paves the way for coordinated policy actions to manage and 
mitigate the risks and vulnerabilities to the region. 
Conclusion 
The global economic and financial environment remains highly dynamic and uncertain. While 
emerging  Asia  is  unmistakably  contributing  to  reshaping  the  configuration  of  the  global 
economy  and  the  international financial  system,  the fundamental  underlying factors driving 
this  global  transformation  needs  to  be  continually  reinforced.  It  will  require  our  own 
continuous  economic  and  financial  transformation.  Most  important  will  be  to  ensure  the 
continued  economic  flexibility  of  the  region  to  adjust  to  the  rapidly  changing  global  and 
regional conditions, the strengthening of the connectivity among the emerging economies in 
general  and  within  the  Asian  region,  and  to  boost  further  the  resilience  of  the  region  to 
withstand any destabilising developments. 
The ASEAN economies have a distinct advantage. In terms of their economic flexibility, their 
size and stage of development provides the prospects of having greater agility to adjust to 
the rapidly changing conditions. In terms of the connectivity, the ASEAN region is a highly 
cohesive  region.  Historically,  it  goes  a  long  way  back  to  the  1950s.  Cooperation  and 
collaboration  are  evident  in  most  areas  of  economic  activity  and  in  the  financial  sector,  in 
both the public and private sectors. Policy-makers participate in several regional agreements 
and arrangements. The large economies have the opportunity to leverage on the potential 
synergies from a greater interface with the ASEAN grouping. 
To realise the Asian potential, continuing the transformative momentum and enhancing the 
cohesiveness  of  the  region  would  not  be  complete  without  ensuring  that  the  benefits  of 
development is widely shared. Experience has shown, even in the advanced economies, that 
when  inequality  is  high  and  significant,  instability  follows.  Greater  inclusiveness  within 
economies and across the region is important to ensure the sustainability of our growth and 
development. An important part of this transformative momentum and greater inclusion will 
be  the  transformation  involving  education,  health  care  and  the  social  security  system. 
Addressing  these  challenges  will  ensure  Asia  has  a  high  potential  to  remain  on  its growth 
and development trajectory. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
