Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Inter-regional financial cooperation – another 
layer of financial cooperation towards financial stability 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at CEMLA’s 
60th  Anniversary  Commemorative  Conference  “Central  Bank  Cooperation  at  the  Beginning 
of the 21st Century”, Mexico City, 19 July 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
First  of  all,  I  am  grateful  to  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  the  60th  Anniversary 
Commemorative  Conference  of  CEMLA,  a  symbol  of  financial  cooperation  between  central 
banks  in  Latin  America.  I  am  especially  thrilled,  because  this  is  the  ideal  opportunity  to 
discuss  international  monetary  stability  and  central  bank  cooperation  from  the  integrated 
perspective that spans Latin America and Asia. Latin America and Asia are among the most 
developed regions in terms of financial cooperation.1 Today, I would like to take the concept 
of  financial  cooperation  one  step  further  by  considering  the  topic  of  inter-regional  financial 
cooperation.  Although  the  theme  of  financial  cooperation  at  the  global,  intra-regional,  and 
bilateral level has been discussed at a variety of international forums such as G20, I believe 
inter-regional  financial  cooperation,  especially  between  Latin  America  and  Asia,  represents 
another important layer between the global and the intra-regional or bilateral levels. 
2. 
Latin America and Asia in the 21st Century: from low to high correlation 
Let me begin by giving a brief summary of the linkage between Latin America and Asia  with 
respect  to  real  economic  and  financial  activities,  focusing  particularly  on  the  period  since 
2000. 
Both regions have experienced several large-scale financial crises since the 1980s, namely 
the Mexican Debt Crisis in 1982, followed by the so-called Tequila Crisis in 1994, the Asian 
Financial  Crisis  in  1997  accompanied  by  the  Russian  Crisis,  and  the  Argentine  Crisis  in 
2000. However, roughly speaking, this period in our history also highlights the fact that, until 
the  collapse  of  Lehman Brothers  in  2008,  we  had  never  faced  a  large-scale  financial  crisis 
simultaneously.  In  fact,  the  cross-country  correlation  of  real  GDP  growth  between  Latin 
America and Asia shows relatively small coefficients in the early 2000s (Slide 1). The reason 
could  be  that  the  regions  are  geographically  distant,  and  thus  relatively  less  influenced  by 
each other, particularly in terms of trade activity. 
However, this relationship had already begun to change during the era of the so-called Great 
Moderation, and has changed dramatically since the Lehman shock and the recent European 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  fact,  the  above-mentioned  cross-country  correlation  shows  a 
significant  increase  since  2008  in  the  correlation  coefficients  of  all  major  Asian  economies, 
 1  This 60th anniversary event implies that CEMLA began its activities in 1952, merely seven years after the end 
of World War II. Asia and the Pacific (hereafter, referred to simply as Asia unless otherwise noted) also has a 
long and  very  active  history  of  regional financial cooperation.  The  central bank  leaders  of  seven  South  East 
Asian nations gathered in Bangkok, Thailand in 1966, and established the foundation of SEACEN, which plays 
an important role as a training and learning hub in the region. In 1982, the SEACEN Center was established to 
provide  the  secretariat  function  in  Kuala  Lumpur,  Malaysia,  and  has  since  been  hosting  and  co-hosting  a 
number  of  valuable  and  timely  seminars  and  conferences.  Seminars  and  conferences  were  co-hosted  with 
CEMLA,  and  the  Bank  of Japan  contributed  to  them  as  a  speaker  and  lecturer.  In  1991, the  Bank  of  Japan 
invited Asian counterparts to form EMEAP, consisting of eleven central banks and monetary authorities in the 
region.  EMEAP  has  since  then  celebrated  a  number  of  concrete  achievements  in  regional  financial 
cooperation, including the establishment of the Asian Bond Fund. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
following a gradual increase in China and Japan a few years earlier. Although geographical 
distance has not changed, our mutual dependency in trade has dramatically increased since 
the  mid-2000s,  driven  largely  by  China,  and  owing  to  significant  improvements  in 
transportation technology and a decline in various trade-related costs (Slide 2). 
The linkage of trade, and thus economic and financial activities, between Latin America and 
Asia is expected to be strengthened further in the future. Trade volume is determined by the 
size of population and the degree of complementariness of goods and services, if transaction 
costs are sufficiently small. The combined populations of Latin America and Asia are forecast 
to  remain  at more  than 60  percent  of the global  population.  As  income  levels  increase,  the 
two regions combined are expected to become one of the largest consumer markets in the 
world  (Slide  3).  Moreover,  the  two  regions  have  a  well-balanced  supply-and-demand 
relationship, ranging from agricultural goods and raw materials to capital goods. This implies 
that future trade activity in a combined Latin America and Asia can be self-sustained without 
having  to  rely  substantially  on  advanced  countries.  As  mutual  linkage  of  economy  is 
enhanced through trade, eventually so is financial linkage between the two regions, including 
an increase in foreign exchange transactions for the purpose of real demand and hedging, as 
well  as  an  increase  in  stock  price  correlation  reflecting  active  cross-border  corporate 
transactions. 
This heightened inter-dependency of economy and financial markets implies that a financial 
crisis  in  one  region  has  a  direct  impact  on  the  other.  Moreover,  as  the  importance  of  a 
combined  Latin  America  and  Asia  increases,  so  too  does  the  chance  that  they  happen  to 
become  the  epicenter  of  a  global  financial  crisis.  In  this  regard,  policy  makers  of  the  two 
regions are mutually responsible for the stability of the global economy and financial market. 
To fulfill such responsibility, financial cooperation should not be confined to one region. 
Latin America and Asia have many issues in common. Addressing capital flows is one such 
issue. A variety of regulations and macroprudential measures has already been introduced, 
and  has  been  to  a  certain  extent  effective  in  each  of  the  jurisdictions  or  regions.  However, 
more structural issues associated with financial stability should be discussed, not only at the 
intra-regional  level,  but  also  at  the  inter-regional  level  between  Latin  America  and  Asia. 
These  structural  issues  include  the  development  of  liquid  and  deep  capital  markets,  and 
improvements  in  financial  infrastructure,  including  deregulation  and  harmonization  of 
regulations.  Moreover,  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  issues  related  to  population  aging, 
and  corresponding  arrangements  of  social  security  and  tax  systems,  also  need  to  be 
considered comprehensively with an inter-regional view in mind. 
3. 
Asian experience on financial cooperation 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  Asian  experience  on  financial  cooperation,  anticipating  similar 
discussion of the Latin American experience later from other participants. 
(Vulnerabilities in Asia) 
Although overall economic and financial stability has been improved remarkably in Asia since 
the Asian Financial Crisis, there are still vulnerabilities in the region. First, there remains the 
double-mismatch  of  currency  and  maturity  in  the  banking  sector.  Such  vulnerabilities 
materialized in some Asian economies when U.S. dollar liquidity dried up after the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers. We have seen similar impacts recently with the deleveraging by European 
banks. Second, in Asia, including Japan to some extent, the financial intermediation function 
has still been served largely by indirect financing, mostly through banks. Given this financing 
structure, a large negative shock hitting financial institutions makes it difficult for non-financial 
corporations  to  gain  smooth  access  to  debt  financing  from  these  institutions,  almost 
regardless  of  their  financial  soundness.  Third,  there  is  still  the  issue  of  scant  investment 
opportunities  in  Asian  local  currencies.  Abundant  savings  in  Asia  have  not  been  invested 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sufficiently  within  the  region,  and  have  thus  eventually  been  invested  outside  the  region, 
such as in bonds in the United States and developed Europe. 
To  put  it  in  a  different  perspective,  the  Asian  financial  sector  remains  highly  dependent  on 
banks, indicating the underdevelopment of regional bond and other capital markets. Owing to 
such  an  unbalanced  market  structure,  Asian  economies  are  exposed  to  the  risk  that 
domestic  asset  prices  become  volatile  because  of  rapid  global  capital  flows,  resulting  in  a 
sharp increase in the volatility of foreign exchange rates. Also, the immature local derivatives 
market  makes  appropriate  risk-taking  transactions  difficult,  as  risk-hedging  instruments  are 
limited  (Slide  4).  Moreover,  owing  to  their  less-developed  securitization  markets,  Asian 
economies  do  not  sufficiently  enjoy  the  merits  of  the  securitization  schemes  that  attract  a 
variety of investors depending on their risk-taking capacities (Slide 5). 
(Authorities’ efforts to address vulnerabilities) 
How  have  the  Asian  authorities  responded  to  these  vulnerabilities?  I  would  like  to  explain 
their efforts in three aspects. 
To develop local currency-denominated bond markets 
The  first  is  a  project  aimed  at  developing  liquid  bond  markets  to  provide  a  bridge  between 
abundant  local  savings  and  local  investments:  the  ABF  of  EMEAP,  and  the  ABMI  of 
ASEAN+3. 
The Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP) established the Asian 
Bond  Fund  (ABF)  investment  trust  in  2003,  and  became  the  initial  buyers  by  investing  in 
sovereign  and  quasi-sovereign  bonds  in  the  eight  member  jurisdictions.  When  it  was 
launched,  the  Fund  was  limited  to  investment  only  in  U.S.  dollar-denominated  bonds. 
However,  since  2005,  the  Fund  has  begun  to  include  those  denominated  in  the  local 
currencies  of  the  eight  members.  In  addition,  EMEAP  launched  an  exchange-traded  fund 
(ETF) called the Pan Asian Index Fund (PAIF). The PAIF was first listed on the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange in 2005, and later cross-listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in 2009.2 
As  part  of  the  ASEAN+3  process,  the  authorities  have  launched  the  Asian  Bond  Markets 
Initiative (ABMI),3 aimed at promoting bond markets. The most notable recent achievement is 
the establishment in November 2010 of a trust fund in the ADB called the Credit Guarantee 
and  Investment  Facility  (CGIF).  The  CGIF  plans  to  start  its  credit  guarantee  operations  for 
local currency-denominated corporate bonds issued in the ASEAN+3 jurisdictions in the third 
quarter  of  2012  at  the  earliest.  At  the  Finance  Ministers’  and  Central  Bank  Governors’ 
Meeting in May this year, another new roadmap for the ABMI was proposed and endorsed to 
further promote resilient capital markets in the region, for example, by improving the regional 
credit  rating  system,  developing  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises’ 
finance  and 
securitization markets, and raising the level of financial education. 
To establish and enhance a currency swap network 
The  second  response  by  Asian  authorities  to  the  region’s  vulnerabilities  is  a  project  to 
establish and develop a mutual framework of U.S. dollar liquidity provision, called the Chiang 
 2  Each  listed  fund,  as  well  as  the  PAIF,  aimed  at  raising  awareness  among  private  investors,  has  steadily 
gained  recognition  among  investors,  although  the  extent  of  this  recognition  varies  across  the  markets. 
Moreover,  the  project  has  been  functioning  as  a  catalyst  for  improving  market  infrastructure,  such  as 
deregulation  and  exemption  of  withholding  taxes  for  non-resident  investors,  through  its  reviewing  process 
among the EMEAP members. 
3  ABMI  advocates  four  main  issues,  namely  i)  facilitation  of  demand  for  local  currency-denominated  bonds, 
ii) promotion  of  their  issuance,  iii)  improvement  of  the  regulatory  framework,  and  iv)  improvement  of  the 
relevant infrastructure for the bond market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Mai Initiative (CMI). Aimed at  improving the region’s resilience against  external shocks, the 
CMI  started  building  a  bilateral  currency  swap  network  in  the  region,  which  involves  a 
contingent  claim  on  foreign  currency  reserves  held  by  each  ASEAN+3  authority.  The  CMI 
has since enhanced its effectiveness by increasing its size and the number of participants. In 
fact,  in  March  2010,  the  authorities  evolved  the  CMI  framework  from  its  original  bilateral 
swap arrangements to the multilateral Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM), which 
is  a  collective  decision-making  framework  signed  by  all  member  jurisdictions  in  a  single 
contract.4 
To  ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  crisis  prevention  and  actual  U.S.  dollar  liquidity 
support,  it  is  essential  for  the  authorities  to  monitor  closely  the  regional  economy  and 
financial  markets,  and  exchange  views  on  their  respective  macroeconomic  policies.  The 
ASEAN+3 authorities thus established their own but independent surveillance unit, called the 
ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO), in Singapore in April 2011. 
Recent efforts to enhance financial stability 
In addition to the above-mentioned two projects, momentum is building among Asian central 
banks  to  make  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  (CBCAs),  aimed  at  further  enhancing 
financial  stability  in  the  region.  CBCAs  are  arrangements  whereby  a  central  bank  provides 
local  currency  liquidity  by  accepting  foreign  currency  assets,  such  as  sovereign  bonds  in 
foreign countries, as eligible collateral. Such arrangements already exist in some advanced 
countries. CBCAs are thought to be an effective framework particularly in times of short-term 
money  market  stress.  Foreign  financial  institutions’  branches  and  subsidiaries  often  lack 
stable local funding sources, such as retail deposits. However, under a CBCA, they can still 
continue  to  provide  credit  to  their  customers,  who  are  in  most  cases  branches  and 
subsidiaries of non-financial corporations domiciled in their home countries. 
In fact, a CBCA was established in November last year between the Bank of Japan and the 
Bank  of  Thailand,  as  there  are  many  Japanese  non-financial  corporations  operating  in 
Thailand. At almost the same time, a CBCA was announced between Bank Negara Malaysia 
and the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and early this year between Bank Negara Malaysia 
and  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  Meanwhile,  EMEAP  has  formed  an  action  group  and  made  a 
CBCA  reference  template  for  their  future  expansion  in  the  region.  So  far,  they  are  bilateral 
negotiations between two jurisdictions, depending on their necessity. 
Moreover, Japan and China are making efforts to enhance mutual cooperation towards the 
development of financial markets in the two largest Asian economies. Owing to cooperation 
between  the  authorities  and  private  market  participants,  many  tangible  outcomes  have 
already been achieved, including the purchase of Chinese government bonds by the Japan’s 
Foreign Exchange Fund Special Account and the start of direct exchange between Japanese 
yen and Chinese renminbi on the Tokyo and Shanghai markets. 
Towards inter-regional financial cooperation 
4. 
As economic and financial linkages deepen, I believe that the above-mentioned efforts and 
issues addressed in Asia can be shared more or less with Latin America. Both regions also 
have  common  structural  problems.  I  believe  that  it  is  fruitful  for  regions  bearing  similar 
problems to resolve them collaboratively. 
First, let me raise the issue of demographic change and economic potential. Slides 6,  7,  8, 
and  9  show  the  ratio  of  working-age  population  to  the  rest,  that  is,  how  many  people  of 
 4  At the same time, the authorities expanded the total borrowing amount from USD 90 billion to USD 120 billion, 
enabling prompt and effective U.S. dollar support in times of crisis. Moreover, at the above-mentioned Finance 
Ministers’  and  Central  Bank  Governors’  Meeting,  the  authorities  agreed  to  double  the  size  of  the  CMIM  to 
USD 240 billion, and expand its scope to also cover crisis prevention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
working age have to provide for one dependent person, for Japan, the United States, Asia, 
and Latin America, respectively. Low fertility rates and population aging have been the main 
cause of prolonged low economic growth in Japan since 1990. This is also likely to become a 
big  issue  even  for  Korea  and  China  in  the  not-so-distant  future.  Some  Latin  American 
countries  may  also  have  similar  concerns,  although  the  degree  varies  across  jurisdictions. 
Having  this  future  vision  well  in  mind,  we  have  to  be  prepared  even  now  to  implement  the 
necessary social reforms, including the restructuring of social security systems, tax reforms, 
and revision of employment systems. 
Second, let us consider the development of asset prices and credit expansion. In Slides 10, 
11, 12, and 13, the development of property prices and loans in real terms is added to the 
chart of the working-age population ratio (inverse dependency ratio) in the previous Slides 6, 
7,  8,  and  9,  respectively.  In  Japan  and  the  United  States,  we  see  a  significant  relationship 
between population dynamics and real asset prices. A similar tendency  is also observed in 
China, as representative of Asia, and Brazil, as representative of Latin America. Whether this 
development leads to the generation and bursting of asset bubble depends largely on future 
policy implementation in the respective regions. 
To  address  these  structural  problems,  it  might  be  more  effective  for  both  regions  to 
collaborate, rather than to deal with them individually and independently. The following three 
points are also issues to be considered cooperatively. 
First, as an economy develops and a middle-income class emerges, we need to implement 
measures  to  realize  a  more  balanced  growth  between  domestic  and  external  demands.  At 
the same time, the population eventually ages as the economy matures, and thus the key to 
success  will  be  the  promotion  of  domestic  demand  appropriately  in  line  with  the 
developmental stage of the economy. 
Second,  from  the  viewpoint  of  reducing  asset  price  volatility,  it  is  also  important  to  further 
develop  regional  capital  markets  with  the  aim  of  enhancing  resilience  against  external 
shocks. In this regard, we need to take into account market differences within the region. 
Third,  it  is  essential  for  each  jurisdiction  to  harmonize  its  market  regulations  and  practices 
with  the  global  standards  in  promoting  cross-border  transactions.  However,  unilateral  effort 
by  a  single  jurisdiction  has  its  limitations,  and  thus  collective  effort  is  desirable  to  improve 
market  infrastructures  effectively  in  both  regions.  While  respecting  diversity  across 
jurisdictions,  we  should  not  introduce  arbitrary  regulations  or  ignore  global  contractual 
practices. 
Needless  to  say,  even  if  we  are  successful  in  dealing  with  these  issues,  we  cannot 
completely prevent financial crises. However, we can improve our resiliency in times of crisis 
by preparing multi-layered safety nets as backstops in the financial system. Such safety nets 
include  the  development  of  deep  and  liquid  capital  markets,  the  establishment  of  currency 
swap  networks,  and  cross-border  collateral  arrangements.  Moreover,  it  is  also  important  to 
establish  solid  foundations for  individual  and  regional  economies  by  addressing  at  an  early 
stage  long-term  social  structural  problems  such  as  declining  fertility  rates  and  population 
aging. A resilient real economy is an indispensable factor in financial stability. 
Last but not least, as you already know, the IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings will be held in 
Tokyo this coming October. The Bank of Japan plans to take advantage of this opportunity to 
co-host  a  seminar  with  CEMLA.  I  will  participate  in  this  wonderful  event,  representing  the 
Bank  of  Japan,  and  I  look  forward  to  the  enthusiastic  proposals  and  discussions  regarding 
financial  stability  in  Latin  America  and  Asia,  and  thus  global  financial  stability,  among  a 
variety of participants, including senior officials of central banks in the two regions. 
I will stop here. Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
