William C Dudley: Housing and the economic recovery 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the New Jersey Bankers Association Economic Forum, Iselin, 
New Jersey, 6 January 2012. 
 Housing and the economic recovery 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  join  you  today  for  the  annual  meeting  of  the  New  Jersey  Bankers 
Association.  
In  a  recent  speech1  I  talked  about  a  number  of  the  challenges  facing  the  economy  as  we 
seek to secure the recovery and build for the future. Today I will focus on one of these: the 
problems in the U.S. housing market. In focusing today on housing, I would emphasize that 
this is only one factor behind the frustratingly slow economic recovery. Nevertheless, it is an 
important one that deserves our attention. As always, what I have to say today reflects my 
own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the 
Federal Reserve System. 
The New York Fed is deeply committed to contributing to efforts to resolve the housing crisis 
that  still  afflicts  our  nation.  Our  economists  monitor  the  housing  market  and  analyze  its 
impact on the national economy. My outreach staff work with community groups and housing 
practitioners to support local programs that aid distressed homeowners. Our lawyers perform 
pro-bono  work  for  homeowners  facing  foreclosure  and  advise  on  legal  reforms,  while  our 
researchers and market analysts have developed proposals to mitigate current problems and 
improve the future structure of housing finance. 
In my presentation today, I  will explain why a  more robust housing market matters for the 
wider economy. I will also highlight those factors specific to the housing market that create a 
risk  that  it  will  linger  in  an  extremely  weak  state  for  longer  than  is  necessary  and  remain 
vulnerable to further weakness. 
I will make the case for further housing-related policy interventions that would help stabilize 
home  prices,  improve  the  housing  outlook  and  generate  an  earlier  recovery  in  housing 
activity.  I  believe  such  actions  would  support  growth  and  make  monetary  policy  more 
effective  in  promoting  the  dual  mandate  given  to  the  Federal  Reserve  by  Congress  – 
maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability.  
The housing bust 
Given the excesses of the housing boom that took place in the early to middle part of the last 
decade, a substantial downward adjustment in housing was unavoidable. Since peaking in 
the second quarter of 2006, home prices have fallen by about 30 percent,2 returning to levels 
that  last  prevailed  in  mid-2003.  In  the  states  of  Arizona,  California,  Florida  and  Nevada, 
where  home  prices  rose  much  more  than  the  national  average,  prices  have  declined  by 
roughly 40 percent. Over the past year, house prices have declined by another 4 percent, 
though they remained roughly flat, when one excludes distress sales. 
                                                 
1   William  C  Dudley,  2011:  “Securing  the  Recovery  and  Building  for  the  Future.”  Remarks  at  United  States 
Military Academy at West Point, New York, November 17. 
2   Based on the CoreLogic index. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Home  construction  collapsed  with  new  single  family  starts  falling  from  a  peak  rate  of 
1.75 million homes  per  year  to  a  low  of  360,000  in  early  2009.  After  a  very  slight pick-up, 
they have been bumping along at about a 425,000 annual rate for over a year. 
Although  the  number  of  mortgages  becoming  delinquent  is  off  its  peak,  it  remains  very 
elevated  and  increased  in  the  third  quarter  of  2011.3  According  to  the  Mortgage  Bankers 
Association  of  America,  at  the  end  of  that  quarter  there  were  roughly  1.5  million  first  lien 
mortgages  90  or  more  days  past  due,  and  2  million  first  lien  mortgages  in  some  stage  of 
foreclosure.  
Over time, without an improvement in housing and the labor market, more loans will become 
seriously delinquent. Moreover, absent more aggressive efforts to find economically efficient 
alternatives  to  foreclosure  –  loans  already  seriously  delinquent  and  in  foreclosure  will 
become  real  estate  owned  by  the  lender,  or  REO.  My  staff  estimate  that  the  flow  of 
properties into lender REO in 2012 and 2013 could be as high as 1.8 million per year, up 
from around 1.1 million in 2011 and around 600,000 in 2010.  
The  overhang  of  properties  in  the  foreclosure/REO  pipeline  continues  to  exert  downward 
pressure  on  house  prices  and  housing  activity.  Recent  surveys  by  MacroMarkets  and  by 
Fannie Mae indicate that households expect negligible gains in home prices over the next 
few years, with many expecting that prices will continue to decline.  
Macroeconomic consequences  
The ongoing weakness in housing has made it more difficult to achieve a vigorous economic 
recovery. Housing has inhibited economic activity through a number of channels. 
First, the strong rebound in residential investment that typically powers economic recoveries 
following deep recessions has been absent. For example, nine quarters following the ends of 
the mid-1970s and early 1980s recessions, residential investment had climbed by 65 percent 
and  55  percent,  respectively,  above  the  level  at  the  corresponding  troughs.  In  contrast, 
during  this  cycle,  there  has  been  no  rebound.  In  the  third  quarter  of  2011,  residential 
investment was still somewhat below the level in the second quarter of 2009. 
Second,  by  eroding  household  wealth,  the  decline  in  housing  prices  has  contributed  to 
greater weakness in consumption. For most American households the family home is by far 
the largest tangible asset, a buffer against misfortune, and often a significant savings vehicle 
to fund retirement.4  
Since home values peaked in 2006, homeowners have lost more than half their home equity 
– about $7.3 trillion – and expectations of future gains have also declined. At present roughly 
11 million households are in negative equity with the aggregate amount of negative equity 
estimated to be roughly $700 billion.5  
Third, the weakness in home prices has reduced credit availability. Because the home is the 
primary source of collateral for most households, financial institutions are less willing to lend 
when house prices have declined substantially and could fall further. In addition, problems in 
the  foreclosure  process  and  obstacles  to  efficient  modification  of  loans  in  securitizations, 
which I’ll describe in a moment, make a house of a given value less attractive as collateral to 
secure a loan. As a result, as home prices have fallen, financial institutions have tightened 
                                                 
3   FRBNY Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit 2011 Q3. 
4   Because housing is such an important asset for many households, household expectations of future income 
may also be influenced by what they observe happening to house prices. 
5   These households have particularly strong incentives to increase saving to recreate a buffer against adverse 
events and to enable them to move house. Source of data is CoreLogic. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
lending standards. This has reduced the amount of credit available for households, including 
for small business formation.  
Fourth,  the  big  drop  in  house  prices  has  made  it  more  difficult  for  borrowers  to  refinance. 
This has undercut to a degree the ability of monetary policy to support demand.  
Traditionally, refinancing activity has been an important channel through which lower interest 
rates  support  spending  and  employment.  Refinancing  frees  up  borrower  income.  Because 
those who refinance tend to have a higher marginal propensity to consume from income than 
the  investors  receiving  the  mortgage  payments,  such  refinancing  activity  increases  overall 
demand.  However,  the  fall  in  home  equity  combined  with  a  pro-cyclical  tightening  of 
refinancing  standards  and  fees  means  that  many  borrowers  who  would  like  to  refinance 
cannot do so.  
Problems in housing  
By many measures – including affordability ratios and price-to-rent ratios – home prices have 
fallen back to or below their pre-boom levels. Indeed, housing no longer appears overvalued. 
In  many  former  boom  localities,  the  price  of  existing  homes  has  fallen  below  the  cost  of 
building a new home.6 Also, after several years of depressed construction the national stock 
of housing no longer looks excessive relative to the nation’s population. 
Nevertheless,  housing  currently  remains  in  excess  supply,  in  part,  because  household 
formation rates remain depressed.  
Normally, when there is excess supply, markets self-correct fairly efficiently. Prices fall until 
they  reach  a  level  at  which  supply  and  demand  are  balanced.  Unfortunately,  the  housing 
market has a number of specific features that complicate this adjustment process and mean 
it could undershoot – and remain weaker for longer than is necessary. 
Housing is a very long-lived asset. Once new  building ceases in stressed markets, further 
reductions in demand cannot be matched by further supply reductions.7 This means that the 
market clearing price for housing is highly sensitive to those factors that influence demand. 
Moreover,  there  is  a  feedback  loop  from  prices  to  demand,  with  weaker  prices  leading  to 
weaker demand. If house prices are anticipated to increase, then the expected capital gain 
helps  to  offset  the  financing  cost  of  owning  a  home.  However,  if  households  believe  that 
house  prices  could  decline  further,  the  expected  capital  loss  adds  to  the  financing  cost  of 
owning a home and prospective buyers will be reluctant to buy even if mortgage rates are 
low.  
That said, it should also be recognized that the factors that affect demand and home prices 
are not immutable. They depend, in part, on policy choices. Consider, for example, the fact 
that most home purchases are financed with long-term mortgage credit. This means that the 
demand for housing is highly sensitive to the availability and cost of that credit.  
Outcomes  in  housing  are  also  affected  by  the  legal  and  operational  infrastructure  of  the 
mortgage  market.  This  apparatus  has  been  wholly  inadequate  for  dealing  with  a  systemic 
shock  to  housing  and  employment,  and  is  amplifying  bad  outcomes.  A  flawed  resolution 
regime  –  very  different  from  the  more  efficient  regime  for  resolving  excess  debt  in  private 
commercial property – exacerbates the risks of under-shooting.  
                                                 
6  
In Las Vegas, for instance, the ratio of house prices to replacement costs is now 0.7, having peaked at about 
2.0 during the boom. 
7   The supply curve is fixed and vertical at the post-bubble stock of housing so the entire adjustment to changes 
in demand takes place via prices rather than quantities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conflicts  of  interest  are  embedded  in  mortgage  securitization  structures  and  between  first 
and  second  lien-holders.  There  are  challenges  to  how  the  industry  records  and  transfers 
interests  in  these  mortgages.  For  mortgages  that  are  part  of  securitizations,  the  legal 
obstacles  to  loan  modification  that  preserve  value  are  substantial.  Meanwhile,  mortgage 
servicers  lack  the  systems,  processes,  governance,  resources  and  incentives  to  deal 
effectively  with  a  large  volume  of  delinquent  borrowers  –  who  often  suffer  poor  customer 
treatment at a time of personal distress.8  
The result is inefficiently low levels of mortgage modification, too few “short sales”9 by mutual 
agreement  between  distressed  borrowers  and  lenders,  and  too  much  reliance  on  the 
foreclosure process. This process also has many legal impediments and has become even 
more inefficient as the volume of loans in the pipeline increases. One consequence has been 
lengthening  delays  in  completing  foreclosures  –  including  unavoidable  foreclosures.  These 
delays have increased the economic damage caused by foreclosure and reduced recovery 
rates. 
The damage caused by inefficient foreclosures is worth emphasizing. It is not just the direct 
loss of value in terms of deterioration of homes that are ultimately foreclosed. In addition, as I 
have  personally  witnessed  in  my  outreach  visits  across  the  New  York  Fed’s  District, 
foreclosures 
families,  surrounding  neighborhoods  and 
communities. Unmaintained homes facing foreclosure drag down the value of nearby homes. 
Also, property taxes on non-foreclosed homes often go up due to a declining tax base and 
this puts additional downward pressure on housing prices. 
Foreclosures also undercut housing demand. Households that go through foreclosure need 
to repair their credit records and to accumulate new downpayments. For several years they 
are no longer available as potential home buyers and this also contributes to softer demand 
and weaker housing prices. 
Further declines in home prices also could be reinforcing because they would likely make the 
already  daunting  foreclosure/REO  pipeline  even  larger.  Currently,  households  in  negative 
equity or “underwater” on their loans owe $65,000 on average more on their mortgages than 
the value of their homes. Since the recession, most defaults have been by necessity – that 
is,  they  have  been  prompted  by  a  job  loss,  health  problems  or  divorce  coupled  with  the 
household being in negative equity. No doubt, however, there is some degree or duration of 
negative  equity  that  may  cause  households  to  conclude  that  a  default  is  inevitable  and 
should be taken sooner rather than later. If this point were reached, defaults by choice could 
significantly swell the flow of homes into the foreclosure pipeline. 
impose  significant  costs  on 
The case for housing intervention  
All these factors imply that there are many potential equilibrium outcomes in terms of housing 
demand and home prices – some considerably more desirable than others. Negative price 
expectations and flawed financing and administrative mechanisms, if left unaddressed, can 
contribute to ongoing weakness in housing demand and make it harder to generate a robust 
economic recovery.  
Persistent  weakness  in  housing  is  particularly  problematic  because  it  acts  as  a  drag  on 
spending and job creation in an environment in which such weakness can not be easily offset 
                                                 
8   A number of these issues were documented by an interagency task force that included the Federal Reserve 
and are being addressed through consent orders requiring supervised institutions to remedy deficiencies. 
9   When the amount of debt secured by a property exceeds its likely net sales price, a “short sale” can be a less 
costly alternative to foreclosure. The short sale agreement between the homeowner and lender often grants 
the lender final approval of the sales price and may release the homeowner from any deficiency. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by other policy adjustments. Housing policy should seek to break adverse feedback loops, 
promote more economically efficient outcomes in housing and support growth.  
In recent speeches,10 I have called for a “comprehensive approach” to stabilize the national 
real  estate  market  and  lay  the  foundations  for  recovery.  I  believe  this  should  include 
measures to improve access to mortgage credit, reduce obstacles to refinancing, lessen the 
flow of homes into foreclosure through bridge financing and accelerated principal reduction, 
and to facilitate the absorption of REO back into use as owner- or renter- housing. 
Many of these policies simply seek to solve or bypass the legal and incentive problems in the 
market today and mimic efficient private actions that might be taken if mortgage loans were 
all held in portfolio and accounting rules did not discourage net present value maximization. 
Others seek to solve coordination problems and take account of the externalities or spillovers 
to  generate  outcomes  that  are  superior  from  the  broadest  perspective  of  the  nation  as  a 
whole. 
Earlier  this  week  Chairman  Bernanke  sent  members  of  Congress  a  thoughtful  analysis  of 
housing policy11 by staff at the Board of Governors in Washington that evaluates a number of 
these same issues. What I would like to do today is to elaborate on some specific proposals 
we  have  developed  in  New  York,  in  order  to  try  to  persuade  you  that  there  are  workable 
solutions  to  our  housing  problems  at  costs  that  I  deem  very  reasonable  relative  to  the 
economically inefficient path we are on. Of course, I am open to other promising alternatives 
that would address the same issues. 
I  note  also  that  a  truly  comprehensive  approach  would  also  include  long-term  
reform –including reform of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – to put housing finance on a more 
stable  footing  and  to  equip  the  market  to  deal  more  effectively  with  any  future  systemic 
shocks.  
But I will not discuss these issues in-depth today.  
Access to mortgage credit 
Restoring  demand  for  housing  requires  new  mortgage  debt  to  be  offered  to  creditworthy 
borrowers  on  reasonable  terms.  This  is  important  because  residential  mortgage  lending 
terms tightened significantly during the crisis, and have not eased subsequently.12 
Indeed, over 50 percent of all new loans – and 70 percent of new prime conforming loans – 
go to borrowers with FICO scores of 760 or above, compared with about 30 percent before 
the crisis. Borrowers with credit scores of 720 or less now make up less than 30 percent of 
new originations, although they represent 52 percent of the population with credit scores. 
Steps  should  be  taken  to  improve  households’  access  to  credit.  Currently,  lenders  are 
discouraged from making new prime conforming loans due to excessively stringent put-back 
rules  on  these  mortgages.  Such  rules  give  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  broad  scope  to 
force the originator to repurchase at par loans that go delinquent if there are any errors in the 
mortgage loan paperwork – even if the error has no direct link to the delinquency. 
It  is  essential  that  lenders  are  accountable  for  the  representations  they  make  and  are 
appropriately  penalized  for  any  misrepresentations.  However,  doing  this  via  a  blanket 
                                                 
10   “The  National  and  Regional  Economic  Outlook,”  October  24,  2011,  and  “Securing  the  Recovery” 
November 17, 2011. 
11   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. White Paper, “The U.S. Housing Market: Current 
Conditions and Policy Considerations,” January 4. 
12   According to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
repurchase regime leads to bad outcomes at a time when there is an unusually high risk of 
job loss leading to delinquency. It would be better to establish alternative ways to penalize 
lenders for misrepresentation that were not in practice so closely tied to the risk of job loss.13  
The  current  repurchase  regime  exposes  lenders  originating  prime  conforming  loans  to 
significant credit risk and encourages them to focus only on the lowest-risk customers. 
Lenders  are  applying  tougher  restrictions  than  the  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  formally 
require in order to limit the risk that they will have to take back such loans when they become 
delinquent. 
For  mortgages  guaranteed  by  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  a  better  balance  between 
incentives  for  sound  underwriting  and  credit  availability  could  be  achieved  by  inserting  a 
materiality test in the rep and warranty agreement.  
In the future, it would be worth exploring whether a better regime in general would be to have 
representations and warranties with a finite duration, but supplemented by a rigorous quality 
control check of the underwiting based on a random sample of the mortgages as they are 
being securitized.14 
Today’s  tough  underwriting  standards  and  high  risk-based  premiums  for  conforming  loan 
borrowers should also be reviewed. I do not want to see a return to the lax standards and 
underpricing  of  credit  risk  of  the  boom  period.  But  the  guarantee  fees  for  new  purchase 
mortgages should be based on the expected losses on these mortgages – not the realized 
losses on loans of earlier vintages.  
There is also a strong case for tackling the downward bias on appraisals, which are voiding 
many  transactions  between  willing  buyers  and  willing  sellers.  Incentives  for  individual 
appraisers favor conservatism today – just as they favored over-optimism during the boom.  
This problem is aggravated by the difficulty in establishing benchmark prices in markets with 
few transactions and a high share of distress sales. The industry could establish appraisal 
standards that avoid such procylical outcomes.  
Mortgage refinancing 
Increasing  refinancing  would  support  the  housing  market  by  promoting  aggregate  demand 
and  employment.  Refinancing  creates  additional  cash  flow  for  borrowers  to  absorb  any 
adverse  income  shocks  and  this  reduces  the  likelihood  of  default,  distress  sales  and 
foreclosures.  
However, there are significant obstacles to refinancing in current circumstances. Declines in 
home equity have been aggravated by tighter standards, high refinancing fees, burdensome 
administrative processes, and legal risks to the lenders refinancing the loan. 
Because the taxpayer, via Fannie and Freddie, is already exposed to the risk of conforming 
loans defaulting, it makes no sense to make it expensive or difficult for borrowers with these 
loans  to  refinance.  After  all,  refinancing  reduces  the  credit  risk  to  which  taxpayers  are 
exposed.  It  is  also  inefficient  to  fully  re-underwrite  applications  for  such  refinancings.  For 
example,  appraisals  could  be  greatly  simplified  and  made  less  expensive  by  using 
automated valuation models. 
The Home Affordable Refinance Program, or HARP, was set up to facilitate refinancing of 
high loan-to-value prime conforming mortgages. The announced goal of the HARP was to 
                                                 
13   We should want the cost of misrepresenting loans to be invariant to the state of the jobs market. 
14   Risk retention will also apply to some forms of mortgages in future. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
refinance 3 million to 4 million mortgages. However, shortcomings with the original program 
mean that less than a million HARP refinancings have taken place.  
Legal risks discouraged lenders from participating more fully in HARP to date. Notably, if a 
lender  refinanced  a  loan  made  by  another  company,  it  was  liable  for  the  underwriting 
associated with the original loan. The profit from refinancing was unattractive relative to the 
risk of being forced to repurchase the loan. Given this, lenders had little incentive to compete 
to refinance loans and this led to higher mortgage rates and less refinancing.  
Many  of  these  issues  have  been  addressed  by  recent  revisions  to  HARP  and  related 
decisions by Fannie Mae, but more could and should be done. Remaining legal issues could 
be alleviated by harmonizing standards between Fannie and Freddie. 
I  would  like  to  see  refinancing  made  broadly  available  on  streamlined  terms  and  with 
moderate  fees  to  all  prime  conforming  borrowers  who  are  current  on  their  payments.  This 
could substantially increase the number of refinancings.  
Bridge financing 
To  stabilize  the  housing  market,  we  also  need  to  weaken the  link  between  unemployment 
and new foreclosures. The primary reason for distress sales and mortgage defaults today is 
the  loss  of  a  job.  Even  if  it  were  possible,  it  would  be  inefficient  for  homeowners  with 
mortgages to self-insure against a job loss.  
Some  support  for  unemployed  homeowners  has  been  provided  in  some  states  under  the 
Hardest  Hit  program.  I  favor  a  broad  program  to  provide  bridge  financing  for  all  qualified 
borrowers  with  demonstrated  ability  to  service  their  debts  who  become  unemployed 
involuntarily  –  though  categorically  not  those  who  quit  or  are  terminated  with  cause.  In 
economic terms, this is a form of collective insurance.15  
My staff estimates that there are 4 million to 5 million “at risk” homeowners who can afford 
their mortgage, but who would struggle to make their payments in the event that the primary 
earner in the household became unemployed.  
With  the  current  weak  labor  markets,  they  estimate  around  600,000  of  these  at-risk 
households will experience an involuntary job loss that lasts longer than a month over the 
next year. The average annual amount that would be required to keep the mortgage current 
for  these  households  while  unemployed  and  receiving  unemployment  insurance  is  around 
$21,000. This would be a loan not a grant.16  
This  implies  an  annual  bridge  lending  program  of  $15  billion  per  year  during  the  current 
stress period. This seems expensive, but this is not the cost of such a program, just the cash 
outlay  in  the  early  years.  In  the  future,  loan  repayments  would  help  to  offset  the  program 
cost. 
Moreover,  when  one  factors  in  the  reduced  negative  externalities  achieved  by  limiting 
distress sales, the expected program cost would be even lower.  
Of course, any bridge financing loans would need to be properly secured in order to protect 
taxpayers interests. In situations in which the value of the loan already exceeded the value of 
                                                 
15   In  the  early  1980s,  Pennsylvania  created  such  a  loan  program  to  assist  homeowners  dealing  with 
unemployment due to the closing down of steel mills. The program was called the Homeowners's Emergency 
Mortgage Assistance Program, or HEMAP. Since its inception, over 80 percent of the loans made under the 
program have been fully repaid and the borrowers able to remain in their homes. A new program could be 
funded by the federal government or individual states. 
16   In  addition,  the  repayment  terms  for  the  bridge  loan  once  the  owner  becomes  reemployed  should  be 
contingent on the owner’s reemployment earnings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  home,  it  might  be  appropriate  to  require  lenders  to  write  down  the  excess  debt  as  a 
condition for the borrower obtaining a bridge loan. This would ensure that the bridging funds 
did not “bail out” the lender. Writing down excess debt would likely be in the lender’s rational 
self-interest  given  the  borrower’s  situation,  since  a  distress  sale  or  foreclosure  at  current 
market prices would generally yield larger losses.  
Earned principal reduction 
Investment  firms  that  purchase  delinquent  mortgages  routinely  reduce  principal in order  to 
maximize value on these loans. It would make sense for Fannie and Freddie to do this as 
well in order to minimize loss of value on the delinquent loans they guarantee. 
However, I am uncomfortable with the notion that “underwater” borrowers who owe more on 
their mortgages than their homes are worth should have to go delinquent before they have a 
chance of securing a reduction in their mortgage debt. I believe we should also develop a 
program  for  earned  principal  reduction  for  borrowers  who  are  underwater  but  keep  on 
making  their  mortgage  payments.  Such  a  program  would  strengthen  the  incentives  for 
mortgage holders who are underwater to continue to stay current on their loans, and reduce 
the likely number of defaults and REO sales. 
Negative equity is one of the most significant predictors of mortgage default across all types 
of  mortgage  products,  including  when  you  control  for  credit  scores  and  level  of  income 
documentation. While recent underwater borrowers have not been defaulting at a rapid pace, 
they  are  also  not  prepaying,  implying  that  underwater  mortgages  remain  “at  risk”  for  a 
prolonged period of time to any adverse shock to the borrower. 
It is admittedly challenging to predict how underwater borrowers will ultimately perform and 
this performance will be sensitive to the path of home prices. Nonetheless, analysis by my 
staff  that  looks  at  likely  borrower  behavior  over  an  extended  time  horizon  suggests  that 
without a significant turnaround in home prices and employment, a substantial proportion of 
those loans that are deeply underwater will ultimately default – absent an earned principal 
reduction program.  
One  option  developed  by  my  staff  is  for  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  to  give  underwater 
borrowers on loans that they have guaranteed the right to pay off the loan at below par in the 
future  under  certain  circumstances,  including  that  the  borrowers  have  continued  to  make 
timely payments. For instance, the borrower could be given an open-ended option to pay off 
the loan at an LTV of 125 percent, and the right to pay off the loan at an LTV of 95 percent 
after three years of timely payments.  
The borrower would be protected from further declines in home prices, but in return would 
give  up  a  portion  of  any  upside  from  future  capital  gains  on  the  home  via  a  shared 
appreciation agreement. Note that under this arrangement some of the reduction in the loan 
amount  would  be  paid  by  the  borrower  as  the  outstanding  balance  was  amortized  by 
continued monthly payments.  
REO portfolio 
Even  with  aggressive  policies  to  minimize  the  flow  of  loans  into  foreclosure,  my  staff 
estimates that large volumes of properties would still flow into lenders’ REO over  the next 
few years. This growing overhang could continue to depress prices.  
Thus, along with more incentives to promote short sales, steps should be taken to facilitate 
the timely and orderly absorption of these properties back into the market including as renter-
occupied housing. An interagency group including the Federal Reserve is working on issues 
relating  to  REO-to-rental  conversions.  Appropriate  policies  would  simultaneously  lessen 
downward pressure on home prices and upward pressure on rents.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Among other steps, investors could be encouraged to purchase REO to be made available 
as rental housing. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac could increase the number of loans offered 
to individual investors, provided the investor puts up an adequate amount of equity for each 
mortgage. And REO properties in a given locality could be bundled for sale. 
The government might consider a package of tax incentives for purchases of REO that are 
used as rental properties. Such incentives might include a reduction of the current 27½ year 
depreciation period and/or a reduction of capital gains tax liability if the property is held for a 
minimum period, such as five years. 
One idea developed by my staff – let’s call it “homes for heroes” – would be to create a new 
tax credit or other home purchase subsidy specifically for veterans of our foreign wars that 
would  enable  these  veterans  to  purchase  such  properties  at  a  discount.  There  are  over 
2½ million Gulf War II veterans alone, many of whom served multiple tours of duty overseas, 
and a significant proportion of them might otherwise not be able to purchase homes today. 
Our  nation  owes  them  a  great  debt,  and  such  a  policy  would  provide  a  boost  to  housing 
demand quickly.  
Moral hazard 
Some  argue  that  any  interventions  to  improve  the  real  estate  market  would  lead  to  moral 
hazard – that is these intervention would reward bad behaviors. I think these concerns are 
overstated.  First,  the  programs  that  have  been  proposed  can  be  designed  with  the  proper 
incentives to limit moral hazard and to encourage desireable behavior.  
Second, in contrast to the earlier phase of housing crisis when mostly subprime borrowers 
came under stress, many of the borrowers running into trouble with their mortgages today 
took out conforming loans subject to standard downpayment requirements, had respectable 
FICO scores and borrowed a moderate amount to finance an average house. The problem 
was that these purchases occurred near the peak in the market and now many of the buyers 
have  suffered  an  adverse  life  shock  such  as  unemployment  or  illness.  This  isn’t  a  moral 
hazard  issue,  this  is  just  the  bad  luck  associated  with  the  timing  of  the  purchase  and  an 
exceptionally weak jobs market. Punishing such misfortune accomplishes little.  
The taxpayer interest 
I believe that the proposals I put forward are strongly in the public interest. I also believe that 
they would be good for taxpayers. Consider, for instance, the proposal for earned principal 
reduction.  While  this  would  certainly  involve  outlays,  these  would  be  offset  by  reduced 
defaults. Whether there is a net cost or not depends on the reduction in the default rate that 
would come with principal reduction and how this reduction would affect the performance of 
the overall housing market and the economy.  
Based on recent data on borrower behavior,17 my staff calculates that the taxpayer (through 
the  effect  on  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac)  would  be  better  off  with  earned  principal 
reduction under a base case of roughly flat house prices and persistent weakness in the jobs 
market. Under a scenario of modest house price increases, the combination of fewer defaults 
and shared appreciation also produces a net benefit.  
This  result  occurs  before  taking  into  account  the  positive  externalities  of  nudging  house 
prices onto a stronger path, which would reduce the magnitude of losses on loans that do 
default. On an expected value basis, such a program appears still more compelling, since 
                                                 
17   Lender Processing Services data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are currently exposed to the downside risk of further declines 
in home prices. 
Of course, just focusing on the impact on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is much too narrow 
even  from  a  taxpayer  perspective.  If  you  believe  as  I  do  that  improving  the  outlook  for 
housing  would  materially  strengthen  the  over  economy,  one  must  also  include  the  fiscal 
benefits generated by stronger economic growth.  
Housing policy and monetary policy 
In closing, the housing policy agenda I describe would address one factor that has impeded 
the economic recovery. Implementing such policies would improve the economic outlook and 
make monetary accommodation more effective.  
However,  because  the  outlook  for  unemployment  is  unacceptably  high  relative  to  our  dual 
mandate and the outlook for inflation is moderate, I believe it is also appropriate to continue 
to evaluate whether we could provide additional accommodation in a manner that produces 
more benefits than costs, regardless of whether action in housing is undertaken or not.  
Monetary policy and housing policy are much more complements than substitutes.  
As I hope I have convinced you today, while the Fed has will do all it can to achieve our dual 
mandate  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  in  the  context  of  price  stability,  we  have  to 
recognize that there is more to economic policy than just monetary policy. Low interest rates 
help  housing,  but  cannot  resolve  the  problems  in  that  sector  that  are  pressing  on  wider 
economic activity. With additional housing policy interventions, we could achieve a better set 
of economic outcomes than with just monetary policy alone.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
