Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Presentation of the 2011 Annual Report 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing 
Council of the Bank of Spain on the presentation of the 2011 Annual Report, Madrid, 
8 June 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The presentation of the Annual Report for 2011 is taking place in an extremely difficult setting 
for Europe in general, and for Spain in particular, marked by the acute euro area sovereign 
debt crisis and the double-dip recession in the Spanish economy.  
The year 2011 was characterised by the worsening of the euro area sovereign debt crisis. 
Initially affecting a small number of countries in a situation of relative vulnerability, it spread 
to others with sounder economic fundamentals, duly turning systemic. The fresh downturn in 
the  euro  zone  not  only  detracted  from  the  area’s  recovery  but  was  also  one  of  the  main 
determinants of the halt in the ongoing pick-up in world growth begun a year earlier.  
Two main factors lay behind the crisis. First, the insufficient adaptation of domestic economic 
policies to the demands of monetary union membership, which translated into a build-up of 
major imbalances that placed some economies in a position of vulnerability. And second, the 
lack  of  political  consensus  at  the  European  level  to  tackle  the  weaknesses  of  the  euro’s 
institutional  design,  which  largely  explains  the  spread  of  the  tensions  to  countries  whose 
misalignments were on a lesser scale.  
Throughout  2011  and  in  2012  to  date,  positive  steps  have  been  taken.  Several  countries 
have  launched  ambitious  fiscal  adjustment  programmes  and  undertaken  banking  system 
recapitalisation and restructuring processes. And structural reforms in the labour market and 
in  the  services  sectors  have  been  approved.  Also,  on  a  Europe-wide  scale,  debt-ceiling 
monitoring  mechanisms  have  been  reinforced,  as  have  the  procedures  to  sanction 
non-compliance. Further, under the new Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance, 
there have been moves to promote the explicit recognition of the commitment to budgetary 
stability in national legislations. Along with this progress in the fiscal realm, a new framework 
has  been  established  to  prevent  and  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances.  This  Excessive 
Imbalance  Procedure,  as  it  is  known,  should  be  instrumental  in  the  early  detection  of 
vulnerability  and  in  setting  in  place  the  necessary  corrective  measures.  With  the 
establishment  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  there  has  likewise  been  headway  in 
creating a permanent crisis-management mechanism.  
In  sum,  there  has  been  significant  progress.  But  frequently  these  changes  have,  as  the 
markets say, been “behind the curve”; their implementation has been excessively slow and 
they  have  been  subject  to  too  many  frictions,  which  has  fuelled  investor  doubts  over  the 
ability of European governments to move forward and forge consensus on matters pivotal for 
governance in the area.  
Under  these  conditions,  ECB  action  has  been  decisive  in  preserving  stability  in  the  area. 
When debt market tensions reared again in the second half of 2011, the ECB reacted with 
various  measures.  These  were  geared  to  confirming  the  expansionary  stance  of  monetary 
policy,  to  restoring  the  functioning  of  its  transmission  mechanism  and  to  breaking  the 
feedback  loop  between  banking  system  risks  and  sovereign  risk.  In  addition,  significant 
non-conventional measures were approved. These included most notably the lengthening of 
the  horizon  for  liquidity  loans  to  a  term  of  three  years,  in  two  special  auctions  held  in 
December 2011 and February 2012.  
The  three-pronged  measures  adopted  –  spanning  domestic  economic  policies,  European 
governance  reform  and,  most  notably,  ECB  action  –  proved  essential  in  containing  the 
heightening  tensions,  which  might  have  led  to  a  systemic  crisis  of  unforeseeable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
consequences.  That  said,  these  measures  were  not  a  conclusive  solution;  they  simply 
helped  gain  valuable  time  so  that  governments  could  continue  moving  to  resolve  the 
challenges outstanding and so that the measures adopted might begin to bear fruit.  
To  definitively  resolve  the  European sovereign crisis will require major progress in various 
fields. In the short term, the ongoing reform of governance must be completed and put into 
practice, including the full start-up of the European Stability Mechanism. A suitable balance 
must  also  be  struck  between  two  complementary  objectives:  fiscal  consolidation  and 
economic  growth.  Here,  the  “fiscal  package”  agreed  at  the  end  of  2011  must  be 
supplemented with a new “growth package”.  
Looking more into the medium term, profound reflection is needed on the euro area we want 
in  10  years’  time.  This  crisis  has  highlighted  the  vulnerabilities  that  may  emerge  in  a 
monetary union lacking common fiscal and financial policies. It is thus worth considering a 
greater transfer of sovereignty in these areas.  
On  the  home  front,  the  challenges  the  Spanish  economy  faces  are  enormous.  The  latest 
episode  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  severely  impacting  agents’  confidence  and  the 
economy’s financing conditions, placing it in a position of extreme vulnerability. Following two 
consecutive  quarters  of  negative  growth,  our  economy  is  once  again  in  recession  and  the 
prospects  of  recovery  are  not  immediate.  Moreover,  the  prolonged  cyclical  weakness  is 
preventing swifter headway in redressing public finances and in reducing private-sector debt, 
and casting doubt on the resilience of the financial system. That has triggered tensions on 
the debt markets and activated perverse feedback loops.  
Lastly,  the  Spanish  economy  risks  seeing  its  capacity  to  obtain  external  funding  severely 
blocked. While in the short run this does not actually constrain ordinary funding flows (given 
the  banking  system’s  possibility  of  resorting  to  ECB  funding),  the  prolongation  of  such  a 
situation will be extremely harmful in the medium term.  
Spain is in this situation despite the fact that its authorities have implemented far-reaching 
reforms in recent years to resolve the inefficiencies in its economic functioning, to correct the 
serious deterioration in public finances and to redress and restructure the financial system, in 
order to restore financing flows.  
Resolving these problems is taking longer than expected, but that should not lead to reform 
fatigue. It is important to persevere with the economic policy actions undertaken. In this way 
the levels of competitiveness needed to ensure the smooth functioning of the euro area may 
be  regained,  the  ordinary  funding  channels  restored  and  the  imbalances  built  up  in  recent 
years, in particular in relation to public finances, finally corrected. These requirements must 
be met if the economy is to begin to generate employment and to grow. 
The  adjustment  continues  to  fall  on  domestic  demand,  weighed  down  by  the  correction  of 
imbalances,  the  fiscal  consolidation  drive  and  tighter  financing  conditions.  The  external 
sector  continues  to  soften  the  impact  of  domestic  spending  on  activity,  due  both  to  the 
buoyancy  of  exports  and  to  the  slackness  of  imports  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  but  its 
contribution is insufficient to halt the decline in output.  
In this setting, job destruction continued apace in 2011 and in 2012 to date. And, owing to 
the uncertain prospects for the Spanish economy, a turnaround is not expected in the very 
short term. However, as this episode is progressively overcome, the approved labour market 
reforms will foreseeably have a favourable impact on employment generation, contribute to 
adjusting working conditions to firms’ specific circumstances and provide for a more efficient 
reallocation  of  productive  resources,  which  should  ultimately  prompt  an  increase  in 
productivity levels. 
The cyclical weakness and the adverse behaviour of the labour market have not fed through 
sufficiently to the cost and price-formation mechanism, which still shows considerable inertia. 
The adjustment of unit labour costs is being achieved primarily thanks to the high productivity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
gains brought about by job destruction, while the easing in inflation has corrected to a lesser 
extent the gap built up during the upturn. 
This behaviour highlights the slow and imperfect functioning of the competitiveness channel, 
which should in principle lead to a containment of prices and costs in those economies that 
accumulate  bigger  external  misalignments.  Indeed,  achieving  lasting  improvements  in 
competitiveness  requires  greater  cost  and  price  adjustments  and  productivity  gains 
associated with genuine improvements in productive efficiency. 
However,  since  2007  the  Spanish  economy’s  external  deficit  has  been  substantially 
corrected,  dipping  from  10%  of  GDP  in  2007  to  3.4%  of  GDP  in  2011.  Underpinning  this 
narrowing of the deficit has been the buoyancy of exports and the sluggishness of imports, in 
step  with  the  weakness  of  domestic  demand.  Notwithstanding,  the  culmination  of  this 
adjustment is conditional upon certain elements such as the deficit on the energy  balance 
and the magnitude of the investment income payments component, with a negative balance 
equivalent  to  2.7%  of  GDP  in  2011,  which  is  very  closely  related  to  the  high  level  of  the 
International  Investment  Position.  These  factors  all  accentuate  the  importance  of  those 
reforms contributing to correcting the deficit through the boosting of sustainable competitive 
gains in the medium and long term. The correction of this imbalance is particularly pressing 
in  that  the  reliance  on  external  saving  has  become  a  major  factor  of  vulnerability  of  the 
Spanish economy during the crisis. 
The increased dependence on external financing in the pre-crisis period is the consequence 
of the sizeable accumulation of debt by households and firms, which also led to the Spanish 
banking system becoming oversized. The need to correct these imbalances poses an added 
difficulty to recovery in the economy, given that it restricts the headroom available to raise 
investment and consumption through resort to external financing. 
It  is  also  crucial  to  continue  with  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  system.  Hence,  when 
solvent  demand  recovers,  it  may  be  serviced  by  a  normal  flow  of  financing  which,  both  in 
Spain and in the rest of continental Europe, is routed essentially through credit institutions. 
But households and firms still have a relatively lengthy process of debt reduction ahead of 
them. Accordingly, in the short term, the recovery in growth cannot be credit-led as in the 
past. 
Along  these  lines,  credit  to  the  non-financial  private  sector  in  2011  fell  by  around  4%, 
although there were significant differences from sector to sector. In the case of households 
the pace of debt reduction was somewhat slower, whereas in that of firms the reduction in 
credit was more marked in those sectors, such as construction and real estate development, 
that  had  become  oversized  to  a  greater  extent  before  the  crisis.  In  contrast,  the  need  for 
adjustment  is  less  in  those  large  corporations  whose  growth  has  largely  been  based  on 
increased geographical diversification. 
All  the  foregoing  factors  will  influence  the  pattern  of  exit  from  the  recession.  The  need  to 
reduce  debt  levels  will,  coupled  with  fiscal  consolidation  demands,  continue  to  limit  the 
possibilities of expanding domestic spending, meaning that the recovery should turn on net 
external  demand.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  necessary  to  begin  to  reverse  the  dynamic  of 
external debt, which will require further progress in attaining a more balanced foreign trade 
position, overcoming the obstacles posed by the high investment income component and the 
dependence on energy imports. 
A  pick-up  in  competitiveness  will  thus  be  pivotal  if  external  demand  is  to  stand  in  for  the 
shortcomings of domestic demand and boost growth on the supply side, which in the current 
circumstances is the only way forward. 
To  overcome  the  crisis  an  economic  policy  geared  to  the  medium  term  is  needed  to  help 
complete  the  correction  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  still  in  place,  to  further  the 
restructuring of all sectors and to allow the structural reforms outstanding to be tackled. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Fiscal consolidation is unavoidable if growth in the medium term is to be restored, despite the 
fact the scale and timing of the adjustment required may have adverse effects in the short 
term. This is the only strategy available for restoring market confidence. Compliance with the 
objectives set requires rigorous budgetary implementation, to which all levels of government 
should contribute. The strengthening of the budgetary framework under the recent Budgetary 
Stability  Law  should  assist  in  this  connection.  The  law  sets  explicit  ceilings  on  deficit  and 
debt  levels  in  line  with  demands  at  the  European  level,  and  it  includes  stricter  reporting 
requirements and new coercive mechanisms to ensure compliance by all tiers of government 
with fiscal targets.  
The  fiscal  consolidation  strategy  should  also  take  into  account  the  medium  and  long-term 
considerations  affecting  public  finances,  in  particular  those  associated  with  population 
ageing, namely spending on pensions and health care. 
Lastly, it should be said that the weakness of the labour market and of growth have been the 
main factors behind the limited progress in correcting the budget deficit in 2011. Without a 
recovery  in  employment  and  in  growth,  it  will  be  costlier  in  the  long  run  to  pursue  fiscal 
consolidation,  so  boosting  structural  reforms  must  be  a  priority.  Among  these,  promoting 
so-called flexicurity to the full is vital, and should be complemented by a fresh liberalisation 
drive in the markets for goods and services that is conducive to competition, training in new 
technologies, innovation and the improvement of human capital.  
Another  key  economic  policy  priority  should  be  to  continue  with  the  ongoing  clean-up, 
recapitalisation and restructuring of the Spanish banking system. Since 2009, the measures 
in  this  area  have  adhered  to  a  set  of  common  principles,  although  changes  in  economic 
conditions  and  in  the  markets  have  meant  governments  have  had  to  adjust  them.  These 
principles include most notably to limit as far as possible use of public funds and to minimise 
the length of time the State has a stake in the banks; to promote integration and restructuring 
processes  to  counter  the  excessive  fragmentation  and  size  of  the  sector;  to  pursue  the 
clean-up  of  bank  balance  sheets  to  withstand  asset  quality  impairment;  to  reinforce  bank 
solvency; to resolve the structural weaknesses of the savings bank model, and to promote 
transparency. 
Among  the  measures  adopted  in  2011  to  which  the  Annual  Report  refers  is  Royal 
Decree-Law  (RDL)  2/2011  on  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  system.  This  legislation 
raised core capital requirements to 8% generally, and to 10% for unlisted banks with a high 
dependence  on  wholesale  funding,  which  were  those  on  which  doubts  were  greatest.  To 
ensure that all banks could meet these requirements, it was decided that the Fund for the 
Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector (FROB) should act as a backstop. Further, the 
RDL stipulated the obligation for those institutions requiring public aid to operate as banks, 
with  the  aim  of  reinforcing  their  fund-raising  capacity,  and  transparency  towards  investors. 
These  measures,  along  with  pension  reform,  contributed  most  positively  to  the  easing  of 
market tensions witnessed in the first half of 2011, with the risk premium falling at one point 
below 200 bp. 
Following  the  approval  of  the  RDL,  the  banks  and  the  authorities  focused  on  ensuring 
compliance  with  this  legislation,  and  on  pursuing  bank  integration  processes  and  on 
implementing the business model changes arising from the amended regulations governing 
savings banks. Under the provisions of the RDL, 13 banks had to increase their capital by 
more  than  €13  billion,  meaning  that  in  the  second  stress  test  conducted  by  the  European 
Banking  Authority,  further  capital  increases  were  not  needed.  However,  as  the  crisis 
worsened and spread in summer 2011, the Community authorities demanded a temporary 
increase  in  the  capital  requirements  of  large  banks  and  the  creation  of  a  temporary 
extraordinary  buffer  associated  with  potential  sovereign  debt  portfolio  losses.  These  new 
requirements  were  applied  to  the  five  largest  Spanish  banks,  for  which  additional  capital 
needs of somewhat over €26 billion were calculated.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  a  result  of  all  these  developments,  there  was  significant  progress  in  the  clean-up  and 
restructuring of the Spanish banking system. From the onset of the crisis to the beginning of 
this year, provisions of around 13% of GDP were set aside, banks shored up their solvency 
by significantly increasing their capital, most savings banks converted into banks and around 
30 institutions disappeared, with their management passing in most cases to other sounder 
and more efficient banks. As regards the sector’s capacity and the size of banks, staff and 
office numbers fell by around 12%, standing at similar figures to those as at end-2004, and 
the average size of banks in terms of their assets increased twofold.  
Yet this progress was not enough to restore investors’ confidence in the soundness of our 
banking  system.  Given  the  double-dip  recession,  the  insufficient  reduction  in  the  budget 
deficit  and  the  continuing  effects  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  doubts  persisted  about  the 
quality of construction and real estate development-related assets. 
In an attempt to dispel this uncertainty, various measures  were adopted in the first half of 
2012. Furthering the principles that have governed the ongoing restructuring of the financial 
system,  the  measures  addressed  accelerating  the  clean-up  of  bank  balance  sheets, 
reinforcing their solvency, boosting integration processes and promoting transparency. RDL 
2/2012, approved in February, stipulated an increase in provisioning for construction and real 
estate  development-related  assets,  and  the  creation  of  a  capital  buffer  to  cover  potential 
losses  arising  on  problem  loans  associated  with  land  and  ongoing  developments.  More 
recently, in May 2012, the Government approved RDL 18/2012, on the clean-up and sale of 
financial-sector real estate assets. The aim was to dispel doubts over the quality of Spanish 
credit  institutions’  non-doubtful  real  estate  portfolio.  To  do  this,  provisions  for  construction 
and  real  estate  development-related  assets  not  classified  as  troubled  have  been  raised 
substantially, bringing forward the impact of potential additional impairment to this portfolio. 
Banks  that  undergo  a  capital  shortfall  as  a  result  of  these  new  requirements  will  have  to 
reinforce their capital, resorting to financial aid from the FROB if necessary.  
Overall, the clean-up and capital increases arising from the two RDLs approved this year will 
see  a  considerable  reinforcement  of  the  banking  system’s  buffer  against  potential  losses. 
Indeed, once these measures have been fully implemented, the provisions set aside by the 
Spanish banking sector since early 2008 will amount to close to 19% of GDP. In addition, the 
legislation demands problem foreclosures be transferred to asset management companies, 
and  a  programme  for  private  appraisers  to  value  the  entire  credit  portfolio  of  the  banking 
sector has been set in train.  
Allow  me  to  conclude  with  some  reflections  on  two  issues  I  consider  very  important:  the 
restoring of confidence, and the importance of independent regulatory agencies. 
In the difficult circumstances facing the Spanish economy, the most critical variable is neither 
growth  nor  unemployment,  no  matter  how  serious  recent  developments  have  been,  but 
rather the deterioration in confidence. The priority aim of action by all authorities should be to 
restore lost confidence, since without it resuming growth and job creation will not be possible. 
The low level of confidence we have hit in recent months and weeks means that resolving 
Spain’s fiscal and financial problems has become more difficult and costly.  
The potential impact on confidence should, therefore, be a primary determinant of any action 
by  the  authorities,  political  representatives  and  economic  agents.  Here  a  particular  effort 
should be made to explain all the decisions adopted by the different levels of government in 
Spain that have been well-received and valued by the markets, such as structural reforms, 
pension  reform  and  the  recent  Organic  Law  on  Budgetary  Stability,  among  others.  There 
should likewise be a common effort, in the interest of all sectors of the Spanish economy, to 
disseminate and address in depth the additional measures that should shortly be adopted to 
tackle the crisis. There is no more important or pressing task in the short term than to restore 
lost confidence. And here, collaboration is called for by politicians and economic and social 
agents  in  positions  of  responsibility,  and  by  all  institutions  with  economic  policymaking 
responsibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
A  fundamental  determinant  of  confidence  is  the  credibility  of  regulatory  and  supervisory 
institutions, based on their ability to exercise their powers professionally and independently. 
This is always an essential element of a country’s economic reputation, but all the more so 
when confidence has been called into question and the recovery in growth depends on the 
external financing of its economy.  
Adam Smith observed in his famous work that the wealth of nations was then closely related 
to how open their trade was. And today we can see how the richest and most democratically 
sound countries in the world are those that have competent and independent regulatory and 
supervisory agencies that act as a counterweight to governments potentially succumbing to 
interventionist temptations. 
Internationally,  it  is  currently  accepted  that  governments  have  very  important  tasks  to 
perform  in  the  financial  field.  These  may  include  designing  restructuring  strategies, 
determining resolution instruments, deciding on the use of public funds, etc. But there is also 
broad  consensus  that  such  tasks  should  be  implemented  by  independent  regulators  and 
supervisors.  
By assigning the regulatory and supervisory remit to independent institutions that act using 
sound technical criteria, the danger of decisions being subject to the vagaries of politics or to 
lobby group interests is removed to some extent. Reasons of technical capability also come 
into play. Independent and professional supervisors have the time and resources to build up 
enormously rich knowledge which, given the particular characteristics of financial activity, is 
essential for tackling problems in this sector, minimising errors and unwanted side-effects at 
the same time.  
Having  independent  regulatory  and  supervisory  institutions  by  no  means  guarantees  that 
mistakes  are  not  made.  But  their  presence  ensures  that  decisions  are  not  tainted  by 
momentary political considerations. I cannot say that the Banco de España, in its supervisory 
mission, has not occasionally been mistaken. But I can assure you that the decisions of the 
Banco de España have always been based on exclusively professional criteria.  
This is an important facet of independence. Independence is not something innate. It is not a 
label or badge conferred by anyone. Independence is demonstrated, and it is exercised or 
not  exercised.  Nobody  is  independent  for  what  they  are,  but  rather  for  what  they  do.  But 
another  important  aspect  to  ensure  the  independence  of  these  institutions  is  to  prevent 
governments  or  interest  groups  affecting  such  independence.  In  the  specific  case  of  the 
Banco de España, the respect of the authorities for its independence and reputation is crucial 
for maintaining confidence in our banking system at home and abroad, and for overcoming 
the major challenges we currently face. 
Naturally, this respect for the independence of regulatory and supervisory agencies should 
unavoidably be accompanied by an obligation on their part to account for the performance of 
their  functions  before  Parliament.  Such  accountability  to  the  representatives  of  the  nation 
should  not  only  be  an  obligation  for  these  agencies  but  also  their  right,  since  the 
transparency provided by Parliament is a mainstay for safeguarding the independence of the 
institution from possible interference by authorities and interest groups. 
Allow me to thank those here, the Deputy Governor, the Governing Council members and 
the Directors General, and all the Bank’s staff for their collaboration these past six years. I 
deeply recognise the competence and dedication with which they discharge their important 
responsibilities.  
But  I  should  like  to  conclude  expressing  my  particular  appreciation  of  those  who  have 
participated in the supervisory function of the Banco de España these past years. Banking 
Supervision, Banking Regulation and our Legal Services have been involved in major actions 
affecting  the  most  vulnerable  institutions,  such  as,  for  instance,  removing  most  of  the 
managers from 30 credit institutions, converting savings banks into commercial banks and 
assessing numerous clean-up and recapitalisation plans, and complying at all times with the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mandate of different governments to minimise the use of taxpayer funds. It is telling that the 
image (measured by their ratings) of our major banks has systematically been above that of 
the world’s 23 biggest banks throughout the crisis until, in recent weeks, a downward spiral 
of downgrades has ensued and doubts about our banking system as a whole have spread. 
But this is no time for despondency. I am convinced that, once time puts everybody in their 
place, your work during these years of crisis will be acknowledged and rightly appreciated by 
all. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
