Duvvuri Subbarao: Interview with The Wall Street Journal 
Interview  with  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  in  The  Wall 
Street  Journal,  conducted  by  Alex  Frangos  and  originally  published  on  WSJ  online  on 
13 February 2012. 
 The Transcript can also be viewed at 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204795304577221253451295374.html 
Reserve Bank of India Gov. Duvvuri Subbarao sat down with The Wall Street Journal to talk 
about  his  efforts  to  restart  India’s  growth  engine  and  to  fight  persistent  inflation.  Speaking 
from  the  18th  floor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  headquarters  overlooking  Mumbai,  Mr.  Subbaro 
touched on a range of issues, including the RBI’s efforts to stabilize the plunging rupee in 
late  2011,  his  calls  for  cuts  to  government  spending,  and  how  it  was  difficult  to  increase 
interest rates several times over the objection of a panel of advisors. 
Following is an edited transcript of the conversation: 
WSJ: What is your monetary policy stance right now, are you easing credit conditions 
or are you in neutral? 
SUBBARAO: It’s difficult to say what is neutral. But we give guidance in our quarterly policy 
statements in October and again in January, which is to say that the tightening has peaked, 
and from here onwards, it’s that we’ve got to come down, that we have to start easing. There 
was some question as whether the CRR (cash reserve ratio) cut we had done in the January 
policy  was  a  signal  of  easing.  It  depends  on  how  you  interpret  that.  But  historically  the 
Reserve Bank has viewed the CRR as a monetary policy instrument with of course liquidity 
dimensions. So it was both to signal that the interest rate cycle has peaked and also to infuse 
liquidity. 
WSJ: So was it easing or not? 
SUBBARAO: I would say it was easing to the extent we had eased the liquidity situation and 
we viewed the CRR as a monetary policy instrument. 
WSJ: You got applause for holding the government’s feet to fire on the growth in the 
fiscal  deficit  in  your  January  policy  statement,  saying  such  spending  is  fueling 
inflation. You have talked about this issue in the past, but never so pointedly. Critics 
say you should have done so earlier. What’s your response? 
SUBBARAO:  If  you  see  our  monetary  policy  statements  over  the  past  two  years,  we’ve 
consistently  drawn  attention  to  the  fiscal  deficit  concerns  having  recognized  that  some 
stimulus  was  of  course  necessary  as  part  of  the  crisis  management.  However  we  thought 
that  this  was  an  appropriate  time  this  time  around  to  call  a  more  pointed  attention  to  this, 
because  this  year,  the  current  fiscal  year,  the  fiscal  deficit  has  breached  the  initial  budget 
estimate  and  there  area  lot  of  expenditure  demands  piling  up  as  we  see  from  the 
newspapers.  So  we  thought  it  important  to  call  attention  to  the  inflationary  dimensions  of 
fiscal  deficit,  inasmuch  as  we  have  combating  inflation  over  the  past  two  years.  To 
summarize, we did call attention to our concerns to fiscal deficit but did so more pointedly 
this time around because it was a more appropriate and more opportune time to do that. 
WSJ: Governments generally are not known to be disciplined on spending in election 
years and there are several large state elections in India this year. What if they don’t 
heed your advice on spending because of election year pressures. 
SUBBARAO:  Not  just  me,  there  are  lots  of  other  people  talking  about  the  negative 
repercussions of fiscal deficits. And I think these negative repercussions will show up more 
pointedly if the government does not make credible and sizeable fiscal adjustment. For one, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  battle  against  inflation  will  become  that  more  difficult.  Second  private  credit  will  get 
crowded out. There are lots of people who say fiscal deficits in India have not crowded out 
private credit in the past. That may well be true to some extent because fiscal deficits have 
ballooned with private credit demand was low. But now is time when we want private credit 
demand to pick up and supply to flow. So that would be hurt. And third, the twin deficits of 
current account and fiscal deficits feed on each other. The maneuverability or the room for 
not making fiscal adjustments is very limited if not nonexistent. 
WSJ: What specific things would do think are advisable adjustments to make. Readers 
see the term fiscal consolidation, but what does that mean exactly? 
SUBBARAO:  The  only  discretionary  expenditure  they  can  make  in  the  short  term  is  on 
subsidies.  And  there  is  I  believe  quite  a  strong  case  for  making  adjustments  on  subsidies 
even  from  the  anti-poverty  perspective.  That  said,  I’d  like  to  comment  on  some  principles 
apart from specifics. The finance minister will of course come out with a budget estimate for 
fiscal deficit for next year in the budget. Beyond that I think he should indicate a roadmap, a 
medium  term  roadmap  for  fiscal  deficit,  which  they’ve  done  in  the  past  and  there’s  a  big 
probability he will do that. I think he should back that up with a credible plan of how it’s going 
to  be  achieved.  Second,  I  think  we  also  must  rely  also  on  expenditure  compression  in 
addition to tax increases to build the fiscal adjustment. And third, there must be some focus 
on the quality of fiscal adjustment, because if you are chasing just the number, it’s possible 
that you would prune out productive expenditure and retain unproductive expenditure. 
WSJ:  You  mentioned  some  subsidy  cuts  would  be  good  for  anti-poverty  programs. 
Which ones? 
SUBBARAO:  If  there  is  subsidy  in  LPG  (liquefied  petroleum  gas),  it’s  a  subsidy  that’s  not 
going to the poor. It’s a subsidy that’s going to people who can afford LPG, which is certainly 
not the poor. Power subsidies are given by state governments according to people who have 
land, whereas the landless, who are poorer, don’t get any subsidy at all. There’s got to be 
some attention paid to the poverty impact of subsidies and targeting subsidies with an anti-
poverty focus. 
WSJ: It seems all the parties in the state election in Uttar Pradesh are campaigning to 
give away free power. That sort of thing would seem to make it hard to cut spending in 
the coming year. 
SUBBARAO:  Yes.  Sometimes  there  is  concern  of  how  much  of  a  democracy  tax  we  are 
paying. 
WSJ: You said in last policy statement you would be constrained from lowering rates 
unless  there’s  credible  fiscal  consolidation.  The  budget  is  presented  March  16, 
whereas your meeting is March 15. For a March 15 meeting, is a rate cut still an option 
given any plan for fiscal consolidation would be presented a day later. 
SUBBARAO: We didn’t have a precise date when we said that. But I can’t really speculate on 
what this off the table on the table for the next policy review. Theoretically all options are on 
the table. 
WSJ:  Some  critics  say  you  weren’t  aggressive  enough  with  rate  increases  in  the 
beginning of the cycle and some say you were too aggressive in the end and some 
say both. Which criticism are you more comfortable with? 
SUBBARAO: Criticism is part of the game when you are making public policy. It’s legitimate 
that  people  criticize.  And  I’m  comfortable  that  the  criticism  comes  from  both  sides,  which 
must mean we are at least partly right, that some people think we are right. But I must enter 
some explanation of our unrolling of our tightening over the past two years. One criticism as 
you mentioned that it was back loaded, that we were sleeping at the wheel and then woke 
up. That’s not the case. The baby step approach that it’s come to be called, was justified on 
three  grounds.  First,  inflation  was  stemming  at  that  time  from  supply  shocks.  There  were 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
demand  pressures  but  they  were  very  insipient  at  that  time.  Second,  we  had  to  support 
recovery. Around the world there was still the depth of recession and here at home we had to 
support  recovery.  And  rates  had  come  to  historically  low  levels  as  part  of  the  crisis 
management and we couldn’t raise them abruptly, so it had to be a calibrated process. So 
even with the benefit of hindsight, I believe we calibrated the policy stance quite well. The 
last point I want to make is there’s no counterfactual. It’s not clear that inflation would not 
have  been  much  higher  if  we  had  not  acted.  I’d  say  we  are  quite  comfortable  with  our 
criticism, but I believe that our baby step approach for much of 2010 was justified. 
WSJ: Wasn’t it your responsibility to raise rates earlier in order for the government to 
realize spending was a problem earlier? Your job is price stability and it doesn’t matter 
what the cause is, you need to tackle it. 
SUBBARAO: You certainly need to tackle it but you can’t do public policy to teach a lesson 
or to spite someone. You’ve got to coordinate with the government and there was a fiscal 
stimulus  as  part  of  the  crisis  and  it  certainly  would  take  time  to  wind  that  down.  We  were 
quite sensitive to that. I don’t think it would have been appropriate for the Reserve Bank to 
raise  rates  regardless  of  what  government  was  doing  just  to  tell  them  that  the  ball  was  in 
their court. I don’t think that would have been appropriate. 
WSJ:  People  in  market  are  saying  measures  to  maintain  liquidity  in  the  financial 
system such as your OMO (open market operations) and CRR (cash reserve ratio) cut 
are the only thing supporting government bond yields at these levels. 
SUBBARAO: That’s one perspective. But you must also recognize that we had said that we’d 
like liquidity to be within one 1% of NDTL (A measure of liquidity). The last few months, it’s 
been way above that. From a purely liquidity management perspective, we were acting by 
the  guidelines  we  had  given  to  the  market.  The  question  is  whether  this  is  supporting 
government borrowing. When we introduced liquidity for it to be within our targeted range, no 
destination for that money is indicated. It’s for the banks to choose to lend to the government 
or the private sector. It’s not as if we were telling banks to lend to the government. 
WSJ: India even at 7% has GDP growth is a very good number globally. But there’s a 
lot of disillusionment in the last year or two from companies. How do you see India 
portrayed  and  does  it  feel  different  from  2007–2008.  Has  there  been  cooling  of 
enthusiasm for the India economic story? 
SUBBARAO: Certainly there is a feeling that the economy has slowed down and that it was a 
slowdown that could have been avoided that we need not have come down to 7% if both the 
external  world  as  well  as  domestic  policy  situation  had  been  better.  First,  of  course  is  the 
monetary tightening and the high interest rates, but that’s just one factor. There’s been a lot 
of uncertainty about policy in Delhi and getting projects going at the field level in terms of 
land, power, all the permissions, all the clearances you need to get, which are not so much 
Delhi focused but at the field level and certainly about the slowdown in second generation 
reforms. 
WSJ:  Any  change  in  economic  outlook  given  the  reduced  jitters  from  Europe,  the 
austerity plan passed in Greece overnight, more hope about the U.S. economy? 
SUBBARAO: Something happened as we turned the calendar from 2011 to 2012. The fears 
of  imminent  collapse  two  months  before  Christmas  have  certainly  waned.  In  Europe  the 
LTRO performed better even than the ECB hoped, I think. Then there is the fiscal compact. 
There is still concerns about short term funding and still concern about whether the banks will 
be able to raise the capital. There’s less of a concern about an event shock, but still concern 
about process shocks as we go along and Greece and other countries have to roll over their 
debt. And the firewalls they wanted to build have to some extent succeeded in showing that 
Greece  is  different  from  other  “PIIGS”  countries.  That’s  certainly  had  a  positive  impact  on 
investor  sentiment  here.  Although  our  exposure  to  Europe  is  not  dominant,  it’s  certainly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
significant. To the extent that Europe seems to be less unstable today, it does help domestic 
investor sentiment here too and we’ve seen that on all the market indices. 
WSJ: What makes India so vulnerable to global financial markets, as we saw last fall 
with rupee falling during the worst of the euro mess. What can you do and what can 
India do to make sure the next time the effect is less severe? 
SUBBARAO:  All  emerging  economy  currencies  have  depreciated  in  the  pre-Christmas 
months, but Indian rupee depreciated more than other currencies. All of you wrote and as we 
know the rupee was worst performing currency in the world or whatever. What explains that 
is that we are a current account deficit economy. South Africa too is current account deficit. 
Those emerging economies that had a surplus or a small deficit were less hit than countries 
that have a sizeable deficit like India, and that deficit was growing. So the rupee depreciation 
was  a  result  of  external  flows  practically  thinning  out  and  driven  by  the  dynamics  of  the 
current account deficit. 
What  can  the  reserve  bank  do,  we’ve  in  fact  done  what  we  could  do  which  was  to  curb 
speculation in the market and to encourage capital flows of a more stable nature but there 
are limits to that. All the things we’ve done to raise deregulate interest rates on NRI (non-
resident  Indian)  rupee  deposits,  on  raising  the  limits  on  FII  (foreign  investor)  exposure  to 
equity  and  debt  markets  and  curbing  speculation.  But  eventually  we  need  to  make  the 
balance of payments more robust to inspire confidence. There it’s quite clear. We need to 
diversify our export destinations and product mix. 
As far as imports are concerned, we need to reduce the dependence on oil imports and one 
way  to  do  that  is  to  deregulate  petroleum  product  prices.  Gold  imports  of  course  have 
increased partly as a reflection of a safe haven. We need to provide other safe havens. We 
need  to  attract  more  stable  flows.  FDI  for  example  and  finally  we  must  within  the  RBI 
encourage, if not pressurize our corporates to hedge their foreign exchange exposures. They 
don’t do that adequately. They do cost benefit calculations, if the rupee is not moving rapidly, 
they  calculate  the  cost  of  hedging  is  higher  than  the  risk  they  take  by  not  taking.  But  as 
happened in the pre-Christmas months, it can certainly overshoot, so we’d like corporates to 
hedge more. But not proscribe that, we want to leave it to the banks and the corporates. 
WSJ: When you lifted foreign investor quotas and non-resident deposit rates last year, 
it  brought  in  capital  and  helped  the  rupee.  Was  it  something  you  were  going  to  do 
anyway? At your core, do you want India’s markets to be more open or do you like the 
protection that exists? 
SUBBARAO: I’d like our capital account to be more open and these are measures we should 
be taken. Of course we took them under some sort of pressure so the interpretation that you 
made  is  quite  appropriate  that  maybe  these  are  crisis  driven  measures,  but  certainly  they 
were on our road map of liberalizing further. 
WSJ: So were you taking advantage of a crisis? 
SUBBARAO: In a way it was timed as such, but even otherwise we would have done them 
sometime. 
WSJ: Do you see currency volatility continuing? 
SUBBARAO: I cannot really speculate on how the currency will move. That’s dependant on a 
number  of  factors.  But  certainly  I’d  like  to  see  less  volatility  in  the  market  in  the  currency 
movement and less of a need for the reserve bank to intervene so that the exchange rate is 
determined  by  forces  of  supply  and  demand.  And  yes,  when  we  are  a  stronger  economy, 
when capital flows are of a stable nature are coming, the exchange rate will be subject to 
less volatility. And again, that will be an appropriate platform for taking further capital account 
reforms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
WSJ:  With  the  rupee  a  bit  more  stable  around  49,  is  now  a  good  time  to  build 
reserves? 
SUBBARAO, I can’t speculate that but we had used some reserves certainly. 
WSJ:  Given  the  thirst  globally  for  emerging  market  debt,  why  not  open  India  even 
more to foreign investors. 
SUBBARAO:  Certainly  we  would  like  more  FII  (foreign  institutional  investors)  in  corporate 
debt but you must recognize that even the existing limit is not used up. There is something 
out there we have to fix about the appetite for the corporate bond market. It’s not a restriction 
placed on the capital account front. As far as FII on government debt, yes certainly, we have 
expanded that quite rapidly in the last three or four years, but there is need for going a bit 
more  cautiously,  because  as  we’ve  seen  during  the  crisis,  countries  with  large  sovereign 
debt  exposure  to  foreigners  suffered  destabilizing  volatility.  So  we  need  to  balance  the 
concerns of stability with concerns of less expensive foreign flows. 
WSJ: When you take over in 2008 did you make a conscious decision to take a more 
hand’s off approach when it comes to foreign exchange interventions? 
SUBBARAO:  That’s  a  judgment  outsiders  will  have  to  make.  By  inclination,  I  believe  that 
markets  should  be  allowed  to  function  and  that  we  should  minimize  our  intervention  and 
that’s good for building the resilience of the economy. 
WSJ: But it does help on the monetary policy side, as a flexible exchange rate makes 
your interest rate policy more potent? 
SUBBARAO:  Certainly.  That’s  very  fresh  in  my  mind.  I  gave  a  speech  last  week  on  the 
impossible trinity, so to the extent you have a freely floating exchange rate you have greater, 
more independent monetary policy. 
WSJ:  Are  you  satisfied  with  the  intervention  you  undertook  last  year  on  the  foreign 
exchange market? 
SUBBARAO:  Yes.  I  would  think  so,  especially  on  speculation.  If  you  don’t  intervene,  the 
speculative forces could be self reinforcing which is that exporters would defer bringing their 
receipts in and importers would buy forwards. That’s a self-reinforcing feedback loop. To the 
extent that we curbed speculation and showed that determination, it certainly helped. 
WSJ: So 54 rupees to the dollar was a level you weren’t comfortable? 
SUBBARAO: I can’t really comment on a specific exchange rate. We were looking at the first 
derivative, not the stock figure, but the rate at which it was going. 
WSJ:  Are  these  foreign  exchange  measures  temporary  ,  do  they  fit  in  you  capital 
account liberalization trajectory? 
SUBBARAO: Some of them do fit in with our capital account thinking. Some of the measures 
to  curb  speculation,  they  are  permanent  until  removed,  but  that’s  not  saying  much.  We’d 
have to take a view on speculative tendencies and if we believe we are robust enough and 
there’s no scope for speculation we will roll them back, but that’s no indication that rollback is 
on the radar screen. 
WSJ: Oil prices remain elevated, a major concern for you, as mentioned in the latest 
policy statement. How will you deal with that if they persist? 
SUBBARAO: Oil prices are a big factor and largely beyond our control and are very complex 
economic and geopolitical factors that drive oil prices. Just looking at the world situation, the 
U.S.  growth  situation is  quite  modest  and  Europe  is  probably  in  a  recession  and Japan  is 
growing but you know. Oil prices should have come down or should have been much lower 
than they are today. Evidently there is something going on there that is keeping pressures 
up. Partly it’s liquidity. Even the LTRO [the European Central Bank’s long-term refinancing 
operation] money, it’s not clear it’s being used all in Europe and some of it is being used in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
speculation. And then there are the political factors, which is Iran. If Iran is outside the world 
pool  there  could  be  price  pressures.  If  Saudi  Arabia  because  of  fiscal  concerns,  its 
commitment to extend fiscal supports to other Arab countries, to meet that commitment they 
might  want  to  keep  oil  prices  at  a  certain  level.  There’s  economic  factors,  there’s  political 
factors there are market factors, all of them that determine oil prices which are largely out of 
control. Inasmuch as we import 80% of our oil and more than a third of our imports, so oil 
prices are a big factor for inflation management, for the fiscal deficit and for macroeconomic 
stability for the country. 
WSJ:  Does  that  make  India’s  relationship  with  Iran  and  this  deal  to  pay  for  oil  with 
rupees, how critical is that? Do you talk about the central government about this? 
SUBBARAO:  We  are  conforming  to  the  U.N.  sanctions  as  far  as  dealings  with  Iran  are 
concerned. And U.N. sanctions do not prohibit purchases of oil from Iran. As much as we 
purchase  oil  from  Iran,  we’ve  got  to  find  a  way  to  pay  for  it  and  our  effort  has  been  to 
continue to make our payments.  
WSJ: How do you see growth for the 2013 fiscal year, starting in March 2012?  
SUBBARAO: We expect growth to be higher in 2013 than in 2012, partly because at some 
point  in  time  we  might  start  easing  the  interest  rate  cycle.  Partly  because  the  external 
situation  will  be  more  stable.  The  world  recovery  will  pick  up.  And  I’m  hoping  that  a 
confluence of factors, including the sentiment factor that is inhibiting investment will have run 
out, and that positive sentiment will revive. Animal spirits will come back into play.  
WSJ: What about inflation. Why do you feel confident enough to talk so openly about 
cutting rates?  
SUBBARAO: I think inflation should start coming down. The decline we’ve seen in November 
and December is largely to food prices, within food to vegetable prices. But we’ve also seen 
demand pressures easing. We’ve seen a decline in non-food manufactured product inflation, 
which is our measure of core inflation, which I believe peaked some months ago. We’ve seen 
pricing  power  of  corporates  coming  down.  And  growth  itself,  if  it  moderates  to  7%,  which 
means  both  investment  and  consumption  pressures  are  lower.  I  believe  it  will  come  down 
through fiscal year 2013, but at a gradual pace.  
WSJ: How would you rate your performance as central bank governor? 
SUBBARAO: I think it’s inappropriate for me to make a mid-career judgment on my career 
but it’s for others to make a judgment. I’ve had enormous challenges, very difficult situations, 
but  the  reserve  bank  is  a  great  institutions,  I’ve  had  tremendous  intellectual  support  and 
advice which I hope has steered the country through challenges. 
WSJ: Speaking of that advice, the technical advisory committee, you haven’t seen eye-
to-eye with them on the pace of rate increases, why are you not agreeing? 
SUBBARAO: We have enormous respect for what the TAC has to say and for the last, let’s 
say the second half of calendar 2011, when we continued to raise rates, many of our TAC 
members had expressed concerns about inflation, but had advised that we must pause but 
without  any  explanation  about  how  inflation  would  come  down  unless  we  had  acted.  We 
weighted their advice against our own judgment and acted as we did. I do hope we get some 
credit for putting it out in the public domain. 
WSJ: How difficult was it to make those decisions with the committee so close to you 
disagreeing? 
SUBBARAO:  It’s  difficult.  It’s  certainly  something  you  don’t  do  lightheartedly.  You  do  think 
twice before going against their advice.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
WSJ:  You’ve  mentioned  being  more  open,  talking  to  the  press  and  analysts  and 
publishing minutes. What’s your inspiration for that and why do you think it’s better 
for the deliberations to be more open rather than guarded? 
SUBBARAO: I was wondering whether it’s more to do with my leadership or my personality 
style.  Communicating  with  the  market  and  communicating  openly  does  help  get  the 
appropriate feedback and getting a reality check on what you are doing. There are of course 
certain times and certain things you have to keep confidential and be unpredictable, but we 
try to minimize that. I expect that you’ll be roughly right as Keynes said, and precisely wrong. 
WSJ: Can you talk about the health of the banking system. Some see a deleveraging 
process  going  on,  higher  nonperforming  loans  and  the  fiscal  situation  on  the 
government  side  makes  it  difficult  to  recapitalize  the  state  owned  banks.  How 
concerned are you about the banks?  
SUBBARAO: NPLs (Non-performing loans) have grown and have grown quite rapidly in the 
second half of 2011 calendar year, and that’s partly to be expected when the economy is not 
growing that fast and when restructuring had been done during the crisis. The incidence of 
impaired assets out of restructuring would certainly be higher than the overall sample. But 
we’ve done stress tests, and they show that our banks will remain profitable and will have no 
capital concerns even under fairly significant stress in terms of the some of the restructured 
assets turning into non performing assets. Still that’s a concern, and it’s part of our regulation 
and  supervision  process  and  looking  into  that  and  advising  banks  to  improve  on  their 
portfolio situation.  
WSJ: People get very worked up about growth being as low as 6.9%. Historically that’s 
high, but on flipside, that level is such an elastic economy there’s so much catching 
up to do, anything less than 5% is practically recessionary. Where’s your level? How 
good a number is 7%? 
SUBBARAO: For India to come down from 9% to 7% is as difficult an adjustment to make as 
for the U.S. to come down from 2% to 0%, when your growth rate falls rapidly. What is our 
potential  growth  rate,  noninflationary  stable  growth  rate?  We  said  before  the  crisis  it  was 
8.5%. After the crisis, some studies showed it was about 8%. But now we’ve seen inflation, 
even when the economy was growing at 7.5%, indicating the noninflationary growth rate is 
about 7% or so. But that is not destiny and that we are not locked into a 7% growth rate. We 
should  certainly  accelerate  that,  and  it’s  certainly  possible  to  do  that,  but  for  that,  supply 
responses must come.  
WSJ:  If  you  could  wave  your  magic  wand  on  the  Indian  economy,  what  structural 
impediment  in  the  Indian  economy  would  you  want  fixed,  improved  FDI,  balance  of 
payments, investment growth?  
SUBBARAO: I think public finance reform. All the things you mentioned are equally important 
and unlikely to work in isolation. But I’d think public finance reform at both the central and 
state governments would go a long way in providing a platform for all the other reforms to 
take off. 
WSJ: What about reforming the RBI. It’s a very big organization. You manage interest 
rate policy and are in charge of issuing government debt, which some see as a conflict 
of  interest  as  your  incentives  might  be  to  keep  borrowing  costs  low  for  the 
government when inflation argues for higher rates. Should that change? 
SUBBARAO:  I  believe  not.  The  RBI  has  a  much  wider  mandate  than  most  other  central 
banks. We are the monetary authority and issuer of currency, but we are the regulator and 
supervisor of banks, financial markets and nonbanks, the external sector we are responsible 
for, and we have a huge development mandate. That’s served the country quite well.  
In  particular  about  the  debt  management,  as  to  whether  that  should  be  hived  off  from  the 
RBI. The case for that was to made on the ground that there was a conflict of interest for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Reserve Bank to do debt management, because it interferes with monetary policy. Second, 
that the fiscal deficit was on the way down, therefore there is possibility for an independent 
debt management office. I think both those arguments have lost part or most of their validity. 
I  believe  there  is  a  quite  a  bit  of  synergy  for  the  RBI  to  be  doing  the  debt  management, 
because raising resources of the size the government does in India, is not just a matter or 
raising resources, it has implications for interest rates, for liquidity for credit flow and for the 
macro economic situation. Given that fiscal deficits and government borrowing are so high, I 
think  there  is  quite  a  bit  of  synergy  between  a  central  policy  which  is  charge  of  monetary 
policy which is also doing debt management? 
WSJ: What’s the synergy, that you not issue debt? 
SUBBARAO: No. That’s not an option. That we can ensure, that as much as the government 
has to borrow, that there is sufficient liquidity so the private sector crowding out is minimized. 
We  can  ensure  that  the  interest  rates  are  still manageable  and  competitive  for  the  private 
sector. And also recognize that the conflict of interest angle is somewhat overplayed. When 
70%  of  the  banking  sector  is  with  the  government,  there  is  a  conflict  of  interest  if  debt 
management is done by an office that has some affiliation with the government.  
I don’t think we will use our function as the debt manager to put pressure on the government 
about the fiscal deficit. There are other avenues to pressure and to argue our case. As far as 
debt management is concerned, we want to be efficient debt managers. 
WSJ:  How  much  does  China,  as  India’s  largest  trading  partner,  weigh  on  your 
economic analysis?  
SUBBARAO: Perhaps we reckon with that possibly less than we should be doing. Our trade 
with China is growing, our links with China are growing and we’ve allowed corporates to raise 
debt  in  yuan.  I  think  Chinese  economic  management,  particularly  their  economic  policies 
should be part of our reckoning more than it is now.  
WSJ:  You  were  recently  reappointed  for  another  two  year  term,  running  out  in 
September 2013. Would you like to serve after that? 
SUBBARAO: No. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
