Yandraduth Googoolye: Mauritius – a regional financial services hub 
Address by  Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the  opening  ceremony  of  the  symposium  on  the  theme  “Mauritius  –  a  regional  financial 
services  hub”,  organised  by  the  Mauritian  Management  Association,  Pointe  aux  Piment, 
10 October 2012. 
 Honourable  Anil  Kumar  Bachoo,  GOSK,  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure,  National  Development  Unit,  Land  Transport  &  Shipping  &  Acting  Minister  of 
Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade  
Dr Rajun Jugurnuth, President, Mauritian Management Association  
Mr Marc Hein, Chairman, Financial Services Commission  
Ms Madhavi Ramdin, Head of ACCA Mauritius  
Chief Executives  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good Morning  
I  am  delighted  to  be  in  your  midst  for  the  opening  of  this  Symposium.  I  extend  my  warm 
appreciation  to  the  MMA  for  this  laudable  initiative  which  comes  at  a  very  opportune  time 
when the country, having embarked on a rapid development path, is increasingly in need of 
professionals who are pragmatic in their approach but modern in their mind, to say but the 
least.  
The  financial  sector  is  at  the  core  of  the  economic  system,  providing  a  range  of  services 
which  are  necessary  for  domestic  and  trade  related  industries  to  function  efficiently  and 
enabling  consumers 
inter-temporal  consumption-savings 
requirements. While economic growth tends to induce accompanying financial sector growth, 
empirical  research  demonstrates  a  well-established  causal  link  from  financial  sector 
development to economic growth. In short, having a financial sector that meets the financing 
and  investment  needs  for  consumers,  businesses  and  governments  as  efficiently  and 
competitively as possible, increases the nation’s capacity to grow.  
Efficiency and competitiveness are more likely to be evident in an economy that is open to 
international competition and world’s best practices. Countries that have highly efficient and 
competitive financial sectors are also likely to be exporting those services. Mauritius has a 
comparative  advantage  in  many  parts  of  its  financial  sector  compared  with  most  other 
countries in the region. While we remain a very open trading economy overall, our exports 
and  imports  of  financial  services  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  are,  by  international  standards, 
relatively low. The opportunities for leveraging off our financial services skills and expertise, 
in the region and beyond, are potentially enormous.  
The financial sector in Mauritius is an important contributor to national output, employment, 
economic growth and development. The sector accounts directly for around 10.0 per cent of 
GDP,  and  employs  directly  around  12,000  people  or  4.0  per  cent  of  total  employment. 
Indirectly,  it  employs  a  substantially  larger  number  of  people,  by  way  of  outsourced  legal, 
accounting, technology, administration, processing and other services.  
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the world’s focus is increasingly on Africa for its 
untapped potential and Asia as a major source of investment, technology and funding. In this 
conjuncture,  Mauritius  has  all  the  attributes  to  act  as  a  bridge  between  Africa  and  Asia. 
According to the Global Competitiveness Report 2012–13, Mauritius ranks 13th in terms of 
to  effectively  manage 
their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
“strength  of  investor  protection”.  Global  investors  interested  in  trading  with  Africa,  for 
instance, should increasingly be encouraged to use Mauritius as a platform to set up their 
investment holding companies.  
Over the years, our country has established strong economic ties with both Asia and Africa. 
Mauritius is an active player in key African and regional organizations, including the African 
Union (AU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Common Market for 
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Indian Ocean Commission Rim Association 
for  Regional  Cooperation  (IOR-ARC).  Mauritius  has  established  a  dozen  Double  Taxation 
Agreements  (DTAs)  with  our  African  peers  and ten,  with  our  Asian  counterparts.  All  these 
provide for opportunities which all stakeholders in the country need to tap if we are to service 
the region as a Financial Services Hub.  
The most important characteristic of a leading financial centre is that it must be stable and 
well regulated, and provide a wide range of financing and investment products as efficiently 
and competitively as possible.  
On the regulatory front, I can assure you, Ladies and Gentlemen, that the Bank of Mauritius 
has  been  and  is  continuously  striving  very  hard  to  render  the  Mauritian  Jurisdiction  as 
credible and transparent as possible. Some ten years back, the financial world was lobbying 
for the relaxation of regulation or the implementation of “light touch regulation”. However, 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  always  maintained  a  consistent  and  prudent  approach  in  its 
regulatory  oversight,  and  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  proved  us  right  in  our 
conviction that a properly regulated jurisdiction promotes financial stability and enhances the 
level of confidence in the financial system.  
The Bank of Mauritius is further working, in collaboration with the banking sector, on the ring-
fencing of banking activities with a view to facilitating the monitoring process and mitigating 
the  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  In  order  to  promote  the  independence  of  our  banks  and 
enhance the resilience of our banking sector, the Bank of Mauritius encourages international 
banking Groups to conduct business in Mauritius through subsidiaries rather than branches. 
Emphasis is equally being laid on the oversight of domestic Systemically Important Financial 
Institutions (SIFIs) for greater financial stability and compliance with the recommendation of 
Basel III.  
In  terms  of  regulatory  tools,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  issued  some  thirty  Guidelines  to 
institutions  under  its  purview,  which  cover  crucial  and  diverse  areas  such  as  capital 
adequacy, risk management, credit impairment, corporate governance, public disclosure of 
information and anti-money laundering, among others. These guidelines are constantly being 
updated to take on board evolving risks. New guidelines are also in the pipeline, including 
Basel III.  
In the field of anti-money laundering, in particular, the Bank of Mauritius has, besides issuing 
Guidance Notes on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism 
for Financial Institutions, set up a Committee comprising Compliance Officers of banks and 
officials of the Bank of Mauritius to discuss and follow up on all compliance issues. We have 
equally signed an MOU with the Financial Intelligence Unit, since 2009, for the exchange of 
information  and  greater  cooperation  in  combating  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of 
terrorism.  
The concern for a macro-prudential oversight of the banking sector stands as a priority on 
the agenda of the Bank of Mauritius. In this connection, we have, at national level, entered 
into  MOUs  with  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  (MRA),  Financial  Services  Commission 
(FSC), Competition Commission of Mauritius (CCM) and Statistics Mauritius.  
On  the  international  level,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  equally  signed  MOUs  with  some  ten 
foreign regulators, of which five are from the region, for a better oversight on the activities of 
foreign  banking  institutions  operating  on  our  shores  and  on  the  regional  operations  of  our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is 
that, 
from 
learnt 
lessons 
the  global 
financial  crisis 
local banks. We are also in the process of finalizing MOUs with a few other central banks in 
the region.  
Efforts are being deployed in view of the establishment of policies and measures to address 
the question of banking crisis resolution in the region. It may be highlighted that one of the 
greatest 
in  a  world  of 
interconnectedness,  regulators  must  collaborate  and  exchange  information  to  mitigate  the 
effect of contagion risk and ensure that prompt actions are taken to prevent any future crises. 
We are gearing our efforts towards the establishment of supervisory colleges in the African 
Region to foster supervisory cooperation.  
I  wish  to  return  to  the  subject  of  corporate  governance  which  I  am  sure  will  be  of  great 
relevance  to  the  audience. We  have  in  August  issued  a  revised  Guideline  on  Corporate 
Governance with a view to bringing improvements in the corporate governance framework 
of our financial institutions. The guideline has been aligned to the new recommendations of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and greater emphasis is now being laid on the 
independence of directors. We are requiring, amongst others, that the chairperson of a board 
in a local bank be an independent director. We have further requested the setting up of local 
advisory boards for the branches of foreign-owned banks. Additionally, greater transparency 
is being required regarding the role of the board of directors, particularly on ethical standards 
and corporate values.  
We believe that the soundness and resilience of the banking system, and by extension the 
financial  system,  involves,  inter  alia,  the  proper  functioning  of  various  mechanisms  which 
inevitably entail accountability and transparency.  
Regarding  transparency,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  succeeded  with  the  collaboration  of 
banks, in disclosing the overall CAMEL rating of individual banks on its website and on a bi-
annual basis. Mauritius is among the few countries and the first in the Sub-Saharan region to 
have gone public with those ratings. I believe that the publication of the CAMEL ratings has 
brought  in  higher  market  discipline  in  the  banking  system  and  is  encouraging  banks  to 
improve their performance. Certain jurisdictions have even embarked on the dissemination of 
stress-testing results of their commercial banks.  
We  have  constantly  been  modernizing  our  Payments  System.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius 
launched the Bulk Clearing and Cheque Truncation System in September 2011. This system 
allows for electronic clearing of cheques as well as low value payments. We are presently 
working on a National Switch project.  
As  you  may  be  aware,  the  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (REPSS)  of  the 
COMESA has become operational effective 3 October 2012. The REPSS is an initiative of 
the  COMESA  Clearing  House  and  is  fully  endorsed  by  all  COMESA  member  states.  The 
Bank of Mauritius is the settlement bank in the REPSS and the status of a settlement bank 
for such a huge market, spread over a total area of 12.8 million square kilometres and with a 
population  of  413 million,  is  a  coveted  position  and  will  benefit the  country  ultimately.  The 
REPSS opens another opportunity for our country to enhance its role in the region. In fact, an 
efficient cross border payment system is a necessity for trade integration and the future of 
REPSS is very promising.  
Mauritius  also  inspires  confidence  among  foreign  investors  on  account  of  its  robust  legal 
framework. As of date, our jurisdiction has made considerable efforts to establish appropriate 
legislations  whether  in  the  field  of  banking,  financial  services,  anti-money  laundering  or 
securities market. However a big challenge still awaits the country; we need to be compliant 
with The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) by next year. The sooner this is 
achieved,  the  better  it  would  be  for  us.  We  could  then  start  selling  our  jurisdiction  as  a 
FATCA-compliant one.  
To  conclude,  we  need  a  vision  for  our  financial  industry:  that  is,  (a)  maintaining  a  best 
practice,  principles  based  regulatory framework,  (b)  maintaining  world  class  education  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
training to ensure the continuous availability of a highly skilled and innovative workforce and 
(c)  removing  barriers  to  the  competitiveness,  efficiency  and  liquidity  of  domestic  financial 
markets.  
Mauritius has many innate advantages. Our geographic proximity to Africa should provide a 
basis for diversification away from traditional markets. Our growing trade integration with the 
region provides increasing trade financing and other opportunities for our financial sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, we need the collaboration of each and every stakeholder to enable 
Mauritius to cement its role as a Regional Financial Services hub.  
I wish good luck to the MMA for its glorious initiative.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
