Peter Praet: Deleveraging and the role of central banks 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Conference  “The  effect  of  tighter  regulatory  requirements  on  bank  profitability  and 
risk-taking incentives”, Bocconi University, Milan, 26 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Roberto Motto, Fédéric Holm-Hadulla, Cornelia Holthausen and Angela Maddaloni for their 
contributions to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am pleased to speak today at this renowned banking conference at Bocconi University.  
The banking sector’s deleveraging process in the euro area has been underway since 2008. 
Until recently, most of the adjustment was achieved by increasing capital via equity issuance, 
conversion of hybrids, capital injections and retained earnings. With the intensification of the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  there  has  been  stronger  pressure  to  also  adjust  via  asset  shedding, 
especially those assets with higher risk weights.  
The deleveraging process, while necessary, always bears the risk of becoming abrupt and 
disorderly,  thus  threatening  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  non-financial  sector  and  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
In my remarks today I will highlight the challenges for the central bank in dealing with this 
process,  arguing  that  the  measures  undertaken  by  the  Eurosystem  in  recent  years  have 
helped to prevent self-enforcing spirals and a credit crunch. I will then focus on the special 
circumstances  of  the  euro  area,  given  its  institutional  features.  Finally  I  will  highlight  the 
expected  benefits  associated  with  moving  towards  a  strong  banking  and  financial  union  in 
the euro area. 
Banking sector’s deleveraging 
From a policy perspective it is useful to think about banks’ deleveraging as arising from two 
possible  sources:  demand  factors  and  supply  factors.  Although  somewhat  artificial,  this 
distinction may be instructive in guiding the appropriate policy response.  
Typical demand factors are the lack of profitable opportunities for investment or the presence 
of deleveraging forces arising in other sectors of the economy. Supply factors are related to 
banks’  insufficient  balance  sheet  capacity  to  hold  assets.  This  can  arise  from  capital 
shortfalls or funding strains – or both.  
Banks can address capital shortfalls and funding strains by adjusting the asset and/or liability 
side of the balance sheet. Asset shedding is the most far-reaching solution. If balance sheet 
pressures  arise  from  funding  strains,  banks  may  decide  to  sell  the  most  liquid  assets  and 
non-core  assets  that  can  be  liquidated  in  a  short  space  of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
deleveraging  pressures  are  mainly  related  to  capital  positions,  banks  have  an  incentive  to 
shed more capital-intensive assets to induce the largest reduction in risk-weighted assets.  
Abrupt adjustments of the asset side of the balance sheet can lead to a credit crunch, if they 
are  made  by  many  banks  simultaneously.  Rational  behaviour  at  the  level  of  an  individual 
bank (and investor) can impose externalities on other players in the financial system through 
fire  sales  and  financial  contagion.1  This  can  set  a  self-sustained  process  in  motion  that 
ultimately brings the whole financial system to collapse.  
                                                
1  See  V.  Acharya  and  S.  Viswanathan,  (2011)  “Leverage,  Moral  Hazard  and  Liquidity”,  Journal  of  Finance, 
Vol. 66,  No  1;  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale,  (2000)  “Financial  Contagion”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  Vol.  108, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Alternatively,  if  banks  prefer  to  keep  a  certain  portfolio  of  assets,  they  have  to  make  an 
adjustment on the liability side. Banks can recapitalise by issuing equity, or there can be the 
activation of bail-in measures. Or banks can try to tap alternative sources of funding in case 
deleveraging pressures come from the inability to roll over existing liabilities. 
The  mix  of  actions  on  the  asset  and  liability  side  that  banks  may  choose  to  take  is  not 
necessarily  optimal  from  a  welfare  point  of  view.  For  instance,  given  the  reluctance  of 
shareholders to issue equity and dilute the value of their shares, banks may prefer to shed 
assets or cut lending rather than increase capital.  
This creates a role for authorities in trying to steer the process towards certain courses of 
action in  which banks’ choices are better aligned with economic welfare. For instance, the 
supervisory  authority  may  put  pressure  on  banks  to  increase  the  level  of  capital  –  for 
example, through upward adjustment of capital requirements under the Basel III framework. 
In addition, authorities may resort to bail-in measures whereby a bank’s existing debt holders 
would  be  forced  to  convert  parts  of  their  debt  into  bank  equity  or  to  accept  a  (partial) 
write-down of their claims.  
Of  course,  authorities  face  several  constraints,  due  to  the  lack  of  specific  powers  to  force 
resolutions,  for  example,  or  incentive  problems  leading  to  delayed  action.  For  instance, 
bail-in  measures  may  take  some  time  to  administer  because  of  the  complexity  of  large 
banking groups and the various legal issues involved. In this context, Europe faces specific 
challenges given the lack of harmonisation of national systems, which strongly complicates 
the  resolution  of  cross-border  banks.  Significant  steps  are  being  taken  to  overcome  these 
shortcomings. I will return to this topic after discussing the implications of deleveraging for 
monetary policy. 
Monetary policy and the deleveraging process 
Whereas  the  deleveraging  of  the  banking  sector  is  a  necessary  process  to  correct  the 
imbalances  built  up  prior  to  the  crisis  and  to  bring  the  economy  back  to  strong  and 
sustainable  growth  path,  “disorderly”  deleveraging  can  represent  a  serious  threat  to  price 
stability. I have already described some of the mechanisms through which deleveraging can 
spiral off. I would like to now focus on the implications of deleveraging for the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy.  
The financial sector represents a powerful conduit of the monetary policy impulses decided 
by  the  central  bank  –  the  so-called  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy.2  It  works  mainly 
through  changes  in  the  balance  sheet  position  of  banks  and  (non-financial)  borrowers, 
influencing  credit  demand  and  supply.  When  there  are  significant  adverse  shocks  to  the 
balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions,  for  example  because  of  sharp  decreases  in  the 
values  of  assets  or  because  of  impairment  in  funding  markets,  banks  can  respond  by 
tightening credit standards applied to households and firms. 
The transmission of shocks hitting financial institutions’ balance sheets to the real economy  
– or originating within the financial system itself – is exceptionally strong if banks are not able 
to  shield  credit  supply  and  if  borrowers  are  highly  dependent  on  bank  credit  to  finance 
investment  and  consumption.  Many  euro  area  banks,  for  instance,  have  been  highly 
dependent  on  market  funding  and  have  therefore  been  vulnerable  to  sudden  stops  in  this 
source of funding. We also know that in the euro area banks are the main providers of funds 
                                                                                                                                                   
No. 1; and M. Brunnermeier and L. H. Pedersen, (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, Review of 
Financial Studies, Vol. 22, No 6. 
2  See Bernanke, B. S., and Gertler, M., 1995, “Inside the Black Box:  The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy 
Transmission.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4):27–48 and a vast following literature. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to the non-financial sector.3 Therefore, the potential for a very large amplification of shocks to 
the real economy is particularly strong in the euro area. 
In such situations, the transmission mechanism of standard monetary policy impulses may 
become  impaired  and  the  central  bank  has  to  resort  to  non-standard  measures.  Let  me 
elaborate on that. 
In normal times, central banks provide liquidity  to the banking sector through open market 
operations. Typically, banks obtain central bank liquidity against the provision of central bank 
eligible  collateral  in  a  repo  transaction.  By  setting  the  interest  rate  of  its  open  market 
operations, the central bank can directly steer the risk-free rate in the short end of the money 
market. This then feeds through to other, longer-term interest rates and ultimately to credit 
conditions applied to the real economy. 
During financial and especially banking crises, banks’ demand for central bank liquidity may 
sharply  increase  to  compensate  for  the  decline  in  other  forms  of  banks’  liabilities,  often 
resulting  from  withdrawals  of  bank  deposits.  By  accommodating  such  an  increase  in  the 
demand for liquidity, the central bank is the only agent able to prevent a process of disorderly 
money-supply contraction. The stabilising role of the additional liquidity is especially strong if 
it is supplied for longer maturities. In this way, access to central bank liquidity allows banks to 
obtain funding at the policy rate – as long as they have the required collateral and a sound 
business model.  
Thus, the  central  bank can  use the  amounts  and  modalities  of  its  liquidity  provision  to  the 
banking  sector  to  influence  prices  in  the  money  market  and  other  markets  for  relevant 
assets.  By  easing  the  pressure  to  abrupt  deleveraging,  the  central  bank  can  reduce  the 
likelihood of a credit crunch and adverse spiralling dynamics, thereby addressing downside 
risks to price stability. 
It  should  be  kept  in  mind  however,  that  monetary  policy  can  exert  mitigating  effects,  but 
cannot solve the underlying problems, often of a structural nature. In addition, the creation of 
abundant liquidity can in itself create side effects that need to be carefully monitored.  
First,  there  is  a  risk  of  distorting  the  incentives  to  carry  out  the  necessary  adjustment  by 
favouring evergreening of loans and “zombie-bank”-type dynamics. This would represent a 
continued source of uncertainty about banks’ exposures to non-performing loans, about the 
possible implicit liabilities faced by governments and ultimately a drag to economic growth.  
Second, large liquidity-providing repo operations increase asset encumbrance in the banking 
sector. Banks tie certain types of collateral with the central bank, and these assets are no 
longer  available  to  the  bank  for  other  types  of  transactions.  And  this  increases  banks’ 
difficulties to issue unsecured bonds and thus can worsen their access to private sources of 
refinancing. 
The ECB’s measures during the financial crisis 
Let me now turn to the concrete measures that the Eurosystem has undertaken during the 
crisis.  
When rumours about some European banks’ exposure to the US subprime market in August 
2007  strongly  affected  money  market  interest  rates  and  trading  volumes  within  just  a  few 
hours, the ECB reacted by providing liquidity to the banking sector on a short-term basis – 
first  overnight,  then for slightly  longer maturities. This  served  to  ensure that  solvent  banks 
would  obtain  the  liquidity  that  was  disappearing  from  other  sources.  The  first  overnight 
provision of liquidity by the ECB of almost € 100 billion was demand-driven and revealed the 
                                                
3  See  Allen,  F,  Chui,  M.,  and  A.  Maddaloni,  A.,  2004.  “Financial  Systems  in  Europe,  the  U.S.A.  and  Asia.” 
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20(4):490–508. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
high  uncertainty  within  the  banking  sector  on  the  ability  to  obtain  funding  from  private 
sources. 
In  general,  during  the  first  year  of  the  crisis,  there  was  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  on 
individual  exposures,  but  not  yet  a  very  strong perception  of  more  severe  problems  in  the 
banking sector as a whole. Central bank liquidity provision thus aimed at stabilising interest 
rates, and ensured that temporary liquidity problems of banks would not create problems for 
bank solvency.  
The Eurosystem was able to deal with these tensions by only slightly altering its operations 
under  the  standard  operational  framework.  This  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  number  of 
counterparties  to  monetary  policy  operations  has  historically  been  very  large  in  the  euro 
area, and because the standard framework offers quite some flexibility. In a nutshell, during 
this first phase of the crisis, the Eurosystem (1) more flexibly used its open market operations 
by  changing  the  time-path  of  liquidity  provision  and  employing  fine-tuning  operations, 
(2) lengthened the maturity structure of its open market operations (for instance, operations 
with a maturity of six months were introduced, whereas the maximum length had been three 
months before the crisis), and (3) coordinated with other central banks around the world to 
provide US Dollar funding.4  
The failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 and the subsequent very severe financial 
market tensions led the Eurosystem to adopt further measures. Official interest rates were 
cut by 325 basis points in just a few months to the then-historically low level of 1 per cent by 
March 2009. Open market operations were conducted as tenders with a fixed rate and full 
allotment. This implied that the ECB no longer controlled the aggregate supply of liquidity to 
the  banking  sector,  but  that  the  aggregate  demand  by  banks,  subject  to  individual  banks’ 
availability of adequate collateral, determined total liquidity provision. As a consequence, the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet increased, and short-term money market interest rates dropped 
to  levels  close  to  the  deposit  facility  rate.  Moreover,  the  ECB  further  widened  the  set  of 
eligible  collateral.  Finally,  and  importantly,  the  ECB  introduced  a  limited  number  of  open 
market  operations  with  maturities  of  one  year  (three  such  operations  were  conducted  in 
2009). 
The objectives behind this second wave of measures differed from the first wave. By the end 
of 2008, the problems of banking sectors – in the US, Europe and elsewhere – and the need 
for massive deleveraging had become apparent. At the same time, the interbank market was 
severely  disrupted,  and  so  was  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the  real 
economy.  The  measures  adopted  by  the  Eurosystem  were  geared  at  restoring  the 
functioning  of  its  transmission  mechanism,  and  at  supporting  the  continued  availability  of 
credit to households and non-financial firms.  
As a result of increasing tensions in the sovereign debt markets since 2010, the situation of 
the  euro  area financial  sector  worsened.  Doubts  about the  sustainability  of  sovereign  debt 
levels  in  some  countries  of  the  euro  area  led to  significantly  increased  levels  of  sovereign 
bond spreads. This, in turn, also led to higher interest rates in the private debt markets of the 
affected  countries.  It  became  apparent  that  the  health  of  the  national  banking  sector  was 
often  closely  intertwined  with  the  health  of  the  local  sovereign:  funding  problems  in  the 
banking sector and weak fiscal positions mutually reinforced each other.  
Significant heterogeneity emerges when looking at changes in the bank balance sheet items 
in different countries of the euro area, primarily concerning changes in deposits and in credit 
growth. “Sudden stops” were observed in the funds flowing towards the euro area countries 
more  adversely  affected  by  the  sovereign  crisis,  with  changes  in  the  bank  deposits  in 
                                                
4  See for instance Cassola, N., A. Durré and C. Holthausen (2011): “Monetary Policy Operations: experiences 
during the crisis and lessons learnt”, Proceedings of the Sixth ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches 
to monetary policy revisited – lessons from the crisis”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stressed  and  non-stressed  countries. These  developments  were  eventually  mirrored  in  the 
Target balances of the Eurosystem  
The  large  differences  in  financing  conditions  across  countries  translated  into  a  very  high 
fragmentation of credit growth across the national dimension.  
The ability of banks in some countries to deleverage is heavily complicated by the adverse 
market conditions. Not only do banks in the affected countries often need to deleverage more 
than others, but also their portfolios consist of less liquid assets (such as domestic sovereign 
bonds)  and  they  face,  ceteris  paribus,  higher  funding  costs  than  their  peers  in  other  euro 
area  countries.  Often  they  are  even  completely  cut  off  from  traditional  private  sources  of 
funding.  
With  the  deepening  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  Eurosystem  undertook  additional 
measures, with a particular view to mitigating the increased heterogeneities in the euro area 
financial  conditions.  In  2010,  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  was  launched,  aimed  at 
certain important segments of the financial market that were dysfunctional, but vital for the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals.  Additionally,  in  December  2011,  the  Eurosystem 
announced further enhanced credit support in the form of two repo operations with maturity 
of up to three years. 
There  are  indications  that  especially  these  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTRO) have proven effective in preventing an abrupt deleveraging. They significantly helped 
in restoring confidence in financial markets by providing insurance on the ability for banks to 
rely on ECB liquidity. This has taken pressure off banks to fire-sell assets or to shrink their 
loan book. In fact, there is some evidence that banks who bid for liquidity at the three-year 
operations  used  this  liquidity  to  address  the  roll-over  risk  implied  by  the  issuance  of  debt 
securities or other funding instruments that will mature over the next few years.  
At  the  same  time, there  is  some first  evidence  that  the  provision  of  long-term  liquidity  has 
helped in supporting credit provisions, especially in countries more affected by the sovereign 
debt crisis, therefore helping to address impairments in the transmission of monetary policy.  
The  ECB  has  recently  announced  the  details  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  in 
secondary  markets  for  sovereign  bonds  in  the  euro  area  in  order  to  address  severe 
distortions in government bond markets which in particular originate in unfounded fears on 
the part of investors of the reversibility of the euro. OMT also aims to safeguard the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  in  all  countries  of  the  euro  area,  thereby  preserving  the 
singleness of the ECB’s monetary policy. 
The way forward: moving towards an integrated financial market union 
As I mentioned already, while monetary policy can alleviate deleveraging pressures in crisis 
times,  it  cannot  address  their  root  causes.  In  fact,  to  tackle  the  underlying  problems,  a 
wide-ranging policy response is necessary, inter alia, pertaining to public finances, economic 
competitiveness and the financial sector. 
Given  the  focus  of  today’s  conference,  I  would  like  to  use  the remainder  of  my  speech  to 
consider the last aspect, namely the institutional framework that governs financial markets in 
European Monetary Union (EMU). In particular, I would like to address two questions: first, 
what  principles  should  the  institutional  architecture  be  based  on  in  order  to  be  effective  in 
avoiding  excessive  risk-taking  and  cross-border  fragmentation  of  banking  sectors;  and 
second, how do the on-going reform efforts towards a “financial market union” at European 
level contribute to these aims? 
In  answering  the  first  question,  policy-makers  should  be  guided  by  two  criteria:  first, 
economic  actors  that  stand  to  gain  from  risky  activity  should  also  bear  the  associated 
downside  risk.  To  be  concrete,  a  system,  in  which  banks  can  expect  to  be  bailed  out  by 
taxpayers  if  their  investment  decisions  go  wrong,  is  neither  efficient  not  fair.  Second,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
institutional architecture of EMU should achieve a level of integration that is commensurate 
to  the  integration  of  its  banking  financial  sectors.  Hence,  there  should  be  no  systematic 
cross-country differences in the design and implementation of the rules that govern financial 
markets.  Otherwise,  such  differences  might  become  a  source  of  financial  fragmentation  in 
their own right. 
Neither  of  these  criteria  is  easy  to  fulfil.  As  the  experience  with  Lehman  Brothers  has 
demonstrated,  failures  of  large,  integrated  financial  institutions  can  have  devastating 
consequences  for  economic  stability.  Risks  of  contagion  from  one  institution  to  entire 
financial sectors greatly complicate any effort to establish a more symmetric risk and reward-
structure  for  banks.  Harmonising  financial  sector  policies  across  countries  in  turn  requires 
substantial  operational  and  legislative  efforts,  given  that  national  institutions  have  evolved 
separately and are now heterogeneous in many regards. 
All these difficulties can be addressed and, in fact, they are being addressed by European 
policy-makers. In particular, the recent initiatives at European level comprise several crucial 
steps to achieving a more incentive-compatible as well as a more integrated and coherent 
framework among countries. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  several  concrete  elements.  The  first  step  is  the  establishment  of  a 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  The  SSM  aims  to  ensure  that  all  supervisory 
decisions  about  euro  area  banks  are  taken  in  a  consistent  and  stringent  manner, 
independently  of  the  country  in  which  it  is  located.  Once  fully  effective,  this  will  reassure 
markets  that  all  banks  face  the  same  scrutiny  and  thus  will  counteract  financial  market 
fragmentation  in  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  by  delegating  supervisory  decisions  from  the 
country to the euro area level it facilitates the internalisation of cross-country spill-overs, thus 
allowing for more efficient outcomes.  
As a further key element, the European Commission recently released a proposal for a bank 
recovery  and  resolution  directive,  which  contains 
important  crisis  prevention,  early 
intervention,  and  resolution  tools.  Again,  this  toolkit  serves  to  avoid  tax-payer  financed 
bank-rescue  operations  and  to  harmonise  practices  across  countries.  A  fully-integrated 
financial  framework,  as  also  envisaged  under  the  current  reform  agenda,  would  move 
beyond  these  common  tools  by  establishing  a  common  resolution  framework,  including  a 
resolution  authority  at  euro  area  level.  This  would  further  strengthen  harmonisation  and 
stringency in line with the “philosophy” underlying the bank recovery and resolution directive.  
Finally, the current reform efforts envisage the harmonisation of deposit guarantee schemes 
with  a  view  to  establishing  a  level  playing  field  across  countries  and  ensuring  appropriate 
contributions from the banking sector to the financing of such scheme. 
To sum up, the on-going and envisaged reforms towards a financial market union follow a 
clear and economically sound strategy. It is crucial to follow through with these efforts in a 
swift and diligent manner.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  banking  sector  is  experiencing  a  necessary  correction  to  overcome 
past excesses and to restore its health. The ECB’s non-standard measures have prevented 
destructive self-sustained dynamics. They have also helped to address heterogeneity in the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy across different euro area countries. And most 
importantly they have contributed to ensuring price stability.  
Going forward, a more integrated financial market union is one of the top priorities in Europe. 
And the single supervisory mechanism – just a few months ago considered as out of reach in 
the foreseeable future – is now under construction.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Still, it is of the utmost importance that national governments and European policy makers 
undertake all needed structural measures to address the fundamental sources of the current 
crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
