Guy Debelle: Enhancing information on securitisation 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Australian Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 22 October 2012. 
 Thanks to Christian Vallence and David Olivan for their help. 
Today  I  would  like  to  do  two  things.  Firstly,  I  will  discuss  the  current  state  of  play  in  the 
securitisation markets. Then I will describe some prospective changes to the Reserve Bank’s 
repo-eligibility  criteria 
for  asset-backed  securities.  These  changes  will 
the 
information available to the market about Australian asset-backed securities.  
improve 
The current state of play 
I have noted on several occasions at this forum that securitisation markets were likely to take 
a considerable period of time to adjust to the post-crisis environment. More than five years 
on since the first wave of investor concerns about structured finance, securitisation issuance 
is still struggling to recover in most countries.  
Graph 1 
 In the US, new issuance in 2012 to date is a little over half the level seen since issuance 
peaked in 2006 (Graph 1). RMBS issuance is still exclusively by the government-sponsored 
enterprises. Private-label issuance of RMBS remains dormant. Some other segments of the 
market appear to be recovering, particularly securities backed by auto loans and credit card 
receivables. Australian issuers are tapping this segment of the US securitisation market, as 
are some European issuers.  
In  Europe,  issuance  sold  into  the  market  has  been  negligible  since  2008.  There  has, 
however, been a large number of securitisations put together that have been retained on the 
balance  sheet  of  the  issuer  for  use  as  collateral  with  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  England 
(Graph 2).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Graph 2 
 In  Australia,  RMBS  issuance  in  2012  has  recovered  to  the  point  where  new  issues  are 
replacing  maturing  issues  so  the  stock  outstanding  is  no  longer  declining  (Graph 3).  The 
issuance  in  the  year  to date  has totalled  $10 billion.  By  way  of  comparison,  in the  second 
quarter of 2007, at its peak, issuance amounted to $25 billion. Given we are now five years 
on  from  that,  and  although  amortisation  rates  have  slowed  somewhat  from  their  pre-crisis 
rate  of  around  20 per cent  per  annum,  only  around  10 per cent  of  the  pre-crisis  issuance 
remains outstanding. Most of the pre-crisis stock comprises issues that have yet to amortise 
below  the  10 per cent  threshold  required  before  clean-up  calls  can  be  executed,  while 
around  15 per cent  was  issued  by  entities  that  aren’t  around  anymore,  such  as  the  old 
RAMS.  
Graph 3 
This year we have seen positive signs in the Australian securitised market, particularly over 
the past several months. First, despite the periodic bouts of turmoil in offshore markets, there 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
has been a steady flow of new issues. Primary spreads have gradually tightened this year 
and a number of deals have been fully placed with external investors (that is, no tranche has 
been retained by the issuer), including junior tranches. More recently, several issues have 
been  completed  with  little  or  no  support  from  the  AOFM  due  to  strong  private  investor 
demand. And, of course, the collateral underlying Australian asset-backed securities (ABS) 
continues to be of high quality, with arrears rates on Australian mortgages remaining low.  
The  structure  of  RMBS  deals  continues  to  evolve.  Issuers  have  reduced  their  reliance  on 
lenders’ mortgage insurance (LMI), for instance, as credit ratings agencies have discounted 
the  credit  enhancement  LMI  brings  to  a  deal.  Instead,  issuers  have  lengthened  seasoning 
periods  and  increased  subordination  to  enhance  credit  quality.  The  average  seasoning  of 
2012  issuance  has  been  48 months,  compared  to  an  average  of  36  months  over  the 
preceding three years.  
Some preference has emerged for bullet structures to minimise prepayment and extension 
risk for investors. Offshore investors in particular have shown a preference for bullet features, 
while the domestic investor base is generally more comfortable with pass-through securities. 
Issuers have looked to incorporate arrangements such as liquidity underwriting and roll-over 
features to provide bullet-like structures to deals. Of course, there is a limit to the ability of 
issuers 
significant 
over-collateralisation  or  liquidity  underwriting  costs.  ABS  have  always  been  about  passing 
through cash flows, and prepayment risk must ultimately always be borne (and be paid for) 
by someone.  
This preference has also been evident in the demand for non-RMBS asset-backed securities. 
Issuance  of  ABS  backed  by  assets  such  as  auto  loans  and  trade  receivables,  with  their 
shorter  maturity  and  more  predictable  cash  flow  profiles,  has  quickly  returned  to  (and 
exceeded) pre-crisis levels (Graph 4).  
issues  without 
incorporate 
structures 
bullet-like 
into 
to 
Graph 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
At this forum last year,1 I said that I thought covered bonds were likely to be used to access 
funding  offshore,  while  RMBS  would  continue  to  be  the  main  vehicle  used  to  raise 
asset-backed funding onshore. That wasn’t quite how it panned out earlier this year, when 
there were a few very large covered bonds issued domestically. But I think that had mostly to 
do with the price. Local buyers found it hard to resist the yield on offer on those early covered 
issues.  The  wide  spreads  on  the  first  covered  bond  issues  also  repriced  primary  RMBS 
spreads to uneconomic levels for both bank and non-bank issuers (Graph 5).  
Graph 5 
 But  since  then,  pricing  levels  on  covered  bonds  have  tightened  considerably.  Issuance 
patterns have been more along the lines I expected to occur, with the bulk of recent covered 
issuance occurring in the offshore market, and at much longer tenors. At the same time, we 
have seen RMBS issuance pick up in the domestic market, with only a few issues into the 
offshore market. Twelve months after their inception, banks have issued, on average, around 
a  quarter  of  their  covered  bond  issuance  caps  (Graph 6).  Covered  bonds  seem  to  be 
performing  their  expected  role  of  attracting  a  different  investor  base  and  providing  an 
important source of funding diversification for financial institutions.  
                                                
1   Debelle  G  (2011),  “The  Present  and  Possible  Future  of  Secured  Issuance”,  Address  to  Australian 
Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 21 November. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 6 
 Enhancing Information on securitisation 
While  the  RMBS  market  has  gradually  improved,  there  clearly  remains  scope  for  further 
improvement,  though,  as  I  have  said  on  a  number  of  occasions,  you  shouldn’t  expect  the 
market to return to its pre-crisis levels.  
One avenue which should help facilitate improvement is enhancing the information available 
to the market about the securities on issue. With that in mind, I will talk about some changes 
the Reserve Bank is announcing today that aim to increase the information available.  
There is an increasing demand for more transparency in securitisation from both investors 
and  regulators  alike.  One  objective  for  improving  transparency  is  to  ensure  that  investors, 
other market participants and regulators all have access to relevant and reliable information 
in order to monitor risk. Another aim is to improve document standardisation, which can help 
to stimulate liquidity in securitisation markets.  
There are a number of initiatives in various countries, some ongoing and others already in 
force, that seek to increase transparency of securitisation. This is encapsulated in the IOSCO 
report on Global Developments in Securitisation Regulation.2 In relation to standardisation of 
information, the report proposes that IOSCO members encourage industry to develop best 
practice  templates  and  encourage  industry  bodies  to  work  with  their  counterparts  in  other 
jurisdictions  to  ensure  harmonised  treatment.  The  announcement  by  the  Bank  today  is 
consistent with the objectives contained in the IOSCO report, and is supported by ASIC.  
Similarly, in Europe and the UK, loan-level reporting has also been introduced by the ECB 
and the Bank of England. As is the case in Australia, the main drivers of this initiative were 
the  need  for  these  central  banks  to  get  standardised  information  on  securitisations  for 
internal risk analysis and to provide broader transparency in the market. In the US, the SEC 
is currently considering what information needs to be provided by issuers as a result of the 
                                                
2  
IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions) (2012), Global Developments in Securitisation 
Regulation,  Consultation  Report, 
<http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf 
/IOSCOPD382.pdf>. 
available 
June, 
at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Dodd-Frank  legislation.  Proposed  rules  would  require  loan-level  data  underpinning  pooled 
assets  being  lodged  with  the  SEC  in  computer  readable,  standardised  format.  So,  the 
changes we are making today are part of a global development.  
As  you  are  all  aware,  for  around  five  years  now,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  included 
asset-backed  securities  amongst  the  range  of  collateral  eligible  for  our  domestic  market 
operations.  
The self-securitised RMBS proved to be beneficial during the height of the crisis in 2008, as 
the  RBA  was  able  to  quickly  stabilise  funding  markets  by  providing  liquidity  against  them 
(Table 1). The advantage of having these securities in place is that the Reserve Bank is able 
to assess their value and quality ahead of time, rather than in the midst of a crisis.3 Similarly, 
in recognition of the role that these assets can play  in stressed circumstances, APRA has 
encouraged  both  large  and  small  ADIs  to  self-securitise  some  of  their  assets  and  put 
arrangements in place with the RBA, such as RITS membership (although most ADIs already 
had  them).  For  large  ADIs,  these  securities  will  be  important  from  2015  when  the  new 
liquidity regime and the Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF) are in place.4  
Even  though  none  of  these  assets  (and  few  unrelated  RMBS)  are  held  on  the  Reserve 
Bank’s balance sheet now, the fact that they are eligible for repo means that the Bank must 
always be fully cognisant of the risks these assets carry.  
                                                 
3   This allows us to lend against good collateral in stressed circumstances, a core function of central banks. 
4  Debelle G (2011), “The Committed Liquidity Facility”, Speech to the APRA Basel III Implementation Workshop 
2011, Sydney, 23 November. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  information  currently  required  for  RMBS  repo-eligibility  is  largely  about  the  core 
attributes  of  the  security.  This  includes,  for  example,  the  information  memorandum, 
high-level  data  relating  to  the  asset  pools  backing  the  securities  and  a  list  of  mortgage 
insurers present in the pool. A AAA credit rating is also required.  
In part because we felt it was an appropriate time to do so five years after their inclusion on 
our  collateral  list,  and  in  part  ahead  of  the  introduction  of  the  CLF,  the  Bank  has  been 
conducting an internal review of its reporting requirements for RMBS.  
As  a  result  of  this  review,  today  the  Bank  is  announcing  some  enhancements  in  the 
information  requirements  for  repo-eligibility  of  RMBS.  In  a  nutshell,  these  will  require  that 
issuers  provide  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  broader  public  with  more  comprehensive  and 
up-to-date information on the securities.  
While some information on RMBS is generally available in the market, reporting standards 
can  vary  significantly  across  issuers,  since  there  is  currently  no  regulatory  standard  for 
RMBS  reporting  in  Australia.  The  available  data  also  tend  to  be  dispersed  in  a  number  of 
different  locations,  making  it  difficult  to  gather.  Hence,  in  consultation  with  the  Australian 
Securitisation Forum (ASF), we have sought to achieve some uniformity and greater depth in 
the information reported.  
Broadly speaking, the new information requirements cover both transaction-related data as 
well as information on the underlying assets, such as anonymised loan-level data.5  
Details of the information that will be required at least every quarter on both existing and new 
RMBS issuance are set out in reporting templates, which are available today on the Bank’s 
website. These templates are aligned with the ASF’s current best practice RMBS reporting 
and disclosure standards. They are also consistent with those developed by the ECB and the 
Bank of England.  
These  reporting  templates  standardise  reporting  of  RMBS  data  across  Australian  issuers 
who seek repo-eligibility of their issues. They will help the Bank to more precisely value the 
securities held on its balance sheet in terms of both price and risk. They will also decrease 
the Bank’s reliance on credit rating agencies in assessing the securities. As well as applying 
to those securities issued in the market, these requirements will also apply to self-securitised 
RMBS.  
But just as importantly, these data will also be of benefit to the broader market by providing 
more  transparency  to  Australian  RMBS.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  also  require  that  issuers 
make these reporting templates available to the public, free of charge. Issuers will have to 
inform the Reserve Bank of where their data are being stored and being made available to 
the public. It will also be a requirement that issuers ensure that these data are accurate.  
The  proposed  reporting  templates  we’ve  put  out  today  are  open  for  comment  until 
end-December.  Again  though,  I  would  note  that  we  have  worked  with  the  ASF  in  putting 
these  information  templates  together.  Having  taken  account  of  any  comments,  we  will 
provide final reporting templates early next year. Once that has been done, issuers will have 
a  transition  period  in  which  to  provide  the  information.  At  the  end  of  that  period,  if  the 
information is not available, the security will no longer be repo-eligible. RMBS issues that do 
not meet the reporting requirements during the transition period will remain repo eligible.  
I  encourage  issuers  to use  this  transition  period  to  develop  the  reporting  systems  and  the 
data handling infrastructure needed to comply with the new requirements.  
                                                
5   This will not involve reporting of data on any individual borrowers, thereby mitigating privacy concerns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Furthermore in 2013, the Bank will also make available for comment reporting templates for 
other ABS, such as securities backed by auto loans or credit card receivables, asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) and commercial backed securities (CMBS).  
In  terms  of  managing  public  availability  of  the  data,  the  Bank  is  placing  no  specific 
requirements on where issuers must make these data available, and this is one area of the 
new requirements on which the Bank is keen to receive industry feedback.  
Conclusion  
In conclusion, the securitisation market is continuing its gradual recovery. But there is scope 
for it to recover further yet. One avenue that may facilitate further growth is the availability of 
more information, and more standardised information, than exists currently.  
Today,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  put  out  some  enhanced  information  requirements  for 
repo-eligibility  of  asset-backed  securities.  These  information  requirements  should  not  only 
benefit the Reserve Bank in assessing the quality of the securities provided to it as collateral, 
but also be of benefit to the market as a whole.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
