Mario Draghi: Interview with Der Spiegel 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Der  Spiegel, 
conducted  by  Mr  Michael  Sauga  and  Ms  Anne  Seith  on  22 October  2012,  published  on 
29 October 2012. 
 SPIEGEL: President Draghi, do you have a savings account? 
Draghi: Yes. 
SPIEGEL: Do you know how much interest you are getting? 
Draghi: Around 1.75%, that’s the current rate on savings in Italy. 
SPIEGEL: The rate on a German savings account is even lower than that. The returns are 
not anywhere near sufficient to make up for rising prices. Are savers picking up the bill for the 
euro crisis? 
Draghi: No. If we do not resolve the euro crisis, we will all pay the price. And if we do resolve 
it, we will all benefit, particularly German taxpayers and savers. Interest rates in Germany are 
at a low level,  with some negative bond rates, not because of our measures, but because 
Germany receives safe-haven flows from other parts of the euro area. 
SPIEGEL: Nevertheless, many people, particularly in Germany, are worried about the value 
of  their  money,  because  the  European  Central  Bank  has  reduced  interest  rates  to  a 
historically  low  level  and  announced  its  intention  to  make  large-scale  purchases  of 
government bonds issued by indebted southern European countries. Are people right to be 
worried? 
Draghi: We take the worries of the people very seriously. People are right to ask why we felt 
it necessary to announce the programme for government bond purchases. One thing should 
be clear: responding to the crisis of confidence, while maintaining price stability, will benefit 
German taxpayers and savers.  
SPIEGEL: Then please explain it to us. 
Draghi: The crisis of confidence means that money is flowing to Germany. This depresses 
interest rates in Germany and increases interest rates in other countries to unjustifiably high 
levels. Put simply, interest rates reflected, among other things, speculation that the euro area 
could break up. This speculation was unfounded, and we had to counter it. 
SPIEGEL: And so you decided to help out the governments in Rome and Madrid. 
Draghi:  No,  the  decisive  factor  was  something  else.  The  high  bond  yields  also  caused 
interest rates on corporate and housing loans to shoot up. This put the effectiveness of our 
monetary policy at risk: no matter how much we cut interest rates, there was no longer any 
effect on the real economy. We couldn’t just sit back and do nothing. 
SPIEGEL: Many experts have expressed doubts that the interest rates on loans in Spain and 
Italy were really at alarming levels. 
Draghi:  There  is  no  reason  for  this;  we  have  a  great  deal  of  evidence.  Take  the  bank  in 
Spain that could barely issue a bond, although it was, objectively speaking, just as solvent as 
a  credit  institution  in  Germany.  No  wonder  that  banks  charge  completely  different  interest 
rates on loans depending on which side of the border they are resident. Also, for this reason, 
a  married  couple  can  get  totally  different  mortgage  conditions  for  an  apartment  in  Madrid 
than in Munich.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
SPIEGEL: It is not unusual for interest rates on loans to vary from country to country. 
Draghi: That is true, but the scale of the differences had exceeded all normal levels. Interest 
rates do not have to be identical across the whole euro area, but it is unacceptable if major 
differences  arise  from  broken  capital  markets  or  concern  about  a  euro  area  break-up.  In 
addition,  short-term  rates  were  higher  than  long-term  rates  in  some  countries,  which  we 
always  see  as  a  warning  sign.  All  of  our  analysis  indicated  that  we  were  facing  a  serious 
crisis of confidence, and that we urgently needed to do something about it. 
SPIEGEL: But many people, particularly in Germany, believe that your measures are illegal. 
You are circumventing the prohibition on financing government deficits by printing money. 
Draghi: That is incorrect. We are prohibited from buying bonds directly from governments, 
and we abide by this prohibition. But we are allowed to purchase bonds on what is known as 
the secondary market – that is, from banks or financial institutions – if it is necessary for our 
monetary policy. And that’s exactly what we are doing. 
SPIEGEL: The question is why you had to frighten people with the comment that you were 
preparing to purchase “unlimited amounts”. Didn’t you realise that this would make people 
anxious? 
Draghi: I chose the word “unlimited” in order to clearly indicate our determination to defend 
the  euro.  One  has  to  understand  how  markets  work.  But  unlimited  does  not  mean 
uncontrolled; on the contrary, we will only buy bonds from those countries that accept strict 
conditions, and we will check very carefully whether those conditions are adhered to. 
SPIEGEL: We  have  our  doubts  about that. Would  you  really  refuse to  help  a  country  that 
does not fulfil the reform requirements?  
Draghi: Of course. If a country does not adhere to what has been agreed, we will not resume 
the  programme.  We  have  announced  that  we  will  suspend  operations  once  a  programme 
country is under review. We will then ask the International Monetary Fund and the European 
Commission to assess whether the country is keeping the conditions of the agreement, and 
only after a positive assessment will we resume operations.  
SPIEGEL: One only needs to consider the example of Greece currently to get an idea of how 
credible  such  statements  are.  The  government 
their 
commitments to the troika (made up of the IMF, ECB and European Commission) and yet 
they are now about to receive the next tranche of financial assistance anyway.  
Draghi: That is not an appropriate comparison. Greece will not be considered at all for our 
programme because it is targeted exclusively at countries that finance themselves, now as 
before, on the capital market. This is something completely different.  
SPIEGEL:  Many  people  are  nevertheless  concerned  that  the  ECB  wants  to  take  a  vast 
amount  of  high-risk  government  bonds  from  southern  Europe  onto  its  balance  sheet.  You 
already have on your books around €200 billion in securities from countries such as Portugal 
and  Ireland.  Will  it  be  the  taxpayer  who  ultimately  has  to  jump  in  if  the  countries  cannot 
service their debt? 
Draghi: I do not anticipate this; quite the opposite. So far we have actually made a profit on 
our  bond  purchases,  which  has  gone  to  the  national  central  banks,  in  turn  profiting  the 
governments and taxpayers. 
SPIEGEL: Can you guarantee it will stay this way?  
Draghi:  One  thing  is  clear:  if  the  governments  in  southern  Europe  continue  with  the 
successful implementation of policy reforms seen in the last few months, German taxpayers 
will make a profit from our purchases. There is no better protection against the euro crisis 
than successful structural reforms in southern Europe.  
in  Athens  repeatedly  broke 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SPIEGEL: This can also be expressed in a different way: your balance sheet is dependent 
upon political developments in Madrid, Rome and Lisbon. Do you think it is wise for a central 
bank to make itself dependent on governments in this way? 
Draghi:  We  are  not  making  ourselves  dependent,  quite  the  opposite.  When  the  crisis 
escalated in early summer, the ECB had three options: first, do nothing, allowing the crisis to 
get worse and worse with greater risks, particularly for the German taxpayer; second, provide 
support unconditionally;  or third, provide support under certain conditions. The ECB chose 
the  third  option  because  that  was  the  best  way  to  combat  the  causes  of  the  crisis. 
Governments must commit to sound economic and financial policies. This is how we ensure 
reform in the euro area – and our independence.  
SPIEGEL: Experience teaches us somewhat differently. If you artificially lower interest rates, 
it  makes  it  easier  for  governments  to  become  indebted  and  decreases  the  pressure  for 
reform. 
Draghi:  High  interest  rates  are  the  most  significant  source  of  pressure  for  a  government 
resisting reform, I agree with you there. This is exactly why we insist on adherence to strict 
conditions.  Moreover,  we  do  not  want  to  completely  eliminate  differences  in  interest  rates 
between countries. We will only intervene if the differences become excessive.  
SPIEGEL: Many experts doubt that you can make a clear distinction in this regard. 
Draghi: We would disagree. There are models and indicators available that will help us to 
make an informed judgement.  
SPIEGEL:  When  you  announced  your  programme,  interest  rates  in  Spain,  for  example, 
stood at 6.5%. What proportion of this was speculative? 
Draghi: I will not tell you that: we have decided not to give exact figures for our programme 
that we could later be pinned down to. What I can tell you is that a good analysis will provide 
you  with  the  necessary  indications  regarding  at which  point  the  differences  give  cause  for 
concern. 
SPIEGEL: We fear that you are getting entangled in hopeless political discussions with the 
European governments. In order to put Monetary Union on a firm footing, you are in favour 
of, for example, greater centralisation of economic and financial policy. Up to now we have 
seen little of this. 
Draghi: This is not how I see it. Governments are on the right path. They have committed 
themselves  to  transferring  more  competencies  for  budgetary  and  financial  policy  to  the 
European level. They need to take the necessary decisions on this at their summit meeting in 
December. 
SPIEGEL: Up to now, governments have only been ready to concede greater powers to the 
Commission regarding the control of their budgets. The actual decisions will continue to be 
taken at the national level, however.  
Draghi: The governments  have  taken  decisions  that  would  have  been  inconceivable  even 
one year ago. This is progress, but it is not enough.  
SPIEGEL: Why not? 
Draghi: If you want to restore confidence in the euro area, you need rules. But that is only 
the first step. You also need to ensure that the rules are adhered to. This is what was lacking 
in the past and what governments need to work on. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
SPIEGEL: Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has proposed giving the EU Commissioner 
for Economic and Monetary Affairs a direct say in national budgets. What do you think of that 
proposal? 
Draghi: I am fully in favour of it. Governments would be wise to seriously consider it. I firmly 
believe that, in order to restore confidence in the euro area, countries need to transfer part of 
their sovereignty to the European level. 
SPIEGEL: But it is precisely that that many governments are unwilling to do. Why are they 
so against it? 
Draghi: A lot of governments have yet to realise that they lost their national sovereignty a 
long time ago. Because, in the past, they have allowed their debt to pile up, they now need 
the goodwill of the financial markets. That sounds like a paradox, but it is nonetheless true: it 
is only once the euro area countries are willing to share sovereignty at the European level 
that they will gain sovereignty. 
SPIEGEL: The second measure with which you wanted to place Monetary Union on a firmer 
footing was the establishment of a single supervisory mechanism (SSM), with the ECB at the 
helm. However, it will now not be up and running on 1 January 2013, as planned. Are you 
disappointed? 
Draghi:  Not  at  all. What  is  more  important  is  that  the  SSM  works  well,  not  when  it  starts. 
Otherwise, the reputation and independence of the ECB are at risk. 
SPIEGEL: Why do you think that the ECB will do a better job of supervising banks than the 
competent national authorities have been doing until now? 
Draghi: It is not that we want to replace the national supervisory authorities; on the contrary, 
we  want  to  work  closely  with  them.  However,  they  need  to  be  independent  of  their 
governments  in  their  assessment  of  the  problems.  In  the  past,  problems  in  the  banking 
sector have been hushed up time and again. 
SPIEGEL: Like in Spain… 
Draghi: I am not going to mention any names. However, I am certain that we will be able to 
act more independently and quickly if Frankfurt is at the heart of the decision-making. 
SPIEGEL: But that means that the independence of your monetary policy will come under 
threat.  Will  you  still  be  able  to  take  an  impartial  decision  on  interest  rates  if  there  is  the 
danger that major banks will be pushed into financial ruin? 
Draghi: I am aware of the risk, which is why there must be a strict separation between the 
two  areas  at  the  ECB.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  should  assign  most  of  the 
supervisory tasks to an independent committee composed primarily of supervisors.  
SPIEGEL: That sounds modest, because you now actually have more responsibilities than 
any  other  central  banker  before  you.  You  are  the  biggest  creditor  of  many  euro  area 
countries;  you  are  the  chief  banking  supervisor  and  are  designing  a  new  structure  for  the 
euro area alongside the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy. Would it 
be wrong to call you the most powerful man in Europe? 
Draghi:  That  is  certainly  not  the  way  I  see  myself.  With  regard  to  the  banking  union  for 
example, we are only providing technical assistance, because we were asked to. 
SPIEGEL:  You  are  in  the  news  after  every  EU  summit  along  with  world  leaders.  Are  you 
trying to say that you don’t have any influence? 
Draghi: I can see how I may give this impression, but I am well aware that I am a central 
banker without a political mandate, who only acts together with the Governing Council of the 
ECB.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SPIEGEL:  In  Germany,  people  have  several  reservations  about  your  crisis  policies.  Were 
you surprised to receive so much criticism? 
Draghi:  I  had  the  opportunity  of  a  very  deep  and  wide-ranging  exchange  of  views  with 
members of the Bundestag last Wednesday. My impression was that I was able to explain a 
number of issues, in particular how the measures comply with our mandate to safeguard our 
independence and to ensure price stability in the medium term.  
SPIEGEL: This fear  stems from  historical  experience.  Germans  have  learnt that,  if  central 
banks flood the markets with money, this always leads to inflation. 
Draghi: We have to take these fears very seriously. But the correlation is not so simple. In 
some cases, such as in the Weimar Republic, printing money caused inflation. But in other 
cases, proactive central bank action did not.  
SPIEGEL: You mean the Federal Reserve System’s decision at the start of this millennium 
to  drastically  reduce  interest  rates,  a  policy  which  contributed  to  the  price  bubble  on  the 
housing market and the financial crisis of 2007–08. How do you intend to rule out something 
similar repeating itself in Europe? 
Draghi: We, the Governing Council of the ECB, are committed to safeguarding price stability 
and avoiding systemic asset bubbles. So far we have seen some rising prices in a few asset 
markets  at  the  local  level.  Such  phenomena  must  be  dealt  with  regionally  by  the  relevant 
political  and  supervisory  authorities,  for  example  by  asking  banks  to  hold  more  capital 
against their real estate exposure. 
SPIEGEL: What would you say to German taxpayers who fear inflation? 
Draghi: At present I do not see any risks to price stability. The ECB remains committed to 
safeguarding price stability as it has always done in the past. We firmly expect the inflation 
rate in the euro area to fall next year to below our target of close to 2%. 
SPIEGEL:  At  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  Germans  were  promised  that  the  ECB  would 
behave like a second Bundesbank. Many people here now speak of a new Banca d’Italia, 
which tolerated double-figure inflation rates in the 1970s. 
Draghi:  I  consider  such  accusations,  to  put  it  mildly,  inelegant.  For  two  reasons:  in  the 
1970s, the Banca d’Italia was not independent. Today, the situation is completely different. 
But there is also a personal reason. Because of inflation, my family lost a large part of its 
savings  at  that  time.  You  can  therefore  rest  assured  that  I  am  personally  and  not  only 
professionally committed to delivering price stability. 
SPIEGEL:  Two  German  members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  have  stepped  down  in 
protest, and the head of the Bundesbank Jens Weidmann openly opposes your policy. Does 
that not make you think? 
Draghi: Of course. That reflects concerns which we incorporate into our decisions. You can 
be assured that, in taking measures, we stick strictly to our mandate. 
SPIEGEL: Your former colleague Jürgen Stark, who resigned, sees it differently. 
Draghi: His reasoning is not shared by the Governing Council of the ECB. 
SPIEGEL:  But  the  fact  is,  you  are  doing  things  that  would  have  previously  been 
inconceivable. 
Draghi: We are also currently in a crisis that was previously inconceivable. It is therefore not 
very  helpful  to  compare  our  measures  with  the  past.  When  we  speak  of  the  Bundesbank 
culture, we mean a culture of independence and price stability. I am deeply attached to both 
principles and can assure you that each member of the Governing Council is just as deeply 
committed to delivering price stability in total independence and fully in line with the mandate 
of our founding fathers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
SPIEGEL:  In  a  recent  interview  with  SPIEGEL,  Mr  Weidmann  warned  that  central  bank 
financing could become addictive, like a drug. 
Draghi:  That  risk  exists,  and  we  have  it  in  mind.  But  central  bank  financing  can  also  be 
helpful, like medicine. And that should also be kept in mind. 
SPIEGEL: For how long can these controversies between you and Mr Weidmann continue? 
Draghi: I would like certain discussions to proceed in a more controlled way. Mr Weidmann 
and I still have a great deal of understanding for one another. We have the same goal and 
our differences of opinion over the correct instruments are not insurmountable. 
SPIEGEL: You now live in Frankfurt. How often do you travel to Italy? 
Draghi: Not very often. I like Frankfurt, in particular its museums, which my wife and I like to 
visit. 
SPIEGEL: Mr Draghi, thank you for this interview.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
