Jörg Asmussen: The Eurozone and Japan – the way forward 
Intervention by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 2012 Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank Group, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Ladies and gentleman, 
It is a pleasure to take part in this discussion today, and in particular to join the company of 
such a distinguished panel of European and Japanese colleagues. 
With  events  moving  so  fast  in  the  euro  area  –  and  in  ways  that  are  often  confusing  for 
outsiders – getting out and speaking to investors around the world is more necessary than 
ever.  So  let  me  also  extend  my  thanks  to  Juergen  Fitschen  and  Deutsche  Bank  for 
organising this very useful event.  
As  time  is  short,  I  would  like  to  begin  my  intervention  by  jumping  straight  into  the  three 
questions that are the focus of this panel today. 
• 
• 
• 
How to return to sustainable debt levels in the euro area? 
How to deal with intra-euro area competitiveness imbalances? 
Where does the euro area go from here?  
How to return to sustainable debt levels in the euro area? 
Turning to the first question: how to return to sustainable debt levels in the euro area? 
Debt sustainability in the euro area is being questioned for two reasons. 
The first reason is that some investors are afraid of destructive scenarios that could lead to 
default or, in the extreme, exit from the euro. As a result, they are forcing some countries to 
pay  risk  premia  that  are  not  fully  justified  by  underlying  fundamentals,  making  those 
destructive scenarios self-fulfilling. 
But  this  aspect  of  debt  sustainability  can  be  addressed  by  simply  changing  perceptions. 
Here,  the  ECB’s  recent  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  should  play  a 
supportive  role.  It  provides  a  credible  backstop  for  tail  risks  and  confirms  that  the  euro  is 
irreversible. 
The second reason debt sustainability is being questioned is that certain euro area countries 
have debt levels that are too high, or on a sharply rising trajectory. This is more complex to 
deal with. Inflating away the debt burden is not an option in the euro area. So Member States 
have to take policy actions to redress public finances. But the evidence suggests it can be 
done. 
To stabilise debt levels, the euro area already has a benchmark a new debt reduction rule 
agreed  as  part  of  reforms  to  fiscal  governance.  Observing  it  will  be  difficult  for  some 
countries. But they have made similar adjustments in the past. Many ran fiscal surpluses for 
years before entry into the euro. 
To support this process, it is urgent to improve euro area growth rates, which are projected to 
remain low for a number of years. This can be done by unlocking the many rigidities that still 
exist in euro area product and labour markets. 
This process of debt stabilisation is already well underway. The IMF projects that the euro 
area will be almost in primary balance this year, with an average debt level just over 90% of 
GDP.  In  terms  of  fiscal  consolidation,  this  puts  the  euro  area  significantly  ahead  of  some 
other advanced economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How to deal with intra-euro area competitiveness imbalances? 
Ensuring  debt  sustainability  is  to  a  large  degree  linked  to  the  second  question  of  today’s 
panel: how to deal with intra-euro area competitiveness imbalances? 
To  some  extent,  this  question  is  already  answered.  Rebalancing  is  happening.  Large 
competitiveness adjustments are taking place in the so-called periphery.  
The countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen unit labour costs improve by around 
10% since 2008, relative to the euro area average. Current account deficits are on average 
8 percentage points of GDP lower than they were then.  
But to ensure that this competitiveness improvement is structural rather than cyclical, three 
further elements are crucial. 
First,  continued  and  determined  reform.  And  this  ultimately  has  to  go  beyond  economic 
policies and into fundamental issues of governance, like public administration, judiciary and 
education. 
Second, the completion of Europe’s Single Market. It does not serve citizens to protect local 
monopolies that lead to high prices and low quality. Europe has some of the world’s most 
sophisticated and innovative companies, and they should be operating on a European scale. 
Third,  stronger  economic  governance. We  have  already  made  some  progress  here  with  a 
new procedure to monitor and correct euro-area imbalances. But we also need to find better 
ways to incentivise continued structural reform, including through the use of common funds. 
All  these  measures  are  of  course  relevant  for  the  country  most  in  the  media  spotlight, 
Greece. A lot has been done by the Greek authorities in last two years. The primary deficit 
has been reduced by more than 8 pp from end-2009 to end-2011. Labour market reforms are 
beginning to show positive results. 
But a lot still remains to be done. The Greek authorities have to demonstrate that they can 
continue  to  stick  to  their  commitments.  We  are  seeing  encouraging  signs  that  the  fiscal 
targets for next year can be met. This is the best way out of its crisis: for Greece to reform 
within the euro area. 
Where does the euro area go from here?  
Addressing  these  imbalances  would  go  a  long  way  towards  putting  the  euro  area  on  a 
sustainable path. This leads into the third question: where does the euro area go from here? 
First of all, we should acknowledge that the euro area has done a huge amount of institution-
building in the last two years. Few would have predicted, in early 2010, that we would today 
have an international treaty ensuring balanced budgets and a permanent rescue fund of 500 
billion euro. 
But to fully restore confidence in the euro area, we also need to fix the flaws in its institutional 
architecture. The euro area is drawing up a roadmap to complete EMU based on four key 
pillars: financial market union, fiscal union, economic union and political union.  
On financial market union, progress is already being made with the agreement to establish a 
single supervisory for euro area banks. In order to prevent moral hazard, it is important that 
this is complemented with an integrated framework for bank resolution. 
For the other unions, the roadmap aims to strengthen oversight of policies, furnish the euro 
area with the shock-absorbing institutions that we see in other monetary unions, and provide 
a proper outlet for citizens to express their views. 
Thank you for your attention.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
