Sayuri Shirai: The euro area crisis, the flight-to-safety premium, and 
cooperation and coordination among central banks 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
workshop co-hosted by the Asian Development Bank Institute and the Reinventing Bretton 
Woods Committee, “Adjusting the World to the New Realities of the International Financial 
System”, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good morning. My name is Sayuri Shirai, and I am a Policy Board member of the Bank of 
Japan. It is indeed a great honor for me to be here, giving a talk at the workshop co-hosted 
by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  (ADBI)  and  the  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods 
Committee  (RBWC)  under  the  title  of  “Adjusting  the  World  to  the  New  Realities  of  the 
International Financial System”. 
Currently,  one  of  the  major  sources  of  global  uncertainty  arises  from  stresses  in  the  euro 
area.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  focus  today  first  on  the  current  situation  of  the  euro  area 
crisis. I would then like to move on to the issue of how the euro area crisis has been affecting 
Japan  and  other  developed  countries  through  financial  channels.  Finally,  I  would  like  to 
address the challenging issue of cooperation and coordination among central banks. 
Current situation of the Euro area crisis 
II. 
In  the  euro  area,  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  over  political  and  economic 
developments. Along with the (short-term) adverse impact of fiscal consolidation measures, 
the crisis initially led to deteriorating economic conditions in the peripheral countries. Initially, 
the  crisis  was  largely  contained  in  those  peripheral  countries.  However,  the  crisis  is  now 
affecting the core countries through trade and financial channels and a rapid deterioration in 
corporate and consumer sentiment. Consequently, the euro area has reentered a recession, 
and this has contributed to a slowdown in global economic growth. The sluggish economy in 
the euro area is likely to last at least until the end of the year, according to European Central 
Bank (ECB) estimates released last month (whereby the central rate of real GDP growth rate 
for  2012  was  adjusted  downward  from  minus  0.1 percent  in  June  to  minus  0.4 percent  in 
September). 
To deal with the financial sector’s funding difficulty in the peripheral countries, the ECB has 
been actively engaging in a number of accommodative monetary policy measures over the 
past  year  –  including  longer-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  36 months 
(conducted  in  December  2011  and  February  2012),  resumption  of  the  Securities  Markets 
Programme (SMP), reducing the reserve ratio, a cut in key interest rates, and modification of 
collateral requirements. In July this year, moreover, the ECB cut key interest rates by another 
25 basis  points:  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  was  reduced  from 
1 percent to the historically lowest figure of 0.75 percent, that on the marginal lending facility 
from  1.75 percent  to  1.5 percent,  and  that  on  the  deposit  facility  from  0.25 percent  to 
0 percent. 
These  actions  helped  lower  the  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  euro-denominated  money 
markets  and  moderated  tensions  in  the  area’s  financial  markets.  The  yields  on  long-term 
sovereign  bonds  have  also  declined  in  the  whole  euro  area,  including  the  peripheral 
countries.  A  decline  in  bank  lending  rates  has  also  followed  in  line  with  the  decrease  in 
yields. Nonetheless, the scale of the decline in those rates for the peripheral countries has 
not been sufficiently large to narrow the gap with those rates in the core countries (Chart 1). 
This  is mainly  because the  vicious  cycles  between  sovereign  and financial  stresses  –  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
their  repercussions  on  the  real  economy  –  have  not  been  curtailed  in  the  peripheral 
countries. 
The high bank lending rates in the peripheral countries are closely associated with the high-
risk premiums charged on the yields on their sovereign bonds by investors. Given that these 
premiums  are  far  above  those  justified  by  the  economic  fundamentals,  according  to  an 
estimate  by  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD) 
(Chart 2),  they  could  be  called  a  “fear  premium”.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF, 
2012) also reports that these premiums are predominantly driven by a common factor rather 
than country-specific macro/liquidity risks. As long as there is the fear of possible reversibility 
of the euro – even in a situation where the expected probability of that tail-risk scenario is 
extremely low – the ECB will find it very difficult to lower the yields on sovereign bonds of 
these peripheral countries on a sustainable basis. 
The fear premium has also promoted fragmentation of the financial markets within the euro 
area by discouraging cross-border financing activities in the private-sector between the core 
and peripheral countries. This has resulted in greater dependence of the financial sector in 
the  peripheral  countries  on  the  ECB’s  refinancing  operations,  or  Emergency  Liquidity 
Assistance  (ELA)  provided  by  their  national  central  banks.  These  operations  have  led  to 
expansion of the consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem. 
However, it is increasingly recognized that the very accommodative monetary policy has not 
promoted active lending activities that would stimulate domestic demand (such as investment 
and  consumption)  as  much  as  had  been  expected  (Chart 3).  In  the  euro  area,  sluggish 
lending activities (for example, the August data on credit growth indicated minus 1.1 percent 
for firms and minus 0.4 percent for households) reflect a sharp decline in credit demand – 
caused  by  weak  economic  outlook,  balance-sheet  adjustments,  and  highly  risk-averse 
behavior  as  well  as  banks’  higher  lending  rates  and  tightened  lending  conditions.  These 
sluggish lending activities also reflect a cautious attitude on the part of lenders – driven by 
growing uncertainty, elevated funding costs, and tighter financial regulations. 
The weak link between an accommodative monetary policy and private-sector credit growth 
is  a  feature  observed  not  only  in  the  euro  area  but  also  in  other  developed  countries, 
including  Japan  and  the  United  States.  There  are  structural  factors  behind  this  issue,  but 
their root causes are country or region specific, and they thus differ from one another. In the 
case  of  Europe,  the  short-term  depressing  impact  of  fiscal  austerity  measures  and 
deleveraging of the banking sector – exacerbated by the fear premium – make it difficult to 
promote bank lending at present. 
All these data point to the fact that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the real 
economy  may  have  been  hampered  by  the  severe  distortions  prevailing  in  the  sovereign 
bond  markets  which  are  largely  caused  by  the  fear  premium.  This  is  why  the  ECB 
announced  outright  monetary  transactions  (OMTs)  last  month  (and  terminated  the  SMP) 
together  with  a  strict,  comprehensive  conditionality  attached  to  the  European  Financial 
Stability Facility/European Stability Mechanism (EFSF/ESM) program (whether it is based on 
a  full  or  a  precautionary  program)  in  the  event  of  their  activation.  This  conditionality  is  a 
necessary condition, since the ECB Governing Council will decide on the start, continuation, 
and suspension of OMTs in accordance with its mandate, once a country under examination 
adopts the program. 
I  believe  that  such  an  imposition  of  conditionality  on  the  activation  of  an  asset  purchase 
program is an action rarely seen in the recent history of central banking. The ECB made it 
clear  that  the  proper  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  could  be  restored  if 
progress  was  also  made  in  the  following  areas:  fiscal  consolidation  programs,  structural 
reforms  (i.e.,  labor-market  reform,  deregulation,  privatization,  and  efficiency  of  public 
administration),  and  region-wide  institution  building  (or  regionally  coordinated  actions  to 
strengthen  the  firewall  limiting  the  contagion  of  a  crisis  from  one  country  to  another  in 
addition  to  the  possibility  of  EFSF/ESM  primary  market  purchases).  In other  words,  it  was 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
made  clear  that  monetary  policy  could  contribute  to  narrowing  the  output  gaps  and 
preventing  disinflation.  This  should  be  regarded  as  a  temporary  measure  in  providing 
breathing space, while governments and regional institutions (such as the European Union 
[EU] or the Eurogroup) deal with the structural issues that are necessary to lower the fear 
premium  and  raise  the  potential  (trend)  economic  growth.  Here,  the  IMF  could  play  an 
important role as a third party in the process. 
Meanwhile, Japan also suffers from a weak link between a very accommodative monetary 
policy  and  private-sector  credit  growth  (Chart 4).  However,  the  root  causes  of  this  weak 
linkage in Japan differ from those in the euro area. Japan’s financial conditions have been 
very accommodative. The financial sector – which has hardly been affected by the euro area 
crisis thanks to relatively sound balance sheets, low leverage ratios, and ample deposits – 
has largely maintained an accommodative lending attitude. Therefore, sluggish credit growth 
is  largely  a  consequence  of  limited  demand  for  credit  (such  as  loans  to  finance  business 
investment  and  mortgages),  as  evidenced  by  the  declining  trend  in  new  business  fixed 
investment as a percentage of GDP (and cash flow) and the moderate increasing trend in 
housing  investment.  This  phenomenon  is  closely  associated  with  the  declining  potential 
(trend)  economic  growth,  long-standing  mild  deflation,  and  persistent  output  gaps.  These 
features characterize the Japanese economy and partially reflect cyclical factors. But more 
importantly,  these  features  are  attributable  to  structural  factors  –  such  as  demographic 
changes (the rapid pace of aging, the declining working-age population from the mid-1990s, 
and  the  constantly  declining  population  projected  from  2011  onward),  structural  rigidity 
(which  hinders  smooth  inter-industry  and  intra-industry  structural  adjustments),  growing 
global  competition,  and  completion  of  the  catching-up  process  (Shirai  2012).  Against  this 
background,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  differentiate  between  cyclical  and 
structural  factors,  when  considering  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  While  an 
accommodative monetary environment is being maintained, efforts by the government and 
private sector are also important in order to raise potential economic growth and leap from a 
mild-deflationary phase onto a sustainable path. 
III. 
Impact of the Euro area crisis on Japan and other developed countries 
through financial channels 
The euro area crisis has been adversely affecting the global economy mainly through trade 
and financial channels. Japan has also been affected through sluggish exports over the past 
few  months  owing  to  both  a  direct  and  indirect  decline  in  exports  to  Europe  through  the 
supply-chain network centered on mainland China. The lower-than-expected export activities 
were  one  of  the  factors  considered  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ)  made  a  downward 
adjustment of the economic outlook at the Monetary Policy Meeting last month. At the same 
time, the BOJ decided to enhance monetary easing to ensure the return of Japan’s economy 
onto a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
In addition, the euro area crisis has promoted capital inflows to “safe haven” countries, such 
as Japan, the United States, and core European countries, and it has amplified the “flight-to-
safety premium” or “scarcity premium” charged on yields on their long-term sovereign bonds. 
There  are  various  measures  for  estimating  these  premiums.  One  simple  approach  is  to 
estimate  the  difference  between  the  observed  long-term  interest  rate  (e.g.,  the  yield  on 
10-year sovereign bonds) and expected nominal GDP growth (or the sum of expected real 
economic  growth  and  expected  long-term  inflation).  Based  on  recent  data,  the  differences 
indicate a negative figure for Japan, the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom in 
the  range  of  between  minus  1 percent  and  minus  3 percent,  which  appears  to  confirm  the 
presence of the flight-to-safety premium. 
A  more  sophisticated  approach  is  to  conduct  a  regression  analysis  using  the  long-term 
interest rates as the dependent variable and various structural and relevant indicators (such 
as fiscal conditions, foreign borrowing, labor productivity, demographics, and inflation) as the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
independent variable. Then, the residual could be interpreted as reflecting the flight-to-safety 
premium,  the  impact  of  monetary  policies,  and  so  on.  To  separate  the  possible  impact  of 
monetary  policy  from  this  analysis,  Ichiue  and  Shimizu  (2012)  employed  the  5-to-10-year 
forward rate as the dependent variable (rather than the 10-year bond yield). In this case, the 
residual  could  be  interpreted  as  reflecting  the  flight-to-safety  premium  (assuming  that 
unexplained factors are limited). If the residual shows a negative sign, it can be interpreted 
as indicating the presence of such a premium. 
The estimates of the residual or the difference between the observed 5-to-10-year forward 
rate  and  the  estimated  forward  rate  derived  from  the  model  indicate  a  negative  figure  for 
Japan, the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom (Chart 5). This means that the 
observed long-term interest rates were lower than the estimated rates in those four countries, 
which  suggests the  presence  of the flight-to-safety  premium. This  is  in  contrast  to  a  rising 
fear premium applied to the yields on sovereign bonds of the peripheral countries. 
My  view  is  that  the  increase  in  the  flight-to-safety  premium  is  attributable  to  the  supply 
shortage of “safe assets” because the repeated credit rate downgrading on sovereign bonds 
has  reduced  the  number  of  high-quality  sovereign  bonds  in  Europe.  Moreover,  the  global 
financial  crisis  triggered  by  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  had  already  reduced  the 
number  of  triple-A-rated  private-sector  bonds (such  as  mortgage-backed  securities [MBSs] 
and other asset-backed securities [ABSs]), thus contributing to the relative shortage of safe 
assets  globally.  Meanwhile,  demand  for  safer  liquid  assets  has  been  growing  in  the  world 
owing  to  continued  uncertainty  related  to  the  euro-area  stresses,  an  increase  in  foreign 
reserves  held  by  emerging  economies  and  oil-producing  countries,  and  tighter  financial 
regulations. 
Consequently, capital inflows into securities investment from abroad have contributed to the 
appreciation of the exchange rates of some of these countries, as typically seen in the case 
of Japan (Chart 6). This has adversely affected the export manufacturing sector, which had 
been recovering from the supply-chain disruption and resultant plunge in exports caused by 
the Great East Japan Earthquake on March 11, 2011. 
Moreover,  the  flight-to-safety  premium,  while  lowering  the  cost  of  financing  for  borrowers, 
may amplify the sudden reversal risk in Japan and other related countries. The IMF (2012) 
stressed  the  possibility  of  such  a  risk  in  the  medium  term.  Given  the  high  degree  of 
correlation between Japanese government bonds and other sovereign yields during normal 
periods, such a risk could materialize through a spillover effect from one country to another. 
That report also suggested that a sudden rise in the yield, when most developed countries’ 
policy rates are at the zero bound, might result in the output of Japan and other countries 
falling below their baseline growth paths. 
Cooperation and coordination among central banks 
IV. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  issues  related  to  cooperation  and  coordination  among 
central  banks.  It  is  true  that  a  number  of  central  banks  in  developed  countries,  including 
Japan,  have  been  conducting  a  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  (such  as  a  virtually 
zero-interest rate policy and an asset purchase program) to cope with weak economic growth 
and  prevent  disinflation  (or  to  achieve  recovery  from  mild  deflation  in  the  case  of  Japan). 
These  policies  are  necessary  and  consistent  with  the  mandate  of  our  central  bank  laws 
under the current situation. But it is also true that such policies could exert positive and/or 
negative spillover effects on other countries. 
It is often pointed out that the exceptionally low interest rates and injection of ample liquidity 
using  nonstandard measures  in  developed  countries  have  contributed  to  the generation of 
volatile  capital  flows  and  exchange  rates  and  amplified  the  boom-bust  cycle  in  emerging 
economies.  For  example,  Mr  Caruana,  the  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS), noted that credit to U.S. households and businesses has barely resumed 
its growth since the crisis, whereas dollar loans  to such borrowers in the rest of the world 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have increased by up to 20 percent (2012). He also pointed out that the Federal Reserve’s 
recent  large-scale  bond  purchase  has  reduced  global  bond  yields  under  the  increasingly 
integrated international bond markets. 
At  the  same  time,  central  banks  in  emerging  economies  may  be  conducting  asymmetric 
monetary  policy  to  mitigate  the  volatile  exchange-rate  movements.  For  example,  some 
countries have maintained relatively low interest rates for a long time in the face of massive 
capital inflows, though a rise in the interest rate could be executed relatively quickly in the 
case  of  capital  outflows.  This  kind  of  action  could  be  related  to  the  failure  of  policy 
coordination  since  each  country  attempts  to  avoid  exchange-rate  appreciation  relative  to 
competing  countries  in  order  to  maintain  competitiveness,  and  thus  each  waits  until  some 
other  country  takes  the  initiative.  This  results  in  the  prolonged  accommodative  monetary 
policy  stance,  thereby  contributing  to  a  rapid  increase  in  commodity  prices,  credit  growth, 
and overheating of economies. 
Considering the possibility of a fallacy of composition, Mr Caruana stresses the importance 
of assessing the impact of central bank policies on global outcomes. In this sense, the IMF’s 
attempt  to  focus  on  the  external  effects  of  policies  in  major  economies  in  the  Spillover 
Reports launched in 2011 is a welcome step to promote understanding of this issue. Active 
discussions at the G20 meetings can also contribute to global awareness. 
Though fulfilling its mandate is an important obligation for a central bank, each central bank 
increasingly  pays  attention  to  the  possible  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability.  This  arises  from  the  lesson  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  whereby  relatively  low 
policy rates in a low inflationary period can contribute to accumulating financial imbalances. 
Since financial activities take place on an increasingly global basis and financial markets are 
rapidly  integrating,  it  is  also  becoming  increasingly  important  for  central  banks  to  pay 
attention to global investors’ risk appetite and capital-flow movements when the transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  considered.  Thus,  I  myself  feel  that  promoting  further 
information sharing among central banks is becoming important. 
With the growing interdependence of financial markets, the importance of policy coordination 
among central banks has increased. As an example, I would like to point out one effective 
coordinated policy action recently undertaken by six central banks (the Bank of Canada, the 
Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National 
Bank)  –  namely,  the  U.S.  dollar  liquidity-providing  operations.  These  were  aimed  at 
addressing  pressures  in  the  global  money  markets  (Chart 7).  The  action  was  taken  in 
November  2011  as  a  response  to  growing  strains  in  U.S.  dollar  financial  markets.  Those 
central banks agreed to lower the pricing on the existing temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap 
arrangements  by  50 basis  points  so  that  the  new  rate  would  be  the  U.S.  dollar  overnight 
index  swap  rate  plus  50 basis  points.  As  a  contingency  measure,  moreover,  these  central 
banks  agreed  to  establish  temporary  bilateral  liquidity  swap  arrangements  so  that  liquidity 
could  be  provided  in  each  jurisdiction  in  any  of  their  currencies  if  necessitated  by  market 
conditions. 
As a result, this action – particularly the cut in the interest rate on the U.S. dollar liquidity-
providing  operations  –  succeeded  in  substantially  lowering  the  cost  of  swapping  euros  for 
U.S. dollars (Chart 8). Furthermore, the decline in the U.S. dollar funding cost encouraged 
many European banks that were having difficulty in raising funds from the market to borrow 
directly  from  the  ECB,  thereby  preventing  a  forced  fire  sale  of  assets  and  a  cut  in  loans 
denominated in U.S. dollars. 
In  closing,  the  recent  global  and  euro-area  crises  have  reminded  us  of  the  deepened 
financial  integration  and  resultant  greater  spillover  effects  of  shocks  from  one  country  to 
another. I feel that efforts to deepen an understanding of these issues could be an important 
first step toward achieving economic and price stability globally. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Chart 1 
Policy rate and lending rates in the Euro area 
Source: European Central Bank. 
Gaps between observed and expected spreads over German bonds 
Chart 2 
  Notes: 1. Actual spreads refer to 10-year bond yields as of September 4, 2012.  
2. Expected spreads are based on the past relationships between yields and debt rates. 
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Money stock, monetary base, and loans in the Euro area 
Chart 3 
Sources: Bank of Japan; Cabinet Office; European Central Bank; Eurostat. 
Chart 4 
Money stock, monetary base, and loans in Japan 
Sources: Bank of Japan; Cabinet Office. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
Estimated premiums charged on sovereign bond yields 
Chart 5 
Note:  Estimated  premiums  in  Japan,  the  United  States,  and  the  United  Kingdom  are  differences 
between observed and estimated 5-to-10-year forward rates as of May 2012, and those in France, 
Italy, Spain, Ireland, Portugal, and Greece are differences between observed and expected 10-year 
bond yields, shown in Chart 2. 
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Bank of Japan. 
Chart 6 
Nominal effective exchange rates 
  Sources: Bank of Japan; European Central Bank; Bloomberg. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Basic scheme of U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations 
Chart 7 
Note: Participated in by the central banks of Canada, the United Kingdom, Japan, the euro area, 
the United States, and Switzerland. 
 European banks’ U.S. dollar funding costs (3-month) 
Chart 8 
Source: Bloomberg. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
References 
Caruana,  Jaime,  “Policymaking  in  an  Interconnected  World”,  Luncheon  Speech  at  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 36th Economic Policy Symposium on “The Changing 
Policy Landscape”, Bank for International Settlements, 2012. 
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Yuhei Shimizu, “Determinants of Long-Term Yields: A Panel Data Analysis 
of  Major  Countries  and  Decomposition  of  Yields  of  Japan  and  the  US”,  Bank  of  Japan 
Working Paper Series, No. 12-E-7, 2012. 
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Takeshi Kimura, Toshifumi Nakamura, and Hikari Hasebe, “Anzen Shisan 
no  Jyukyu  to  Kokusai  no  Kishousei  Puremiamu”,  Bank  of  Japan  Review  Series,  2012-J-1, 
2012 (available only in Japanese). 
International Monetary Fund, “2012 Spillover Report”, 2012. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “What is the Near-Term Global 
Economic Outlook? An Interim Assessment”, 2012. 
Shirai,  Sayuri, 
“Have  Demographic  Changes  Affected  Japan’s  Macroeconomic 
Performance? – Some Implications for Monetary Policy –”, Speeches at the Bank of Finland, 
the Riksbank, and Stockholm University, Bank of Japan, 2012. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “International  Policy  Response  to  Financial  Crises”,  Remarks  at  the 
Symposium  Sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, Bank of Japan, 2009.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
