Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Charting new frontiers – financial advisers the 
future 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the Inaugural Conference of the Association of Financial Advisers “Charting new 
frontiers – financial advisers the future”, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2012. 
 I would like to congratulate the Association and its members for your commitment, which has 
resulted in the successful formation of the AFA to champion and promote the interests of all 
licensed  financial  advisers  in  Malaysia.  The formation  of  AFA  is  most timely,  and  marks  a 
significant milestone in the progressive maturing of the financial advisory industry. 
Since  the  introduction  of  FAs  in  2005,  we  have  seen  commendable  growth  within  the 
industry, with the number of licensed FAs rising from 2 to 17, and the number of licensed FA 
representatives  increasing  from  17  to  229  today.  The  formation  of  the  AFA  is  timely  as  it 
provides  a  platform  to  encourage  greater  collaboration  among  FAs  to  instill  greater 
professionalism among its members and I expect the AFA to play an important role in coming 
up with clear strategies to propel the financial advisory sector towards greater progress and 
growth. 
Developments in the insurance and takaful sectors 
There  are  some  broad developments  within  the  economy  and  the  financial  sector  that  will 
expand the opportunity for growth in the provision of independent financial advisory services. 
First, the insurance and takaful sectors have seen positive and continuous growth over the 
last five years, with total insurance premiums transacted and takaful contributions recording 
an average annual growth of 4.9%, with annual growth peaking at 13% in 2010. In terms of 
insurance penetration, in 2011, 67 out of 100 Malaysians had some form of life insurance or 
family takaful coverage as compared to only 59 out of 100 Malaysians in 2006. This means 
there remains  a  large  untapped  segment  of the  population  with  no  life  insurance  or family 
takaful protection that the profession can further develop. 
Second,  in  terms  of  distribution  channels,  the  agency  force  is  still  the  dominant 
intermediation  point  for  the  insurance  industry.  At  present,  the  market  share  of  financial 
advisers  as  a  delivery  channel  is  still  low  and  therefore,  the  prospect  of  growth  is 
tremendous. 
The prominence of the agency force as a delivery channel of choice for the distribution of life 
insurance  business  is  evidenced  from  the  more  than  10%  growth  in  the  number  of  life 
insurance  agents  enrolled  between  2006  and  2011.  Consistent  with  the  increase  in  the 
agency  force,  the  expenditure  dedicated  to  maintain  this  delivery  channel  also  remained 
significant,  with  commissions  and  agency  remunerations  consistently  accounting  for  more 
than 70% of the net investment income of the industry. 
This  trend  reflects the  attractive  payouts  a  productive  agent  can  potentially  earn,  although 
the  industry’s  commission  structure  is  bound  by  the  limits  specified  in  the  operating  costs 
control guideline (OCC Guideline) issued by the Bank. 
Benchmarked against selected countries within the region which do not regulate commission 
payment, the commission rate currently earned by Malaysian agents remains relatively high 
compared  to  the  benchmarked  rates  of  between  140%  to  150%,  as  seen  in  other 
jurisdictions. This excludes other agency-related benefits which are also allowable under the 
OCC guideline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Some  have  argued  that  the  current  commission  levels  are  too  low  as  the  commission 
structure has not been revised since the Guidelines were first introduced in 1996. However, 
closer  scrutiny  shows  that  agency  income  from  commissions  had  increased  in  absolute 
terms in line with the increase in average premiums size. The average size of new business 
grew  by  9%  per  annum  over  the  last  decade  while  in-force  premium  size  recorded  a 
compounded annual growth rate of 5%. Hence, the commission income of productive agents 
has in fact been growing in excess of the consumer price index and national average wage 
inflation.  
The  world  is  constantly  changing,  the  transformation  that  is  taking  place  in  the  financial 
sector  landscape  also  warrants  a  suitable  change  in  the  regulatory  framework  which  the 
industry must be prepared to embrace and adapt to, going forward. The OCC had served its 
objectives  well  to  keep  operating  costs  reasonable  to  ensure  policyholders’  interests  are 
preserved.  To  enhance  greater  efficiency  and  facilitate  a  more  competitive  market 
environment, the Bank will accord greater operational flexibility to the industry in determining 
amongst others, the commission structure for its agents and other intermediaries. 
Based on statistics made available to the Bank, commission and agency remuneration have 
consistently accounted for approximately 40% of the total net premium income of life insurers 
since 1997. With the proposed flexibility, individual insurers will have the ability to determine 
the  remuneration  of  its  intermediaries  but  subject  to  appropriate  safeguards  being  put  in 
place  such  as  a  more  robust  disclosure  framework  for  greater  transparency.  These 
operational flexibilities will be implemented in a gradual manner, with some measures being 
introduced  by  the  end  of  this  year.  This  is  to  minimize  the  risk  of  adverse  impact  on  the 
efficient delivery of insurance products and services to consumers. 
With  the  fundamental  changes  taking  place  around  us,  it  is  timely  for  insurers  including 
intermediaries,  to  assess  how  best  to  improve  insurance  penetration  going forward. There 
are  some  fundamental  questions  that  need  to  be  asked. Would  attracting  a  larger  agency 
force  be  the  most  effective  solution  in  this  more  liberalized  environment?  Or,  should  the 
focus  perhaps  be  on  expanding  the  diversity  of  the  intermediaries  in  general,  to  ensure 
consumers have more alternatives to receive high-quality and suitable advice? 
Whatever the response to these questions, what is obvious is that investing in human capital 
is an important common denominator, not only to enhance the existing level of expertise of 
intermediaries but also to attract the right people to ensure a continuous supply of talents into 
the profession. 
It  is  from  this  perspective  that  an  incentive  package  is  being  considered  by  the  Bank  to 
subsidize the costs related to minimum professional qualifications for FAs. We hope that it 
will entice more agents to consider upgrading themselves to become successful FAs. 
Growing demand for independent financial advisory services 
As our economy continues its track towards high income nation status, and as our society 
becomes more affluent and discerning, we envisage an increasing demand and preference 
for  high-quality,  independent  and  personalized  advisory  services  among  financially-savvy 
consumers. 
Apart  from  rising  levels  of  disposable  income  and  financial  sophistication,  Malaysians  are 
expected  to  live  longer  now  than  ever  before.  It  is  projected  that  by  2040,  17%  of  the 
Malaysian population will live beyond the age of 60 years old compared to about only 8% of 
the  total  population  in  2010.  This  creates  the  need  for  more  effective  long-term  financial 
planning on the part of consumers to ensure they have sufficient funds to see them through 
their  golden  years.  In  this  respect,  as  part  of  the  Government’s  initiative  to  encourage 
savings  among  Malaysians  to  better  prepare  for  their  retirement,  the  Government  had 
announced a tax relief of RM3,000 for individuals who have bought an annuity plan for the 
next 10 years commencing in 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An increased competition within the financial sector and evolving demographic structures has 
also led to the introduction of new and more complex financial products offered by financial 
service  providers.  While  financial  consumers  now  have  a  greater  array  of  choice,  the 
challenge is in choosing the most appropriate financial product commensurate to their needs. 
Lessons  learned  from  other  markets  showed  that  high-profile  cases  of  mis-selling  of 
investment-linked  and  pension  products  extols  the  importance  of  ensuring  consumers  are 
properly adviced on the key features, terms, conditions and suitability of a financial product 
before they enter into any financial contract. 
Assisting consumers to make wise financial choices 
As  FAs,  you  have  the  responsibility  to  educate  consumers  on  the  importance  of  financial 
planning, such as saving for the first home or a child’s future education, or buying insurance 
protection  to  safeguard  against  unexpected  losses.  FAs  can  assist  consumers  in  better 
understanding their current and future financial needs and circumstances. FAs can provide 
independent  and  impartial  advice  which  is  tailored  to  the  consumers  risk  appetite  and 
financial needs. 
Apart  from  educating  their  clients  on  what  they  should  be  investing  in,  FAs  also  play  an 
important role in educating their clients on what they should not be investing in. As you are 
the industry’s front-liners and are actively meeting with potential customers on a daily basis, 
FAs can be relied on as a key source of information to prevent consumers from falling prey to 
financial scams. 
Broad strategies for effective provision of wealth management  
In  recognition  of  the  need  to  further  enhance  the  regulatory  framework  supporting  the 
development  of  the  financial  advisory  sector,  the  Bank  has  recommended  for  further 
streamlining of the current dual licensing regime for FAs and financial planners (FPs) in the 
Financial  Sector  Blueprint  2011–2020.  A  Joint  Working  Group  with  the  Securities 
Commission  has  been  formed  to  assess  the  existing  legislations  and  regulatory  regime 
across  both jurisdictions,  with  the  aim  of further  reducing  duplications  and  related  costs of 
compliance for the benefit of industry participants. 
Some of the measures that have already been introduced include the harmonization of limits 
on foreign shareholding and streamlining of professional qualifications and requirements on 
continuing  professional  development.  The  Bank  will  be  engaging  with  the  AFA  at  a  later 
stage as part of the consultative process towards further enhancing the regulatory regime for 
FAs and FPs. 
In  line  with  our  objective  of  promoting  fair  and  responsible  conduct  by  financial  service 
providers, the Bank has recently reissued the Guidelines on Proper Advice Practices for Life 
Insurance and Family Takaful Business. The Guidelines which was previously applicable to 
the  sales  force  and  agents  of  insurers  and  takaful  operators  has  now  been  extended  to 
include all insurance and takaful intermediaries, including financial advisers. The Guidelines 
outline the minimum standards for proper advice and ethical selling practices of life insurance 
and family takaful products by insurance and takaful intermediaries, with the aim of ensuring 
consumers are provided with suitable advice to support informed decision-making. 
With these Guidelines in-force, the Board of Directors of respective FAs are now required to 
establish the necessary processes to ensure proper monitoring of the quality of the advisory 
process conducted by FA representatives, and we expect FAs to deal firmly and expediently 
in the event of non-compliance which results in mis-selling or the provision of inappropriate 
advice. 
I am greatly encouraged to see the continuing growth of the FA industry and today’s event 
marks  a  significant  milestone  for  the  industry  as  a  whole.  The  theme  of  this  Conference, 
“Charting New Frontiers – Financial Advisers the Future” is well-timed and reflective of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
changes  we  are  now  experiencing  as  our  nation  progresses  towards  a  high-income 
economy. Once again, I would like to congratulate AFA on its official launch and look forward 
to  meaningful  contributions  from  the  Association  in  driving  the  financial  advisory  sector 
forward. On this note, I wish you all a successful and productive Conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
