Mugur Isărescu: Establishment of a new 15-county IMF-WB Constituency 
that already includes Romania 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the 
establishment of a new IMF-WB Constituency that includes Romania, at the Annual Meeting 
of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Your Excellences, Ministers, Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  you  all  on  this  special  occasion  and  to 
welcome our new partners from Belgium and Luxembourg. 
This  moment,  when  the  establishment  of  a  new,  15-country  constituency,  is  formally 
announced, has several historical meanings, already presented by Minister de Jager. 
Let me add something from the experience of my country. Romania joined the International 
Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  in  1972  and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Dutch 
Constituency ever since. It is worth mentioning that this Constituency had only five members 
in those days: The Netherlands, Israel, Cyprus, Yugoslavia and Romania. After 1990, I saw 
how, in a few years, the memberships grew to 13 countries. Despite this rapid enlargement 
with such diverse configuration and the huge transformation happening in all the countries in 
the last two decades, our Constituency has remained remarkably stable and has operated 
well. 
This is why I share the views of Minister de Jager that we have been able to find strength in 
our diversity. 
More  than  this,  I  could  say  that  based  on  diversity  and  stability,  this  constituency  has 
gradually  emerged,  as  one  supporting  the  interests  of  small  open  economies  such  as  our 
countries. And today, with Belgium and Luxembourg joining, we are one of the largest and 
diverse constituencies among European chairs, with a substantially higher voting weight and 
a voice to play an even stronger role in the IMF Board in the future. 
Not  only  do  we  count  nearly  a  quarter  of  all  the  EU  members,  but  we  have  among  us 
countries  with  broad  experience in the  world  of finance. I  wish  to remind  you  that  the first 
Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  was  Camille  Gutt,  the  distinguished 
Belgian economist. The fifth Managing Director, Johannes Witteveen, was a Dutch national. 
The First Deputy Managing Director for a long period of time, during the last twenty years, 
was Stanley Fischer. 
The historical lesson that a country like Romania has learned for the past forty years as a 
member of the Dutch Constituency is the importance of continuity. Continuity has given us 
the feeling of belonging to a great family which is caring and providing for its members. 
For many of us, former communist countries, being part of this constituency has offered a 
unique opportunity to benefit from the expertise of Western specialists, in the great effort of 
institutional development. An example is the Romanian central bank in the early ‘90s. Thus, 
the  Supervision  Department  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  was  set  up  with  technical 
assistance from the Nederlandsche Bank. Also, forex and market operations developed from 
the co-operation with our colleagues from the Belgian central bank. 
Another form  of  cooperation  between  the member  states  of  the Constituency  was  the fact 
that since 1993, a second constituency meeting at the level of ministers and governors was 
held annually in one of the member countries, on a rotating basis. The IMF management and 
senior  staff  were  invited  to  speak  on  issues  of  interest.  I  have  participated  to  almost  all 
constituency  meetings  since  1990.  I  could  testify  that  each  of  them  was  interesting  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fruitful.  As  a  veteran  I  cannot  help  but  remember  the  first  meeting  after  the  fall  of 
communism, in September 1990. At that time I met three not only impressive tall men, but 
also, outstanding personalities: Governor Wim Duisenberg, Minister Wim Kok and Executive 
Director  Goddard  Posthumus.  I  have  to  say  I  had  the  honour  to  collaborate  with  all  the 
executive directors of our constituency. Thus, it is a pleasure to remember the extraordinary 
relationships developed with Onno Wijnholds, Age Bakker, Jeroen Kremers, Governor Nout 
Wellink and Minister Gerrit Zahn. 
Dear colleagues and friends, 
I am proud to say that the constituency meeting held in June this year, in Romania, where 
both Belgium and Luxembourg representatives were invited, was a step forward towards this 
formal  outcome.  It  was  as  if  the  engagement  was  held  in  Bucharest  and  now,  the  official 
marriage is being celebrated here, in Tokyo. 
It was not an easy journey. The National Bank of Romania has shown its support and loyalty 
from  the  very  beginning.  Many  of  you,  present  here,  played  an  essential  role  in  making  it 
happen: Minister Jan Kees de Jager, Governor Knot, Executive Directors Menno Snel and 
Ruud Treffers. 
I want to extend my thanks to them and to each and every one of you. Now we are a big 
family where trust is vital. I wish we have the opportunity to meet again in the future, look 
back on this day and be proud of our accomplishments. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
