Luis M Linde: United Kingdom and Spain – assessing current issues 
Intervention by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at  the dinner opening the 
25th Tertulias Hispano-Británicas, Madrid, 26 October 2012. 
 Almost a quarter of a century back,  following  the visit by her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II to 
Madrid  in 1988, a group  of  Spanish and British  diplomats,  politicians,  academics  and  civil 
servants had an excellent  idea. They took  advantage of the Gibraltar dispute  not  to  further 
cool  relations  between  Spain  and  the  United  Kingdom,  or  to  squabble  some  more,  but 
rather to seek to be closer friends and try and understand one another better. 
Today marks the 25th  edition  of the Tertulias. Let me welcome  all those taking  part,  firstly 
and especially our British friends, who honour us with their presence. 
A few days ago, perusing James Boswell’s legendary book  on the life of Samuel Johnson, 
one  of  European  culture’s  literary  giants,  I  came  across  several  paragraphs  in  which 
Boswell  relates Dr Johnson’s interest in Spain. He was convinced  that  Spain was a greatly 
unknown  country  in  England  and  in  Europe,  and  he  suspected it  could  teach  much  to 
those  taking  the  trouble  to  travel  there.  Samuel Johnson  made  this  statement  around  the 
mid-1760s. 
Today,  Spain  is  no  doubt  much  better  known  in  the  United  Kingdom  than  in  Johnson’s 
time,  as  it  is  also  the  case  for  the  United  Kingdom being  better known in  Spain.  But 
everything  is  relative  and  I  believe  it’s  not  difficult  to  spot  black  holes,  mistaken  notions 
and errors of understanding  on both  sides. While these Tertulias are usually an opportunity 
to  overcome  some  of  these  problems,  they  most  importantly  allow  us  to  understand  our 
respective  stances  on current,  important  or pressing  issues. And  we  also enjoy ourselves. 
Because, unlike other meetings, the Tertulias are, from my experience, a rather entertaining 
event. I still have fond memories of the meetings I attended and the discussions  we  had  in 
the  now  distant  1990s  in  Santiago  de  Compostela,  in  Seville,  in Santander and  also in 
Oxford and in Edinburgh. 
The  Tertulias  were  instituted  at  what  was  a  key  time  in  recent  European  history:  the 
disappearance  of  the  Berlin  Wall,  German  reunification,  the  collapse  of  the  Soviet  Union 
and  the  start  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  project. Next  came  the  great  economic 
expansion at the onset of the 21st century,  the international financial crisis and the serious 
economic  problems  that  have affected  all of  us, Spain  and  the  United  Kingdom  included. 
The European Union and the Monetary Union are today at a difficult  crossroads. They face a 
problem  which,  when  the  Maastricht  Treaty was negotiated,  we knew  might  arise: that the 
Monetary  Union  without  fiscal  integration  would  be  an edifice  with  weak  foundations.  And 
although attempts  were made to  head off  the risk with  public  deficit  and debt  rules, it was 
known  that  these were  merely shoring  up  the  building  and  that  they  could  not  resolve its 
fundamental weakness. 
But  the  difficulties  we are encountering  in the European Union and in the Monetary  Union 
have not only to do with the weak fiscal foundations  of this edifice. They are also related to 
problems of what we call “governance”. 
Clearly,  we  have  extremely  complex  negotiating  and  decision-making procedures  in  the 
European  Union  and 
in  addition  to 
macroeconomic imbalances,  these  problems  affect  the  stability  of  the  markets  and  the 
perception of risk regarding the area’s future. 
Most  Britons  are  sceptical about  Monetary  Union  and  its  future.  Although  it  is  not  very 
politically  correct  to  say  so,  the  truth  is  that  this  scepticism is  really  not  too  bad  for  us 
since it  helps  those  of  us who  are members  of  the Monetary  Union to  see ourselves from 
outside  and to  take, perhaps, a more realistic view. Sceptics  or not, we can agree that  the 
the  Monetary  Union.  And, 
irrespective  of  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fallout from a failure  of the Monetary Union would certainly affect the future of the European 
Union as a whole. 
The United  Kingdom  chose  not  to  participate  in the Monetary  Union and holds  firm  to  this 
position.  Indeed,  it  would  be  strange  if  it  were  to  change  its  mind  in  the  current 
circumstances.  But  it’s  clear  to  me  that  the  United  Kingdom  has  no  interest  in  European 
Monetary  Union  failing.  That  is  why  I  am  convinced  that  our  British  friends  are true  allies 
when  it  comes  to  overcoming  the  current  euro  area problems,  and  that  we  can  count  on 
their help and cooperation  – albeit from a different  position  than ours – for our initial steps 
regarding the Banking  Union, including  the steps  towards  single supervisory  arrangements 
and the functions  of  the European Banking  Authority.  The United  Kingdom  has one of  the 
world’s most  sophisticated  financial  industries,  and a wealth  of  regulatory  and  supervisory 
intelligence  and  experience.  Quite  frankly,  we  wish  to  avail  ourselves  of  their  help  and 
advice. 
The current  economic  situation  is not  an easy one in either the United  Kingdom  or  Spain. 
There are serious imbalances in our public  finances and problems  in our banking  systems, 
but unemployment is much more severe  in Spain than in the United Kingdom and, moreover, 
we  are  suffering  from  a  bout  of  distrust  regarding  the  future  of  the  euro  area,  which 
affects  our  external  financing,  but  naturally  not  the  United  Kingdom’s.  What  is  more,  the 
restrictions  on  the  European  Central  Bank  differ  from  those  to  which  the  Bank  of 
England is subject.  Finally, we should note that the latest news on economic  activity  in the 
United  Kingdom  appears  to  be  positive,  and  that  in  Spain  we  are  implementing  a  very 
harsh adjustment that is already yielding appreciable results in terms of fiscal consolidation, 
competitiveness and correction of the current account deficit. 
As you will  have so many other matters  to  discuss,  apart  from  the economy  and the euro, 
you must forgive me for dedicating  so much time to my own specific subjects. 
To  conclude,  I  am  sure  these  present  Tertulias  will,  as  in  all  the  previous  meetings,  be 
successful,  that the participants  will enjoy themselves, and that our British friends will have 
very good memories of this visit to Madrid. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
