Christian Noyer: Monetary policy – how to cope with the current financial 
crisis? 
Speech with Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of the  Bank for  International  Settlements,  at the GIC (Global  Interdependence 
Center)  Conference  on  “The  Global  Financial  Crisis  –  lessons  from  Japan”,  Session  1: 
Monetary policy – how to cope with the current financial crisis?, Tokyo, 1 December 2012. 
 Five years into the crisis, central banking does not look the same. Numerous and significant 
changes have occurred in the way in which central banks perform their duties and fulfil their 
missions.  Whether  we  are  witnessing  temporary  departures  from  normality  or  irreversible 
transformations  is  hard  to  tell.  According  to  one  view,  frequently  expressed,  the  crisis  has 
ushered in a new era for central banking where independence, in particular, cannot be taken 
for granted. I do not share that assessment. True, central banks all around the world have 
taken  on  exceptional  responsibilities.  But  they  have  also  faced  exceptional  circumstances. 
And  they  have  done  so  in  a  fully  independent  capacity  and  in  accordance  with  their 
mandates.  
I also believe that, without such actions, the crisis would have inflicted much greater damage 
upon  advanced  economies.  On  numerous  occasions,  determined  interventions  by  central 
banks  have  stabilised  financial  markets  as  spirals  and  panics  were  developing.  Central 
banks  have  constantly  dealt  with  dysfunctions  in  credit  and  capital  markets,  borne  out  of 
excessive risk aversion.  
These  interventions  have  largely  succeeded  in  avoiding  deflation  and  a  cumulative  fall  in 
GDP during the most acute phases of the crisis. It remains true, however, that, contrary to 
past  episodes  which  followed  deep  recessions,  the  current  recovery  appears  sluggish, 
uncertain  and  fragile.  The  global  growth  environment  remains  affected  by  significant 
uncertainties.  Today,  I  would  like  to  reflect  upon  these  developments  and  focus  on  the 
challenges facing central banks in the post-crisis environment. 
1. Let me start with a few stylised facts 
The first, and most visible, is the spectacular expansion in central banks’ balance sheets. In 
all advanced economies, their size has been multiplied, over four years, by a factor of two to 
five. This is an unprecedented development. Beyond advanced countries, central banks in 
emerging economies have also, to a lesser extent, expanded their balance sheets, mainly, 
but not only, as a result of foreign exchange interventions.  
A second, and related, feature is the diversification of central banks’ interventions. Prior to 
the crisis, central banks would conduct monetary policy by determining the policy rate, and, 
in some countries, by imposing  compulsory reserve requirements on banks. The crisis has 
led to the development and proliferation of so called “non-conventional measures”, with two 
objectives.  First,  to  remedy  financial  market  disruptions;  and  second,  to  provide  further 
monetary accommodation once policy rates have been brought down to very low levels and 
hit the so-called “zero lower bound”. 
Most, but not all, non-conventional measures have led central banks to use and expand their 
balance sheet in order to influence a broader set of financial parameters: long-term interest 
rates,  credit  spreads  and  credit  volumes.  In  the  euro  area,  the  bulk  of  interventions  have 
aimed at providing unlimited liquidity to the banking system, first through the “fixed rate full 
allotment”  procedure  adopted  in  2008,  then  through  a  progressive  extension  of  maturities, 
culminating in the two three-year LTROs decided on in December 2011. Other central banks, 
and  more  recently,  the  Eurosystem,  have  resorted  to  asset  purchases,  both  private  and 
public, sometimes on a large scale. So-called “forward guidance” on interest rates has been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
used, especially in the United States, to influence interest rate expectations and bring down 
the yield curve. 
Most  recently,  additional  innovations  have  been  introduced  in  the  United  Kingdom  and 
Japan,  where  central  banks  have  taken  actions  to  directly  stimulate  private  credit  to  the 
economy. These actions have involved a mix of regulatory measures and targeted liquidity 
providing  operations,  such  as  the  “funding  for  lending”  scheme  implemented  in  the  United 
Kingdom. 
2. It is important to note that none of these developments were imposed on central banks by 
governments. In all countries, non-conventional measures and the consecutive expansion of 
balance sheets were a deliberate and voluntary response to financial market developments 
that threatened their integrity, their functioning and overall economic stability.  
Nor  were  these  measures  planned  in  advance.  Central  banks  had  to  react  to  unforeseen 
developments with very little recent historical experience to guide their decisions. Overall, the 
response to the crisis was largely a “learning-by-doing” process. 
With hindsight, however, there appears to be an underlying logic to all these interventions. 
First,  after  the  bursting  of  the  credit  bubble,  all  advanced  economies  entered  a  phase  of 
deleveraging,  in  an  attempt  to  reverse  and  absorb  the  excesses  of  the  pre-crisis  period. 
Deleveraging, which is basically a balance sheet contraction, has affected almost all sectors 
in our economies: banks, obviously, households (in the United States and United Kingdom) 
and,  now,  governments.  Deleveraging  is  unavoidable  and  necessary.  Both  borrowers  and 
lenders need to re-establish sustainable debt positions in order to restart credit  and restore 
the  normal  financing  of  the  economy  in  the  long  run.  But  deleveraging  creates  huge 
difficulties in the short run. It may be extremely deflationary as it involves both a contraction 
in credit and money and an increase in savings rates. To some extent, central banks have 
counteracted  this  development.  By  expanding  their  balance  sheets,  they  increased  their 
leverage  when  other  economic  agents  (with  the  exception  of  large  corporates)  were  all 
deleveraging simultaneously.  
Second, the uncertainty created by the crisis has led to an increase in the demand for safe 
and  liquid  assets.  At  the  same  time,  the  supply  of  these  assets  has  been  significantly 
reduced, especially in Europe, since credit risk has appeared on government debt. To some 
extent,  central  banks  have  partly  narrowed  this  gap  between  demand  and  supply  by 
providing  financial  intermediaries  with  the  safest  and  most  liquid  assets  of  all:  their  own 
liabilities, in the form of deposits and reserves held by banks. The importance and usefulness 
of  this  function  is  illustrated  by  the  significant  amounts  still  outstanding  in  the  Eurosystem 
deposit facility or in the form of non-compulsory reserves. 
It is, indeed, in the essence of central banks’ historical function to step in when dislocations 
in financial markets appear and to contain long-lasting damage to the economy. If they fail to 
act, then self-fulfilling expectations could lead to panic and financial dislocation.  
A good example is the situation in the euro area in the second quarter of this year. Week 
after  week,  there  were  growing  signs  of  a  perceived  “convertibility  risk”  between  different 
parts  of  the  euro  area.  However  unfounded,  these  self-fulfilling  fears  destabilised  capital 
flows  and  led  to  the  rapid  and  increasing  segmentation  of  financial  and  credit  markets. 
Financial  conditions  were  increasingly  divergent  across  the  euro  area,  irrespective  of  the 
quality of borrowers and the level of policy rates. If left unchecked, this process would have 
rendered monetary policy totally powerless to combat both inflation and deflation, if either of 
these risks had materialised. This was, for the Eurosystem, an unacceptable situation. It led 
the Governing Council to announce in September the introduction of the Outright Monetary 
Transaction  (OMT)  programme,  whereby  the  Eurosystem  may  purchase  government  debt 
with a maturity of up to three years. As you know, OMTs, while ex-ante unlimited in time and 
amount,  are  strictly  conditional  upon  the  country  implementing  a  programme  making  it 
eligible to financing from the European Stability Mechanism. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3.  By  definition,  “non-conventional”  policies  are  highly  innovative  and  central  banks  have 
made great efforts and devoted large resources to explaining their rationale and modalities. 
Nevertheless,  there  remain  some  misperceptions  and  concerns  which  I  will  briefly  try  to 
dispel and address.  
First,  there  are  fears  that  the  whole  process  of  balance  sheet  expansion  is  inflationary. 
Indeed,  one  important  effect  of  non-conventional  policies  is  to  significantly  increase  the 
quantity  of  central  bank  money  in  the  economy.  Since,  ultimately,  inflation  is  always  and 
everywhere a monetary phenomenon, it may seem natural to anticipate further inflationary 
pressures  down  the  road.  While  I  understand  these  preoccupations,  I  do  not  see,  in  the 
current situation, any reason for concern. True, there has been a strong increase in central 
bank money and the situation should be monitored accordingly. What matters, however, for 
inflation,  is  the  changes  in  broad  monetary  aggregates,  which  determine  private  agents’ 
ability  to  purchase  goods,  hence  the  price  level.  These  broad  aggregates  have  either 
remained unchanged or grown very slowly. What has happened, in fact, is that broad money 
has been substituted by central bank money as economic agents have felt the need to hold 
more liquid and safer assets. This expansion in central bank money has not affected inflation 
expectations, which have remained well-anchored.  
Should the situation change, nothing has been done that would impair our ability to fulfil our 
primary mandate and preserve price stability. Many tools are available to absorb liquidity, if it 
proves necessary.  
Concerns  are  also  expressed  in  the  euro  area  about  purchases  of  government  debt  as  a 
form of “monetary financing” of the government. As you know, such purchases are explicitly 
allowed  for  in  the  Treaty.  There  is  no  legal  issue,  here. What  about  the  economics?  This 
question can be broken down into two. First, the market impact. True, these purchases may 
lead to lower interest rates. This is their purpose. OMTs will only take place if and when the 
Governing  Council  has  determined  that  bond  markets  are  no  longer  functioning  properly, 
hence  interest rates  are  distorted.  A  last,  serious,  concern  is  moral  hazard.  Lower  interest 
rates  triggered  by  secondary  purchases  could  give  rise  to  bad  incentives,  impede  market 
discipline  and  delay  necessary  fiscal  adjustment  efforts. This  is  the  very  reason  why  strict 
and explicit conditionality is attached to OMTs. 
4.  Central  banks  have  been  active;  they  have  been  audacious;  but  they  do  not  have 
unlimited  power.  This  may  be  a  good  time  to  reflect  upon  what  monetary  policy  can  and 
cannot do. I will concentrate on one specific question: the so-called “decreasing returns” of 
non-conventional monetary policy. The argument goes as follows: balance sheet expansion 
and  low  interest  rates  create  potential  imbalances  in  the  financial  sector.  Past  a  certain 
stage,  the  potential  cost  and  instability  stemming  from  these  imbalances  far  outweigh  the 
short-term benefits for the economy.  
There  is,  indeed,  a  difficult  trade-off.  The  very  purpose  of  non-conventional  policies  is  to 
induce some risk-taking, encourage portfolio rebalancing and stimulate lending by the private 
sector.  The  danger,  of  course,  is  that  “wrong”  risks  are  being  taken  with  no  credit  to  the 
productive economy and low interest rates causing a search for yield in speculative assets. 
The  situation,  therefore,  requires  a  very  subtle  calibration  of  our  overall  stance.  It  seems 
crucial today that we carefully consider the joint effects of monetary and prudential policies – 
both  on  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  –  to  make  sure  that  they  do  not  produce 
unintended effects on capital allocation. 
5.  Central  banks’  actions  are  not  limited  to  fighting  the  crisis  and  stabilising  the  financial 
system. In the euro area, under the impulsion of the European Council, we are working on 
building a more robust and efficient financial system. One major weakness revealed by the 
crisis is the strong link between banks and sovereigns. As a result, any negative fiscal shock 
or  bad  news  has  an  immediate  adverse  effect  on  the  overall  financing  conditions  for  the 
private  sector.  And,  at  the  same  time,  difficulties  experienced  by  banks  give  rise  to 
expectations of a public bail-out and lead to a deterioration in the perceived creditworthiness 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of the sovereign. Such very powerful and perverse feedback loops have been at work during 
critical phases of the crisis, over the last two years.  
The purpose of the banking union, decided on in June, is to break that link and create, as a 
first stage, a single supervisory mechanism in the euro area under the auspices of the ECB. 
It is essential that the banking union be rapidly implemented, covering all credit institutions. It 
will  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  It  will  re-establish  the  normal  functioning  of 
monetary  policy.  It  will  de-segment  financial  markets  and  allow  for  normal  private  capital 
flows  within  the  euro  area.  It  will  ultimately  allow  for  a  disengagement  of  the  euro  system 
from  interbank  and  financial  intermediation.  Moving  decisively  towards  a  Banking  Union  is 
one major contributing factor in reducing uncertainty and boosting confidence. 
Conclusion: the ability of monetary policy to fight uncertainty 
Uncertainty is a major cause of the current weak recovery. One may point to the paradox in 
the present environment characterised by very low interest rates, very large cash reserves in 
the hands of corporates, but very little investment. The good news is that a small spark could 
have huge effects. The bad news is that this spark has not occurred.  
Monetary  policy  cannot  by  itself  remove  economic  uncertainty.  It  can  contribute  to  limiting 
and attenuating its effects. It is also essential that other sources of uncertainty be dealt with, 
especially  when they stem from government policies. In the euro area, fiscal consolidation 
must  continue  and  crisis  management  mechanisms  must  be  made  operational.  In  other 
countries,  such  as  the  United  States  and  Japan,  future  fiscal  uncertainties  must  be 
eliminated. Finally, stable regulatory regimes, first and foremost in the financial sector, are 
also essential. 
For its part, monetary policy must be predicable, not in the sense that each and every move 
of the monetary authorities be precisely anticipated, but rather, that their objectives be clear 
and  their  actions  fully  understandable  by  economic  agents.  Strong,  independent  and 
responsible central banks are, more than ever, necessary to price and financial stability.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
