Masaaki Shirakawa: Evolution of the Bank of Japan’s policies and 
operations – looking back on fifty years of history 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Introductory 
Program  on  Bank  of  Japan  Policies  and  Operations  on  the  occasion  of  2012  Annual 
Meetings of the IMF/World Bank Group, Tokyo, 9 October 2012. 
 Good morning, honorable ministers, honorable governors, and distinguished delegates to the 
2012 Annual Meetings of the IMF/World Bank Group. I am truly delighted to welcome you to 
the Bank of Japan today. Before I begin my remarks, please allow me to take this opportunity 
to express my sincere gratitude for the warm support we received from you and many other 
friends around the world when we were hit by the devastating tremor of the Great East Japan 
Earthquake last year. 
This  is  the  second  time  Tokyo  has  hosted  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the  IMF/World  Bank 
Group. The last time was in 1964 when Japan was at the zenith of a high-growth period and 
still one of the “emerging market economies”. Comparing the size of economy at that time to 
that of the United States, nominal GDP was 12% and per capita nominal GDP was 24% of 
that of the U.S. That roughly corresponds to Russia or Brazil today. Japan went through a 
reconstruction period after World War II, and from the mid-1950s to early 1970s, it enjoyed 
high  economic  growth  that  marked  an  annual  rate  of  10%.  Among  the  conditions  that 
contributed to this high growth, I believe the most important ones were, first, the migration of 
the labor force from rural areas to the cities and from the agricultural to the manufacturing 
sector, which resulted in higher productivity, second, the high level of education, and third, 
the  benefits  of  the  free  trade  system.  However,  no  economy  can  maintain  high  growth 
indefinitely.  From  a  certain  point,  the  potential  growth  rate  starts  to  decline  gradually.  The 
most important task for policy makers is to achieve a smooth transition from high growth to 
stable  growth.  Yet,  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  identify  in  real-time  the  change  in  potential 
growth  rate.  The  attempt  to  maintain  high  growth  beyond  its  potential  may  cause  various 
imbalances. Let me take the case of Japan as an example. Japan suffered from high inflation 
in the first half of the 1970s, amplified by the first oil shock. Later, the country tried hard to 
make  its  industrial  structure  energy  efficient,  and  monetary  policy  was  focused  on  price 
stability.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  the  Japanese  economy  achieved  the  best  economic 
performance  among  major  developed  economies  in  terms  of  price  and  growth  rate.  This 
situation, albeit good in itself, fomented excessive optimism about Japan’s higher potential 
growth and, together with the influence of prolonged easy monetary policy, contributed to the 
creation of economic bubbles of unprecedented scale in the latter half of the 1980s. In the 
1990s, Japan suffered from deleveraging of excess debt, the aftermath of the bursting of the 
bubbles. And, since the early 2000s, the Japanese economy has gradually come to face a 
different issue from that in most of your countries. The challenge here is the rapid ageing of 
the population dragging down the potential growth rate. Since the beginning of the 2000s, the 
growth  rate  itself  has  remained  low,  while  the  growth  rate  per  working-age  population  in 
Japan has been 1.5% per annum, the highest among the major developed economies, along 
with Germany. 
It is impossible for me to go through the fifty years’ history of Japanese economy in just a few 
minutes. What I would like to stress is that we need to identify the new issues that always 
emerge at different stages of economic and financial development, and find the appropriate 
policy responses in a timely manner. 
In  any  case,  changes  in  the  economic  environment  require  a  constant  review  of  a  central 
bank’s policies and operations.  
Let me start with the exchange rate system. Japan currently uses a floating exchange rate 
system.  Fifty  years  ago,  we  had  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system.  Cross-border  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transactions  were  still  quite  regulated  in  those  days,  despite  Japan’s  acceptance  of  IMF 
Article VIII obligations. These restrictions were gradually removed and cross-border capital 
transactions increased dramatically. 
There was also a sea change in the financial system during the same period. In the 1960s, 
interest rates were strictly regulated and the capital market was underdeveloped. The major 
tool for the  Bank  of Japan’s  monetary  operations  at  that  time  was  the  allotment  of  central 
bank  loans  with  a  below-market  interest rate,  and  the  role  of  open market  operations  was 
limited.  Today,  the  major  monetary  operation  tools  have  been  shifted  to  the  open  market 
operations to control money market interest rates. Incidentally, the Bank of Japan has been 
deploying various non-traditional policies over the past 15 years, given that we are faced with 
short-term interest rates that are currently practically zero.  
In the area of payment and settlement systems, the development of computer systems and 
information technology brought major changes in the way funds and securities were settled. 
Fifty years ago, settlement was conducted by deferred netting. Today, the BOJ NET system 
settles  the  funds  among  the  counterparty  financial  institutions  on-line  and  on  a  real-time 
gross basis (RTGS). 
The evolution of the Bank of Japan’s policies and operations reflects the different stages of 
development  in  the  Japanese  economy  and  the  changes  in  the  domestic  and  external 
financial environment. In addition, the systems specific to Japan and its historical background 
are  also  reflected  in  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  operations.  Here  I  would  like  to  pick  up  two 
examples from different areas. 
One is the inclusion of securities companies or investment banks among the counterparties 
of the Bank of Japan. Following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, investment banks in the 
United  States  became  bank  holding  companies  and  gained  access  to  the  central  bank’s 
facilities. For more than seventy years, the Bank of Japan has allowed securities companies 
to  open  BOJ  current  accounts.  And  it  has  conducted  on-site  examination  of  those 
account-holding  securities  companies.  This  treatment  of  securities  companies  made  it 
possible for the Bank of Japan to swiftly provide liquidity, as the lender of last resort, when 
the financial crisis triggered by the unprecedented scale of the bursting of its bubbles forced 
the collapse of Yamaichi Securities, then one of the biggest securities companies. I believe 
that was one of the reasons why Japan was able to avoid becoming the epicenter of a global 
financial crisis at that time. 
Another example from a different field is the business survey known as the TANKAN. The 
Bank of Japan has been sending a special quarterly questionnaire to Japanese companies 
since  1957.  The  survey  currently  covers  about  ten  thousand  medium-sized  to  large 
companies, in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. As such, the TANKAN 
provides information valuable to gaining an understanding of the state of the economy.  
Central banks must strive to provide the operations best suited to their own environment. I 
believe this is also true for the central banks of African countries, represented by many of the 
governors  here  today.  A  few  years  ago, I  attended  a  conference  held  by  the  BIS  with  the 
governors of African central banks. There, I learned that banking services provided through 
mobile  phones  are  widely  used  in  Africa.  Although  I  was  initially  surprised  to  hear  this,  I 
quickly  realized  that  it  is  indeed  quite  a  natural  development  given  the  geographical 
environment  of  Africa,  and  is  something  which  may  have  bearing  on  the  operations  that 
African central banks are endeavoring to provide. 
I referred earlier to the evolution of central bank monetary policies and operations over the 
past fifty years by taking the experience of the Bank of Japan as an example. In considering 
these changes, I have realized once again the difficulty of reaching a universal definition for 
such  a  unique  organization  as  a  central  bank. Today,  instead  of trying further  to  precisely 
define the central bank, I would like to talk about the three points I always highlight regarding 
the roles of a central bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, the most important role of a central bank is to provide a stable financial environment. 
Sustainable economic growth tends to be achieved in a stable financial environment, even if 
that is not always the case. 
Second, a central bank is an organization that plays its role through banking services. The 
specialized knowledge required of a central bank is not only knowledge of macroeconomics, 
but the wisdom to cover a wide range of activities. What is especially important for central 
banks is practical knowledge related to the details of the circulation of money. Borrowing the 
phrase  of  one  central  banker  I  respect,  this  kind  of  knowledge  is  akin  to  the  knowledge 
required by a good plumber.  
Third, a central bank is an organization that needs to learn constantly from the changes in 
the  world.  Earlier,  I  referred  to  a  stable  financial  environment.  The  specific  elements  from 
which  a  stable  financial  environment  is  constructed  also  change  with  time.  When  price 
stability is achieved, many economic entities gain the confidence to take more risk. And, as a 
result, the stability of the financial system is compromised. This paradox of price stability is a 
good  example  of  the  need  for  the  central  banks  to  stay  vigilant  and  keep  learning  in  a 
changing environment.  
The staff members from the Bank of Japan will now explain the current central bank policies 
and operations of the Bank. We would also like to take this valuable opportunity to learn from 
your experience and to deepen the ties of cooperation with you. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
