Philip Lowe: What is normal? 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Business Economists Annual Dinner, Sydney, 5 December 2012. 
 I would like to thank Jonathan Kearns for valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
Thank you for the invitation to speak at tonight’s dinner. This is the second time that I have 
participated in the ABE’s annual forecasting conference and it is a pleasure to be here once 
again.  
The title of my remarks this evening is in the form of a question. And that question is, “What 
is Normal?”  
The Oxford Dictionary defines the word “normal” as “conforming to a standard; usual, typical 
or expected”.1 The question of “what is normal” therefore seems an appropriate one for an 
annual forecasting conference. For many of us, our days are spent looking at economic and 
financial developments and asking whether they are “usual, typical or expected”. And if we 
conclude they are not, we ask ourselves will things return to normal, and if so when, or has 
normal changed? Like many of you, I often get asked if what we are seeing is “normal”, “the 
new normal”, “the old normal” or is it something different?  
In many areas of life our perceptions of what is normal are crucial to how we feel about what 
is going on around us. There are, for example, a range of human behaviours that were once 
considered normal but would cause many of us considerable angst if we saw them today. 
What is considered normal, and entirely unremarkable in one context, can be viewed  very 
differently in another.  
So context and experience are important. With that in mind, my remarks tonight are split into 
two parts. First, I would like to look back over Australia’s recent economic performance and 
what it means for people’s perceptions of what is normal. And then second, I would like to 
talk about some issues related to monetary policy and what is considered normal.  
Australia’s recent economic performance  
On  a  number  of  fronts,  the  past  20  years  have  been  very  good  ones  for  the  Australian 
economy. During the early part of this period, the economy was recovering from the sharp 
downturn of the early 1990s recession. We then had the boom in housing prices and credit. 
That  was  followed  by  the  sharp  rise  in  the  terms  of  trade,  which  was  only  temporarily 
interrupted by the financial crisis in the North Atlantic. And most recently, we have seen a 
boom in investment in the resources sector.  
Over these 20 years, we have experienced almost uninterrupted growth, a feat not matched 
by  any  other  developed  economy.  The  banking  system  has  remained  strong.  The  fiscal 
accounts have been kept in good order. And inflation has remained under control.  
It is fair to say that these outcomes are better than was widely expected 20 years ago. If we 
use our own history or overseas experience as a guide, these outcomes, collectively, could 
hardly be described as usual, typical or expected. Indeed, they have been better than what 
might reasonably be described as normal.  
Importantly, this experience leaves us with a very positive legacy.  
                                                
1   See <www.oxforddictionaries.com>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
More of us have jobs than ever before. Our incomes are noticeably higher. We are wealthier. 
And our economy has moved up the global league tables.  
But this experience has also affected how Australians view our current economic situation. 
After such a good run, there is a sense of dissatisfaction in parts of the community that we 
are  not  repeating  all  aspects  of  this  earlier  experience.  Twenty  years  of  good  economic 
performance and rising asset prices raised our expectations of what is normal and many in 
the community are a little disappointed that these higher expectations are not being met fully. 
I suspect that this is one factor that explains why the public mood has been a bit flat over 
recent times,  despite many  observers  outside  our  country  viewing  the Australian  economy 
with some envy.  
This change in what is considered normal is adding to the adjustments that are going on in 
the economy. To illustrate this change and the unusual nature of the events that preceded it, 
I would like to show you six graphs.  
The first graph is of growth in consumption per capita (Graph 1). If the volatility in the data is 
smoothed  out,  you  can  see  that  the  period  from  the  mid  1990s  to  the  mid  2000s  was  an 
unusual one. Consumption growth per person was consistently strong; it was faster than over 
the preceding years and faster than over recent years. This is true for both retail trade and 
for the consumption of services.  
Graph 1 
  The  second  graph  is  really  a  corollary  of  the  first  and  is  of  the  household  saving  rate 
(Graph 2). From the mid 1980s up until the mid 2000s, the saving rate was on a downward 
trend. Put differently, growth in consumption was consistently faster than growth in income. 
For part of this period we spent every extra dollar we earned, and then a bit more. This could 
hardly be said to be normal, or sustainable. More recently, the saving rate has increased and 
it is back to the level it was in the mid 1980s.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2 
 The  third  graph  shows  household  debt  and  household  wealth  relative  to  household 
disposable income (Graph 3). Here, the story is similar. From around the mid 1990s to the 
mid 2000s, the value of both our assets and our liabilities grew much more quickly than our 
incomes. But because the value of our assets increased at a faster rate than the value of our 
liabilities, there was a large increase in measures of household net wealth relative to income. 
Again,  such  a  large  adjustment  is  unusual.  In  recent  times,  the  steady  rise  in  the  various 
ratios has stopped and they are now roughly back to where they were a decade ago.  
Graph 3 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The fourth graph is of the share of the dwelling stock that is sold each year (Graph 4). During 
the latter part of the 1990s and the first part of the 2000s, turnover in the property market 
was  much  higher  than  average.  More  than  ever  before,  we  moved  houses  or  bought  and 
traded second properties, either as an investment or as a holiday property. The high rate of 
turnover boosted many parts of the economy, including the real estate sector and parts of the 
retail sector. It also boosted state government finances due to higher stamp duty revenue. 
Over the past few years, turnover has declined and has been around half the rate that it was 
in the early 2000s.  
Graph 4 
The fifth graph is of the share of the working-age population that has a job (Graph 5). Again 
over the period from the mid 1990s to the mid 2000s, employment consistently grew much 
more  quickly  than  the  working-age  population.  While  this  partly  reflects  a  rise  in  labour 
market  participation  by  females,  this  type  of  experience,  sustained  over  a  long  period,  is 
unusual. And, as in some of the other graphs, we see a levelling out in this ratio over recent 
years.  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 5 
 Finally, the sixth graph shows the increase in our living standards – measured by the rise in 
real  income  per  hour  worked  –  together  with  the  increase  in  productivity  (Graph 6). 
Something rather unusual has happened here too, although the timing is a little different from 
that in the previous graphs. Over the past decade there was a decoupling of the link between 
advances in our living standards and growth in productivity, with living standards increasing 
more quickly  than  productivity. We found  ourselves  in  this  favourable  situation  because of 
the very material rise in Australia’s terms of trade that occurred over this period.  
Graph 6 
The developments in these six graphs have their roots in a number of influences. The first is 
financial liberalisation and the return to low interest rates in the 1990s after the high inflation 
of the 1970s and 1980s. And the second is the large increase in Australia’s terms of trade, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
due to strong growth in Asia, and China in particular.2 The strong productivity growth in the 
1990s and the recovery from the early 1990s recession also played some role.  
Importantly,  financial  liberalisation  and  lower  nominal  interest  rates  gave  households 
increased access to debt, with many households taking advantage of this. This pushed up 
the  price  of  housing,  and  some  households  used  their  increased  equity  to  fund  higher 
consumption. Financial liberalisation and rising house prices were also associated with the 
greater  turnover  in  the  property  market.  Financial  institutions  were  among  those  that 
benefited  from  this,  with  rapid  balance  sheet  growth  and  unusually  low  levels  of  problem 
loans.  Collectively,  these  developments  also  helped  generate  strong  employment  growth. 
This boosted fiscal revenues, as did the large increase in the terms of trade, and this boost to 
revenues made possible frequent cuts in personal income tax rates.  
The process of adjustment to financial liberalisation and lower interest rates took a long time 
to play out – at least a decade and probably longer. This long period of adjustment made it 
more difficult to determine what was normal. If something happens year after year, there is a 
tendency  to  think  it  can  continue  to  happen  and  some  people  start  to  make  their  plans 
accordingly.  However,  when  the  adjustment  is  finally  complete  there  can  be  a  period  of 
disappointment when previous trends do not continue. At least with hindsight, the response 
to financial liberalisation and lower interest rates looks to have run its course around the mid 
2000s.  At  the  time  we  largely  avoided  a  sense  of  disappointment  because  of  the  second 
influence I mentioned earlier – that is, the large run-up in the terms of trade that was then 
starting to take place.  
One concrete example of how the past influences the interpretation of current developments 
is  our  interpretation  of  the  behaviour  of  consumers.  In  particular,  it  has  become 
commonplace to talk about the “cautious” consumer, and I myself have done this frequently, 
including when I last spoke at this dinner. But increasingly, I wonder whether or not this is the 
best description.  
Certainly,  using  these  earlier  years  as  our  benchmark,  consumers  do  look  to  be  cautious; 
consumption  growth  is  slower  than  it  was  previously;  the  saving  rate  is  higher;  and  credit 
growth is lower. But are these earlier years the most suitable benchmark? I suspect they are 
not.  Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  consumption  has  been  growing  broadly  in  line  with 
income.  That  does  not  look  to  be  particularly  cautious,  although  it  is  different.  Growth  in 
household borrowing has also been broadly in line with household income. Again, this does 
not look to be particularly cautious, but it is different. It may be more appropriate to describe 
this type of behaviour as “prudent”, rather than “cautious”. Indeed, it might be described as 
“normal”.  
The general point here is that there is a recalibration going on regarding what is considered 
normal.  Having  consumption,  credit  and  asset  prices  grow  broadly  in  line  with  incomes 
should probably be viewed as usual, typical or expected. So too should the rate of increase 
in our living standards being determined by productivity growth.  
I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  I  am  not  saying  that  we  have  to  accept  inferior  economic 
outcomes from those that we have had on average over the past 20 years. Indeed, Australia 
is  very  well  placed  to  continue  to  benefit  from  the  growth  of  Asia  and  we  have  many 
advantages,  including  our  skilled  workforce.  But,  on  the  financial  side,  we  are  unlikely  to 
repeat this previous experience, and nor should we aspire to. There was an adjustment to 
take  place  and  that  adjustment  has  occurred.  Whether  we  can  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities that lie ahead and continue to enjoy the rate of increase in our living standards 
that  we  have  become  used  to  depends  upon  productivity  growth.  The  contribution  the 
                                                
2   The  effect  of  the  large  increase  in  the  terms  of  trade  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Stevens  G  (2012), 
“Producing  Prosperity”,  Address  to  the  Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (CEDA)  Annual 
Dinner, Melbourne, 20 November. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reserve  Bank  can  make  here  is  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation  and  to  keep  the 
economy  on  an  even  keel.  Beyond  that,  it  is  in  the  hands  of  businesses,  workers  and 
governments  to  deliver  the  type  of  changes  that  will  drive  the  next  round  of  productivity 
improvements.  As  a  number  of  people  have  noted  recently,  this  needs  to  be  high  on  our 
national agenda.  
Monetary Policy  
I would now like to talk about the concept of normal as it applies to four issues related to 
monetary policy.  
The first of these is inflation. The key point here is that low inflation has become normal in 
Australia  (Graph 7).  Most  consumers  and  businesses  now  view  it  as  usual,  typical  or 
expected that inflation will average 2 point something over time. Australians, and those doing 
business here, can make their investment and spending decisions without having to worry 
about the possibility of rapid and unexpected increases in the general level of prices. This is 
quite  different  from  the  1970s  and  1980s.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  important  benefit  of  the 
medium-term inflation target that has been in place in Australia for the past two decades.  
Graph 7 
 The  second  issue  is  one  where  the  news  is  not  so  good,  particularly  for  many  in  this 
audience. The unfortunate reality is that in the area of forecasting it is normal for forecasts of 
economic activity to be wide of the mark. This is evident in work recently undertaken by two 
of my colleagues at the RBA who looked at the history of our own forecasts.3 They conclude 
that  “the  RBA  forecasts  explain  very  little  of  the  variations  in  GDP  growth,  medium-term 
changes  in  unemployment,  or  the  medium-term  deviations  of  underlying  inflation  from  the 
target”. This conclusion is obviously challenging for those of us involved in the forecasting 
process!  
                                                
3   See Tulip P and S Wallace (2012), “Estimates of Uncertainty around the RBA's Forecasts”, RBA Research 
Discussion Paper 2012–07. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The reason I raise this issue is that we are very cognisant of the limits of forecasting, and 
that  it  is  normal for  outcomes to  vary  materially  from  what  was  expected.  Outcomes  often 
deviate from what was considered usual, typical or expected as global events occur and the 
structure of the economy changes. This means, as Glenn Stevens said in a speech to this 
audience  last  year,  that  monetary  policy  decisions  should  not  be  rigidly  and  mechanically 
linked  to  forecasts.4  Of  course,  this  does  not  imply  that  the  process  of  forecasting  is 
unimportant. This process forces questions to be asked and issues to be analysed, and is a 
central  part  of good monetary  policy.  But  because  it  is  commonplace for  there  to  be fairly 
high  levels  of  uncertainty  around  the  point  forecasts,  there  is  also  an  important  role  for 
judgement by policymakers.  
The third issue that I would like to touch on is the normal level of interest rates.  
For much of the decade or so before the financial crisis it was normal for headline mortgage 
rates to move in near lock step with the cash rate. This has obviously changed over recent 
years, as bank funding costs – and hence mortgage rates – have risen relative to the cash 
rate. As we have noted many times, the Board of the RBA has taken account of this in its 
monthly  policy  decisions.  As  a  result,  the  cash  rate  today  is  around  1½ percentage  points 
lower  than  it  otherwise  would  have  been.  The  fact  that  the  Bank  has  offset  the  effect  of 
higher funding costs on lending rates means that the normal level of the cash rate is lower 
than  it  otherwise  would  have  been.  A  3 per  cent  cash  rate  today  is  not  the  same  as  a 
3 per cent cash rate in the past.  
A more difficult issue to assess is the normal level of lending rates, as opposed to the normal 
level of the cash rate. It is difficult to be definitive here, but there are a couple of reasons why 
the normal level of lending rates may be lower, at least for a time, than was the case over the 
past two decades.  
The  first  reason  is  the  international  environment.  As  I  talked  about  in  another  speech 
recently,  many  of  the  countries  that  avoided  the  financial  crisis  are  experiencing 
uncomfortably high exchange rates and low interest rates.5 Australia is one of these. With the 
major  economies  of  the  world  quite  weak,  most  other  countries  would  see  themselves  as 
benefiting  from  a  lower  exchange  rate  to  boost  their  exports.  But,  of  course,  given  that 
exchange  rates  are  relative  prices,  not  every  country  can  simultaneously  have  a  lower 
exchange  rate.  It  should  not  really  come  as  a  surprise  that  countries  that  are  in  relatively 
good shape and have not seen large-scale expansion of the central bank balance sheet are 
experiencing stronger currencies than those that are in relatively poor shape. This is one of 
the mechanisms through which the weak conditions in most of the advanced economies are 
transmitted to the rest of the world. And in response to this, interest rates are lower than they 
otherwise would be to offset some of the effects of an uncomfortably high exchange rate.  
The second factor that might have an influence on the normal level of lending rates is related 
to  the  issues  that  I  spoke  about  at  the  outset.  For  most  of  the  past  20  years  we  were 
benefiting  from  either  the  credit  boom  or  the  terms  of  trade  boom.  Under  the  influence  of 
these  two  factors,  one  might  expect,  all  else  constant,  higher  average  lending  rates  than 
otherwise, as both factors boost aggregate demand relative to supply at least for a period. 
Another way of thinking about this is that in the earlier period there was an increase in the 
rate of time discount and correspondingly an increase in the normal level of interest rates. 
Although the high terms of trade are still boosting aggregate demand, the aftermath of the 
credit  boom  and  the  gradual  realisation  that  this  experience  is  unlikely  to  be  repeated  is 
                                                
4   See Stevens G (2011), “On the Use of Forecasts”, Address to Australian Business Economists Annual Dinner, 
Sydney, 24 November. 
5   See Lowe P (2012), “Australia and the World”, Address to Commonwealth Bank Australasian Fixed Income 
Conference Dinner, Sydney, 30 October. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
working  in  the  other  direction.  All  else  constant,  this  might  be  expected  to  lead  to  lower 
average lending rates than during the earlier period.  
Of course, all else is not constant, including the amount of spare capacity in the economy, 
the nature of capital flows and the rate of productivity growth. But it is possible that normal 
lending rates will be somewhat lower for a period owing to the combination of global factors 
and the legacy of the credit boom. Whether or not this turns out to be the case depends upon 
a whole range of factors, including how cost and price pressures in the economy evolve.  
This  brings  me  to  the  fourth  and  final  issue.  And  that  is  whether  we  are  seeing  a  normal 
response of the economy to the reductions in interest rates that have occurred over the past 
year or so.  
Assessments in this area are difficult, not just because there is a very wide range of historical 
experience,  but  also  because  of  the  challenge  of  determining  what  is  the  normal  level  of 
lending rates. However, the current response, across a large number of indicators, is falling 
within the range of outcomes that we have seen in the past. There do appear though, to be 
some differences in the behaviour of the household and the business indicators. In particular, 
while a number of household indicators have picked up somewhat, business confidence and 
conditions  have  not.  This  difference  will  obviously  bear  close  watching  over  the  period 
ahead. One other area where the response has been smaller than typical is the exchange 
rate,  which  has  remained  high.  The  more  important  conclusion,  though,  is  that  monetary 
policy still looks like it is working. There are lags and different parts of the economy respond 
differently,  but  lower  interest  rates  are  still  effective  in  providing  a  boost  to  the  overall 
economy.  
Conclusion  
So to conclude, I wish you all the best of luck on your journey of discovery of what is normal; 
of what is usual, typical or expected. One difficulty that I suspect we all face is when we think 
we  have  found  the  answer,  it  seems  to  change  again.  Perhaps  the  one  constant  is  that 
uncertainty is normal!  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
