Barbro Wickman-Parak: The IMF’s role – new thinking in the wake of the 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting at Global Challenge, Stockholm, 5 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Ms Maria Wallin Fredholm and Ms Emelie Mannefred, from the Riksbank’s Financial Stability 
Department, for their assistance in the writing of this speech. 
The 188 member countries of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) will gather in Tokyo for 
the  Fund’s  annual  meeting  next  week.  When  I  began  working  with  IMF  issues  at  the 
Riksbank in 2007, my impression was that the IMF was suffering from an identity crisis. The 
Fund’s lending to countries in crisis appeared to have played out its role and major staff cuts 
were underway. In short, the mood was rather subdued in the corridors of the IMF. 
The financial crisis led to an abrupt change. The IMF  was forced to quickly provide action 
programmes and funding for crisis countries. Before the crisis, the IMF’s lending amounted to 
approximately  USD  9  billion,  the  largest  part  of  which  went  to  Turkey.  Today,  the  IMF’s 
lending amounts to around USD 112 billion, and the absolute largest part of this sum now 
goes to countries in Europe. The media spotlight often falls on the Fund when it rides to the 
rescue with crisis-management measures like this. But the every-day, important and tireless 
surveillance work of the IMF seldom attracts any headlines. 
The IMF continuously monitors all of its member countries, for example through its Article IV 
consultations. These include in-depth analyses of the development of the economy, points 
out risks and gives advice on areas such as fiscal policy, labour-market policy and monetary 
policy. The knowledge of individual countries that the IMF has built up during years of regular 
surveillance is a precondition for quickly being able to warn against and counteract risks and 
to launch tailor-made action programmes when countries need financial support.  
The IMF extended its financial surveillance a number of years ago, but there is still more to 
be  done.  In  the  Nordic-Baltic  IMF  constituency,1  of  which  Sweden  forms  a  part,  we  have 
been a driving force on several important issues in this area. As a small, open economy with 
a large financial sector, Sweden has every reason to support the IMF in its efforts to develop 
its surveillance and analysis of financial risks at the global level. In my opinion, the IMF is the 
organisation  that  is  best  suited  to  taking  responsibility  for  the  surveillance  of  the  global 
financial system. 
The IMF’s role as a global supervisor is one of the issues that will be discussed in Tokyo next 
week.  And  this  is  also  what  I  will  discuss  in  my  speech  here  today.  A  new  policy  area, 
macroprudential policy, is emerging in the wake of the financial crisis. How this policy should 
actually be carried out in practice is a complicated issue and I believe that the IMF can play 
an important role in this context too. 
The financial crisis revealed major problems 
The era in which we were said to be living in the best of all possible worlds, popularly known 
as  “The  Great  Moderation”,  came  to  a  disastrous  end  in  2007.  Following  a  long  period  of 
steady growth and stable low inflation, we had been lulled into the belief that this would never 
change. We believed that the financial markets were excellent at converting savings to loans 
and distributing risks so that they were taken by agents who both wanted and were able to 
                                                
1  The Nordic-Baltic constituency consists of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and 
Sweden. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
bear them. The risks that were mainly discussed were the imbalances in the global economy 
in the form of countries with large current account surpluses and those with corresponding 
deficits. Those who raised questions about the stability of the global financial system and the 
risks relating to a rapid expansion of credit found it difficult to be heard in this situation. 
The financial crisis brought into focus the inability of the international community to prevent 
and manage crises in the global financial system. There were several problems. First, there 
was  a  lack  of  knowledge  about  the  links  and  the  contagion  risks  in  the  financial  system. 
Second,  regulation  and crisis  management  were  handled  at  the  national  level,  despite  the 
rapid  internationalisation  of  the  financial  markets.  Third,  surveillance  focused  on  individual 
institutions and if these were stable separately it was often concluded that the system as a 
whole was stable. An important reason for these shortcomings was that there was an unclear 
allocation  of  roles  and  no  organisation  with  an  explicit  mandate  to  oversee,  identify  and 
analyse risks in the global financial system. 
The IMF was also criticised for its actions in the run-up to the financial crisis. The IMF’s own 
independent review body, the Independent Evaluation Office (IEO), has said that before the 
crisis the IMF, like many others, was convinced that the risk of serious crises was practically 
non-existent.2  This  was  apparent,  for  example,  in  the  overconfidence  in  the  health  and 
resilience of the major financial institutions. Risks that are generally related to construction 
booms and financial innovations were toned down, as was the need for strong regulations to 
prevent such risks. It was not until the spring of 2008 that the IMF’s Global Financial Stability 
Report warned against emerging vulnerabilities among the major financial institutions, but by 
that time the crisis was already a fact.  
In response to the crisis, more distinct frameworks for the oversight and supervision of the 
financial system at the national and regional levels are now being developed. For example, in 
2010 an agreement was reached between central banks, finance ministries and supervisory 
authorities in the Nordic-Baltic region on cooperation in the fields of financial stability, crisis 
management and crisis resolution. Intensive work is also underway at the European level to 
put  an  effective  supervisory  structure  in  place.  It  is  good  and  important  that  interlinked 
regions arrive at their own solutions. But the financial systems are interlinked throughout the 
world,  as  illustrated  not  least  by  the  recent  crisis.  It  is  thus  also  important  to  address  the 
question of financial surveillance at the global level. 
Legitimacy is about influence, but also about being effective 
Several bodies work with financial stability at the global level in different ways. These include 
the Financial Stability Board (FSB), the Basel Committee, the IMF and the G20. However, 
none of these bodies has any formal, overall responsibility for global financial stability. 
As I have said, it became clear in connection with the crisis that the global public institutions 
were not strong enough and lacked momentum. The measures that were implemented, for 
example  swap  lines  and  liquidity  lines,3  were  often  initiated  by  central  banks.  Important 
decisions, for example the decision to triple the IMF’s resources, were also taken by the G20 
acting alone, despite the fact that many more countries were affected by these decisions. But 
the G20 took on a leading role in the crisis in the responsibility vacuum that prevailed. The 
G20 consists of 19 major countries and a representative of the EU. Although Sweden has 
always  contributed  financially  to  the  IMF  when  this  was  needed,  we  were  not  allowed  to 
                                                
2  See  IEO  (2011),  “IMF  Performance  in  the  Run-Up  to  the  Financial  and  Economic  Crisis,  IMF  Surveillance 
2004–2007”. 
3  Swap lines entail two parties agreeing to exchange currencies with each other. One example from the crisis is 
the  Riksbank’s  agreement  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  through  which  the  Riksbank  was  able  to  exchange 
Swedish krona for USD 10 billion. The aim of this was to increase the Riksbank’s ability to offer dollar loans to 
borrowers in Sweden. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
participate  and  influence  the  decisions  this  time;  they  filtered  down  to  us  from  the  G20 
through the EU. The decisions were thus made by a small circle even though they affected 
all of the IMF’s then 186 member countries. 
In  order  for  decisions  that  concern  the  global  economy  to  have  an  impact  and  be 
implemented  effectively,  the  countries  affected  by  the  decisions  must  feel  that  they  can 
participate and that they are able to influence the decisions. Legitimacy is thus a precondition 
for  effectiveness.  The  world  cannot  and  should  not  be  governed  by  only  the  largest  and 
strongest countries. The cooperation between the countries of the world that is required to 
safeguard global financial stability should take place in strong and effective global institutions 
with a broad membership. 
This is why an institution like the IMF is important to small countries like Sweden. It is a rule-
based organisation that ensures the influence and equal treatment of the member countries. 
It is against this background that I believe the IMF is the organisation that is best suited to 
being  responsible  for  overseeing,  identifying  and  analysing  risks  in  the  global  financial 
system. 
Greater focus on financial surveillance 
My view is that the IMF has taken several steps in the right direction in its work with financial 
surveillance during the years that I have followed its activities. 
For  example,  the  IMF  has  begun  to  integrate  the  analysis  of  financial  stability  with  the 
traditional macroeconomic analysis of the member countries. Now, for instance, the financial 
economists of the IMF also take part in some of the annual country reviews (the Article IV 
consultations). The Baltic countries, among others, are able to testify to how effective this is. 
When Latvia experienced problems, the IMF was quickly able to put together a reform and 
support package thanks to its sound knowledge of the country. This shows that it is important 
to  have  knowledge  of  both  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments,  and  seen  in 
retrospect the Latvian programme is a good example of this. 
A further major step forward is that the Financial Sector Assessment Programmes (FSAPs), 
which was previously voluntary, was made compulsory by a decision in 2010 for the 25 most 
systemically-important countries – including of course the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Japan  and  the  Euro  Area,  but  also  Sweden.  Oversight  programmes  of  this  type  are  highly 
systematic  and  entail  assessing  the  financial  system  on  the  basis  of  a  set  of  robustness 
criteria. The Governor of the Riksbank, Stefan Ingves, was by the way one of the architects of 
the  FSAP  programme  during  his  time  at  the  IMF.  In  this  context  it  can  be  mentioned  that 
before the crisis the United States did not think it needed an FSAP assessment, but such an 
assessment was conducted in 2010. 
Another  example  of  an  attempt  to  integrate  the  macroeconomic  analysis  and  the  financial 
analysis is that since the autumn of 2011 the IMF has published a consolidated surveillance 
report  in  which  the  main  messages  from  all  of  the  surveillance  reports  are  summarised 
together with recommendations on how to manage the risks.4 
To further improve and strengthen the surveillance of the financial sector, the IMF recently 
presented  a  more  detailed  strategy  for  how  to  conduct  this  surveillance  in  the  future.  The 
aims of the strategy are for the IMF to improve its understanding of macro-financial relations, 
to  become  better  at  identifying  contagion  risks across  national  borders and  to  increase  its 
cooperation with other organisations. This is no easy task and the work involved is far from 
complete. This is something that the IMF will need to develop on an ongoing basis. 
                                                
4  This report was initially called the Consolidated Multilateral Surveillance Report (CMSR) but was renamed to 
“Global Policy Agenda” ahead of the 2012 Annual Meeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  Nordic-Baltic  constituency  has  pushed  for  the  IMF,  alongside  its  surveillance  of 
individual  countries,  to  also  regularly  conduct  the  regional  surveillance  of  countries  with 
closely interlinked economies and financial systems. This is of course particularly relevant for 
Sweden as our banks have such large commitments in the other Nordic countries and in the 
Baltic  countries.  Although,  as  I  mentioned  above,  our  countries  have  increased  their 
cooperation in the field of financial stability, a recurring and comprehensive regional analysis 
and examination of these issues would be of great value. Important steps have been taken in 
this  direction  and  we  are  looking  forward  to  an  even  sharper  regional  focus  in  the  Fund’s 
ongoing financial surveillance. 
Capital flows require more analysis… 
The question of whether capital flows should be deregulated or not was the subject of lively 
discussion  in  the  1990s  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  crisis.  After  the  crisis,  some 
countries believed that one of its causes was that certain countries were asked to liberalise 
capital  flows  too  early.  The  issue  has  therefore  been  very  sensitive  since  then.  Today, 
however, most countries agree on the positive effects of free capital flows – that is that they 
contribute to increased economic growth by enabling resources to be used more efficiently. 
The  issue  of  free  capital  flows  has  now  appeared  on  the  IMF’s  agenda  once  again.  The 
sudden stop in capital flows during the initial phases of the crisis and the subsequent rapid 
increase  in  capital  inflows  into  emerging-market  economies  have  focused  attention  on  the 
problem  of  volatile  capital  flows.  Massive  inflows  can  lead  to  overheating  and  asset-price 
bubbles and as there are no clear guidelines a number of emerging-market economies have 
chosen to manage massive inflows by introducing a range of capital controls. The member 
countries have therefore given the Fund the task of drawing up guidelines on how countries 
should manage such capital flows. This work has been underway for the last 12 months and 
a proposal for a comprehensive framework will be discussed by the IMF’s Executive Board at 
the  end  of  October.  According  to  the  proposed  guidelines,  countries  should  in  the  first 
instance  review  their  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in  order  to  manage  or  counteract  major 
capital flows,  and  as  a complement  to  this they  should  use  various  macroprudential-policy 
tools. As a final resort they may introduce capital controls. The idea is that the IMF should 
give advice on how these tools should be designed in order to be effective. 
No organisation has played a clear role in the liberalisation of capital flows. This is a major 
difference  compared  to  the  liberalisation  of  trade,  where  the  World  Trade  Organisation 
(WTO) played and still plays a prominent role. I think it is positive that the issue of capital 
flows  is  once  again  on  the  IMF’s  agenda  as  it  is  an  important  issue  that  requires  careful 
analysis as volatile capital can cause serious problems. 
…as clearly demonstrated by the crisis in our region 
The need to analyse capital flows became clear in connection with the crisis in our region 
too. If capital flows had been systematically analysed prior to the crisis, we would have seen 
that capital flows to the Baltic countries were dominated by bank loans from Nordic parent 
banks  to  their  Baltic  subsidiaries  and  not,  for  example,  by  more  sustainable  direct 
investments. Perhaps this would have led the alarm bells to ring sooner and louder. 
In  our  constituency  we  have  carried  out  an  empirical  study  of  Iceland’s  and  the  Baltic 
countries’ experience of capital flows and capital controls before and during the crisis. The 
aim  of  the  report  is  to  help  the  IMF  to  collect  “best  practices”  but  also  to  identify  “bad 
practices”. According to the study, there were clear shortcomings in the policies conducted in 
Iceland and the Baltic countries and in the supervision of the financial system throughout the 
region. However, even if the countries had managed to conduct a much tighter fiscal policy, 
they would still not have been able to do anything about the major capital inflows. Other tools 
would have been needed for this, for instance various kinds of macroprudential-policy tools. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If such tools had been made available at an early stage, it may have been possible to slow 
down the dramatic expansion of credit that proved to have such devastating consequences. 
The IMF can play an important role in the work with macroprudential policy 
Macroprudential  policy  has  come  increasingly  to  the  fore  in  the  effort  to  find  ways  of 
preventing  crises  in  the  future.  Macroprudential  policy  entails  preventive  work  aimed  at 
analysing and counteracting risks in the financial system. This includes the development of 
methods and forms of cooperation to discover and assess potential threats to stability in the 
financial  system.  I  believe  that  the  surveillance-  and  analytical  capacity  of  the  IMF  means 
that  the  organisation  can  play  an  active  role  in  this  context  by  systematically  collecting, 
analysing and providing information on the lessons learned in different countries and regions. 
I also believe that the IMF can support the exchange of information between authorities on 
the development of methods and models in the field of systemic risks. 
The  range  of  possible  tools  and  the  division  of  responsibility  between  authorities  and 
countries  are  now  being  discussed  intensively  within  the  framework  of  macroprudential 
policy. The tool that is attracting most attention at the moment consists of the countercyclical 
capital buffers that form part of the new Basel regulations. This means that the banks will be 
forced to hold more capital in periods  when a credit boom risks triggering problems in the 
financial  system.  When  the  risks  subsequently  subside,  the  capital  requirements  can  be 
eased. A tool that can be seen as a complement to the countercyclical buffers is variable risk 
weights  for  different  types  of  loan.  Another  proposal  is  to  introduce  a  mortgage  cap,  for 
example by limiting the size of the mortgage in relation to the market value of the property, 
as we have done in Sweden since the autumn of 2010. 
But  which  tools  are  the  most  effective  in  which  situations?  It  is  hard  to  say.  The  area  is 
relatively  new  and  there  is  therefore  a  lack  of  experience  and  research  in  the  field.  This 
means that we will have to test our way forward for several years. There are a lot of reports 
that explain why macroprudential policy is needed and the tools it may entail. But not a lot 
has  been  written  about  how  it  should  actually  be  conducted  in  practice.  This  is  of  course 
because the policy area is new and we still have a lot to learn. I believe that the IMF can 
contribute here too by increasing our knowledge about which tools are most appropriate in 
which situations and by issuing recommendations to countries on how they should actually 
conduct macroprudential policy and implement various tools. 
The IMF’s Articles of Agreement should reflect a clearer surveillance mandate 
One  way  to  strengthen  the  IMF’s  surveillance  is  to  ensure  that  the  IMF’s  Articles  of 
Agreement  cover  what  the  Fund  actually  does.  According  to  the  articles  that  set  the 
frameworks for the IMF’s work, the Fund’s bilateral financial surveillance should ensure that 
“Each member shall avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system 
in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive 
advantage over other members.” The articles were written in a different era and, as we have 
seen, the IMF has been carrying out financial surveillance and analysis that is broader than 
stipulated in the articles for a number of years now. 
The modernisation and clarification of the IMF’s articles is now needed to enable the Fund to 
fully take on the task of supervising the global financial system, but this will require a long 
process. However, a first step towards a more formal mandate was taken in July 2012 when 
the  IMF’s  Executive  Board  adopted  the  Integrated  Surveillance  Decision  (ISD).  This 
agreement stipulates, for example, that the Fund’s bilateral surveillance should be conducted 
on the basis of a broader perspective than set out in the articles. The links between countries 
and how their economic policies can affect the global economy should now be included in the 
surveillance.  The  ISD  thus  underlines  the  multilateral  dimension  of  the  Fund’s  bilateral 
surveillance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
It is positive that there is now a board decision on how the IMF should work. But the long-
term goal should still be to change the Articles of Agreement so that they reflect what the IMF 
actually does. This is also an issue that we are pursuing in our constituency. Until financial 
stability is covered by the articles, the members will have no obligation to discuss financial 
stability issues with the IMF and even less of an obligation to explain their choices in cases 
where they do not follow the Fund’s recommendations. 
to 
its 
full 
looks 
forward 
implementation.  The 
Summary and concluding remarks 
As  I  said  earlier,  it  is  important  to  clarify  the  IMF’s  role  in  the  surveillance  of  the  global 
financial system. My view is that the IMF is an institution that is well equipped to perform an 
independent and stringent analysis of the international financial system. An important aspect 
to discuss in this context is how to make the best use of the Fund’s risk analyses, advice and 
recommendations. 
First,  it  is  important  for  the  IMF  to  present  clear  and  focused  recommendations  on  global 
financial stability that are not too general. The IMF’s consolidated surveillance report has this 
aim. The report is wide ranging and may easily become toothless, but it has the potential to 
play a greater role in this context. 
Second, the IMF’s advice and recommendations will be ineffectual if the member countries 
do  not  comply  with  them.  The  follow-up  of  these  recommendations  must  therefore  be 
improved.  The  IMF  has  now  said  that  the  follow-up  of  advice  and  recommendations  will 
become a permanent feature of the annual country reviews. Sweden welcomes this initiative 
and 
follow-up  could  also  comprise 
recommendations  on  macroprudential  policy,  which  would  also  help  to  achieve  the  aim  of 
global financial stability. 
Third, moral suasion is the only tool that the IMF can use to influence things. It is perhaps 
also  logical  that  this  is  the  case.  International  organisations  seldom  have  any  other 
mechanisms for exerting pressure. It is therefore important that the Fund is able to “speak 
truth  to  power”  even  when  speaking  to  large  and  powerful  countries  if  it  is  to  have  any 
chance at all to influence things.5 
The  notion  that  the  global  financial  system  was  largely  invulnerable  was,  as  I  have  said, 
firmly refuted by the outbreak of the financial crisis. The crisis clearly demonstrated that the 
surveillance of the global financial system was inadequate and one of the reasons for this 
was an unclear division of roles between various international bodies. 
This led to the G20 assuming a leading role and many important and necessary decisions 
were taken, but this was done on an ad hoc basis by a limited number of countries. This is a 
problem; such decisions should be taken in a legitimate way for their impact to be effective. 
All of this has led to the idea of setting up some form of predetermined structure for how to 
act  when  a  potential  crisis  is  identified. The  IMF  staff recently  attempted  to  concretise  the 
possible form of such a structure. This was presented as a global stabilisation mechanism in 
which  the  IMF  would  act  as  kind  of  whistle-blower  by  using  its  surveillance  activities  to 
identify events that risk triggering market unease, which in turn could lead to problems in the 
financial system. In addition, the IMF could propose measures that aim to reduce the risk of 
problems spreading from country to country, mediate contacts between countries and central 
banks to arrange swap lines, involve regional financing arrangements and, of course, also 
provide loans itself.6 However, proposals of this type find it difficult to “take off”. This because 
                                                
5  This  is  also  taken  up  as  a  recommendation  in  the  IEO’s  report;  see  IEO  (2011),  “IMF  Performance  in  the 
Run-Up to the Financial and Economic Crisis, IMF Surveillance 2004–2007”. 
6  Proposals for the build-up of an international structure for the financial system are also presented in the Palais 
Royal Report, which was published in early 2011. This report was written by 18 former central bank governors 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
although  the  economy  is  globalised,  policy  remains  largely  national.  Governments  want  to 
retain their national sovereignty and central banks their independence. 
So, to sum up, many good proposals are now under discussion and we need to continue to 
clearly pursue our issues here. But building supranational structures is complicated, as the 
on going development of institutions in the euro area reminds us. And there it is a question of 
“only”  17  countries  and  governments  that  have  to  compromise  and  reach  agreement.  Of 
course  this  process  becomes  even  more  difficult  if  a  lot  more  countries  are  involved. 
However,  I  believe  that  issues  like  this  will  continue  to  arise  in  the  period  ahead,  unless 
globalisation declines and the trend is towards more protectionism. Every new crisis will give 
impetus to the debate, and perhaps resistance will eventually be overcome.  
                                                                                                                                                   
and  finance  ministers,  see  Palais-Royal  Initiative  (2011),  “Reform  of  the  International  Monetary  System:  A 
Cooperative Approach for the Twenty First Century”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
