Andreas Dombret: Remarks on current developments in Europe  
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Reception  of  the  Bundesbank  Representative  Office,  New  York, 
1 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
Dear Governor Dudley 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to be here with you today in New York and to welcome you all. Due to 
“Sandy” it was not easy for me to get over to New York, but I can imagine it was much more 
uncomfortable for all of you staying in the area over the last couple of days. And please let 
me express my deepest sympathies for the hardships New Yorkers are facing right now. 
Bill Dudley will speak to you in a couple of minutes about cooperation between central banks. 
In  the  long  tradition  of  this  cooperation,  trust  and  mutual  understanding  have  been 
established  among  central  banks  worldwide.  And  Joerg  Stephan,  the  Head  of  our 
Representative Office, has already mentioned the history of the cooperation between our two 
central banks. I am proud of this history, and we are committed to upholding it with the same 
degree of trust and mutual understanding in the future. 
I will come back to this later. Before doing so I would like to make a few brief remarks on 
developments in Europe. 
Remarks on current developments in Europe 
From  abroad,  I  must  admit  that  developments  in  Europe  are  hard  to  follow  and  may  well 
appear complicated. This can result in risks being overstated and the progress already made 
being  neglected.  As  regards  the  European  Monetary  Union,  significant  steps  in  the  right 
direction  have  been  taken  to  overcome  the  crisis.  In  this  context  I  will  briefly  comment  on 
three topics tonight. 
First, adjustments in the periphery countries are unavoidable, but they are under way. For 
example,  wage  moderation  has  gained  some  momentum,  exports  in  some  of  the  crisis 
countries have been rising, and current account as well as budget deficits are shrinking. 
My  favourite  example  is  Ireland,  which  shows  that  trust  can  be  regained  if  the  agreed 
measures are adopted and implemented. 
As concerns the specific case of Greece, we are way behind the programme goals due to the 
standstill in consolidation and basic structural reforms in this member state. Politicians and 
the  EU  are  willing  to  assist  Greece,  but  Greece  must,  first  and  foremost,  help  itself. 
Announcing  and  passing  laws  is  not  enough  if  the  administration  and  the  general  public 
undermine them. It is now the task of the Troika to decide impartially whether Greece meets 
the conditions for further assistance. 
I  will  be  brief  but  positive  about  my  second  point:  the  need for  changes  in  the framework. 
Last Sunday, ECB President Draghi stated that mutual consensus about the need to transfer 
some  fiscal  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  is  growing.  So  we  can  look  forward  to  the 
outcome  of  his  report  on  the  future  of  the  EU  framework,  which  will  be  presented  and 
discussed at the next EU Council meeting in mid-December. 
Finally, the public debate in Europe recently focused on the topic of a “banking union”, i.e. a 
single  European  supervisory  mechanism.  A  banking  union  can  very  well  be  a  major  step 
towards breaking the link between banks and sovereigns – but by harnessing the disciplinary 
forces of the market, not by doing away with them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In order to minimise the risk that bank rescues pose to government finances, creditors have 
to be the first in line when it comes to bearing banks’ losses. Taxpayers’ money can only be 
the last resort. With regard to spillovers from sovereigns to banks, sovereign-bonds need to 
be adequately risk-weighted to strengthen market signals and improve resilience in case of 
market turmoil. In addition, there should be caps on banks’ maximum exposure to individual 
sovereign creditors, as is already the case with private creditors. 
In summary, I wish to remind you that we need both short-term crisis management as well as 
long-term  structural  adjustments  and  reforms,  as  structural  problems  and  “macroeconomic 
imbalances” did not appear overnight. Similarly, reforms will not achieve their desired effects 
all at once, but the time bought by short-term crisis management measures must be used 
wisely. 
Remarks on German gold reserves 
Please  let  me  also  comment  on  the  bizarre  public  discussion  we  are  currently  facing  in 
Germany on the safety of our gold deposits outside Germany – a discussion which is driven 
by irrational fears. 
In  this  context,  I  wish  to  warn  against  voluntarily  adding  fuel  to  the  general  sense  of 
uncertainty among the German public in times like these by conducting a “phantom debate” 
on the safety of our gold reserves. 
The arguments raised are not really convincing. And I am glad that this is common sense for 
most Germans. Following the statement by the President of the Federal Court of Auditors in 
Germany,  the  discussion  is  now  likely  to  come  to  an  end  –  and  it  should  do  so  before  it 
causes harm to the excellent relationship between the Bundesbank and the US Fed. 
Let’s get back to facts and figures: I would like to remind you that our gold reserves are part 
of  the  German  currency  reserves.  These  were  accumulated  over  time  thanks,  in  part,  to 
Germany’s economic boom in the 1950s and 1960s. Germany’s growing economic strength, 
especially its strong external position, resulted in rather large trade account surpluses, most 
of them acquired in US dollars. At that time, the International Monetary System, known as 
the Bretton Woods System, was dominated by the US currency. As long as this system was 
in force, which was up until 1971, the US Fed was obliged to exchange its currency for gold. 
Any current account surplus thus resulted in an increase in Germany’s gold reserves. This 
gold was stored in US vaults for obvious reasons. This was not only the case for the gold 
hold  by  the  Bundesbank  –  it  was,  in  fact,  common  practice.  By  the  way:  it  was  the  only 
practical thing to do, since running a trade account deficit meant a decrease in gold stocks. 
Thus, we are now looking back at sixty years not only of fruitful cooperation in many fields 
and international fora, but also of storing gold and trading via the New York Fed. As a matter 
of fact, it is sensible for us to do so in New York, as Frankfurt is not a gold trading venue. 
Throughout these  sixty  years,  we  have  never  encountered the  slightest  problem,  let  alone 
had any doubts concerning the credibility of the Fed. And for this, Bill, I would like to thank 
you personally. I am also grateful for your uncomplicated cooperation in so many matters. 
The Bundesbank will remain the Fed’s trusted partner in future, and we will continue to take 
advantage of the Fed’s services by storing some of our currency reserves as gold in New 
York. 
At the same time, you can be assured that we are confident that our gold is in safe hands 
with  you.  The  days  in  which  Hollywood  Germans  such  as  Gerd  Fröbe,  better  known  as 
Goldfinger, and East German terrorist Simon Gruber, masterminded gold heists in US vaults 
are long gone. Nobody can seriously imagine scenarios like these, which are reminiscent of 
a James Bond movie with Goldfinger playing the role of a US Fed accounting clerk. 
While gold is important, we have to combat a crisis of confidence in the euro area. This is the 
task we need to concentrate on. And we will do so. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
