Øystein Olsen: Managing wealth – some thoughts on economic policy 
and the allocation of national savings 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  a 
meeting hosted by the Norwegian Embassy, Rome, 29 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
European economies are currently going through hard times, with repercussions of the crisis 
still  being  felt  throughout  the  world  economy.  For  all  of  us,  it  is  a  humbling  experience  to 
observe how closely interconnected markets and economies have become across national 
borders. My intention here this evening is not to point at solutions to the challenges currently 
facing the euro area. What I can offer, however, is the perspective of a friendly neighbour 
and a substantial investor. 
In this modest capacity, I hope to sound a note of optimism from a region of Europe that in its 
recent  past  went  through  a  grave  crisis,  which  was  followed  by  a  series  of  reforms  and, 
eventually, the return of prosperity. The Nordic experience with the cycle of crisis, reform and 
recovery  might  provide  some  perspective  for  those  European  countries  now  facing  similar 
challenges.  I  will  also  make  some  remarks  on  the  current  situation  in  financial  markets  in 
general, and government bond markets in particular, from the viewpoint of a global investor. 
Easy money is bad for you 
Slide 1: Landes quote 
In his book The Wealth and Poverty of Nations the historian David Landes describes how the 
Spanish empire went into a long period of decline when the flow of Latin-American gold dried 
up in the mid-17th century. According to Landes, the moral of this story is that “easy money 
is bad for you. It represents short-run gain that will be paid for in immediate distortions and 
later regrets.”1 As a country rich in natural resources, Norway has shared and tried to learn 
from  this  experience.  Perhaps  the quotation from  Landes  also  rings  true  for  all  those  who 
borrowed  cheaply  during  the  boom  before  2008,  and  who  now  have  to  face  the 
consequences. 
Windfall  gains,  like  large  and  unsustainable  capital  flows  from  abroad,  are  double-edged. 
They  provide  short-term  relief from  hard  choices,  but may  carry  with  them  hardship  in  the 
longer term. 
Slide 2: Output gap: A boom-bust economy 
After the discovery of oil in the North Sea in 1969, government spending and social programs 
expanded rapidly in anticipation of future petroleum revenues. We sought to build a bridge 
across the post oil-shock recession in Europe. But it was a bridge to nowhere. Fiscal policy 
had fuelled a boom-bust economy. Inflation soared to double digits. A deep recession started 
in the late 1970s. 
Slide 3: Current account balance: Large external deficits 
The  non-oil  tradable  sector  struggled  as  costs  had  increased.  By  1977,  Norway’s  current 
account surplus had turned into a deficit of 12 percent of GDP. Measured in these terms, the 
deficit was three times larger than that of Italy and Spain last year. Policy had to be reversed 
and tightened. Many Norwegians saw a decline in real incomes. 
                                                
1   David Landes (1998): The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., N.Y 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Slide 4: Output gap: A boom-bust economy 
In the early 1980s, the Norwegian economy experienced a new boom, this time fuelled by 
debt. When oil prices fell in 1986, the Norwegian economy was hit again. We experienced a 
collapse in house prices, a severe banking crisis, a currency crisis, a fiscal crisis and high 
inflation.  Unemployment  soared.  Large  parts  of  the  banking  system  were  eventually 
nationalised.  In  the  two  years  period  after  summer  1987,  GDP  fell  by  almost  5  percent. 
During the 1980s, Norwegian GDP per capita grew by a mere 1.2 percent annually, less than 
half of the growth recorded in both the preceding and following decades. 
By  the  early  1990s,  the  Norwegian  authorities  realised  that  the  old  policy  framework  was 
unsuitable for a modernised economy, with deregulated credit and capital markets. The low 
growth  performance  and  volatility  of  the  recent  past  was  to  be  replaced  by  stability, 
predictability  and  renewed  growth.  To  that  end,  several  major  reforms  were  implemented, 
including: 
Slide 5: Measures were taken 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a tax reform which lowered tax rates and expanded the tax base,  
abolition of selective support schemes to companies and industries,  
an agreement between unions and employers to improve cost competitiveness, and  
the  establishment  of  the  Goverment  Petroleum  Fund,  Norway’s  sovereign  wealth 
fund.  
Slide 6: Two golden decades 
A long upturn followed. Norway has not experienced a pronounced economic downturn since 
the  crisis  around  1990.  The  reforms  introduced  during  the  1990s  have  resulted  in  a  fairly 
flexible labour market, which has allowed labour supply to adjust to changing conditions. In 
addition, we have been helped by good fortune in the form of favourable terms of trade. The 
economy  was  quite  robust  when  the  financial  crisis  hit  in  2008,  in  sharp  contrast  to  our 
situation 25 years ago. 
The policy climate in Norway in the early 1990s may have some characteristics in common 
with what we see in parts of Europe today. While short-term challenges need to be tackled 
urgently, a time of crisis may also provide an opportunity to implement structural reforms. In 
the  case  of  Norway,  the  commitment  and  the  capacity  to  implement  reform  was  a  critical 
condition for renewed and sustainable growth. 
The Fund and fiscal policy 
The Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund was passed in 1990. Under the Act, all 
government  revenues  from  the  oil  sector  are  to  be  transferred  to  the  Fund,  and  the  net 
budget surplus is to be invested in international markets. At the time, in the midst of a deep 
recession,  many  doubted  that  any  petroleum  revenues  would  ever  be  saved.  Projections 
indicated that offshore petroleum production would peak in the early 1990s. However, during 
this  decade,  the  government’s  cash  flow  from  the  petroleum  sector  started  to  increase 
sharply. 
Slide 7: The fund mechanism and fiscal policy  
The  policy  guidelines  were  clarified  in  2001.  Rules  governing  the  interaction  between 
Norway’s  petroleum  wealth  and  fiscal  policy  were  established.  Under  the  fiscal  rule,  the 
government can only spend in the annual budget, on average over an economic cycle, the 
expected real return on the Fund – estimated at 4 per cent annually. 
At the same time, Norges Bank was charged with the task of keeping inflation low and stable. 
Thus,  our  traditional  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  abandoned.  A  clear  division  of 
responsibilities between monetary and fiscal policy had been put in place. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
After two decades of spending petroleum revenues more or less as they accrued, the fiscal 
rule enabled the government to save for future generations. At the same time, the rule made 
fiscal policy more robust: By decoupling spending from current petroleum revenues, the fiscal 
rule provides for a gradual and sustainable phasing-in of petroleum revenue spending. 
The fiscal rule is no straitjacket; it allows automatic stabilisers to work. There is also room for 
some careful use of an active countercyclical fiscal policy when necessary, as was the case 
when the international financial crisis hit in 2008. Importantly, there must be a corresponding 
tightening during better times. 
Eventually, our petroleum revenues will fall. If we limit ourselves to spending the real return 
on  the  Fund,  it  will  provide  a  perpetual  stream  to  the  budget  equal  to  the  returns  on  our 
financial assets. Thus, in principle, the Fund could be preserved for eternity. If so, Norwegian 
taxpayers face a permanently lower tax burden for a given level of public services. 
Investment strategy 
Slide 8: The cash flow grew rapidly 
Deposits  into  the  Fund  have  been  substantial,  especially  for  the  past  15  years.  As  it  has 
turned out, governments from different sides of the political spectrum have managed to save 
a substantial part of our national wealth for future generations. 
The Fund has reached a size equal to 130 per cent of GDP, and the fiscal rule allows the 
government to finance a non-oil deficit of some 5 per cent of mainland GDP through transfers 
from the Fund. 
The investment mandate and the overall strategy of the Fund are determined by the Ministry 
of  Finance.  Our  task  as  manager  of  the  Fund  is  strictly  commercial:  to  maximise  returns 
within  the  risk  limits  defined  by  the  government.  The  Ministry  is  not  involved  in  actual 
investment decisions. The Fund is not an instrument in Norway’s foreign policy toolbox. 
Slide 9: Key characteristics  
The large size, the very long time horizon and a lack of immediate liquidity needs are three 
key characteristics of the Fund. Together, they form the backbone of the Fund’s investment 
strategy: 
• 
First, the long-term horizon for the Fund implies a substantial capacity for taking on 
risk. We are able to act as a countercyclical investor.  
Second, the size facilitates a broader diversification of investments, moving towards 
a more global portfolio.  
 In early summer 2007, after a thorough assessment by Fund’s owner, the equity share was 
to  be  raised  from  40  to  60  per  cent.  From  summer  2007  to  2009,  the  Fund  bought 
EUR 160 billion worth of equities in international markets. For this sum, the Fund was able to 
buy 1.0 per cent of Europe’s listed equities – and 0.5 per cent of the equities listed on the 
other  continents.  The  largest  volume  of  transactions  was  carried  out  right  through  the 
financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. Indeed, there probably were times when the Fund was the 
only sizable buyer in the market, which probably helped to stabilise financial markets in this 
period. 
The long-term horizon also enables us to vary the risk level of the Fund, through rebalancing 
asset classes: If the equity share increases to more than 4 percentage points from the target 
weight of 60 per cent, we will sell equities and buy bonds. Conversely, we will sell bonds and 
buy equities when stock prices have fallen. 
The capacity to withstand market turmoil was demonstrated during the financial crisis in 2008 
and 2009. For a period of 18 months, Fund losses totalled roughly EUR 90 billion – more 
than  25  per  cent  of  Norway’s  GDP.  The  losses  did  not  go  unnoticed  and  led  to  a  public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
debate on the investment strategy. The conclusion was that the strategy is robust and that 
Norway must accept such fluctuations in the Fund’s capital, given the high equity share. This 
point  was  made  clear  through  2009  and  2010,  when  those  losses  were  reversed,  and 
additional  gains  made.  The  government  remained  faithful  to  the  strategy,  reaffirming  its 
commitment to the Fund’s long-term investment strategy. 
The large size of the Fund can also be exploited. Last year the Fund started investing in real 
estate as a new asset class. The first property investments were made in France, Germany 
and  the  UK.  We  are  now  preparing  for  property  investments  in  the  US.  Direct  real  estate 
investments will provide a fairly stable, inflation-adjusted cash flow. Over time, in accordance 
with  the  mandate,  we  aim  to  invest  up  to  5  percent  of  the  Fund  in  real  estate.  The 
investments will be allocated to more countries as we gain experience. 
Slide 11: Considerable overweight in Europe 
The large size and the long investment horizon also entail a need for diversification. From the 
start, the  Fund  has  been  invested  with  a  considerable  overweight  in  Europe. Our  average 
ownership in listed European companies is almost three times our average holdings in Asia 
or the Americas. 
Slide 12: Changing regional allocation (starting point) 
At the start of this year, more than half of the Fund was invested in Europe. As the Fund has 
grown,  we  have  come  to  realise  that  a  more  even  distribution  between  regions  will  better 
enable the Fund to take part in global value creation. 
Slide 13: Changing regional allocation (target) 
Recently, a new principle for the regional allocation of the Fund’s assets has been approved. 
A  consequence  of  this  principle  is  that  the  relative  allocation  to  Europe  is  reduced.  The 
Fund’s  relative  holdings  in  the  Americas,  Asia  and  emerging  economies  will  increase 
accordingly. For the Fund as a whole, a more even allocation across regions will improve the 
overall long-term trade-off between risk and expected return. 
In accordance with the new allocation of the Fund’s assets, new purchases will primarily be 
made  outside  of  Europe,  until  the  adjustment  process  is  completed.  As the  Fund  receives 
inflows of fresh capital on month-by-month basis, we are able to undertake the adjustment 
through new purchases. This will ensure a gradual process, and will not entail a large sell-off 
on our part. Instead, the effect will be merely a temporary drop in our purchases of European 
assets.  Under  the  new  principle,  the  Fund  will  still  be  overweight  in  European  assets, 
compared to a market neutral position. 
Lessons from the crisis 
The high equity share, the capacity to increase the risk level in certain periods and the need 
for diversification are derived from the Fund’s characteristics. Let me now review some of the 
lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  that  have  also  shaped  the  development  of  the  Fund’s 
strategy. These changes are closer to the centre of the European debt crisis. 
The  risk  tolerance  of  the  Fund  is  to  a  large  degree  defined  by  the  strategic  equity  share, 
which, as I mentioned, is 60 per cent. Since the Fund is heavily exposed to risk by virtue of 
its relatively high equity share, the function of government bonds is in essence to reduce the 
overall  volatility  of  the  portfolio.  From  this  perspective,  the  most  important  role  for 
government bonds is to hedge the equity portfolio. 
The  hedge  is  best  achieved  by  holding  liquid  government  bonds  with  high  credit  quality. 
Typically, this entails an overweight of the safest, low-yield government bonds. Conversely, 
high-yield  government  bonds  are  more  volatile,  and  thus  they  do  not  serve  the  overall 
purpose as a hedge in a global portfolio. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Slide 14: Fixed income: new benchmark 
The  Fund’s  benchmark  index  for  bonds  is  divided  into  70  percent  public  and  30  percent 
corporate debt. Previously, the allocation in the bond portfolio was based on market weights, 
and thus the portfolio was allocated in proportion to volume of the sovereign debt issued by 
each country. This resulted in rising allocation to the bonds of countries with increasing debt. 
The risk linked to this strategy became clear in the wake of the financial crisis. A reallocation 
of government  debt  on the  basis  of  GDP  weights  will  reduce  this risk. Moreover,  we  have 
started investing in government debt issued by emerging countries. The consequence of this 
is a reduction in the Fund’s European holdings. 
Increased demand for the safest government bonds may be regarded as an adjustment to 
the climate of high spreads and volatility that we have witnessed in recent years. In a market 
environment characterised by general uncertainty, market expectations might cause a slight 
increase in risk premiums to mount rapidly, unless the underlying cause of the increased risk 
premiums is dealt with by the relevant authorities. 
To  sum  up:  a  downweighting  of  Europe,  the  introduction  of  GDP  weights  as  the  basis  for 
asset  allocation,  and  increased  risk  premiums  of  certain  bonds  have  all  contributed to  our 
present  positions.  During  the  past  year,  the  Fund  has  reduced  its  exposure  to  some 
European government bonds, most notably Italian and Spanish bonds. 
Slide 15: Risk has many facets 
Credit risk is not the only risk attracting attention in portfolio management. It is our view that 
unequal treatment of investors during the restructuring of Greek government debt in March 
this  year,  contributed  to  increase  European  risk  premiums.  We  are  happy  to  notice  that 
President Draghi has underscored that investors would now face equal terms related to the 
Outright Monetary Transaction programme, as announced by the ECB. 
Draghi pointed out another risk factor in July, when he stated that risk premiums are not only 
linked  to  default  or  liquidity,  “but they  also  have  to  do  more  and more with  convertibility”.2 
President  Draghi  emphasised  that this kind  of  risk  is  unacceptable.  I  believe  the  ECB  has 
taken the relevant measures to eliminate such risks. 
Financial investors are risk-averse. They react to signals, expectations about the future and 
real adjustments. No doubt some European countries have a long and bumpy road ahead of 
them, before they get their government deficits and debt under control. My message is that 
positive steps have been made. As a consequence of the measures taken by the ECB, as 
well  as  initiatives  taken  by  the  European  Union  and  by  member  states  themselves,  risk 
premiums have recently come down. If measures are carried out as intended, it is quite likely 
that global investors will again allocate the relevant part of their asset portfolios to European 
government bonds. 
Final remarks 
Let me return to an overall macroeconomic perspective: to factors decisive for sustainable 
growth. 
The  existence  of  a  large,  broad-based  business  sector  that  is  exposed  to  international 
competition and trade promotes learning and development. This is true for any country. In 
countries with abundant natural resources, the exposed sector may easily be scaled back, 
while  sheltered  sectors  expand.  While  other  economies  have  been  spared  having  to  deal 
with the curse of cheap credit, US households and European sovereigns have, over the last 
decade, largely the same story to tell. Easy money is bad for you. 
                                                
2   Speech  by  Mario  Draghi  at  the  Global  Investment  Conference  in  London,  http://www.ecb.int/press/key/ 
date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Throughout  economic  history,  mobility  of  both  capital  and  labour  has  been  an  important 
engine  of  growth.  Today  it  is  discomforting  to  see  signs,  albeit  small,  of  financial 
protectionism. Walls are being erected between countries in the form of investment quotas, 
taxes and other measures. These walls harm borrowers, savers and investors alike. 
Norway is a rich country, and over the years we have benefited enormously from exploiting 
our  bountiful  natural  resources.  However,  our  future  wealth  is  still  conditional  on  a 
prosperous future for the whole world. Europe remains our most important trading partner, 
and still accounts for a large part of our financial investments. We have a large and direct 
interest in Europe’s success. 
European economies need to carry out deeper structural reforms to restore competitiveness 
and  growth.  The  burden  of  high  and  rising  debt  will  otherwise  become  too  heavy  to  carry 
over time. Until these issues are clarified in more detail, the uncertainty and its associated 
risk premiums may persist in the market for some time to come. 
For Europe, it is now possible to see the light at the end of the tunnel. When growth finally 
resumes, countries that have improved their economic structures and public finances will be 
well positioned to take advantage of the upturn. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Slide 1: Landes quote 
Slide 2: Output gap: A boom-bust economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   1 
Slide 3: Current account balance: Large external deficits 
Slide 4: Output gap: A boom-bust economy 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Slide 5: Measures were taken 
Slide 6: Two golden decades 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   3 
Slide 7: The fund mechanism and fiscal policy  
Slide 8: The cash flow grew rapidly 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Slide 9: Key characteristics  
Slide 11: Considerable overweight in Europe 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
Slide 12: Changing regional allocation (starting point) 
Slide 13: Changing regional allocation (target) 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Slide 14: Fixed income: new benchmark 
Slide 15: Risk has many facets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
