András Simor: Cost and efficiency of retail payments – evidence, policy 
actions and role of central banks 
Pre-dinner statement by  Mr András Simor, Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central 
bank  of  Hungary),  at  the  ECB-MNB  Joint  Conference  on  “Cost  and  efficiency  of  retail 
payments  –  evidence,  policy  actions  and  role  of  central  banks”,  Budapest,  15  November 
2012. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you here in Budapest. We are honoured that the 
ECB  accepted the  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (MNB)  as the co-organiser for  a  retail  payments 
conference  held  in  2012.  We  attribute  this  privilege  mostly  to  the  fact  that  the  MNB  has 
completed and published first the national cost of payments study based on the harmonised 
pan-European methodology.  
As  I  heard,  this  afternoon  you  listened  to  the  opening  remarks  by  Mr.  Benoît  Coeuré  and 
after  that  you  already  had  two  sessions.  You  will  also  have  a  very  busy,  tight  schedule 
tomorrow, so as a kind of rest let me invite you to play a game. How many of you brought 
your per diem in cash or cheques? Please raise your hand if you did! ... Not too many of you, 
I  see.  I  am  quite  sure  that  15  years  ago  I  would  have  gotten  quite  a  different  result!  This 
game tells us a great deal about innovation. Innovation is very important, because it leads to 
new, viable products, which can contribute to greater competition between payment service 
providers,  changes  in  payment  habits  and  thus  the  enhancement  of  overall  efficiency. 
Nonetheless, I am somewhat more interested in the bigger picture, so let me speak briefly 
about my own priorities in relation to retail payments.  
As mandated by the central bank act, the MNB promotes the smooth execution of payments 
and  the  reliable  and  efficient  operation  of  Hungary’s  clearing  and  securities  settlement 
systems. I am personally convinced that we must go beyond this task and facilitate the 
continued  improvement  in  the  efficiency  of  domestic  payments  using  all  tools 
available to us. Let me give you some Hungarian examples about what I am referring to.  
One  of  our  major  recent  achievements  was  the  introduction  of  intraday  clearing  of 
retail  payments  with  five  daily  cycles  in  July  this  year.  The  MNB  participated  in  the 
project both as the catalyst and as the regulator to overcome network coordination failure. I 
am  quite  sure  that  you  share  my  view  that  network  coordination  failure  can  emerge  quite 
often in the field of payments. Therefore, in this particular case, with the conflicts of interests 
of individual banks and the reluctance of the banking community to make a decision on the 
actual start of implementation, the MNB decided to use its regulatory power. The MNB did so 
because timely implementation of the project was in the interest of society as a whole and 
the better achievement of the public good. Public good was served in several ways; First, by 
eliminating  the  float  on  the  banks’  side;  Second,  by  facilitating  more  finely  tuned  liquidity 
management  by  customers;  and  Third,  by  generally  improving  the  quality  of  services 
provided to customers.  
Another of our achievements is the publication of the Hungarian national cost study 
entitled “Nothing is free”, which has helped to foster a public dialogue about the role 
of  cash  in  our  society.  Our  staff  found  that  cash  is  heavily  used  in  Hungarian  retail 
payments: 85% of the number of retail payment transactions is connected to the use of cash. 
According  to  the  best  estimates,  every  year  0.4%  of  GDP  (in  the  Hungarian  context  this 
currently  corresponds  to  370  million  euros)  could  be  saved  in  Hungary  if  the  national 
payment  pattern  changed  in  such  a  way  that  the  use  of  cash  and  paper-based  payment 
instruments declined, and the use of electronic payments increased.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Our  analysis  revealed  that  the  main  bottleneck  hindering  much  wider  usage  of 
cashless  payments  instruments  is  mostly  on  the  acquirers’  side.  Consequently,  we 
proposed  public  policy  measures  mostly  with  the  aim  of  better  attraction  of 
merchants.  Some  of  our  ideas  have  been  incorporated  in  the  current  economic  policy 
programme of the Hungarian government, but implementation is still underway. One of the 
key contemplated measures is the extension of the network of POS terminals, which is 
underdeveloped  in  comparison  to  other  European  countries.  In  addition  to  possibly 
subsidised  set-up  of  POS  terminals, we  are  also  thinking  about  regulating the  level  of 
interchange  fees.  Despite  some  declines,  interchange  fees  remain  too  high  in  Hungary. 
Therefore, our intention is to somehow reduce the fee level, either by following the US and 
Australian  examples  or  by  reacting  to  recent  European  developments.  Moreover,  we  also 
advocate  the  gradual  introduction  of  mandatory  acceptance  of  card  payments  at  each 
merchant outlet.  
Our  analysis  made  it  clear  that  cash  is  heavily  used  not  only  in  consumer-to-merchant 
relationship,  but  also  in  business-to-business  (B2B)  payments  and  in  payments  of  public 
administration.  In  case  of  B2B  payments,  one  step  forward  is  the  introduction  of  a 
ceiling on the amount which can be paid in cash as compensation in a purchase contract. 
The current ceiling is a monthly amount of around 18 thousand euros, and this will be further 
reduced (to about 5–6 thousand euros), if endorsed by parliament.  
We expect more robust and faster changes in the field of payments of the government. 
An upcoming MNB study has shown that one-third of all payments in the field of public 
administration  (in  total  100  million  transactions)  occur  in  cash.  Let  me  give  some 
background  information.  The  first  item  is  that  about  one-half  of  the  outgoing  cash-based 
payments relate to pension payments and the disbursement of various social transfers and 
benefits. The second item is that – within public administration – the local government sector 
is the most extensive cash user.  
A  low  cost,  basic  payment  account  could  also  function  as  an  important  vehicle  for 
curtailing  cash  usage.  Providing  access  to  payment  accounts  at  reasonable  prices  is  a 
precondition  from  the  aspect  of  the  government.  If  this  kind  of  low  cost,  basic  payment 
account  facility  were  available,  the  government  could  launch  a  massive  programme  to 
increase  electronic  disbursements  of  pensions,  social  transfers  and  benefits  to  unbanked 
people and could also require that labour income and any other remuneration be transferred 
to payment accounts.  
Our intentions are geared not only to raising awareness of the costs involved, but also 
provoking changes. Payment habits can be changed most quickly in the field of public 
administration provided that there is a supportive political will. A country like ours, a country 
with relatively low per-capita GDP and a not insignificant hidden economy, cannot afford to 
delay  reducing  the  use  of  cash.  It  is  very  encouraging  that  in  its  current  economic  policy 
programme the government declared it necessary to curtail cash payments and intends to 
apply  appropriate  policy  measures.  However,  it  seems  that  implementation  will  not  be 
completed very soon.  
For  most  of  the  time  I  have  been  speaking  about  the  Hungarian  case  and  about  the 
challenges we are facing, and the measures we have either taken or are still considering, in 
order to most efficiently tackle the waste of resources. I am sure some of these phenomena 
or similar ones occur in your country as well.  
This  entire  conference  and  the  dinner  reception  just  ahead  of  us  provide  an  excellent 
opportunity  for  learning  from  each  other,  and  to  discuss,  for  example,  experiences, 
successes, failures, and forces behind changes in the overall efficiency of retail payments, in 
particular the role of central banks and the future evolution of the retail payments market. Let 
us keep in mind a Chinese proverb that says “A single conversation with a wise man is better 
than ten years of study”.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  has  been  a  long  day,  in  particular  for  those who  departed  early  this  morning  or  are  still 
suffering from jet lag.  
Therefore, I am not going to hold you up anymore. Bon appétit! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
