K C Chakrabarty: Social banking and finance – opportunities in inclusion 
Session keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of 
India, at the 2nd FT-YES Bank International Banking Summit, Mumbai, 15 October 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  R.K.  Jain  and  Shri  Bipin  Nair  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Mr James Crabtree, Mumbai Correspondent, Financial Times and moderator for the session, 
my  fellow  panellists  Mr  Y.M.  Deosthalee,  CMD  L&T  Finance;  Mr  Ajai  Kumar,  CMD 
Corporation  Bank;  Mr  M.V.  Tanksale,  CMD  Central  Bank  of  India;  Mr  R.V.  Verma,  CMD 
National  Housing  Bank;  Mr  Ajay  Desai,  Chief  Financial  Inclusion  Officer,  Yes  Bank  and 
Mr Leonardo Rubattu, General Manager, Iccrea Banca; other important people sitting in the 
audience  specially  Dr  Rana  Kapoor,  Founder,  MD  and  CEO,  Yes  Bank  and  Mr  James 
Lamont,  Managing  Editor,  Financial  Times;  delegates  to  the  conference;  members  of  the 
print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. It is, indeed, a matter of great pleasure and 
privilege  for  me  to  be  present  here  today  at  the  2nd  FT-YES  Bank  International  Banking 
Summit 2012 and share some of my thoughts with you on the topic for the Session: “Social 
Banking and Finance – Opportunities in Inclusion”. The topic is very relevant, particularly in 
the light of the prevailing global economic crisis, which was, in part, attributed to the financial 
system  losing  its  social  orientation  and  growing  into  an  exclusive  universe,  disconnected 
from  the  real  sector.  Social  banking  and  financial  inclusion  present  a  significant  challenge 
and a unique opportunity to build a broad based and stable financial system, subservient and 
contributing to growth in the real sector and overall economic prosperity of the masses. It is 
also very germane to the overall theme of the conference on “Realigning the Global Banking 
System” as inclusiveness and social orientation needs to be the key pillar around which the 
post-crisis  global  financial  architecture  is  developed.  I,  therefore,  congratulate  Financial 
Times and Yes Bank for including this theme in the conference and look forward to a useful 
brainstorming session ahead. 
What is social banking? 
Before  delving  into  the  nuances  of  social  banking,  let  me  briefly  dwell  on  what  is  social 
business, or more specifically, social banking. In my opinion, any activity which is viewed by 
society  as  not  being in sync  with  societal  priorities  would  get  weeded  out in the  course  of 
time. Therefore, any business, in order to be sustainable, needs to be socially oriented. This 
is  all the more  true  of  banking  business  which, due  to its financial intermediation function, 
has to necessarily be aligned to the developmental needs of the society that it operates in. 
Notwithstanding,  banks  being  commercial  organisations,  must  earn  profit,  else  they  would 
not remain viable or be able to absorb shocks. At the same time, they must serve a social 
purpose; otherwise, they will become irrelevant and unsustainable. 
The banking business, globally, has followed pricing practices that have resulted in the poor 
subsidizing the rich. This has worked to the detriment of the poor, who have had to pay high 
cost for accessing financial services, often forcing them to rely on informal sources for their 
funding needs at exorbitant rates. This has severely curtailed the opportunities available to 
them  to  use  the  financial  system  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  lives.  Therefore,  intuitively 
speaking,  to  me,  social  banking  is  one  where  the  rich  subsidize  the  provision  of  financial 
services  to  the  poor  and  where  banking  business  is  oriented  towards  serving  the  masses 
instead of exploiting them. 
Thus,  seen  in  a  broader  perspective,  banking  can  never  be  “unsocial”.  Hence,  the 
terminology of “banking” and “social banking” can be used concomitantly. However, as the 
organizers of the conference have chosen the topic of Social Banking and finance, I would 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
continue to use the prefix “social”, though, I firmly believe that banking and finance should 
always be social to ensure their long term sustainability and viability. 
Social banking and finance – more relevant than ever before 
Why  has  social  banking  and  finance  become  so  relevant  now?  The  global  financial  and 
economic crisis has had a significant negative impact on lives of individuals globally. People 
have lost their livelihoods, their homes and savings in the aftermath of the crisis. One of the 
prominent reasons for the crisis was that the financial system was focussed on furthering its 
own  interests  and  lost  its  linkage  to  the  real  sector  and  with  the  society  at  large.  The 
relevance  of  social  banking  and  finance  also  arises  from  the  realization  that  free  market 
forces  do  not  always  result  in  greater  efficiency  in  the  financial  system,  particularly  while 
protecting the interests of the vulnerable sections of society. This is due to the information 
asymmetry working against these sections, thereby placing them at a severe disadvantage. 
Post crisis, social banking has become an important theme across the globe. The need for 
banks  to  be  relevant  to  society,  besides  pursuing  their  own  business  interests,  has  been 
reflected  in  various  measures  introduced  through  legislations  and  regulations  in  several 
jurisdictions.  The  fact  ,that  developments  in  the  financial  world  can  have  severe  spillover 
effects on the real sector, thereby materially impacting the lives of the masses – has been 
the  thought  process  behind  these  measures.  The  stability  and  strength  of  the  financial 
system is, thus, a matter of public concern and is reflected in these steps. 
It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  banks  are  an  integral  part  of  the  social  system.  They  draw 
resources such as manpower, funds, support services, etc. from the community, which also 
acts  as  customers  for  banks’  services.  Banks  are,  therefore,  heavily  reliant  on  society  for 
their  operations  and  it  is,  thus,  fair  to  expect  that  banks  reciprocate  by  ensuring  that  the 
interests of the society are taken care of through social banking measures. 
History of social banks 
Historically,  the  first  social  banks  were  founded  in  Italy  in  the  15th  century.  Their  primary 
responsibility was to be an intermediary between those with money to save and those who 
needed money to do business. In India, the history of co-operative banks goes back to the 
year 1904, when the Co-operative Credit Societies Act was enacted. Thus, social banks are 
not a new concept but rather an idea that has had a long history both globally and in India. 
Distinguishing features of social banking 
The critical difference that sets social banking apart from conventional commercial banking is 
that  though  earning  profit  is  one  of  the  objectives  of  social  banking,  it  would  not  be  their 
raison  d’être.  Social  banking  would  also  be  concerned  about  the  community,  about 
contributing to the well-being of the masses and ensuring that their activities are carried out 
in  a  manner  that  is  in  congruence  with  the  broader  goals  of  the  society.  They  would  not 
encourage  businesses 
the  ecosystem  and  would  support  sustainable 
environmental practices through their lending policies. 
Social banking would seek to closely understand the requirements of customers and develop 
products  that  are  best  suited  to  their  needs.  They  work  towards  developing  technology 
leveraged  models  that  bring  down  the  costs  of  providing  services  and  make  banking 
affordable to the masses. By extending the reach and penetration of banks, social banking 
tries to make banking services available to the marginalized segments of the society. 
that  harm 
Social banking also needs to promote inclusion to address poverty 
About 2.5 billion people across the globe do not have access to basic banking services. The 
unbanked population, which lives primarily in developing countries, comprises nearly half of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the world’s working-age population. Their exclusion from the formal financial system restricts 
their participation in the global economy and severely curtails the opportunities available to 
them to pull themselves out of poverty. 
Banks should have a vested interest in poverty alleviation as improvement in the economic 
status of the poor would enable the latter’s joining the formal financial system and becoming 
prospective  bank  customers.  Social  banking  can  contribute  to  poverty  alleviation  by 
developing low cost products customized to the needs of the poor and providing them access 
to affordable credit for entrepreneurial and emergency purposes. Social banking can, through 
financial literacy initiatives, generate awareness among the poor about financial products and 
their utility. Banks can also contribute towards making the poor creditworthy through training 
and counselling programmes. 
Let me now briefly discuss the social banking initiatives in India. 
Social banking as an instrument for financial inclusion – Indian experience 
Though social banking initiatives were introduced in India long back through measures such 
as the cooperative banking movement, nationalization of banks, creation of Regional Rural 
Banks, etc, their success was largely constrained by the size and population of the country 
and non-availability of banking services. This constraint could be overcome only through the 
emergence of suitable technology and hence, in the last decade, with the developments in 
technology,  financial  inclusion  has  received  a  big  boost  in  India  and  greater  efforts  have 
been laid on inclusive banking. 
Inclusive growth in India: a key objective 
• 
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007–12) envisioned inclusive growth as a key policy 
objective.  The  Plan  document  noted  that  economic  growth  had  failed  to  be 
sufficiently  inclusive,  particularly  after  the  mid-1990s.  Though  the  Indian  economy 
achieved  high  growth  rates  between  2003–04  and  2007–08,  it  did  not  result  in 
unemployment  and  poverty  reducing  to  tolerable  levels.  Thus,  the  Eleventh  Plan 
Document tried to restructure the policies in order to make the growth faster, broad-
based and inclusive. Huge investments in education, health and rural infrastructure 
were the key elements of the inclusive growth strategy as envisaged. 
Broadly, the policies aimed at increasing the income and employment opportunities 
and the financing of programmes capable of making the growth more inclusive, such 
as development of agriculture and small scale industries. 
It was recognized that state governments have an important role to play in achieving 
the  objectives,  especially  in  providing  suitable  infrastructure/  extension support for 
facilitating enhanced credit flow to agriculture. 
Multi agency approach 
We have a multi-agency approach to financial inclusion in India. 
• 
The Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) is mandated, inter alia, to 
focus on Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy issues. 
In order to further strengthen the on-going financial inclusion agenda in India, a high 
level  Financial  Inclusion  Advisory  Committee  has  been  constituted  by  the 
Reserve Bank of India. The collective expertise and experience of the members of 
the  committee  will  be  utilised  to  pave  the  way  for  developing  a  viable  and 
sustainable banking services delivery model focussing on accessible and affordable 
financial services, for developing products and processes for rural as well as urban 
consumers  presently  outside  the  banking  network  and  for  suggesting  appropriate 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
       regulatory framework to ensure that financial inclusion and financial stability move in 
tandem. 
Financial Sector Regulators including the Reserve Bank are fully committed to the 
Financial Inclusion Mission. 
 Financial inclusion – what has been done so far? 
Some of the steps initiated for enhancing financial inclusion in India include: 
• 
ICT based Business Correspondent (BC) Model for delivery of low cost door step 
banking services in remote villages is being implemented. 
Board approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) of banks for 3 years, starting April 
2010 are being implemented, with close monitoring by RBI. 
Roadmap  to  cover  villages  with  population  above  2000  by  March  2012  was 
prepared  and  successfully  implemented. Process  of  ensuring  coverage of  villages 
with population below 2000 is underway. 
Mandatory opening of 25 % of new branches by banks in unbanked rural centres. 
Introduction of Basic Saving Bank Deposit Account for all individuals 
KYC documentation requirements significantly simplified for small accounts. 
Guidelines for convergence between Electronic Benefit Transfer and FIP have been 
issued. 
Pricing for banks has been totally freed. Interest rates on advances have been fully 
deregulated. 
Approach adopted by RBI – some specifics 
• 
In India, we have adopted a bank-led model for financial inclusion which seeks to 
leverage  on  technology.  The  financial  inclusion  initiatives  would  have  to  be  ICT 
based and would ride on new delivery models that would need to be developed by 
the market participants to best suit their requirements. 
Our  experience  shows  that  the  goal  of financial  inclusion  is  better  served  through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  suite  of 
products required to bring in effective/meaningful financial inclusion. 
Other  players  such  as  mobile  companies,  etc.  have  been  allowed  to  partner  with 
banks in offering services collaboratively. 
We  recognize  that  technology  is  the  key  to  our  financial  inclusion  efforts. 
Technology needs to be leveraged both for improving access to financial services 
and for bringing down the cost of providing these services. As a starting point, we 
have insisted that all bank branches including RRBs should be on CBS. We have 
encouraged a multi-channel approach including mobiles, hand held devices, smart 
cards, micro-ATMs, kiosks, etc for providing financial services. However, the front-
end devices need to be seamlessly integrated with bank CBS systems. 
Coverage 
A village is considered to be covered by banking service if either a bank branch is present or 
a BC is physically present or visiting that village. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Availability 
Availability of Banking Services means availability of a minimum of four products 
i) 
A Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account (formerly termed as No-Frills account) with 
Overdraft Facility.  
A Remittance Product for Electronic Benefit Transfer and other remittances. 
A Pure Savings Product, ideally a recurring or a variable recurring deposit.  
Entrepreneurial Credit such as General Credit Card, Kisan Credit Card. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Challenges to social banking 
The  concept  of  social  banking,  despite  its  inherent  merits,  faces  several  significant 
challenges in the process of scaling up. An efficient business/ delivery model that is capable 
of  delivering  banking  services  to  the  masses  in  a  cost  effective  manner  is  yet  to  be 
implemented  by  banks.  While  several  delivery  models  have  been  experimented  with,  the 
same  has  not  yet  stabilized.  Similarly,  several  alternate  technology  options  are  being tried 
out.  However,  the  alternative  that  would  be  able  to  handle  high  volume  low  value 
transactions, cost efficiently, is yet to be crystallized. Banks also have to refine their pricing 
practices  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  basic  goal  of  social  orientation  is  maintained  while 
ensuring viability and sustainability of social banking initiatives. 
Sensitization  of  bank’s  manpower  on  their  role  in  implementing  the  bank’s  social  banking 
measures  is  also  a  significant  challenge  as  the  rationale  and  guiding  spirit  behind  the 
initiatives  need  to  be  conveyed  to  the  operational  staff  on  the  ground.  This  is  of  utmost 
importance  as  they  serve  as  the  frontline  contact  of  the  bank  with  the  target  groups  and 
hence,  are  a  vital  cog  in  the  implementation  of  bank’s  social  banking  initiatives.  Besides 
being technologically conversant with the innovative platforms being adopted by banks, the 
staff  needs  to  have  a  behavioural  orientation  that  grooms  them  to  empathise  with  the 
vulnerable groups and gain their confidence. 
The way forward 
With the introduction of banking technology and the realization that poor are bankable, the 
coverage of unbanked population into the financial system is expected to improve. Financial 
inclusion,  along  with  Government’s  developmental  programmes,  is  expected  to  result  in 
overall financial and economic development in the country. As in the case of most developing 
countries,  extending  the  banking  services  to  unbanked  groups  is  expected  to  be  the  key 
driver for inclusive growth. 
Developing innovative delivery channels would be the key to our financial inclusion initiatives. 
There are several success stories globally where market players have worked out innovative 
models,  often  harnessing  on  technology,  to  overcome  financial  exclusion  barriers.  Mobile 
phone services for instance, have been harnessed by several jurisdictions such as Kenya, 
through their M-PESA model, for providing access to financial services to people. The fact 
that there is a huge mass of people with mobile phones, but no bank accounts highlights the 
potential available through this channel. Similarly, use of microfinance, banking agents, etc 
by  various  jurisdictions  has  resulted  in  impressive  gains  from  a  financial  inclusion 
perspective. 
In India, the policy framework is already in place. However, an efficient business model and 
delivery  platform  for  provision  of  services  by  financial  service  providers  is  still  evolving. 
Banks,  in  collaboration  with  other  stakeholders  and  civil  society,  are  working  towards 
stabilizing and scaling up their models for social banking. As mentioned previously, we are 
pursuing bank-led model which leverages on technology to expand coverage and minimise 
cost of providing service. We are technology neutral and banks can select any technology 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
option.  We  encourage  banks  to  develop  models  which  can  operate  in  a  viable  and 
sustainable manner. 
Conclusion 
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  and  growing  disenchantment  among  the  general  public, 
reflected  in  the  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  and  similar  protest  movements  worldwide,  the 
consequent reform measures have focussed on promulgating laws  which seek to exercise 
greater control over the investment practices of banks and to limit speculation. What appears 
as  a more  promising  approach  in the long  run is  to  develop  socially,  morally  and  ethically 
responsible banking practices oriented towards all stakeholders, even while pursuing profit 
motives. Social banking model can emerge as a very sustainable model that can emancipate 
the global financial system from some of the ills that plague it at the present moment. 
The impetus for social banking can come from two approaches – one of them being through 
legal  and  regulatory  requirements.  This  approach  could,  however,  result  in  social  banking 
being  pursued  only  from  a  compliance  perspective.  The  other  alternative,  which  holds 
greater  promise,  requires  a  realisation  by  market  players  that  social  banking  could  be  a 
viable business proposition. For this, banks need to be fully convinced that social banking is 
in  their  own  interest  and  that  success  in  pursuing  this  business  model  would  ensure  their 
long  run  sustainability  and  growth.  It  is  well  recognized  that  without  voluntary  efforts  by 
banks,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  scale  up  social  banking  into  a  viable  alternative. 
Accordingly,  in  India,  we  have  encouraged  financial  inclusion  initiatives  to  be  bank-driven 
and to be guided by Financial Inclusion Plans developed by the individual bank Boards with 
self-set targets. 
As highlighted by the Nobel Peace Award Laureate and former Russian President Mr Mikhail 
Gorbachev, the imperatives for a better future are – peace, fighting poverty, promoting global 
social justice & common wealth, and protecting the environment. In our attempts to achieve 
these objectives, social banking would have to play a significant contribution. 
I  congratulate  Financial  Times  and  YES  Bank  for  organizing  this  Summit  and  once  again 
thank them for providing me the opportunity to be present here today. I look forward to an 
interesting and stimulating discussion with my learned fellow members on today’s panel and 
hope that the session succeeds in generating ideas that financial market players, regulators 
and civil society can work on so as to make social banking a sustainable idea. 
Thank You. 
Select references 
1. 
Address  by  Dr  K.C.  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor,  RBI  at  St.  Xavier’s  College 
(September 6, 2011) on Financial Inclusion. 
Doug  Johnson,  Centre  for  Microfinance,  “Financial  Inclusion  &  Delivery  of  Social 
Transfer Payments”, 2010 
Social Banking and Social Finance: Answers to the Economic Crisis, Springer, New 
York, 2010. 
Draft Five Year Plan Document (2007–12), Planning Commission, New Delhi, 2007. 
Daniel  M.  Schydlowsky,  Peru’s  Development  Finance  Corporation,  “Financial 
Inclusion to Address Poverty”.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
