Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Corporate governance at the Central Bank of Malaysia 
Opening speech by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the Third Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia-The Malaysian Institute 
of  Certified  Public  Accountants  (ICAA-MICPA)  Audit  Forum,  Kuala  Lumpur,  27  September 
2012. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning at the 3rd ICAA-MICPA Audit Forum. The 
theme  for  the  Forum  this  year  is  the  role  of  the  audit  committee  within  the  context  of 
corporate governance in insurance companies. It has been said that an audit committee is 
like a good insurance policy - it is better to have it and not need it, than to need it and not 
have  it.  I  am  certainly  happy  to  know  that  we  have  established  strong  audit  committee 
practice  within  our  financial  industry,  and  while  admittedly,  some  institutions  have  moved 
further  than  others  in  improving  the  effectiveness  of  the  audit  committee,  it  represents 
without  exception  a  core  pillar  of  governance  systems  in  our  financial  sector.  I  say  this 
because as we speak, there are countries that are now debating the requirement for financial 
institutions to establish separate audit committees. 
There are a number of reasons why the theme chosen for this forum is particularly relevant in 
current times. Corporate governance problems have once again come under intense global 
scrutiny since the outbreak of the global financial crisis. It is however worth noting that quite 
aside  from  the  crisis,  recent  episodes  of  compliance  and  market  misconduct  issues 
surrounding financial  institutions have  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  crisis,  but  nevertheless 
have their roots in corporate governance problems. Poor governance allowed, and in some 
cases,  likely  encouraged,  internal  control  failures  leading  to  large-scale  fraud,  excessive 
risk-taking, market manipulations, and an endemic disregard for compliance with laws and 
regulations. 
While such issues have not plagued our domestic financial industry to nearly the same extent 
as  they  have  in  some  other  parts  of  the  world,  there  are  other  reasons  why  we  need  to 
continue to pay close attention to corporate governance in Malaysia. 
For  one,  global  economic  and  financial  conditions  have  become  considerably  more 
uncertain. In the last Monetary Policy Statement, the Bank Negara Malaysia observed that 
economic activity is slower in most major advanced economies. There is considerable policy 
uncertainty  in  these  economies,  while  conditions  in  the  international  financial  markets 
continue  to  be  volatile.  In  this  environment,  effective  leadership  reinforced  by  a  robust 
framework within financial institutions for directing strategy and for regulating behaviour will 
be especially important. 
Domestically,  the  financial  industry  also  faces  greater  competition  as  a  result  of  the 
progressive  liberalisation  of  the financial  sector. Within  the  general  insurance  industry,  the 
course has been set for greater price competition with the gradual removal of tariffs. A review 
of  the  operating  cost  controls  which  also  regulate  incentives  for  insurance  sales  is  also  in 
train.  As  we  know  from this  recent  crisis,  incentives  and  a  disproportionate focus  on  short 
term gains played a central role. This does not mean that we should put on hold initiatives 
that  would  promote  a  more  competitive,  efficient  and  sustainable  insurance  sector.  But  it 
does  mean  that  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  have  sufficient  confidence  in  the  system  of 
checks and balances that exist to safeguard the interests of financial consumers and the long 
term viability of the industry. Corporate governance is clearly an essential part of that system 
of checks and balances. 
As  the  Government  embarks  on  the  Economic  Transformation  Programme,  demand  will 
increase for new and innovative solutions for investment, protection and risk diversification. 
As  presented  in  the  Bank’s  Financial  Sector  Blueprint,  expectations  are  for  the  insurance 
industry to be able to deliver a wider range of insurance products that include medical and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
health  insurance,  risk  protection  offerings  for  small  and  medium  businesses  as  well  as 
products  supporting  the  global  expansion  of  Malaysian  businesses.  Stronger  insurance 
companies are also expected to expand beyond our domestic shores. These developments 
present tremendous opportunities, but also new risks that must be managed. As individual 
insurers  chart  their  own  paths  in  this  landscape,  strong  governance  systems  will  assume 
greater importance to keep business standards in check and to guard against actions that 
would put the long term interests of the company at risk. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  also  particularly  focused  on  corporate governance  in  the  light  of 
regulatory changes that are being pursued for the insurance industry. I am referring to the 
transition  from  a  rules-based  system  which  regulates  a  number  of  aspects  of  insurance 
operations,  to  a  more  principles-based  system.  This  process  has  already  started  with  the 
newer guidelines that we have introduced lately, but there continue to be a number of rules 
applied  to  the  insurance  sector  which  may  have  outlived  their  purpose.  We  are  reviewing 
these.  A  precondition  for  this  transition  is  a  significant  emphasis  on  a  strong  system  of 
corporate governance, and one that is actually working effectively within financial institutions. 
Ultimately,  corporate  governance  reforms  are  about  improving  accountability  and  control, 
especially  where  interests  and  incentives  of  stakeholders  are  not fully  aligned. We  believe 
that  in  Malaysia,  we  have  laid  strong  foundations  for  sound  governance  practices  within 
financial  institutions.  For  the  insurance  industry,  the  prudential  framework  on  corporate 
governance for insurance companies and various other guidelines that have been issued by 
the Bank establish standards that we expect insurers to operate against to ensure the sound 
and  prudent  management  of  insurers.  Our  supervisory  approach  has  contributed  to 
promoting  better  governance  in  practice.  And  in  the  last  four  years,  we  have  focused  on 
providing important support to directors in performing their roles through education initiatives. 
Forums such as this contribute to that effort. 
Our  continuing  work  on  corporate  governance  builds  on  and  strengthens  this  foundation. 
This morning, I would like to take the opportunity to briefly address some of the issues and 
priorities that are currently directing the Bank’s work in this area. 
We have substantially completed a review of the existing corporate governance frameworks 
for the banking and insurance industries and expect to be able to consult with industry on our 
specific  proposals to  update  and  harmonise the frameworks  later  this  year.  As  part  of this 
review, the insurance industry can expect that what is currently described as “best practice” 
in  the  prudential  framework  on  corporate  governance  will  be  elevated  to  principles  or 
minimum  expectations  to  be  met  by  all  institutions. We  do  not  expect  this  to  substantially 
alter current practice in the industry given that for some time now, the Bank already holds 
insurers  to  higher  standards  that  reflect  the  maturity  of  the  industry  and  the  more 
sophisticated nature of the business over time. 
But we also set out in the review to take a fresh and critical look at some key elements of the 
governance framework to ensure that our requirements remain fit for purpose in the context 
of  the  changing  financial  landscape.  Independence,  board  size  and  composition,  and 
expectations of subsidiary boards are among some themes addressed in our proposals. We 
have drawn extensively on our supervisory observations and thematic reviews of governance 
practices  over  the  course  of  the  past  two  years  in  informing  our  review.  In  many  areas, 
positive  changes  can  be  observed  in  the  governance  practices  of  insurers.  In  some  other 
areas,  we  have  found  that  practices  of  institutions  have  fallen  substantially  short  of  our 
expectations as enumerated in existing corporate governance principles that institutions must 
observe. An example relates to the effectiveness of nomination committees and attention to 
remuneration practices. In such areas, we find merit in providing more specific guidance to 
institutions in order to achieve greater progress towards the desired state. 
I alluded earlier to the particular importance of effective governance as we move towards the 
adoption  of  more  principle-based  regulations  for  the  insurance  industry.  A  common 
misperception  that  we  find  in  the  industry  has  been  the  notion  that  principles-based 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
internal  audits  adopt  a  risk-based  approach 
regulation  equals  deregulation  or  less  regulation.  It  is  in  fact  neither.  The  move  is  mainly 
motivated by two key considerations: first, a recognition that in an environment of fast-paced 
innovations, attempts to regulate prudent behaviour through detailed and prescriptive rules is 
just  not  sustainable  as  they  risk  becoming  outdated  almost  as  soon  as  they  are  written. 
Second, common rules often do not adequately capture the risks of larger and more complex 
institutions, or when they do, they are disproportionately onerous for smaller institutions and 
this can choke off innovation. The adoption of more principles-based regulation is therefore 
about  re-regulating  the  industry  in  a  manner  that  better  reflects  the  risks  which  an  insurer 
faces. 
There is a third consideration. With greater focus on principles of sound practice, it is left to 
insurers  to  design  appropriate  internal  rules  that  will  govern  their  activities.  This  has  the 
intended effect of encouraging firms to shift from a compliance focus to developing a deeper 
understanding  of  the  risk  drivers  in  their  business.  In  turn,  conversations  between 
management and the board, and between insurers and supervisors, have moved to focus on 
how  key  risks  are  being  controlled  rather  than  on  whether  particular  rules  have  been 
breached.  This  reflects  our  expectation  that  boards,  supported  by  the  audit  and  risk 
committees,  must  monitor  changes  to  their  risk  profiles  and  actively  review  risk  strategies 
and internal controls in the light of those changes. 
An area in  which Bank Negara Malaysia is currently seeking to better understand industry 
practice  is  with  respect  to  the  interactions  between  the  audit  and  risk  committees  of  the 
board. Audit committees have a clear interest in risk management within their organisations. 
Most 
to  auditing  which  requires  an 
understanding  of  material  risks  within  the  organisation.  Audit  committees  also  obtain 
independent  assurance  from  internal  audit  on  the  effectiveness  of  risk  management 
processes  within  the  organisation  and  this  requires  a  reasonably  deep  knowledge  of  risk 
management.  Conversely,  risk  committees  must  consider  the  quality  of  internal  controls, 
including financial reporting practices, which are an important part of any risk management 
framework. 
The  Walker  Review  of  corporate  governance  in  the  financial  industry  acknowledged  an 
important  link  between  these  two  functions.  In  Malaysia,  we  have  moved  ahead  of  many 
countries in requiring an organisational separation of the audit and risk committees in order 
to  encourage  an  enhanced focus  on  audit  and risk. This move  is  now  validated  by  similar 
directions in other countries including Canada, Australia and the UK to require separation. 
Moreover, the enormous challenges of implementing new financial reporting standards, have 
substantially  increased  the  demands  on  the  audit  committee,  which  further  affirms  the 
separation of these committees as best practice in order to maintain a clear focus on both 
risk management and controls. 
Within  existing  structures  in  the  insurance  industry,  we  observe  common  overlaps  in 
membership between audit and risk committee members. We also observe varying degrees 
in which firms explicitly refer to coordination between the audit and risk committees in their 
respective  charters.  There  is  even  greater  variance  in  the  actual  practice  of  how  the  two 
committees  interact  with  one  another.  These  observations  lead  us  to  believe  that  there  is 
room  for  greater  clarity  and  improved  coordination  in  responsibilities  between  these 
committees. 
Bank Negara Malaysia is mindful of concerns expressed by the industry that we are adding 
too  much  responsibility  to  the  board’s  plate,  and  requiring  boards  to  approve  numerous 
policies  and  management  actions  may  be  distracting  boards  from  being  effective  in 
performing  their  core  oversight functions. The  addition  of  new  responsibilities  to  the  board 
has  also  raised  some  questions  within  institutions  on  whether  the  separation  between 
management  and  oversight  is  being  appropriately  preserved.  In  revising  the  existing 
framework on corporate governance, we intend to take the opportunity to address this issue 
by  improving  how  we  capture  board  roles  and  responsibilities  at  the  organisational  level, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
taking into account all the things that we currently ask boards to do. This will reduce the need 
for the Bank to direct matters that boards must approve in specific business areas. It does 
not however, obviate the need for boards to be fully engaged in approving core policies such 
as  risk  and  capital  management  strategies.  In  other  areas,  the  board  should  determine 
matters that are reserved for its decision, and the Bank will look to the quality of engagement 
with management, escalation of issues to the board and the means by which boards obtain 
assurance  on  matters  that  it  does  not  specifically  approve.  This  will  be  reflected  in  our 
assessment of the quality of oversight and risk control functions of the insurer. 
I hope that these insights to some of the Bank’s current policy considerations will provoke 
reflections of your own on how your organisations are currently organised and positioned to 
cope with an environment that will only become more challenging on various fronts. We have 
much work still to do and over the course of the coming months, we will be seeking industry 
feedback  on  these  issues.  We  also  have  our  own  expectations  of  the  industry.  A  key 
expectation  continues  to  be  that  the  board  collectively  ensures  that  it  has  the  requisite 
knowledge and competencies represented on the board to discharge its role effectively. Our 
demands  of  insurers  will  increase  in  this  respect.  Given  its  responsibility  for  financial 
statements, and for ensuring a sound system of internal controls, the audit committee will be 
a point of some focus as financial reporting standards as well as insurers’ operations become 
more complex. 
This  Forum  and  your  participation  provide  great  encouragement  to  the  Bank  that 
continuously raising the level of board competence is an important priority that is shared by 
those  who  have  primary  charge  of  ensuring  that  insurers  operate  in  a  prudent  and 
responsible manner. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
