Ignazio Visco: Creating job, eradicating poverty and achieving 
sustainable prosperity 
Statement by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, on behalf of the Constituency 
representing  Albania,  Greece,  Italy,  Malta,  Portugal,  San  Marino  and  Timor-Leste,  to  the 
Development Committee, Tokyo, 13 October 2012. 
 Creating jobs for development: a challenge for all countries 
1.  
According  to  the  ILO’s  latest  estimates  for  2012,  the  global  number  of  unemployed  is 
200 million, about 30 million more than in 2007. At the same time, the share of the working 
age population with a job declined to an estimated 60.3 per cent in 2012 from 61.2 per cent 
in 2007. This scenario is projected to remain mostly unchanged in the coming years and can 
even turn out to be optimistic should some of the downward risks materialize. 
Thus,  the  World  Development  Report  (WDR)  2013  on  jobs  recently  published  and  its 
companion  paper  “Creating  jobs  for  development:  policy  directions  from  the  2013  World 
Development Report on Jobs” are timely in addressing one of the most pressing problems for 
many policy makers around the world. They also offer an opportunity to refocus the attention 
of the Bank on its original mandate of eradicating poverty and boosting prosperity. Jobs and 
especially good jobs, are the main avenue to achieve both goals. 
As  the  WDR  2013  states,  it  is  for  the  private  sector  to  create  economically  and  socially 
sustainable jobs, and for the government to provide a stable macroeconomic environment, 
an  investment  friendly  business  climate,  a  solid  rule  of  law  and  a  balanced  labor  market 
regulation.  Policies  and  interventions  will  need  to  be  tailored  to  each  country’s  initial 
conditions, based on the diagnosis of the constraints to job creation. 
The Knowledge Bank: implications for the business model 
2.  
The  strategy  that  aims  at  eradicating  absolute  poverty  in  poor  countries  and  achieving 
sustainable and inclusive prosperity in middle income countries deserves support. 
Financial  resources  need  to  be  directed  with  priority  towards  countries  that  do  not  have 
access to the market at a reasonable cost. On the contrary, about 50 per cent of the overall 
IBRD exposure is currently to countries with per capita income above 2,900 US dollars, and 
30  per  cent  is  to  countries  that  can  borrow  from  the  market  at  a  spread  of  no  more  than 
150 basis points over the corresponding US Treasury. 
Redirecting financial resources to the least developed countries cannot imply that the WBG 
ceases  to  serve  Middle  Income  Countries.  The  WBG  needs  to  define  a  new  engagement 
strategy with MICs based on the second pillar of the mandate: boosting prosperity. Achieving 
this goal requires knowledge and practical solutions, which are somewhat scarce. The WBG 
should provide what these countries cannot find on the market. The Knowledge Bank should 
be  an  active  knowledge  manager  able  to  mobilize  its  own  expertise,  know-how  and 
information to provide tailored solutions to the specific problems of each single client. 
The development of a full scale business line of knowledge production and management is to 
be encouraged, provided that it is based on three principles: knowledge products need to be 
of the highest quality; they have to respond to countries’ needs and demands, rather than 
being  supply  driven;  they  need  to  be  provided  on  a  cost  recovery  basis  and  contribute  to 
sustaining the income generating capacity of the WBG. This market test would ensure that 
the knowledge products have value added for the MICs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This strategy would free up enough IBRD lending capacity to meet the needs of the poorer 
members  of  the  institution,  without  reducing  revenues.  However,  the  income  generating 
capacity of WBG depends also on keeping costs under control. 
Increasing the efficiency of the World Bank through the current modernization process is of 
the upmost importance. In the medium term, it is necessary to reassess whether the current 
structure of WBG based on four organizations, IBRD, IDA, IFC, MIGA, is still the best suited 
to serve the clients of the 21st century, or whether it is a legacy of the past that needs to be 
reorganized  in  a  more  efficient  fashion.  While  searching  for  an  answer,  one  can  achieve 
valuable  efficiency  gains  and  cost  savings  by  merging  across  institutions  back  office 
functions  such  as  treasury,  controller,  risk  management,  human  resources,  information 
technology, general services, external relations, and unifying the country offices. 
Making  the  most  out  of  scarce  resources  by  redesigning  a  very  lean  and  efficient 
organization  is  a  moral  obligation  to  taxpayers  and,  more  importantly,  to  the  1.3  billion  of 
poor people around the globe. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
