Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global financial stability and the internationalisation of 
financial systems in emerging economies 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Euromoney-
Qatar Conference “Global financial stability and the internationalisation of financial systems 
in emerging economies”, Doha, 11 December 2012. 
 It is my honour to be here in Doha to speak at this Euromoney-Qatar Conference on “Global 
Finance Re-designed”. I wish to thank the Qatar Central Bank for the invitation to speak at 
this  event.  In  this  current  global  environment,  the  unprecedented  and  wide  ranging  global 
policy  responses  have  yet  to  produce  financial  stability  and  a  sustainable  recovery  of  the 
global economy. 
The intensification of the globalization of finance in this decade has resulted in an even more 
connected  and  interdependent  world.  While  the  financial  systems  and  economies  in  most 
parts of the world felt the effects of the recent global financial crisis, it has not discouraged 
the pace of internationalization of financial systems, in particular, in emerging economies. My 
address  this  morning  will  be  on  financial  stability  and  the  internationalization  of  financial 
systems in emerging economies. My remarks will cover the benefits and challenges of such 
internationalization, the lessons that can be drawn from the recent global financial crisis, the 
Malaysian experience on the internationalization of our financial system.  
Benefits and challenges of internationalisation of financial systems 
While there are significant benefits from internationalization of financial systems, the resulting 
increased international financial integration brings with it new risks and challenges. The case 
for increased financial liberalization and internationalization maintains that it would foster the 
development  of  a  more  efficient  and  robust  financial  system.  While  the  resulting  more 
competitive  financial  system  will  enhance  the  efficiency  in  the  financial  intermediation 
process and contribute towards reducing the cost of intermediation, the supervisory oversight 
needs  to  ensure  over  competition  does  not  result  in  the  mispricing  of  risk  with  adverse 
consequences on financial stability. 
Other  benefits  are  the  increased  opportunities  for  technology  transfer,  new  expertise  and 
greater innovation and new product offerings. Increased foreign participation in the domestic 
financial markets would also contribute to increased liquidity and more competitive pricing in 
the domestic financial markets and encourage a more efficient allocation of capital within the 
economy. It is also maintained that it will contribute to the expansion and development of the 
domestic financial markets in particular, the capital market, proving an important access for 
financing  of  investment  activity.  With  the  more  efficient  functioning  of  domestic  financial 
markets, it would also improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
Meanwhile,  the  increased  capital  inflows  following  the  capital  account  liberalization 
represents another source of financing that would contribute towards increased investment 
and growth. It will allow jurisdictions with surplus funds to be channelled to those regions with 
productive investment opportunities and thus contribute towards a more efficient allocation of 
funds  across  international  borders.  The  stronger  cross  border  financial  linkages  has  the 
potential to enhance international trade and investment opportunities. It allows countries to 
leverage  on  the  respective  comparative  advantage  and  complementarities  to  reinforce 
mutual growth. This would be important in the current environment to facilitate cross border 
economic activity. 
The  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  in  the  form  of  removing  restrictions  to  foreign 
exchange transactions would also increase the flexibility of managing such foreign exchange 
transactions. This would increase the potential to better manage its associated risks, while 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the increased efficiency gains would also reduce the cost of doing business. Finally, it is also 
argued that in a more liberalised environment, there would be greater market discipline which 
would in turn promote financial stability in the domestic financial system. This however, relies 
on  a  sufficient  level  of  disclosure  and  transparency  to  allow  the  efficient functioning  of  the 
markets. 
The  internationalization  of  financial  systems  is  however,  not  without  risks  and  challenges. 
The  risk  of  contagion  following  from  the  increased  connectivity  increases  significantly,  in 
terms  of  the  extent  and  speed.  The  contagion  can  result  from  external  events  and 
developments  that  can  range  from  failure  of  large  and  important  international  financial 
institution  to  the  eruption  of  wars  or  political  incidents  that  have  regional  or  global 
repercussions. Meanwhile, global developments including from global policy spillovers have 
also resulted in more volatile capital flows. The increased openness of the financial system 
also increases the vulnerability to economic cycles in other parts of the world. The increased 
interdependence  of  financial  systems  and  economies  and  the  contagion  effects  can  be 
expected to be among the significant outcomes of financial internationalization. 
Financial  liberalization could for example amplify further the implications of financial stress 
from other parts of the world on the domestic financial system. It could also accentuate and 
amplify asset bubbles and boom bust cycles. Other implications are that it could contribute to 
the  widening  of  income  disparities  and  also  to  the  marginalization  of  domestic  financial 
institutions if they are not able to perform in a more competitive environment. Finally, volatile 
capital flows may not only affect the efficient functioning of the financial markets but could 
result  in  misaligned  exchange  rates  that  do  not  reflect  underlying  fundamentals.  These 
potential risks and vulnerabilities continue to be a challenge not only to emerging economies 
but also to the more developed financial systems and economies. 
Lessons from the financial crisis  
While there are benefits to be gained from the internationalization of financial systems, the 
risks to financial stability have also increased immensely. The risks generally emanate from 
the greater prospects for contagion following the greater degree of interdependence. These 
risks  would  be  even  more  pronounced  in  emerging  economies  in  which  financial  systems 
have  yet  to  become  more  developed  and  matured.  To  be  better  positioned  to  reap  the 
benefits  from  internationalization  of  financial  systems  in  emerging  economies,  the  crisis 
provides  us  with  several  lessons.  Firstly,  is  to  recognize  that  the  different  parts  of  the 
domestic financial system is highly interconnected. This also includes those parts that may 
not be under the regulatory capture. Financial stress in a specific segment may no longer be 
confined to that segment but may rapidly be transmitted to the rest of the financial system. 
Thus, a piecemeal policy response would not be sufficient. It would require a comprehensive 
response  to  ensure  that  such  stressed  conditions  does  not  evolve  into  a  major  financial 
crisis. 
Secondly, the build-up of risks to financial stability need to be identified early. Pre-emptive 
action would reduce the cost of the crisis on the financial system and the economy. Third, the 
regulatory  authorities  need  to  be  accorded  the  necessary  powers  to  manage  the  risks  to 
financial  stability.  Fourth,  the  optimal  policy  mix  may  not  only  include  policy  actions  to 
address  immediate  term  issues  but  would  also  need  to  simultaneously  address  the 
underlying  structural  problems.  Fifth,  is  to  give  recognition  to  the  importance  of  enabling 
conditions that will render the implemented policies to yield the desired outcomes. Finally, to 
facilitate  effective  policy  decision  making  there  needs  to  be  a  platform  and  governance 
process  for  policy  coordination  across  agencies  within  an  economy  and  for  this  to  be 
extended for regional and international collective action. 
Following the recent global financial crisis, the policy response at the national level has been 
extensive  and  on  an  unprecedented  scale.  While  there  has  been  wide  ranging  financial 
reforms at the international level to strengthen the resilience of the financial sector, the cross 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
border  dimension  of  policy-making  has  not  been  as  extensive.  This  is  despite  the  swift 
spread  of financial  and  economic  shocks  throughout  the  global  economy  and  international 
financial system following the eruption of the financial crisis in 2008. 
Despite these increased challenges, the institutional arrangements for policy cooperation and 
coordination have yet to reach the levels that are commensurate with the degree of global 
economic and financial integration. While the individual efforts by any single economy is vital, 
it can no longer guarantee global financial stability. Emerging economies that are more open 
and  integrated  with  the  global  economy  and  international  financial  system  are  the  most 
affected by these developments. The crisis has forcefully demonstrated the importance of the 
international dimension of policy. 
Finally, a consequence of financial crisis that deserves increased attention is the widening of 
income  disparities  within  economies.  The  recent  crisis  has  worsened  this  trend  given  the 
conditions  of  high  unemployment  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  At  the  national  level,  the 
development  of  inclusive  financial  systems  and  the  development  of  social  safety  nets  will 
contribute to containing this trend. 
Financial internationalisation and the Malaysian experience 
In  pursuing  financial  sector  liberalisation  to  transition  to  a  more  internationalised  financial 
system, Malaysia adopted a gradual and sequenced approach. This was to ensure that the 
necessary  preconditions  were  in  place  so  that  the  benefits  of  increased  financial 
internationalisation would be realised, while ensuring that the associated risks inherent to a 
more  open  economy  and  internationally  integrated  financial  system  could  be  effectively 
managed. 
Seven  preconditions  were  identified  as  being  important  to  this  process.  The  first  was  to 
accord  priority  to  building  the  capacity  of  the  intermediaries  in  the  financial  sector,  and  to 
strengthen  their  resilience  and  competitiveness.  At  the  time  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis, 
Malaysia  had  a  highly  fragmented  banking  sector  with  more  than  seventy  banking 
institutions,  many  of  which  were  small  and  highly  vulnerable.  During  the  financial  crisis,  a 
major restructuring exercise was undertaken. This was followed by an industry-wide merger 
exercise,  prompted  by  an  increase  of  the  capitalisation  requirements.  The  restructuring 
strengthened the balance sheets of the banking institutions, while the consolidation produced 
larger and stronger financial groups. 
The  second  was  to  undertake  financial  reforms  which  focused  on  the  transition  to  a  more 
market-oriented financial system. This involved interest rate reforms that would support the 
more efficient pricing of financial products and services. The more competitive environment 
that  was  generated  became  an  important  driver  of  efficiency  gains  and  innovation  in  the 
financial system. 
Equal attention was also given to the development of the financial infrastructure, in particular, 
the  payment  and  settlement  system  and  the  modernization  of  the  legal  framework  to  give 
greater  clarity  to  the  legislation  governing  the  financial  sector.  This  involved  seven  new 
legislation  that  have  been  enacted  in  the  areas  of  central  banking,  the  payments  system, 
money  services,  deposit  insurance,  and  the  regulation  of  the  banking,  insurance,  Islamic 
finance, development financial institutions and cooperatives. This has given greater certainty 
and predictability in the functioning of the financial system. 
Importance was also given to strengthening the surveillance capabilities of the Central Bank 
and the effectiveness of the regulatory and supervisory regime. This involved the transition 
from a rule-based regulation to an enhanced principle-based regulation regime with focus on 
governance practices and risk management. This was reinforced by the shift to a risk-based 
supervision.  The  supervisory  oversight  has  however  continued  to  remain  intrusive,  with  a 
pre-emptive  intervention  framework  to  ensure  that  the  potential  risks  to  financial  stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
would continue to be addressed including in a more regionally and internationally connected 
financial sector. 
In parallel with these efforts was the development of the securities market. From a financial 
system in which there was an over-reliance on the banking system for financing, the financial 
system has now become more diversified with greater access to financing from the bond and 
sukuk market. The domestic securities market has now evolved to become a vibrant part of 
the Malaysian financing ecosystem, and has served to disperse the concentration of risk in 
the financial system thereby contributing towards preserving financial stability. The Malaysian 
securities market has expanded significantly to become the largest in the ASEAN region. 
Malaysia also made significant investments in talent development for the financial services 
sector. Given its significance in defining performance and resilience of the financial sector, 
comprehensive  institutional  arrangements  have  been  put  in  place  for  all  levels  of  the 
industry; at the entry point, at the working and specialist levels, at the professional level and 
at the leadership levels including for the boards of financial institutions. 
Finally, as the financial system became more regionally and internationally more integrated, 
regional  financial  stability  arrangements  have  also  been  established.  These  included 
advancing  collective  initiatives  in  the  areas  of  regional  surveillance,  the  development  of 
regional  financial  markets  and  payments  infrastructure,  and  cross-border  supervision. 
Forums for  assessment of  risks  to  regional financial  stability  have  also  been  initiated,  and 
work  on  establishing  an  integrated  crisis  management  and  resolution  framework  for  the 
region  is  in  progress.  As  part  of  these  initiatives,  a  regional  support  mechanism  has  also 
been established. 
With  these  pre-conditions  in  place,  Malaysia  commenced  initiatives  to  internationalise  our 
financial system beginning 2003. The internationalisation of the financial sector entailed the 
advancement  in  two  main  areas;  financial  sector  liberalisation  and  capital  account 
liberalisation. In pursuing greater regional and international financial integration, the aim was 
to enhance the diversity of the financial system in terms of its product offerings, to improve 
further the competitiveness of the financial system and to strengthen our economic linkages 
with the region and other parts of the world. 
The  financial  sector  liberalisation  involved  increased  foreign  entry  and  participation  in  our 
financial  system.  New  licences  were  issued  to  foreign  conventional  and  Islamic  banking 
institutions, while the minimum foreign strategic stakes in the insurance and takaful industry 
were increased. Increased operational flexibilities were also accorded to the existing foreign 
banking institutions in the financial system which now account for about 30% of the banking 
system. At the same time, the foreign participation in our securities market was liberalised in 
2007 to allow foreign corporations to raise financing either in domestic or foreign currency. 
The capital account liberalisation throughout the first decade in the 2000s has involved the 
progressive  removal  of  restrictions  on 
foreign  exchange  administration  rules.  This 
liberalisation  was  intensified  after  2005,  taking  into  account  the  state  of  readiness  of  the 
financial  system  and  the  economy  to  manage  the  consequential  increased  cross  border 
financial  flows.  In  July  2005,  Malaysia  migrated  from  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  to  a 
flexible  exchange  rate  regime  to  accord  greater  flexibility  to  adjust  to  changing  structural 
conditions  in  the  region  and  the  global  economy.  With  the  progressive  dismantling  of 
restrictions, businesses now had the flexibility to manage their financial exchange exposures. 
This encouraged two way capital flows and contributed towards stabilising the volatile capital 
flows to our economy. 
Finally, in addition to being accorded with the necessary powers in the new legislations, the 
policy toolkit of the Central Bank has also been expanded to address the potential build-up of 
financial imbalances and its risks to financial stability following increased internationalisation. 
This  includes  macro-prudential  and  supervisory  measures  to  collectively  address  the 
underlying causes of financial stability. A platform has also been established for the greater 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
coordination among policy makers within the country, among the regulators and the public 
sector. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude  my  remarks.  While  many  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  the  various 
episodes of financial crisis experienced by the world economy, there is no one approach to 
the  liberalization  and  internationalization  of  financial  systems.  Its  success  depends  on  the 
prevailing circumstances and the state of readiness of financial systems and the economy 
and its capacity to manage its associated risks. Premature internationalization can result in 
highly destabilizing conditions. The liberalization process also needs to be pragmatic, taking 
into  consideration  the  different  objectives  that  need  to  be  achieved.  With  sufficient 
development  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  safeguards  and  the  buffers,  emerging 
economies  have  every  potential  to  participate  in  a  more  internationally  integrated  financial 
system that will facilitate mutually reinforcing global growth and development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
