Jan F Qvigstad: Understanding macroprudential regulation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank 
of  Norway),  at  the  workshop  on  “Understanding  macroprudential  regulation”,  organised  by 
Norges Bank, Oslo, 29 November 2012. 
 Dear all, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  Norges  Bank  for  this  workshop  on  Understanding 
Macroprudential Regulation. The topic of the workshop is timely; Authorities in all parts of the 
world  are  now  actively  debating  macroprudential  policy.  Academic  research  provides  a 
necessary foundation, both for the design and the implementation of such regulations. 
During my years of service here at the central bank, and also some years at the Treasury, I 
have had my fair share of dealings with banking and financial crises in Norway. 
In  the  1990s,  Norway  was  hit  by  a  severe  banking  crisis.  Three  of  the  four  largest  banks 
failed. Required capital injections were more than three and a half per cent of GDP. This is 
substantially  more  than  the  percentage  share  that  euro  area  banks  currently  need  to 
recapitalise. Ever since the Norwegian banking crisis in the early 1990s, our banking industry 
has  been  regulated  more  strictly  than  banks  in  comparable  countries.  For  instance,  bank 
capital definitions have been tighter, while packaging loans into complex instruments was in 
practice not permitted until 2007. Financial supervision has also been rather strict. 
As  a  result,  the  Norwegian  financial  system  only  had  limited  exposure  to  the  subprime 
mortgage market – notwithstanding some municipalities in the northern part of Norway that 
got involved, with a less than full understanding of inherent risks. Our banks were therefore 
relatively unaffected by the recent crisis when it comes to credit risk. The downturn that our 
economy  experienced  in  2009  was  modest  in  relation  to  other  countries  –  but  this  is  of 
course also due to the composition of our production and exports, with oil accounting for a 
large share. 
More  than  two  decades  ago,  in  the  early  stages  of  the  Norwegian  banking  crisis,  Norges 
Bank  provided  a  large  liquidity  loan  to  a  savings  bank.  The  bank,  however,  soon  became 
insolvent. We learnt how fast illiquidity can turn into insolvency. At the time, the bank was 
rescued partly by Norges Bank writing off its loan. This incident showed that it was important 
to clarify the division of responsibilities between the central bank and the fiscal authorities. 
The  Government  Bank  Insurance  Fund  was  established,  which  would  be  able  to  extend 
loans and inject capital into distressed banks in the future. The aim was to make sure Norges 
Bank avoided intruding into the arena of the fiscal authorities. It is not up to an independent 
central bank to spend taxpayers’ money. 
When Norwegian banks’ funding dried up in the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers collapse, 
government bonds were swapped for covered bonds issued by banks. That is, the Ministry of 
Finance became the banks’ counterparty in the swap arrangement. We thereby avoided an 
expansion  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  while  improving  the  liquidity  and  funding 
situation of our banks. 
The most recent global financial crisis has taught us that it is vital to focus on the financial 
system as a whole, and not only on its components. Many of the risks that played a role in 
the  recent  crisis  were  identified  by  central  banks  and  international  financial  institutions. 
However,  not  enough  attention  was  paid  to  the  ways  in  which  these  risks  were 
interconnected and how they reinforced each other. System-wide risk amplified the financial 
crisis and its global repercussions. 
An  international  response  to  the  management  of  systemic  risk  has  been  to  introduce 
macroprudential regulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to 
for 
foundations 
therefore  need 
further  develop 
its  buffer  decisions.  We 
the  conceptual  and  analytical 
However,  incorporating  systemic  oversight  in  the  financial  stability  framework  poses 
considerable  analytical  and  operational  challenges  for  most  countries.  Indeed,  we  as 
economists  have  relatively  limited  understanding  of  the  design  and  effectiveness  of 
macroprudential policies. But, even when  inflation targeting was introduced, not much was 
known about how to go about implementing it. Practice and research developed in parallel, 
interacting. We hope to see similar developments regarding macroprudential policies. 
To this end, Norges Bank, like many other national and international monetary authorities, is 
actively  working 
for 
macroprudential  policy.  Several  analytical  approaches  for  the  identification  of  the  factors 
contributing to the building up of systemic risk may be used and different policy tools may be 
employed  to  address  them.  One  policy  instrument  introduced  by  Basel  III  is  the 
countercyclical capital buffer. 
In  line  with  our  past  experience  of  dividing  responsibilities,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  will 
implement  countercyclical  capital  requirements  from  2013.  Norges  Bank  will  make 
recommendations 
to  strengthen  our 
understanding  of  macroprudential  regulation  and  develop  relevant  analytical  tools  for  our 
recommendations. 
The  financial  crisis  called  renewed  attention  to  the  fact  that  developments  in  the  real 
economy and the financial sector are closely linked. In response, Norges Bank has decided 
to provide monetary policy and financial analyses in a joint report published quarterly as from 
2013. The reports will form the basis for both monetary policy decisions and for our advice on 
the buffer. 
The primary objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation over time. We operate a 
flexible  inflation  targeting  regime,  which  also  aims  at  stabilising  economic  activity. 
Furthermore,  Norges  Bank  gives  weight  to  the  risk  that  a  prolonged  period  of  low  interest 
rates could lead to elevated risk-taking and excessive debt accumulation in the household 
and business sectors. 
There is always room for improvement. We will seek to improve systemic risk indicators and 
macro-stress testing approaches, keeping them at the research frontier. We will also work to 
better incorporate the financial sector in our macroeconomic models. 
Economic research can contribute significantly to this, and in this context, some fundamental 
questions need to be addressed. 
– First, what is the macroeconomic impact of financial regulations? 
A  greater  understanding  of  how  financial  regulations  act  at the  aggregate  level  is  needed, 
both  in  containing  systemic  risk  and  in  affecting  the  growth  potential  of  economies.  This 
would enable us to make more informed policy recommendations. 
– Second, how should systemic risk for banks, non-bank financial institutions and markets be 
identified and measured? 
Economists have proposed several methods of measuring systemic risk. But more research 
is  needed  in  order  to  understand  systemic  risk  arising  from  banks  and  non-bank  financial 
institutions and their interaction. 
– Third, how should monetary policy be conducted in the context of macroprudential policy? 
And there are many more questions, some of which will be discussed during this workshop. 
We are eager to learn from the expertise and the experience of other countries. Norges Bank 
is committed to investing in research and supporting cooperation with other central bankers 
and foreign academics. This workshop is one product of this commitment. 
We are fortunate to have such prominent speakers contributing to the program. I wish you 
fruitful and stimulating discussions, and I hope you enjoy your stay in Oslo. Fortunately, the 
weather is on our side, motivating us to stay focused on our work. It would have been more 
difficult on a sunny day in June.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
