Malcolm Edey: Macroprudential supervision and the role of central banks 
Remarks by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank 
of  Australia,  to  the  Regional  Policy  Forum  on  Financial  Stability  and  Macroprudential 
Supervision,  hosted  by  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  and  the  China  Banking  Regulatory 
Commission, Beijing, 28 September 2012. 
 One of the consequences of the financial crisis of recent years has been a re-examination of 
the  role  of  central  banks  in  financial  stability  policy,  and  the  associated  notion  of 
“macroprudential supervision”. I’ve been asked to talk today about the interaction between 
micro  and  macroprudential  supervision,  and  how  we  reflect  that  in  the  design  of  our 
regulatory institutions. 
The first thing to say is that the distinction is in my view somewhat artificial. In concept, the 
micro/macro distinction corresponds roughly to the difference between idiosyncratic risk and 
market  risk  in  finance  theory.  One  refers  to  risk  specific  to  a  firm  and  the  other  to  risks 
affecting all firms. Microprudential supervision might be thought of as the management of the 
first type of risk, and macro the second. 
But while that distinction is conceptually clear, I think it would be overly  simplistic to try to 
build a supervisory structure around it in practice. Certainly in Australia we don’t try to do so. 
External  observers  sometimes  use  the  shorthand  that  the  RBA  is  the  macroprudential 
agency and APRA the micro, but we wouldn’t ourselves see it as being so clear-cut. APRA, 
as  the  bank  supervisory  agency,  has  a  mandate  to  use  its  powers  to  promote  financial 
stability for the system, not just to focus on the idiosyncratic risks faced by individual banks. 
And  conversely  the  RBA  as  the  central  bank  can’t  avoid  taking  some  interest  in  individual 
institutions even though its financial stability mandate relates to the system as a whole. 
The more meaningful distinction, I think, is not between the objectives of the key regulatory 
agencies (micro versus macro objectives) but between the powers available to them. APRA 
is the regulator of institutions – it supervises the banks, sets prudential standards and holds a 
wide  range  of  directive  and  resolution  powers.  The  RBA  is  the  liquidity  provider  to  the 
financial  system,  it  has  regulatory  powers  of  its  own  in  respect  of  clearing  and  settlement 
facilities and the payments system, and it incorporates financial stability assessments in its 
monetary  policy  decision  process.  Both  agencies  have  a  mandate  for  macro  financial 
stability, though obviously APRA has the more specific mandate for risk management at the 
level of the individual institution. 
With  that  background  I  want  to  ask  two  questions  about  the  design  and  conduct  of 
macroprudential policy arrangements in general. 
1. 
Is there a single right way for these powers to be allocated between the central bank 
and other regulatory agencies? And  
Is there a single best practice framework, in terms of instruments and objectives, for 
these powers to be used?  
2. 
I want to suggest that the answer to both of these questions is No. I’ll then suggest a couple 
of important positive principles we need to stay focused on, regardless of the specifics of our 
national frameworks. 
To  start  with  the  institutional  question:  is  there  a  “right”  way  to  allocate  prudential 
responsibilities between the central bank and other agencies? 
Certainly  a  number  of jurisdictions  have  come to  the  conclusion that they  needed  to  bring 
more of the supervisory powers under the central bank. This has been perhaps clearest in 
the UK, where the supervisory functions of the FSA are to be brought fully within the Bank of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
England. A similar but less comprehensive shift in the same direction has been an important 
part of the regulatory response in the US and the euro area.  
In some ways these developments seem like a natural response to the crisis. Cooperation 
between  the  holders  of  traditional  central  banking  powers  and  those  holding  institutional 
regulatory  powers  is  very  important.  Where  that  cooperation  is  considered  to  have  been 
inadequate,  it  is  natural  that  institutional  reforms  would  be  directed  towards  fixing  the 
shortcomings. Bringing supervisory powers into the central bank is one way of doing that.  
But it’s not the only way these things can be arranged, and I can see both advantages and 
disadvantages  to  the  more  centralised  approach.  Clearly  the  centralised  approach 
maximises the scope for formalising the coordination between the two sets of functions. But 
a large institution with both central-banking and supervisory powers may be hard to manage, 
and it may still be susceptible to a “two culture” problem. I think this was one reason for the 
earlier  trend  towards  separation  of  these  functions  a  decade  or  more  ago.  My  general 
observation is that we don’t yet know how these more formalised arrangements will perform. 
The  centralised  model  has  to  be  made  to  work  and  to  build  up  its  own  culture  and  track 
record of success.  
That  will  take  time,  and  it’s  far  too  early  to  say  that  any  of  the  post-crisis  arrangements 
represents a new norm of best practice. That is especially so when we consider the length of 
the typical financial cycle, where episodes of serious stress might be separated by intervals 
of a decade or more. It will be a long time before these new arrangements are tested by the 
next cycle. 
I  would  also  stress  that  the  centralised  model  is  not  the  only  way  to  get  effective 
coordination. In Australia we retain a model of separate policy agencies, with a coordinating 
structure  to  ensure  they  work  together  effectively.  Our  four  main  regulatory  agencies  (the 
RBA, APRA, ASIC and the Treasury) together comprise the Council of Financial Regulators, 
under  the  chairmanship  of  the  RBA  Governor.  The  Council  has  no  statutory  powers  of  its 
own, but works to coordinate the activities of the agencies in exercising their own powers. 
Where  existing  powers 
typically  make 
recommendations to the government for legislative action to remedy that. In Australia we’ve 
found that these cooperative arrangements worked well during the crisis period.  
People sometimes ask us how we’ve achieved that without a formalisation of cross-agency 
relations, or giving one agency primacy over the others. How has the informal coordination 
been possible where other countries have found it difficult to make that kind of arrangement 
work? Are we just nicer people? I’d like to say that the answer is Yes, but I think the less 
frivolous answer is that institutional history matters. We’re fortunate to have built up a culture 
across the regulatory agencies where we regard cooperation with the other agencies as an 
important  part  of  our  job,  and  there  is  a  strong  expectation  from  the  public  and  the 
government that we will continue to do so. That being the case, we’re not inclined to disrupt 
an  arrangement  that’s  working.  But  clearly  every  country  needs  to  tailor  its  institutional 
arrangements to its own circumstances and history. 
My  second  question  was  about 
for 
macroprudential policies. Here again I think we  need to be suitably modest as to what we 
can say constitutes best practice.  
I’ve spent much of my career working on monetary policy, and it strikes me that there are 
certain  parallels  between  the  current  desire  for  a  more  rigorous  framework  for  prudential 
policy and the search for rigor in monetary policy that occurred after the breakdown of old 
certainties  in  the  1980s and  1990s. The  result  of  that  search  on  the monetary  policy  front 
was a broadly agreed framework with a single instrument (the short-term interest rate) and a 
well-defined  objective  (inflation  control),  linked  by  a  forecasting  framework  and  an 
understanding  of  the  feedback  between  instrument  and  objective.  This  broad  schema  has 
been thoroughly researched, and lies behind much of the thinking in actual monetary policy 
decision processes. There is also a well understood case for independence of the monetary 
instruments  and  objectives 
the  Council  will 
framework  of 
to  act  are 
inadequate, 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy process, and for transparency and clarity of objectives which has been widely built into 
institutional structures around the world. 
It  strikes  me  that  there  is  nothing  commensurate  with  this  schema  in  the  field  of  financial 
stability  policy.  Instead  of  a  single  instrument,  we  have  a  multiplicity  of  instruments  (e.g., 
capital  rules,  some  of  which  may  be  time  varying,  risk  weights,  LVRs,  liquidity  rules, 
infrastructure requirements, supervisory intensity) whose effects are difficult to quantify. And 
the  objective  of  financial  stability  has  no  simple  metric.  It  can’t  be  summarised  in  a 
continuously  observed  number  like  the  inflation  rate,  though  obviously  we  know  financial 
instability when we see it. Further, as I have argued, there is no single best practice model 
for the design and allocation of decision-making powers. 
The  obvious  conclusion  is  that  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  is  a  much  more  subtle  and 
complex  undertaking  than  the  traditional  monetary  policy  function  of  central  banks.  It 
necessarily  involves  not  just  quantitative  frameworks,  but  detailed  surveillance  of  risks 
guided  by  the  perspective  of  historical  experience.  I  expect  these  are  things  that  central 
banks will be devoting increasing attention to in the years ahead. 
I  want  to  finish  by  emphasising  two  elements  that  must  be  at  the  core  of  effective 
macroprudential policies, regardless of the institutional arrangements in a given country. 
The first is effective cooperation between those involved in traditional central bank activities 
and bank supervisors. Combining these functions in an expanded central bank is not in itself 
a guarantee of effective coordination, though it may obviously help. Key aspects include an 
effective  flow  of  information  across  staff  in  the  market  operations  and  macroeconomic 
departments of a central bank and those working in the areas of financial stability and bank 
supervision. Regular meetings among these groups to focus on risks and vulnerabilities and 
to highlight warning signs can be very valuable. A culture of coordination among these areas 
is very important in a crisis because, in many instances, a stress situation is first evident in 
liquidity strains visible to the central bank, and the first responses may be calls on central 
bank liquidity. 
The second element is effective bank supervision. By this I mean not just the standards and 
regulations but the capacity of supervisors to understand the risks that are being taken, to 
query them, and to ensure that they are being appropriately managed. This is a point that I 
know my APRA colleagues have been emphasising. A great deal of effort in recent years has 
gone  into  upgrading  the  prudential  requirements  on  banks  through  revisions  to  the  Basel 
standards  and  other  measures.  As  important  as  these  things  are,  their  effects  around  the 
world will be only as good as the quality of implementation and the quality of supervision that 
builds on them.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
