Peter Praet: The role of money in a market economy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Bargeldsymposium,  organised  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
10 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Massimo Rostagno and Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for their contributions to the preparation of this 
speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here today at the Bargeldsymposium of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  devising  a  programme  that 
covers such a vast range of practical aspects involved in managing a currency. 
My fellow speakers at this symposium have already shared their expertise on many of these 
practical issues. I have nothing further to add to their insights and expert judgement. Instead, 
I would like to take a step back and address some crucial conceptual questions that surround 
the role of money in a modern market economy.  
Let me start by briefly reviewing the key economic explanations for why the use of money 
has  been  such  a  prevalent  phenomenon  in  history.  To  this  end,  I  will  adopt  the  common 
definition of money as being any object or token that is generally accepted as a means for 
paying goods and services and for settling debts.  
I will illustrate the evolution of money in form of a linear parable, which leads from a barter 
economy to a system with commodities as a medium of exchange; and from there to a fiat 
currency regime. However, it is important to point out that in fact, the history of mankind’s 
experimentations with money in its various incarnations has been far from linear. It is made 
of sudden breakthroughs – often in response to wars, famines or fiscal crises – followed by 
set-backs and regressions to earlier and less developed states of affairs. 
Money and trust 
Imagine  a  clever  merchant  who  regularly  loads  his  produce  onto  a  cart  and  heads  to  the 
market  place  where  all  merchants  meet  to  exchange  their  goods.  This  market  place  is 
impossibly  complicated.  Any  merchant  in  need  of  a  commodity  that  he  does  not  produce 
himself has to search endlessly. Much of his time is spent in trying to find a partner in a direct 
barter “giving what was not wanted directly for that which was wanted” (as William Stanley 
Jevons would have described the situation).1 Trading time could be protracted even longer, 
as a lucky encounter would not necessarily mean that a trade is perfected: lengthy quality 
verification  might  ensue,  as  both  contracting  individuals  would  have  to  be  convinced  that 
equal value was being given up as it was received.  
In this task they could be assisted by a pricing table indicating all possible pairs of rates at 
which  goods  can  be  exchanged.  If  there  are  ten  goods,  the  table  already  has  forty-five 
dimensions; if there are twenty goods, the table has one hundred ninety dimensions, and so 
on.  But  in  fact,  the  table  would  be  a  lot  bigger  and  nearly  impossible  to  consult:  the 
combinations  of  pairs  of  trades  are  for  all  practical  purposes  infinite,  if  one  considers  that 
trades can either be made on the spot or by future delivery, and that any futures contract is 
priced differently according to the time at which delivery is to be made.  
                                                
1   See Jevons, W.S. (1875), Money and the mechanism of exchange, D. Appleton and Co., New York. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  extreme  inconvenience  leads  to  an  insightful  observation.  The  clever  merchant  notes 
that a certain commodity is more frequently exchanged. Why? Probably because it is easy to 
carry  and  certainly  because  it  is  durable  –  it  does  not  physically  decay  and  maintenance 
costs  are  low.  Also,  probably  its  verification  costs  are  relatively  small  so  most  merchants, 
even those who do not need the commodity for consumption, are happy to engage in trades 
where this commodity features at least temporarily.2  
These trades are multistage and sequential: market participants exchange their produce for 
that particular commodity with the expectation to be able to exchange that commodity again 
for the goods they desire. As this commodity has the highest subjective probability of trade, it 
becomes almost generally acceptable.  
By  joining  in  the  network  of  sequential  barters  involving  that  particular  commodity  as  an 
intervening  vehicle  of  exchange,  the  clever  merchant  can  minimise  his  market  time, 
maximise time for production or leisure, and specialise more.  
The exceptional good that enters so many exchanges becomes the medium of exchange; it 
becomes  money.  Money  facilitates  spot  purchase-sale  contracts  because  it  minimises  the 
time  spent  transacting.  Money  also  enhances  inter-temporal  trading,  namely  contracts 
involving future delivery, because it provides a unit of account in which all such contracts can 
be  expressed  and  acts  as  a  “record-keeping”  device  permitting  enforcement  of  budget 
constraints  over  time.3  Remember  how  infinitely  complicated  the  pricing  of  promises 
denominated  in  all  possible  commodities,  quantities  and  future  dates  was.  Now,  with  all 
individuals  agreeing  to  denominate  inter-temporal  contracts  in  the  same  commodity,  the 
pricing problem can be significantly simplified. A monetary economy is more productive and 
more efficient in transferring consumption opportunities across time: money is a pre-condition 
of an efficient credit and savings markets.4  
Let me insert a side-remark here. If saving is nothing more than deferred consumption, and if 
the  currency  is  expected  to  be  generally  acceptable  in  exchange  for  consumption  goods 
today as well as across time, a medium of exchange is a natural store of value for setting 
income aside in view of future consumption. Money does not earn interest, so it is dominated 
by  other  forms  of  savings  which  contractually  yield  a  return.  But  in  the  end,  all  forms  of 
savings  have  to  be  converted  into  money,  if  savings  are  ever  to  be  converted  into 
                                                
2   Several contributions to the related literature invoke the costs of verifying the characteristics and attributes of a 
good  received  in  exchange  (costs  of  inspection,  measuring,  property  rights)  as  the  prime  reason  for  the 
emergence of a dominant medium of exchange. See, for example, Brunner, K. and A.H. Meltzer (1971), “The 
Uses  of  Money:  Money  in  the  Theory  of  an  Exchange  Economy”,  American  Economic  Review,  61(5),  
pp.  784–805;  and  Alchian,  A.A.(1977),  “Why  money?”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  9(1),  
pp. 133–140. This insight has also been modelled in search theoretic frameworks; see Jones, R.A. (1976), 
“The origin and development of media of exchange”, Journal of Political Economy, 84(4), pp. 757–776; and 
Oh,  S.  (1989),  “A  theory  of  a  generally  acceptable  medium  of  exchange  and  barter”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, 23(1), pp. 101–119. 
4  
3  Several  authors  have  claimed  that  the  unit  of  account  function  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  money’s 
medium of exchange function; see Wicksell (1906), Lectures on Political Economy, London; and Niehans J. 
(1978), The Theory of Money, Baltimore. At the same time, the monetary asset will usually also serve as the 
economy’s  unit  of  account  –  i.e.,  prices  will  be  quoted  in  terms  of  money  –  since  otherwise  additional 
accounting costs would be incurred. 
In theory, one could imagine a pure credit, non-monetary economy where all credit contracts are denominated 
in an abstract unit of account whose only function is to state prices. This is the world Eugene Fama describes 
in  his  pure  financial  theory  of  money  (see  Fama  E.  (1980),  “Banking  in  the  theory  of  finance”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 6(1), pp. 39–57). However, in practice, people would only accept promises denominated 
in  something  abstract  if  they  were  certain  that  they  would  be  able  to  exchange  these  promises  for  the 
commodity  they  desire.  Hence,  credit  contracts  need  to  be  denominated  in  things  that people  value  or are 
certain that they would be easily converted into other commodities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consumption.  So,  money  is  probably  part  of  wealth  and,  in  any  case,  any  other  form  of 
wealth will need to be retrieved at a later time in the form of money.  
Another  day,  the  clever  merchant  makes  a  second  smart  observation.  If  only  the 
extraordinary commodity acting as money could be replaced in trade by an IOU, a sight draft, 
a representative claim on a given quantity of the same commodity! Society could retain the 
exchange services of money while economising on the capital – say, gold or silver coins – 
which is used up to embody the commodity medium of exchange. Bills convertible into the 
commodity money would be circulating in lieu of – or at least in parallel to – gold or silver 
coins.  Hence,  a  fraction  of  the  stock  of  those  precious  metals  could  be  unfrozen  from 
circulation and diverted to other productive uses. Somebody will have to issue the bills, hold 
a reserve of coins and stand ready to convert bills into species on sight. But the law of large 
numbers  will  make  sure  that  the  precautionary  reserve  of  species  could  be  kept  small  in 
relation to the overall value of bills in circulation, as only a fraction of money-holders will want 
to convert at each point in time.  
This  new  technology  of  money  creation  exploiting  the  law  of  large  numbers  is  the 
pre-condition for two salient features of today’s economies: the emergence of private banks 
and  the  emergence  of  inside  money  created  by  private  issuers  and  circulating  alongside 
outside money issued by the financial authority.  
The emergence of banks can be thought of in the following manner: in a trading environment 
where  people  meet  randomly,  are  unlikely  to  meet  twice  and  each  person’s  own  trading 
history is his own private information, people issuing bills or IOUs cannot be easily punished 
if  they  ever  fail  to  deliver  on  their  promises.  But  then,  it  may  become  profitable  for  some 
agents  to  make  themselves  easy  to  monitor  and  find  ways  to  communicate,  enforce  and 
protect a “reputation” for never reneging on their payment promises. Banks are born as those 
agents  whose  paying  histories  become  public  information.5  Importantly,  the  emergence  of 
banks benefits not the banks themselves (which usually charge a higher rate on their lending 
than they pay on their issuance of IOUs) but also society as a whole: the free negotiability of 
the  bank’s  liquid  liability  expands  the  market  participants’  trading  opportunities.  Thus,  this 
form of money creation is valuable and socially beneficial. 
Inside money then naturally derives from the business of banks issuing IOUs, bank bills or 
bank deposits, which are readily convertible into commodity currency and thus coexist with 
outside money as a monetary counterpart in transactions.6 The difference between outside 
and inside money is that the former is an asset for the economy as a whole, but it is nobody’s 
liability. Inside money, instead, is named this way because it is backed by private credit: it 
would cancel out if all the claims held by banks on private creditors were to be settled. So, it 
is one form of currency that is created – and can be destroyed – within the private economy.  
As  a  consequence,  reputation  and  trust  in  the  ability  of  individual  banks  and  the  banking 
system as a whole to redeem the bills, the IOUs or the deposits is essential in order for the 
new fractional reserve system to function. Trust is the critical word. It becomes an intimate 
attribute of money. 
                                                
5   Cavalcanti and Wallace justify the emergence of banks in a random-matching model of monetary exchange as 
those  agents  which  whose  trading  histories  are  public  information  (see  Cavalcanti,  R.O.  and  N.  Wallace 
(1999), “A Model of Private Bank-Note Issue”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(1), pp. 104–136; the analysis 
builds on the search theoretic environment of Kiyotaki, N. and R. Wright (1996), “On Money as a Medium of 
Exchange”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  97,  pp.  927–954;  and  Trejos,  A.  and  Wright,  R.  (1995).  “Search, 
Bargaining,  Money  and  Prices,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  103,  pp.  118–141).  They  show  that  a  social 
optimum requires note issue by banks. In addition, those notes are used in trade among the agents whose 
trading histories are private. In their environment, a social optimum requires inside money. 
In 1960, John G. Gurley and Edward S. Shaw published a very influential book, Money in a Theory of Finance, 
in which they developed a theory of finance that encompassed the theory of money and a theory of financial 
institutions. In the book, they first proposed the distinction between outside and inside money. 
6  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Returning once more to our parable, there is one more observation for the clever merchant to 
make: the bills circulating in lieu of gold and silver coins provide an exchange service to the 
society  of  merchants,  which  has  a  value  per  se.  By  virtue  of  its  general  acceptability  the 
medium of exchange provides a service to the user, namely it minimises the time and effort 
needed  to  trade  on  a  market.  This  exchange  service  implicit  in  the  use  of  money  can  be 
valued  independently  of  the  value  that gold  and  silver  receive  in  their  non-monetary  uses. 
Given  certain  conditions,  that  value  would  not  be  lost,  even  if  convertibility  were  to  be 
abolished.  
Yes, we have reached the stage of a fiat money regime, one where the monetary medium is 
made of intrinsically worthless tokens of paper or some other inexpensive material. Regimes 
of  this  sort  have  always  existed  in  the  history  of  monetary  standards  in  the  aftermaths  of 
wars or deep economic depressions. Since August 1971, however, – when President Nixon 
delinked the US dollar from the backing of gold at a pre-specified parity7 – the entire world 
has been operating under a fiat currency regime. 
Pre-conditions for sound money 
Of course, our parable is a very simplified caricature of the historical evolution towards a fiat 
money regime. In particular, what is important to keep in mind, is that this evolution was not 
without  setbacks,  that  is,  periods  during  which  the  trust  in  money  was  fundamentally 
undermined.  
Thus,  it  is  interesting  to  ask  ourselves:  what  are  the  conditions  for  a  monetary  system  to 
remain viable? I see three conditions. 
First of all, an absolute pre-condition is trust on the side of the holder of such inconvertible 
notes  that  the  value  of  the  medium  of  exchange  with  respect  to  the  universe  of  goods 
remains  predictable  and  steady.  If  a  currency  cannot  guarantee  this,  it  loses  general 
acceptability in trade and loses attractiveness as a store of value: it ceases to be money.  
The second condition descends directly from the first: a fiat currency needs public regulation 
and – in its pure form at least – cannot be manufactured by unfettered private issuers. It is 
easy to understand why. Any unregulated private issuer would have the incentive to increase 
note issuance well beyond the socially-optimal level. This is due to a failure of private issuers 
to  account  for  the  negative  externalities  that  increased  production  of  currency,  and  the 
concomitant  erosion  in  its  value,  would  have  on  those  using  it.  In  fact,  unfettered  private 
issuers  would  produce  currency  up  to  the  point where  the  value  of the exchange  services 
provided by the last unit of currency produced is equal to the marginal cost of producing it. 
But if issuing unconvertible notes is costless – or nearly costless – then an agent with the 
right to issue notes would do so in infinite quantities, because only when the money stock 
becomes  infinite  is  the  exchange  service  value  of  the  last  unit  in  terms  of  goods  indeed 
driven to zero.  
Of  course,  one  can  think  of  incentives  for  banks  to  preserve  their  franchise,  thus  partly 
counteracting their temptation to drive the last unit of their own currency to zero and reap the 
entire exchange value that private traders assign to that unit. For example, the bank could 
commit  to  buy  back  its  notes  whenever  their  value  relative  to  a  certain  basket  of  goods 
declines. But time inconsistency problems apparently make these arrangements prohibitively 
costly to run, because there is – to my knowledge – no evidence in history of a fiat currency 
regime, where all money is inside money and no money is contractually redeemable, at least 
                                                
7   The US dollar had been inconvertible to individuals since 1933. In 1971 President Nixon made it inconvertible 
to foreign central banks as well. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ex ante, into some real asset available in the bank’s inventory.8 A currency that offers zero 
exchange services at the margin is a currency without real value, a currency that supports an 
infinite price level: in effect, a failed currency.  
Third, public regulation has to be designed in such a way that any market failure resulting 
from unfettered private issuance is not simply replaced by government failure: this essentially 
requires that the right to issue currency be placed outside the remit of fiscal authorities and 
instead be entrusted to an independent public agency, such as a central bank. This central 
bank’s task should then find a technology that forces money to be maintained in a certain 
proportion to real income and to the real value of transactions and that ensures its general 
acceptability.9  
Barring changes in the money multiplier – a concept to which I will return – if the nominal 
money  stock  grows  at  the  same  pace  as  real  income,  the  price  level  will  be  stable  and 
money will maintain its value in terms of goods and services across time. 
Note  that  in  such  a  fiat  money  environment,  the  outside/inside  money  distinction  remains 
valid  and  meaningful.  The  stock  of  fiat  money  can  now  be  thought  of  as  a  claim  of 
consumers and investors vis-à-vis the public agency, which is outside the perimeter of the 
private  economy.  So,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  private  sector,  it  remains  an  external, 
“outside” claim: it is outside money. Also, banks can issue deposits convertible into outside 
money, which is now the monopolistic prerogative of the regulated public agency, the “central 
bank”.  Indeed,  in  many  –  though  not  all  –  modern-day  monetary  systems,  banks  are 
mandated  to  hold  reserves  in  outside  money  in  their  accounts  at  the  central  bank,  as  a 
statutory  fraction  of  the  total  amount  of  their  customers’  deposit  accounts.  This  places  a 
maximum  limit  on  the  total  amount  of  loans  that  commercial  banks  are  allowed  to  extend 
through issuance of own liabilities and, by implication, on the volume of inside money that 
they can legally create.  
The ratio between the total amount of inside money and the quantity of outside money is the 
reciprocal  of  the  reserve  ratio  –  the  statutory  reserve  ratio  plus the ratio  of  banks’  desired 
excess reserves over deposits – and is sometimes referred to as the money multiplier. As 
long  as  banks  are  held  accountable  for  discharging  their  obligations  in  terms  of  the  fiat 
outside  currency  at  par,  and  as  long  as the quantity  of the fiat  outside  currency  is  kept  in 
check by the public agency, the existence of a money multiplier – even a large one – does 
not  pose  risks  of  over-supply  for  the  overall  stock  of  money,  i.e.  the  sum  of  inside  and 
outside  money.  The  money  multiplier,  as  many  other  economic  ratios,  is  not  steady, 
however. Its wild fluctuations in situations of economic duress can be very harmful for the 
economy.  
Monetary  orthodoxy  holds  it  that,  in  a  fiat  currency  regime,  what  chiefly  matters  for 
determining the value of the currency is the quantity of money injection. In modern central 
bank  operating  practices,  a  central  bank  controls  the  quantity  of  money  creation  by 
exercising a firm control over the real interest rate at which money is lent to the economy (in 
lending  operations),  or  over  the  price  of  the  assets  which  the  central  bank  purchases  in 
exchange for money (in outright transactions). Provided the real interest rate or the price at 
which monetary injection occurs is decided by the central bank in all independence, and with 
                                                
8   Friedrich von Hayek famously argued in favour of a “denationalisation” of fiat money; see von Hayek (1976), 
Denationalisation of Money: An Analysis of the Theory and Practice of Concurrent Currencies, London. He 
claimed that, if only government obstacles could be removed, a free competitive market for privately issued 
currencies  would  provide  the  optimal  quantity  (and  a  wide  variety)  of  monetary  products,  all  of  a  superior 
quality with respect to what a public central bank could offer. 
9   Under certain conditions, this may also include legal intervention by the government in the form of declaring a 
currency  legal  tender;  see  Moutot  (2011),  “Systemic  risk  and  financial  development  in  a  monetary  model”, 
ECB Working Paper, No. 1352. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
an  exclusive  view  to  maintaining  a  stable  price  level,  it  is  less  important,  at  least  within 
certain limits, whether the central bank lends against private or public collateral.  
Does this imply that the distribution of central bank liquidity does not matter? The answer is 
yes, but only to the extent that it does not undermine the incentives for private and public 
agents to systematically violate their solvency conditions.10 By contrast, if these conditions 
are violated, risks of fiscal and financial dominance could emerge. This calls for the central 
bank to pay close attention not only to the quantity of its liabilities, notably outside money, but 
also to the quality and composition of the assets that back money. 
Institutional underpinnings of sound money  
Depending  on  the  institutional  environment,  the  authorities  with  the  right  to  issue  money 
could also face a strong inducement for overproduction. Suppose, for instance, that this right 
lies  with  a  fiscal  authority,  as  has  been  the  case  over  long  stretches  of  history.  The fiscal 
authority  could  finance  state  expenditure  by  raising  taxes;  but  this  would  require  the 
establishment  of  costly  administrative  structures.  It  could  even  finance  spending  via  its 
printing  press.  In  a  fiat  money  regime,  at  the  margin,  the  cost  attached  to  this  operation 
would be close to zero. The benefit, however, would be positive and equal to the value of the 
new public undertaking multiplied by the opportunity cost of financing the new public function 
with  taxes.  The  pecuniary  value  of  that  benefit  to  the  government  issuing  money  is  called 
seigniorage.  
Yet, from the perspective of society as a whole, the creation of additional money would entail 
higher  costs,  as  the  currency  would  be  debased  as  a  store  of  value  and  its  exchange 
services in transactions would be degraded. Unpredictable changes in the value of money 
would undermine its function as a means of exchange. In fact, if these changes are frequent 
and large in scale, the monetary system may even degenerate into a barter economy.  
As  historical  episodes  of  hyperinflation  demonstrate,  such  fears  are  clearly  of  immediate 
concern for economic life. 
Therefore,  society  needs  strong  independent  institutions  to  preserve  the  value  of  money. 
There has to be a mechanism that removes the wedge between the authorities’ perceived 
cost  of  expanding  the  money  supply  and  the  costs  felt  by  society  at  large.  Only  if  this 
mechanism is established will it be possible to effectively counteract the inducement for the 
authorities to abuse their competence to issue money.  
The emphasis on strong institutions as a pre-condition for sound money has deep intellectual 
roots in Germany. The concept of “Ordnungspolitik” is often invoked as a recipe for success 
in  setting  up  institutions  conducive  to  a  stable  and  prosperous  economy.  It  focuses  on 
providing a framework that fosters a level playing field for economic competition and avoids 
excessive interference from other policy domains, and notably from monetary policy. To put it 
in the words of Walter Eucken, a founding father of the ordo-liberal school of thought: „Alle 
Bemühungen,  eine  Wettbewerbsordnung  zu  verwirklichen,  sind  umsonst,  solange  eine 
gewisse Stabilität des Geldwertes nicht gesichert ist.”11 To this end, Ordnungspolitik entails 
stringent rules that restrict discretionary policy intervention and thereby provide a stable and 
predictable environment for private savings, consumption and investment decisions. 
The successful track record of this framework has also very profoundly inspired the design of 
the  institutional  architecture  of  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  In  particular,  monetary 
                                                
10   The  implications  of  central  bank  action  for  the  distribution  of  credit  are  explored  e.g.  in  Goodfriend  (2011), 
“Central  banking  in  the  credit  turmoil:  An  assessment  of  Federal  Reserve  practice”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, 58(1), pp. 1–12. 
11   “All efforts to establish a competitive economy are futile without a certain degree of stability in the value of 
money.” Walter Eucken (1955) Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik, Tübingen. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy is entrusted to an independent central bank with a primary objective to ensure price 
stability. An explicit price stability objective assigned to the central bank is a technology that 
can ensure that – over the medium term – the supply of money is kept commensurate with 
the real expansion of incomes and transactions, so that money maintains its value.  
Since the introduction of the euro, this monetary policy framework has proven highly effective 
in  ensuring  price  stability.  But  it  requires  a  stronger  underpinning  in  the  areas  of  fiscal, 
financial and structural policy. 
Money in crises 
Even with strong institutions in place, no monetary system is fully immune to adverse shocks 
that may temporarily upset economic and financial stability. 
To see why, it is useful to recall the dual role of money as a medium of exchange and as a 
store of value. A key challenge for those who have to manage a currency is that the intensity 
with which either of these two functions prevails at a given point in time differs in crisis and 
normal conditions. And, of course, a solid definition of “normal” versus “crisis” conditions is 
necessary for the public entity in charge of monetary control to be able to switch from one 
mode of currency management to another as the conditions evolve. 
In  normal  times,  the  means  of  payment  function  is  the  prevailing  motive  to  hold  money. 
Households  and  firms  tend  to  invest  in  assets,  which  promise  to  remunerate  creditors’ 
decision  of  parting  from  money  and  lending  in  exchange  of  an  uncertain  cash  flow  to  be 
received in the future. When the overall risk implicit in the discounting of these cash flows is 
moderate,  a  small  positive  yield  paid  on  fixed  income  assets  is  sufficient  to  compensate 
creditors for their decision to forgo current consumption, and money is dominated by those 
assets as store of wealth. Agents bear money not for its maturity value but for its exchange 
value. Money holdings relative to the overall private wealth are kept at the minimum buffer 
level  necessary  to  finance  expected  transactions  plus,  probably,  a  small  margin  to  face 
unexpected  expenses.  These  are  times  when  the  regularity  which  quantity  theorists 
emphasise  –  the  close  relationship  between  the  growth  of  money  supply  and  inflation  – 
becomes  more  intimate  and  evident  in  macroeconomic  statistics,  as  the  portion  of  money 
balances  motivated  by  pure  transaction  purposes  is  large  and  steady.  The  monetarist 
prescription that money creation needs to respect a strict factor of proportionality relative to a 
non-inflationary  path  of  real  income  growth  finds  its  most  pertinent  and  compelling 
application in these normal times.  
But imagine a situation in which agents suddenly lose confidence in other assets which are 
claims on private issuers. The cash flows to be expected of these claims are now discounted 
by an abnormally large risk factor. All assets are promises of payoffs in terms of currency at 
some  future  point  in  time.  As  the  uncertainty  around  these  payoffs  increases,  however, 
agents scramble for currency in an attempt to short-circuit the credit cycle. Short-circuiting 
the  credit  cycle  means  that  the  creditor  attempts  to  compress  the  time  interval  that 
contractually  separates his  purchase  of  a  claim  on  a  stream  of  future  cash flows  from  the 
time  when  cash  is  received.  A  scramble  for  currency  is  a  collective  –  often  desperate, 
panicky – attempt to shorten this cycle.  
But,  collectively,  this  is  not  a  possibility  except  at  highly  punitive  discounts.  Why  is  it  not 
possible for everybody to convert claims to currency into currency at once? Because a large 
fraction of those claims – say, fixed income bonds or equity issued by companies – is backed 
by the issuers’ long-term investment projects. When starting those projects, firms and other 
productive agents raised currency by issuing claims whose maturity was expected to match 
the productive cycle of their underlying real investment. But the underlying real investment 
cannot be liquidated instantly, except in fire-sales that are highly destructive of their realised 
market value. In this process, where everybody seeks to convert non-monetary assets into 
currency, the value of non-monetary assets is curtailed, the value of wealth itself falls, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
liquid 
liabilities  –  deposits, 
in  September  2008,  bank 
the fraction  of money  over  wealth  increases.  Money  is  now  primarily  viewed  as  a  store of 
value. 
What type of money increases most in these conditions? It depends on the extension and 
ramifications of the collective loss of confidence. In a crisis of the kind which we experienced 
in October 1987, a pure “stock market shock”, investors become particularly worried about 
the  value  of  very  long-term  assets,  equity  stocks  traded  in  the  stock  market.  In  1987,  as 
stocks precipitously lost their value in a matter of few hours’ trading, the market dynamics 
involved investors trying to liquidate their stock positions against money, any type of money: 
both outside currency and inside money balances or bank deposits. In those conditions, bank 
liquid liabilities were considered secure enough to preserve investors’ wealth. 
But in banking crises of the proportions observed in 1930–1933 or following the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers 
inside 
money  –  appear  as  insecure  as  bank  equity.  Net  redemption  demands  then  become 
unusually large, and banks – running low on cash reserves – are forced to raise additional 
funds to avoid defaulting on their obligations.  
A bank can raise funds from additional borrowings, possibly by borrowing from the money 
market  or  by  using  lines  of  credit  held  with  other  banks.  But  under  those  conditions  other 
banks might be either equally strained and unable to provide credit, or unwilling to expose 
themselves to a stressed bank. So raising funds may just mean selling assets, or calling in 
short-term  loans.  Both  operations  destroy  finance  and  inside  money.  These  are  the  most 
intractable financial shocks, as they potentially undermine the payments network on which a 
monetary economy is so deeply dependent.  
Under  these  conditions,  the  quantity  theoretic  relationship  between  money-growth  and 
inflation is suspended: the link between money and spending in the economy is blurred by 
the hoarding of currency. The money multiplier drops, the inside money system is wounded 
at its very root, and its beneficial social function is threatened. Combined with a collapse of 
demand  due  to  wealth  effects  and  amplified  by  price  and  wage  rigidities  causing 
unemployment and under-utilisation of productive resources, a financial cataclysm can turn 
into a macroeconomic calamity.  
What is the most appropriate response of a central bank mandated to price stability in these 
conditions? The central bank has to promptly and decisively resist the shortage of liquidity, 
the contraction of finance and the destruction of spendable purchasing power, which is partly 
embodied  in  inside  money.  A  central  bank  that  is  mandated  to  price  stability  has  to 
accommodate the increase in demand for currency. At the same time, it has to ensure that it 
never becomes fiscally or financially dominated.  
Yet would a strong expansion in central bank money not be inflationary? No, an expanded 
central bank liquidity buffer is non-inflationary under these conditions. When it is used as a 
store  of  value  (not  as  a  means  of  payment)  and  a  security  buffer  for  weak  financial 
institutions, money becomes temporarily disconnected from spending decisions. Under these 
conditions, a large stock of base money is a sign of deflationary risks rather than a harbinger 
of future inflation, as was observed in the 1930’s. 
The art and science of central banking will have to be implemented in the identification of the 
time in which normalisation will mean a return of money to its traditional means of payments 
function. At that time, when inside money will resume its traditional role in liquidity provision, 
when the multiplier will start increasing, the central bank will have to be quick in re-absorbing 
the excess outside currency created in the crisis times. Money will have to be put back along 
the trajectory indicated by the quantity theoretic relation. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a few words on how these considerations affect the ongoing debate on 
putting EMU on a sounder footing. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An  effective  monetary  policy  is  one  which  can  resist  inflationary  pressures  and  stabilise 
inflation  at  low  and  stable  levels.  For  this,  an  independent  central  bank  is  an  absolutely 
necessary condition. But it is not sufficient. The fiscal counterpart needs to be disciplined and 
the overall macroeconomic framework needs to foster stability.  
In such a system, the central bank can concentrate on the determination of the interest rate 
charged on its liquidity provision to the banks with a view to maintaining inflation at low and 
stable levels. The fiscal authority for its part has to ensure that its fiscal policy stance remains 
consistent with debt sustainability, at whatever real interest rate may be determined by the 
central bank. Then households and firms can focus on their undertakings without having to 
worry  about  sudden  shifts  in  economic  policy  that  change  the  calculus  underlying  their 
decisions. 
Judging against these ideals, we must acknowledge that the track record of EMU has been 
mixed. 
Despite the challenges that several countries in EMU are currently facing, it is important to 
emphasise  that  the  ECB  has  delivered  on  its  price  stability  mandate,  with  CPI  inflation 
averaging  around  2%  per  annum.  Moreover,  the  ECB  has  contributed  to  averting  acute 
downside  risk  to  inflation  during  the  crisis,  which  would  also  have  impacted  adversely  on 
economic  stability.  To  this  end,  the  Governing  Council  forcefully  reduced  the  main  policy 
rates  and  adopted  several  non-standard  measures  that  preserve  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  signals  to  the  economy.  Its  full  operational  independence  and  the  clear 
orientation  of  its  price  stability  mandate  have  been  crucial  cornerstones  in  guiding  these 
interventions. 
At the same time, our experiences since the start of EMU underscore the importance of other 
policy domains for economic stability. In a benign economic environment before the crisis, 
the institutional framework of EMU has not prevented the accumulation of fiscal imbalances, 
losses  in  economic  competitiveness  and  the  build-up  of  excessive  risks  in  the  financial 
sector. When the financial and economic crisis erupted, these vulnerabilities became a major 
propagator of economic uncertainty and distress. In fact, the mutually reinforcing nature of 
these vulnerabilities even led some observers to question the integrity of the currency as a 
whole.  
This  clearly  demonstrates  that  an  independent  central  bank  with  a  clear  price  stability 
objective is a necessary but not a sufficient condition to preserve trust in a currency. 
Euro  area  policy-makers  have  reacted  to  these  insights  by  embarking  on  a  wide  range  of 
reform efforts to strengthen the institutions governing other policy areas. These include, inter 
alia: a reinforcement of the EU fiscal framework modelled after the German “debt brake”; an 
incentive mechanism at EU level to encourage structural reforms; and a closer integration of 
financial supervision that is commensurate to a strong integration of financial markets across 
borders.  
The ECB supports these efforts to strengthen the institutional architecture of EMU. In fact, I 
am convinced a swift and determined implementation of these reforms will put the soundness 
of our common currency beyond doubt.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
