Anand Sinha: Financial regulatory reforms – not far enough or overkill 
Opening remarks by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Panel Discussion on “Financial regulatory reforms – not far enough or overkill” as part of the 
event “Global economic cooperation – views from G20 countries”, organized by the Indian 
Council 
International  Economic  Relations  (ICRIER),  New  Delhi,  
7–9 October 2012. 
for  Research  on 
 Indira  Gandhi 
A very good afternoon to you all. It is my privilege to chair the panel on “Financial Regulatory 
Reforms:  Not  far  enough  or  overkill?”  Let  me  welcome  the  four  very  eminent  panelists, 
Mr Jae-ha Park,  Deputy  Dean  ADBI;  Mr Stephen Pickford,  Associate  Fellow,  Chatham 
House; Mr Paul Bernd Spahn, Professor Emeritus of Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany  and  Ms Susan Thomas,  Assistant  Professor, 
Institute  of 
Development Research.  
The topic of the panel discussion is a subject of heated debate around the globe and I hope 
our discussions today would help set a balanced perspective on the issue involved. 
Let me first  try  and flag  the  major  issues  and  present  both  sides  of the  argument,  without 
expressing my views at this stage. 
Regulatory reforms undertaken as a policy response to the crisis have generated as serious 
a debate as the crisis itself. The crisis is still continuing and is unprecedented in terms of its 
coverage,  impact  and  longevity.  The  policy  response  to  the  crisis,  too,  has  been  quite 
extensive and as some would say, onerous. Going by the Newton’s third law of motion (every 
action has an equal and opposite reaction), it is fair to expect that reaction (policy response 
to the crisis) matches action (the crisis), in magnitude. Many, however, hold the view that this 
law has been violated inasmuch as the policy reaction is a case of overkill. 
The crisis has highlighted many gaps in the conceptual framework. Some of the gaps are: 
the notion that macroeconomic stability ensures financial stability; light touch regulation and 
supervision  are  adequate  because  financial  markets  are  sophisticated  and  efficient,  which 
can distribute risks to those who can handle these risks; risk models measure risk accurately 
and  all  financial  innovations  are  useful,  etc.  Serious  gaps  have  also  emerged  in 
macroeconomic modelling and, above all, in the understanding or lack of understanding of 
systemic risk and how to deal with it. The crisis has challenged the intellectual foundations of 
macroeconomic and financial policy making. New theories have been written debunking the 
old ones and new regulatory framework is being put in place to make the financial system 
more  resilient.  The  redesigned  regulatory  framework  encompasses  measures  such  as 
enhancing the quality and quantity of capital to be maintained by banks, reducing leverage, 
enhancing  risk  coverage,  stipulating  liquidity  ratios,  maintenance  of  countercyclical  capital 
buffers etc. More importantly, the recognition of the role of systemic risk and the importance 
of financial stability are the major lessons learnt from the crisis.  
The  new  regulatory  framework,  inasmuch  as  it  requires  higher  quantum  of  higher  quality 
capital and liquidity buffers leading to reduced leverage, has raised intense debate over the 
impact they could have  on the economic growth and the profitability of banks. It is argued 
that the  increased  capital  requirements  would  impinge  on  the  profitability  of  banks, forcing 
them to either increase their lending rates to maintain their margins or cut down on lending to 
preserve  their capital  base,  both  of  which  may  have  a  large  negative  impact  on  economic 
growth. The proposed restrictions on activities permitted to be undertaken by banks and the 
ring  fencing  of  certain  banking  activities  have  also  led  to  concerns  in  some  quarters.  The 
prohibition  under  the  Dodd  Frank  Act  on  proprietary  trading  by  US  banks,  bank  holding 
companies and their affiliates, despite certain carve outs has, particularly, caused discomfort 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
from  the  perspective  of  its  negative  impact  on  market  liquidity  and  its  cross  border 
implications. 
On  the  other  hand,  many  feel  that  these  regulations  are  necessary  to  preserve  systemic 
stability  and  to  ensure  long  term  growth.  The  crisis  has  wreaked  havoc  on  the  global 
economy with significant economic and social costs. To strengthen the financial system and 
enhance  the  systemic  stability  with  a  view  to  minimizing  the  incidence  of  such  crises  in 
future,  it  is  argued  that  stronger  regulation  is  necessary.  The  proponents  of  stronger 
regulation argue that the benefits of financial stability would outweigh the costs of regulation 
and, therefore, there is a good reason for revamping the regulatory framework. The debate is 
still inconclusive and the judgement on whether these regulations are a necessity or a case 
of overkill is broadly dependent on which side of the fence you are on i.e. whether you are a 
regulator or associated with a regulated financial sector entity. There are, of course, many 
others  not  in  either  of  the  two  categories  who  hold  strong  views.  While  even  the  critics 
broadly agree on the idea that regulations need a revamp, the critical question remains, how 
much regulation is adequate? At what point the regulations start having diminishing returns – 
regulatory costs outweighing benefits? And whether the regulation which is global in scope 
caters to the local needs of specific jurisdictions? 
Let me, in addition to some of the concerns mentioned earlier, highlight a few other issues: 
i. 
The redesigning of regulations, distilling the lessons taught by crisis, has been an 
enormous task for the policy makers. While a significant amount of work is already 
done, work relating to some critical areas is still in progress, such as – framework for 
forward  looking  provisioning,  management  of  liquidity  risk,  cross  border  resolution 
mechanism and oversight and surveillance of the shadow banking system, etc. 
Some  parts  of  the  new  regulations,  despite  having  recently  designed  framework, 
need more clarity. For example, there are currently no readily available and widely 
accepted  metrics  of  systemic  risk  to  help  calibrate  instruments  or  gauge  policy 
performance, even ex post, with much precision.1 The transmission mechanism of 
macroprudential  policies  need  to  be  better  understood  and  modelled.  Similarly, 
interaction  between  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  and  monetary  policy  is  an  area 
which  is  still  being  examined.  The  likely  asymmetrical  effect  of  macroprudential 
policies during the upturn and downturn phases of the economy, and fine tuning of 
communication  by  central  banks  or  designated  macroprudential  regulators  on 
macroprudential  issues  and  policies  are  other  areas  requiring  focussed  attention. 
The  possible  role  of  monetary  policy  in  leaning  against  the  credit  cycles  is  being 
researched and debated and it may be a while before a clear direction emerges.  
As regards implementation of new regulations, many questions linger – Is it the right 
time  to  implement,  especially  when  the  global  economy  is  slowing,  as  the  new 
regulations  require  higher  quantum  of  capital  which  would  not  only  be  difficult  to 
raise but may also have an adverse impact over global growth due to deleveraging 
and higher lending costs? Are all Basel Committee members in adequate state of 
preparedness to  implement  the  Basel III framework  in  time  and  in full  compliance 
with the framework? 
Another  concern  voiced  by  many  is  the  possible  impact  the  new  regulations  may 
have on Emerging and Developing Economies (EDEs) which, did not contribute to 
the crisis. EDEs require growth and the new regulations, in their pursuit of stability 
over growth, may impinge upon their growth at least in the short term. The opinion 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
                                                
1  Caruana,  Jaime,  (Sept  2012),  “Dealing  with  financial  systemic  risk:  the  contribution  of  macroprudential 
policies”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
often expressed, therefore, is that these regulations are an unnecessary burden on 
EDEs. 
Today’s panel discussion on “Financial Regulatory Reforms: Not far enough, or overkill ” is 
quite apt in scope and timing. I am sure we are going to have an enlightening discussion on 
the  adequacy  and  impact  of  the  regulatory  reforms.  The  eminent  panelists  would  present 
their views on the subject followed by Q & A. 
Now, over to the panelists…  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
