Lim Hng Kiang: What’s next for hedge funds? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  SkyBridge  Alternative  (SALT) 
Conference, Marina Bay Sands, 17 October 2012. 
 Mr Anthony Scaramucci, Managing Partner, SkyBridge Capital 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
A very good morning to all of you. I am very pleased to join you at the inaugural Asian leg of 
the SALT conference.  
Global outlook 
As  we  move  into  the  last  quarter  of  2012,  the  world  economic  outlook  remains  uncertain. 
Advanced economies continue to encounter headwinds as deleveraging, fiscal consolidation 
and a still-weak financial system act as a drag on growth.  
With  US  and  Europe  facing  economic  difficulties,  Asia  will  not  be  immune  to  a  global 
slowdown given its heavy reliance on trade. This can be seen by Asia’s slowing growth in the 
last two quarters as weak demand in the G3, especially the Eurozone, exerted a sharp drag 
on exports from the region.1 
The  IMF  has  recently  revised  its  growth  estimates  downwards.  Global  growth  is  now 
expected  to  be  3.3%  in  2012  and  3.6%  in  2013.2  However,  this  is  dependent  on  the 
assumption that there will be sufficient policy action to ease financial conditions globally and 
that  recent  policy  easing  moves  in  emerging  market  economies  will  gain  traction.  Overall, 
global growth is expected to remain muted for an extended period. 
Impact of macro conditions on the global hedge fund industry 
The  macro  economic  environment  has  left  global  institutions,  including  hedge  funds, 
grappling with historically  low  interest rates, volatile financial markets, and an environment 
that has grown averse to risk taking. As hedge funds cope with a more demanding operating 
and economic environment, the industry will have to deal with two key challenges.  
Firstly, soft returns amidst the volatile environment. The average hedge fund returns across 
strategies was negative 4.6% in 2011, with most of the losses occurring in 3Q 2011 when 
global equities declined by around 17%.3 Whilst hedge fund performance this year-to-date as 
at end-August 2012 was up 3.8%3, the outlook remains uncertain and I think hedge funds 
may struggle to provide consistent returns over time. 
Secondly,  a  more  challenging  fund-raising  environment.  Business  and  compliance  costs 
have increased due to more stringent manager selection criteria by investors and enhanced 
global  regulatory  standards.  As  a  result,  funding  gestation  periods  have  lengthened  and 
failure rates have increased. Hedge funds now require larger assets under management to 
breakeven and remain economically viable. Managers without a strong track record will be in 
for a hard time. Against this backdrop, some consolidation of the global hedge fund industry 
is to be expected.  
                                                
1   MAS: Recent Economic Developments in Singapore – Sep 2012 
2  
3   Hennessee Hedge Fund Indices. 
IMF: World Economic Outlook, October 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  retail  and 
institutional  segments  doubled 
Long term prospects for the hedge fund industry remains positive  
Nonetheless, if we look beyond the immediate economic challenges, the long term prospects 
for the alternative investment industry remain positive.  
A number of studies have identified a growing interest from institutional investors for yields in 
the  alternative  space.  In  the  2012  Towers  Watson  Global  Pension  Asset  Study,  asset 
allocation to alternatives in the seven largest pension fund markets has increased from 5% in 
1995  to  20%  in  2011.  In  another  recent  study,  McKinsey  estimates  that  global  alternative 
investments  across 
in  assets  under 
management between 2005 and 2011, to reach US$6.5 trillion. This represents a compound 
annual  growth  rate  of  14%  over  this  period,  exceeding  the  growth  of  the  traditional  asset 
classes.  
Specifically  in  the  hedge  fund  space,  institutional  investors  have  increased  allocations  to 
hedge  funds  significantly  over  the  last  decade,  from  only  US$125  billion  in  2002  to 
approximately US$1.5 trillion as of end 2011. Looking forward, institutional investors in the 
major  markets  have  indicated  their  intent  to  increase  allocations  to  almost  all  alternative 
classes,  including  hedge  funds.  Increased  institutional  participation  will  drive  growth  as 
hedge funds become an important part of the investment landscape. 
To meet the demands of institutional investors and global regulatory standards, hedge funds 
have  taken  steps  to  beef  up  their  risk management  and  compliance functions.  In  a recent 
study by the Managed Funds Association, BNY Mellon and Hedgemark,4 it was found that 
79% of global hedge funds now separate the roles of the risk manager and fund manager, 
with  60%  of  the  larger  hedge  funds  having  a  dedicated  risk  management  function.  This 
augurs  well  for  the  hedge  fund  industry,  as  it  allows  the  industry  to  grow  in  a  more 
sustainable manner with strong internal control systems and risk management oversight. 
Asia is well placed to provide capital and investment opportunities 
As global institutions and investors seek to address challenges resulting from structural shifts 
in  the global  economy, many  are  turning  to  Asia  to  harness  opportunities  and  to generate 
higher returns. This is due to a few reasons.  
Firstly,  Asia  has  been  leading  the  global  recovery  with  growth  expectations  in  developing 
Asia projected to exceed global growth at 6.7% in 2012 and 7.2% in 2013.5  
Secondly, both demand and supply side factors in Asia are relatively positive. Corporate and 
government  balance  sheets  are  generally  healthy.  Households  are  not  overly  levered, 
savings  rates  are  high  and  unemployment  is  comparatively  low.  The  rising  middle  class, 
highly educated workforce and favourable demographics are also plus points for Asia. These 
factors,  coupled  with  Asia’s  strong  commitment to  economic  openness and free  trade,  are 
important in creating a business friendly and conducive environment for its financial sector to 
continue to thrive and grow.  
Thirdly,  with  Asia’s  relatively  strong  economic  growth  and  favourable  demographics, 
investible assets from the institutional and private wealth segments are set to grow. In a 2011 
report published by Cerulli Associates, institutional investable assets from Asia ex-Japan are 
expected to triple from US$4.3 trillion in 2006 to US$13.6 trillion by 2015. Total wealth from 
the private wealth segment is also expected to increase. In its recent Wealth Report,6 Julius 
Baer expects the number of high net worth individuals in Asia to more than double over the 
                                                
4   Risk Roadmap: Hedge Funds and Investors’ Evolving Approach to Risk (2012). 
5  
6   Julius Baer Wealth Report 2012. 
IMF: World Economic Outlook, October 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
next  three  years  to  almost  3  million.  As  Asia  grows  in  wealth,  there  will  be  more  capital 
requiring  active  and  customised  fund  management  expertise  to  take  advantage  of  the 
investment opportunities in Asia.  
Asia’s  strong  fundamentals  will  support  the  valuations  of  Asian  assets,  which  will  draw  a 
growing  interest  from  institutional  investors  around  the  world  looking  to  diversify  and 
generate returns. According to Preqin,7 46% of Asia-Pacific hedge fund investors intend to 
invest  opportunistically  in  Asia-Pacific  hedge  funds,  whilst  31%  of  Asia-Pacific  hedge  fund 
investors are looking to increase their longer-term allocations to Asia-Pacific. Deutsche Bank 
also  noted  in  its  2012  Alternative  Investment  Survey  that  North  America  and  Asia  are 
currently  the  most  sought  after  investment  regions,  with  investors  planning  to  allocate 
approximately 26% of assets to Asia.  
Conclusion 
As a source as well as a destination for investments, Asia presents compelling prospects for 
the hedge fund industry. Singapore’s strategic location makes us well-placed to serve as a 
hub  with  strong  physical  connectivity,  trade  and  financial  linkages  to  the  rest  of  Asia. 
Together with our strong commitment to growing a well-regulated fund management industry, 
this makes Singapore an ideal vantage point for asset managers to understand Asia and to 
manage pan-Asian investments. 
So  it  leaves  me  now  to  congratulate  SALT  on  its  inaugural  Asian  leg  of  the  SALT 
Conference. I wish all of you a fruitful conference ahead. Thank you. 
                                                
7   Preqin/Global ARC Study of Asian Institutional Hedge Fund Investments 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
