Benoît Cœuré: Why the euro needs a banking union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  conference  “Bank  funding  –  markets,  instruments  and  implications  for  corporate 
lending and the real economy”, Frankfurt am Main, 8 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Carmelo Salleo for his contribution to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
expressed herein. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  evening  as  part  of  this  conference.  I  firmly 
believe that good research underpins policy choices and, as you know, the European Central 
Bank (ECB) is very committed to carefully conducted, high-quality analysis as the bedrock of 
its decision-making. 
Bank  funding  has  been  the  focus  of  policy-makers’  concerns  for  the  past  few  years,  ever 
since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  which  brutally  reminded  us  all  of  the  systemic 
dimension of liquidity and funding risk. Such a cataclysmic event elicited a host of responses, 
ranging from central bank interventions to prevent a meltdown of the financial system to the 
design of new regulations to limit risk-taking by financial institutions. The shock was global – 
and the response has been global. However, much work still needs to be done, so I welcome 
opportunities  such  as  this  conference  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  dynamics  and 
determinants of bank funding and of their implications for the financial system and the real 
economy. 
Our interest in bank funding, as central bankers, stems also from the fact that it touches upon 
the  very  essence  of  our  respective  mandates.  Money,  remember,  is  the  liability  of  the 
banking system. Central bank money represents but a fraction of broad money. To ensure 
that money is sound, and, in the euro area, that it is “single”, we need the banking system to 
be equally sound, and importantly, single. 
It is against this background that I will devote my remarks tonight to the latest development in 
European  policy,  specifically  the  decision  to  proceed  with  a  banking  union  to  complement 
monetary union in the euro area. I will discuss the desirable components of a banking union, 
towards which a single supervisory mechanism represents the first step. 
The establishment of a banking union is a key factor in the completion of monetary union, 
and probably a turning point in the current crisis, with profound repercussions for the financial 
sector and the real economy alike. 
Over the past few years, the mounting pressures in funding markets have led to a growing 
fragmentation  of  the  banking  system  of  the  euro  area  along  national  lines.  Links  between 
banks and sovereigns have grown tighter, and in some countries the credit supply has been 
negatively affected. The conduct of a single monetary policy has become increasingly difficult 
as the transmission channels have become heterogeneous. This fragmentation was affecting 
the  whole  economy  of  the  area,  and  a  banking  union  has  been  proposed  in  order  to 
re-establish  a  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  ensure  that  the  credit  supply 
meets the real economy’s needs. 
Some evidence on the fragmentation of the banking system 
First of all, let me give you some evidence on the fragmentation of the banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  ECB  has  been  continuously  monitoring  the  degree  of  integration  in  the  euro  area 
financial markets. The latest Financial Integration in Europe report, published in April 2012, 
showed several indicators pointing to rising fragmentation in various market segments as the 
sovereign debt crisis has escalated. 
In addition to the price-based indicators highlighted in the report, quantity-based indicators 
also continue to point to a further and significant renationalisation of euro area banks’ funding 
markets. Banks located in peripheral countries continued to lose market funding, while those 
in some other countries retained it and managed to issue bank debt at attractive yield levels. 
The market for  secured bank funding  has  also  been  affected  by  the  increased  tensions  in 
some euro area government bond markets.  
Differences between bank lending rates offered to non-financial corporations and households 
in  euro  area  countries  reflect  divergences  in  bank  funding  conditions  that  go  beyond 
country-specific economic conditions. Let me give you a few examples.  
The coefficient of variation across euro area countries of the short-term cost of borrowing for 
non-financial  corporations  has  been  increasing  towards  all-time  highs.  Also,  in  some 
countries retail  lending  rates  have  increased  markedly,  while  policy  rates  have  decreased. 
Since  mid-2011,  the  rate  charged  by  the  ECB  on  its  main  refinancing  operations  has 
decreased by 75 basis points but the composite cost of borrowing has decreased by a similar 
or greater amount in only 20% of cases. In another 20% of cases, it has even increased by 
more than 25 basis points. 
The dispersion of lending rates has risen both across jurisdictions and across categories of 
enterprises.  For  example,  the  cost  of  short-term  borrowing  for  corporates  in  France  is  still 
around the same level as that recorded at the beginning of 2011; by contrast, in Italy, over 
the  same  period  of  time,  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  corporates  has  widened  by  almost 
100 basis  points.  In  addition,  in  countries  facing  economic  and  financial  distress,  bank 
financing  conditions  are  tightening  further  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  This  is 
particularly problematic not least because of the limited access that small companies have to 
alternative  sources  of  financing.  For  example,  the  spread  between  rates  on  small  and 
large-sized loans has widened further in the case of Spain and Italy: in August 2012 it stood 
at 286 bps in Spain and at 188 bps in Italy, the highest levels for both countries since 2003. 
All  in  all,  we  can  say  that  the  renationalisation  of  the  credit  supply,  coupled  with  funding 
pressures on both banks and sovereigns in certain countries, has weakened the impact of 
monetary policy, as partly unjustified domestic spreads keep rates applied to households and 
non-financial corporations higher than what would be consistent with monetary policy rates. 
Why does financial integration matter so much for monetary policy? 
In  order  to  clarify  why  financial  integration  is  crucial  for  monetary  policy,  let  me  use  a 
metaphor drawn from agriculture: ever since ancient times farmers have watered their fields 
through a complex network of canals fed by wells or rivers. Whenever a canal was blocked, 
the farmer had to act quickly to unblock it in order to save his crop. The practice of irrigation 
was in fact first described in the Epic of Gilgamesh in the second millennium BC. 
Credit is the water of the economy, and for the economy to run smoothly it needs to reach all 
its parts in the same way. Central bank money is the well, banks are the canals and we are 
the farmers. Whenever a canal of this kind is obstructed, we must find a way of restoring a 
smooth  supply  and  we  must  act  rapidly,  as  without  adequate  credit  the  dynamism  of  an 
economy  quickly  fades.  And  I  should  add  that  the  Epic  of  Gilgamesh  also  describes  the 
damage caused by a flood, a reminder that liquidity can become destructive if it gets out of 
control. 
Indeed, the ECB has taken a number of measures to provide liquidity to credit institutions in 
the  euro  area,  thereby  alleviating  their  funding  needs.  Such  measures  include  fixed-rate 
tender procedures with full allotments, longer-term refinancing operations up to a maturity of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
36  months,  the  expansion  of  eligible  collateral accepted  in the  refinancing  operations,  and 
FX tenders  aimed  at  mitigating  funding  costs  in  foreign  currency.  And  the  ECB  will  stand 
ready to withdraw liquidity when upward risks to medium-term price stability materialise. 
Right now transmission channels are obstructed for two reasons, one conjunctural and one 
essentially structural. 
The conjunctural reason is that sovereign spreads in some peripheral countries, which are 
today  the  basis  for  the  pricing  of  bank  funding,  can  rise  above  what  fundamentals  would 
suggest,  as  they reflect various concerns felt by market participants, from over-pessimistic 
views of macroeconomic trends to redenomination risk.  
The  correlations  between  the  yield  levels  of  euro  area  bank  bonds  and  those  of  the 
respective  banks’  sovereigns  are  elevated  and  have  lately  increased  somewhat  further, 
particularly  in  the  peripheral  economies.  This  has  also  been  the  case  for  credit  default 
swaps.  This  reflects  a  spillover  effect  from  the  sovereign  market  to  the  banking  sector’s 
funding costs and impairs the transmission of lower monetary policy interest rates to the real 
economy. 
In  response,  the  ECB  has  announced  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  – 
interventions on sovereign bond markets to repair the transmission channel when the level of 
spreads  hampers  monetary  policy  transmission  and  reflects  market’s  perception  that  the 
single  currency  might  break  up.  OMTs  would  be  implemented  to  the  extent  that  they  are 
for  countries  under  an  EFSF/ESM 
warranted 
macroeconomic  adjustment  or  precautionary  programme,  as 
long  as  programme 
conditionality  is  fully  respected.  IMF  involvement  will  also  be  sought.  OMTs  would  not  be 
carried out while a given programme is under review, but they would resume after the review 
period once programme compliance has been assured. The announcement of the OMTs has 
reduced concerns about the materialisation of destructive scenarios. But it is essential that 
governments continue to implement the necessary steps to reduce both fiscal and structural 
imbalances and proceed with financial sector restructuring measures. 
The structural reason that the transmission channel is malfunctioning is the tight link between 
sovereign  and  bank  funding  conditions.  The  risk  that  banks’  balance  sheets  would  be 
contaminated by sovereign risk was highlighted at an early stage by Barry Eichengreen and 
Charles  Wyplosz  (1998).1  If  banks  are  to  transmit  monetary  policy  impulses  evenly,  they 
need broadly similar funding conditions. However, if the ultimate responsibility for the stability 
of the banking system falls within the domains of individual sovereigns, clearly the two are 
linked and when one of the two becomes riskier, this risk is transmitted to the other. Hence 
the need to sever this link by transferring responsibility for the stability of the banking system 
to the European level. 
from  a  monetary  policy  perspective 
How to re-integrate the banking system: the rationale for a banking union 
To have one banking system again, several measures need to be jointly implemented. 
First of all, each government must deliver fiscal consolidation – this is the objective of the 
Fiscal Compact that was agreed on last December. Once all sovereigns have fiscal balances 
that are sustainable in the long run, sovereign spreads should narrow again – but this will 
take time. In the meantime, we are facing a long transition. 
Second, we need to strengthen the banking system to the point where its creditworthiness is 
less dependent on that of sovereigns. Euro area banks have to improve their resilience, both 
in terms of capital and of liquidity. This objective has been fostered by the European Banking 
                                                
1  See Eichengreen, B and C. Wyplosz, 1998, “Stability Pact? More than a minor nuisance?”, Economic Policy, 
67–113. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Agency (EBA), notably in its final report on the recapitalisation of European banks which was 
published  last  week.  It  has  revealed  a  significant  reduction  in  banks’  capital  gap.  In  this 
respect I would like to stress the importance of the EBA’s recommendation that banks keep 
high  absolute  levels  of  core  Tier  1  capital,  corresponding  to  the  current  9%  ratio,  in  the 
transition to the Basel III standards. 
Finally, in order to cut the ties between individual sovereigns and banks and achieve a fully 
integrated banking system that mirrors and supports a fully-fledged Economic and Monetary 
Union, we need to construct a banking union. 
Let  me  first  define  what  I  mean  by  a  banking  union.  It  is  an  institutional  framework  which 
ultimately  should  have  three  legs:  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM),  a  common 
resolution  structure  and  a  shared  deposit  insurance.  The  SSM  would  bring  all  supervisory 
decisions about euro area banks under one roof, at the ECB, allowing supervisors to take 
into  account  externalities  and  general  exposures  to  systemic  risk.  The  common  resolution 
structure,  with  a  unified  resolution  regime  and  single  resolution  fund,  would  manage 
efficiently the wind-down even of large cross-border banks. Shared deposit insurance would 
reassure depositors that their money is safe in any euro area bank, regardless of its country 
of operations or legal domicile. 
These three elements, when operational, would effectively sever the link between banks and 
sovereigns,  and  support  the  functioning  of  the  EMU.  Euro  area  institutions  would  be 
responsible  for  the  euro  area  banking  system,  and  the  euro  area  sovereigns  as  a  whole 
would back it. What I would like to stress here is that the banking union, agreed upon by the 
Heads of State or Government at the end of June, is both a game changer for the crisis and 
a  leap  forward  for  Europe.  It  will  change  the  dynamics  of  investors’  decisions.  Moreover, 
within  the  euro  area  there  would  no  longer  be  a  host  or  a  home  supervisor,  and  this 
arrangement  should  ensure  that  cross-border  allocation  of  capital  and  liquidity  would  be 
primarily  driven  by  business  considerations.  Banks’  funding  costs  should  start  to  indicate 
again their individual creditworthiness, without the premia that reflect their sovereign’s fiscal 
position or redenomination risk. A common resolution fund would decrease the too-big-to-fail 
problem and thus reduce moral hazard; furthermore, it would spread the burden of resolution 
rather  than  saddling  any  single  sovereign  with  it.  Finally,  depositors  would  not  need  to 
consider  shifting  their  funds  across  the  continent  in  search  of  a  safe  haven,  as  all  banks 
would offer the same insurance coverage.  
Of  course,  as  with  all  structural  changes  and  new  institutional  constructions,  setting  up  a 
fully-fledged banking union will take some time. The most urgent component of the banking 
union is in my view the SSM, which should enter into force as early as possible in 2013 to 
allow  the  ECB  to  prepare  for  its  new  tasks,  with  full  accountability  and  a  governance 
structure that strictly separates monetary policy from supervisory decisions. I won’t go into 
the details of the current proposal put forward by the European Commission. For this, since 
we are at a research-oriented conference, I would refer you to the report2 on the European 
Commission’s  banking  union  proposals  which  has  just  been  published  by  the  Advisory 
Scientific Committee of the European Systemic Risk Board. 
The implementation of the SSM and the resolution structure should be closely coordinated, 
which means that proposals on the latter will be needed in 2013. Yet the exact structure of 
the  deposit  insurance  scheme  will  depend  also  on  what  reforms  are  enacted  after  the 
recommendations  of  the  Liikanen  Report,3  published  last  week,  that  aim  to  protect  retail 
                                                
2  See “A contribution from the Chair and Vice-Chairs of the Advisory Scientific Committee to the discussion on 
the  European  Commission’s  banking  union  proposals”  at  http://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/asc 
/Reports_ASC_1210.pdf?490dce9cc2a2bf39b76ae4b06604b0ca 
3  See 
“High-level  Expert  Group  on 
reforming 
the  structure  of 
the  EU  banking  sector”  at 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/high-level_expert_group/report_en.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
depositors from excessive risk-taking by banks with structural measures that would reshape 
the industry. 
Common challenges to both the resolution structure and deposit insurance scheme will be to 
agree  on  adequate  ex  ante  burden-sharing  rules  between  governments that  provide  market 
participants with the right incentives while preserving financial stability, and adequately deal 
with  legacy  issues.  The  final  form  of  the  banking  union  will  appropriately  reflect  these 
considerations,  and  we  are  confident  that  implementation  will  start  as  planned  with  the 
establishment of the SSM in early 2013. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude  by  stating  once  more  that  for  monetary  policy  to  work  we  need  an 
integrated  banking  system,  and  to  have  an  integrated  banking  system  we  need  it  to  be 
supervised across the euro area as a whole, which will make it possible to be backstopped 
by the euro area as a whole. 
This is the vision put forth in the Four Presidents’ Report, this is the commitment made by the 
euro  area  governments,  and  the  ECB  supports  it  wholeheartedly.  The  monetary  and  the 
banking union are symbiotic, and they are the logical extension of the Maastricht Treaty, both 
in historical and political terms. 
I look forward to a stimulating discussion and wish you a very successful conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
