Thomas Jordan: SNB monetary and investment policy and the impact of 
the strong Swiss franc 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at 
the  Volkswirtschaftliche  Gesellschaft  des  Kantons  Bern,  Berne, 
28 November 2012. 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
As part of measures to combat the financial and economic crisis, balance sheets of central 
banks around the world have expanded substantially. In 2009 and 2010, the Swiss National 
Bank  (SNB)  intervened  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  order  to  combat  an  excessive 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. On 6 September 2011, it set a minimum exchange rate of 
CHF 1.20 per euro, in order to avert major damage to the Swiss economy. Since then, the 
SNB  has  enforced  this  minimum  rate  with  determination  and  is  prepared  to  buy  foreign 
currency  in  unlimited  quantities.  This  monetary  policy  is  reflected  in  a  very  substantial 
expansion in its balance sheet. It has also altered the importance of the currency reserves 
and had an impact on the SNB’s investment policy. 
In view of its mandate, monetary policy has priority at the SNB. Investment policy must be 
subordinated to the requirements of monetary policy. It is at the service of monetary policy 
and may not limit its room for manoeuvre. At present, enforcement of the minimum exchange 
rate has the greatest influence in the management of the currency reserves. The task is to 
diversify a large foreign currency portfolio according to the criteria of liquidity, security and 
return. Even in these extreme circumstances, the SNB’s investment policy and process have 
proved resilient. The investment skills we have developed over the past 15 years, together 
with our flexibility regarding investment categories allow for the smooth absorption even of 
large  inflows  from  foreign  exchange  purchases.  The  principles  upon  which  our  investment 
policy is based have proved their worth. 
The idea of a sovereign wealth fund for better management of the SNB’s currency reserves 
has  attracted  some  public  interest.  However,  a  sovereign  wealth  fund  would  not  facilitate 
monetary  policy  with  regard  to  the  enforcement  of the minimum  exchange rate.  Moreover, 
advocates of a sovereign wealth fund often have unrealistically high expectations, not least 
as regards returns. But the most important point is that the current size and composition of 
the  central  bank  balance  sheet  are  a  direct  reflection  of  monetary  policy.  The  SNB’s 
investment  requirements  are  derived  directly  from  money  creation  and  not  from  other 
revenue  sources.  If  limitations  were  placed  on  the  SNB  balance  sheet,  its  room  for 
manoeuvre in the monetary policy domain would be restricted. 
Due  to  the  accumulation  of  currency  reserves  that  have  resulted  from  monetary  policy 
measures,  there  are  substantial  risks  weighing  on  the  SNB  balance  sheet.  Consequently, 
fluctuations  in  value  may  be  much  greater  in  future  than  they  have  been  in  the  past.  In 
addition,  the  relationship  between  equity  and  currency  reserves  has  worsened.  To  ensure 
that the SNB can fulfil its mandate in the long term, without any restriction, in the interests of 
the  country  as  a  whole,  particular  attention  is  given  to  its  capital  base  through  a  prudent 
provisioning policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
