Tiff Macklem: A measure of work 
Remarks  by  Mr  Tiff  Macklem,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 4 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and thank you for the invitation to speak here today. I am pleased to be in 
Winnipeg, a city that is boldly preparing for the job market of the future. From programs that 
help  new  immigrants,  to  connecting  job  opportunities  with  older  workers,  Winnipeg  and 
Manitoba are providing innovative solutions to the challenge of matching workers with jobs 
and jobs with workers. 
My remarks today will also focus on jobs. 
The  mandate  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  to  mitigate  “fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of 
production,  trade,  prices  and  employment,  so  far  as  may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of 
monetary action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada.” 
We learned from bitter experience in the 1970s that the best way for the Bank to fulfill this 
mandate  is  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  Since  1991  –  now  more  than 
20 years ago – this objective has been formalized with an inflation target, and since 1995 the 
target  has  been  to  achieve  an  annual  rate  of  inflation  of  2  per  cent,  as  measured  by  the 
consumer price index (CPI). The target is reviewed every five years and was most recently 
renewed in 2011.1  
With  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation,  Canadians  can  have  confidence  in  the  value  of 
their money. That’s one less thing they have to worry about. But there is more. Controlling 
inflation is also a means to an end. Low, stable and predictable inflation paves the way for 
solid economic growth and a well-functioning, stable and healthy labour market. 
Having a job is one of the most important measures of an individual’s economic and financial 
welfare. How well, then, has our inflation-targeting monetary policy succeeded in mitigating 
fluctuations  in  the  level  of  employment?  How  have  the  benefits  been  distributed  across 
different  segments  of  the  labour  market?  How  has  monetary  policy  supported  a  better-
functioning  or  more  efficient  labour  market?  And  what  is  the  health  of  our  labour  market 
today and its prognosis looking ahead? 
I am going to address these questions in three parts. In Part 1, I will scan back over the past 
four  decades,  comparing  labour  market  performance  in  Canada  before  and  after  the 
introduction of inflation targeting. In Part 2, I will focus on labour market outcomes through 
the  most  recent  cycle  of  recession  and  recovery.  And  in  Part  3,  I  will  comment  on  the 
challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. 
Labour markets before and after inflation targeting 
A picture of inflation is worth a thousand words. As depicted in Chart 1, the change in the 
behaviour of inflation since the adoption of inflation targeting is stark. Both the average level 
and the variability of inflation have fallen dramatically.2 Since 1991, inflation in Canada has 
averaged  2  per  cent,  as  measured  by  the  CPI,  and  its  standard  deviation  has  fallen  by 
roughly two-thirds, compared with the 1970s and 1980s (Table 1). 
                                                
1   Bank of Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
2   D.  Longworth,  “Inflation  and  the  Macroeconomy:  Changes  from  the  1980s  to  the  1990s,”  Bank  of  Canada 
Review, Spring 2002. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  has  been  associated  with  more  stable  economic 
growth  in  Canada  and  lower  and  less-variable  unemployment.  The  average  rate  of 
unemployment  has  fallen,  and  fluctuations  in  unemployment  as  measured  by  its  standard 
deviation have been reduced by about one-third. 
Importantly, more stable growth since we began inflation targeting has reduced the cyclical 
fluctuations  in  unemployment for  workers  in  all  age  and  educational  categories.  Moreover, 
fortuitously, the most vulnerable workers have benefited the most (Table 2). Unemployment 
rates  for  younger  workers  and  those  with  less  education  are  typically  more  variable  than 
those  for  well-educated  prime-age  workers.  And  it  is  these  same  groups  that  have 
experienced the largest decline in variability  with the adoption of inflation targeting. So the 
benefits  of  greater  stability  have  been  shared  across  the  workforce,  and  workers  with  the 
largest fluctuations have seen the greatest improvement. 
Better  labour  market  outcomes  over  the  past  20  years  have  also  been  accompanied  by 
improved labour market efficiency. The Beveridge Curve measures how well labour markets 
are matching job vacancies with workers looking for jobs (Chart 2).The closer the Beveridge 
Curve  is  to  its  origin  (zero  vacancies  and  unemployment),  the  more  efficient  the  labour 
market. As shown, the curve in the 1980s (blue line) has a higher level of unemployment for 
a given level of vacancies than the curve in the 1990s and early 2000s (red line).3  
Of course, improved labour market performance reflects a broad spectrum of public policies 
and  private  sector  initiatives,  from  employment  insurance  to  education  and  training,  active 
labour market programs, procurement practices, and licensing and residency requirements 
for employment. 
Nonetheless, there is no doubt that better monetary policy has been an important factor. The 
improved  inflation  environment  has  allowed  consumers  and  businesses  to  manage  their 
finances  with  greater  certainty  about  the  future  purchasing  power  of  their  savings  and 
income. Interest rates have also been lower and less variable in both nominal and real terms 
across a range of maturities. And by working to stabilize inflation, monetary policy has helped 
dampen economic cycles and mitigate fluctuations in employment. 
In addition, there is direct evidence that low, stable and predictable inflation has improved the 
efficiency  of  labour  markets  by  eliminating  inflation  uncertainty  as  an  important  friction  in 
wage  bargaining  and  allowing  wage  changes  to  provide  genuine  signals  to  market 
participants regarding the demand for and the supply of workers. 
As inflation has become more stable and predictable, the variability of aggregate wages has 
declined. The standard deviation of labour income per worker has dropped by about 45 per 
cent. At the same time, with less uncertainty about inflation, the distribution of wage changes 
has narrowed. In the unionized private sector, the standard deviation across individual wage 
settlements  fell  by  about  a  third,  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  labour  market  and  the 
perception of fairness around wage setting. 
In addition, since 1991, the average duration of labour contracts has almost doubled, from 
about 20 months to 39 months, and there has been less need for cost-of-living allowances 
(COLAs)  in  wage  contracts (Chart 3). The  number  of  labour contracts with  COLA  clauses 
has declined from 21 per cent to less than 5 per cent. 
Longer contracts and less disagreement about future inflation have also meant fewer strikes. 
The hours lost to strikes peaked in the early-to-mid-1970s when inflation was at double-digit 
levels and uncertainty was high. Since then, the time lost has fallen sharply (Chart 4). Total 
hours  lost  to  strikes  fell  by  66  per  cent  from  the  pre-inflation-targeting  era  to  today.  With 
                                                
3   Statistics Canada stopped collecting data on vacancies in 2003, since the widespread adoption of the Internet 
has changed the way vacancies are advertised. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable,  workers  and  firms  are  spending  less  time  and  fewer 
resources negotiating and striking, and more time creating value and income. 
Recession and recovery 
Let’s fast forward from the past 40 years to the past five. Many workers in Canada felt the 
severe impact of the global financial crisis that began in 2007. When the United States fell 
into recession, Canada was affected through trade, financial, and confidence channels. But 
with our well-regulated financial system, a credible monetary policy framework and a record 
of  fiscal  prudence,  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  proved  highly  effective  in  dampening  the 
cycle and spurring the recovery. 
Employment  in  Canada  recovered  quickly  from  the  recession  compared  with  previous 
recessions or the experiences of other G-7 countries (Chart 5). Some 430,000 jobs were lost 
in Canada during the recession. All of them have since been recouped and another 339,000 
have been created. 
This stands in stark contrast to the situation in the United States, where 8.8 million jobs were 
lost  and  only  about  half  have  been  regained  (Chart  6).  The  U.S.  unemployment  rate 
currently stands close to 1 percentage point above Canada’s and a full 2 percentage points 
higher  when  measured on  a  like-for-like  basis. And  more than  40 per  cent  of  unemployed 
U.S. workers have been out of work for more than six months, compared with only 18 per 
cent  of  workers  in  Canada  (Chart  7).  Long-term  unemployment  is  particularly  worrisome 
because workers who are out of a job for extended periods lose valuable job skills, making 
them  less  employable  and  more  likely  to  give  up  looking  for  work.  Indeed,  labour  market 
participation in the United States has declined by 2.5 percentage points more than it has in 
Canada (Chart 8). 
Some  commentators  have  suggested  that  while  the  Canadian  economy  has  created  more 
jobs, fewer manufacturing jobs and more service sector jobs have meant fewer high-paying 
full-time  jobs.  True,  the  share  of  service  sector  jobs  has  risen  while  manufacturing  has 
declined. This is part of a longer-term trend. The share of employment in manufacturing has 
declined steadily across all advanced economies and Canada’s experience is about average. 
But  the  rest  of  the  argument  is  myth.  Since  the  trough,  the  vast  majority  of  the  new  jobs 
created are full-time and in the private sector (Chart 9). And more than 90 per cent of them 
are in industries that pay average or above-average wages (Table 3). These new positions 
are  in  such  fields  as  construction,  utilities,  health  care  and  professional,  scientific,  and 
technical services.  
Gauging  the  tightness  of  the  labour  market  is  a  key  element  in  assessing  how  close  the 
economy  is  operating  relative  to  its  capacity,  which,  in  turn,  is  an  important  indicator  of 
inflationary pressures. With a relatively quick recovery in employment, much of the slack in 
the  labour  market  following  the  2009  recession  has  been  taken  up.  Nevertheless,  most 
indicators suggest that some slack remains (Chart 10). 
The  unemployment  rate  remains  above  its  pre-crisis  decade  average.  The  duration  of 
unemployment  also  remains  above  its  pre-recession  average  and  the  number  of  people 
working  part-time  who  would  prefer  to  work  full-time  has  come  down  only  slowly.  And  the 
behaviour of wages is not pointing to generalized excess demand for labour. Wage growth 
has been modest (Chart 11). 
The  labour  market  is  an  important  component  of  the  Bank’s  assessment  of the  amount  of 
excess  supply  in  the  economy.  We  continue  to  monitor  the  full  range  of  labour  market 
indicators, together with other relevant information, very closely as we seek to achieve the 
2 per cent inflation target. 
To the extent that the economic expansion continues and the excess supply in the economy 
is gradually absorbed, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
stimulus  may  become  appropriate,  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target 
over  the  medium  term.  The  timing  and  degree  of  any  such  withdrawal  will  be  weighed 
carefully against domestic and global economic developments. 
The future labour market 
In  the  five  years  since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  most  significant  labour  market 
challenge  has  been  creating  enough  good  jobs  for  workers.  Over  the  next  five  years,  the 
most important challenge is more likely to be finding enough good workers for jobs. 
Even  with  some  slack  remaining  in  labour  markets,  firms  are  reporting  –  with  increased 
frequency  –  difficulty  in  attracting  suitable  labour.  Our  own  Business  Outlook  Survey 
indicates  that  labour  shortages  have  gradually  moved  up  across  the  country.  And  in  the 
latest  survey  of  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  by  the  Canadian  Federation  of 
Independent  Business,  “Shortage  of  skilled  labour”  has  moved  ahead  of  “Insufficient 
customer demand” as the top business constraint facing their members.4  
Looking ahead, Canada’s demographic trends will compound the scarcity of labour.5 We are 
getting older, living longer and having fewer children. That means more workers retiring and 
fewer  people  to  replace  them.  This  will  put  upward  pressure  on  wages  and  lead  to 
adjustments to the composition and the nature of the labour force. For firms, attracting talent 
while retaining relevant expertise and institutional knowledge will be more challenging. 
Confronting  this  challenge  requires  working  on  three  margins:  expanding  the  labour  force; 
utilizing it more efficiently; and increasing labour productivity. Let me address each of these 
in turn. 
Expanding the labour force 
Several segments of the labour force have potential for greater labour market participation. 
Let me highlight three. 
First, older individuals may be enticed to stay longer in the workforce. Indeed, this is already 
happening. The labour market participation rate of workers over 50 has increased by more 
than 12 percentage points since 1995. 
This is being facilitated by the fact that Canadians are, on average, healthier than ever and 
that more jobs today are knowledge-based. Corporate policies and technology that support 
more  flexible  working  arrangements,  together  with  targeted  training  and  employment 
information  programs,  will  be  needed  to  further  improve  labour  market  access  for  aging 
workers. 
On  this  issue,  I  know  I’m  preaching  to  the  converted  here  in  Manitoba.  The  innovative 
ThirdQuarter  project  initiated  by  you  and  your  colleagues  in  the  Manitoba  Chambers  of 
Commerce, which is helping to match employers with experienced  workers over 50, is the 
sort of creative thinking we need to address our demographic challenges.6  
Second – and this point is particularly important here in Manitoba – we must redouble our 
efforts  to  address  unemployment  among  Aboriginal  people.  Their  unemployment  rate  is 
above the Canadian average and their participation rate is lower. Moreover, the Aboriginal 
population  is  growing  faster  and  has  a  higher  proportion  of  young  people  than  the  overall 
                                                
4   “September 2012  Results  of SME  Business  Outlook  Survey,”  Business  Barometer,  Canadian  Federation  of 
Independent Business, 3 October 2012. 
5   J.  Boivin,  “Aging  Gracefully:  Canada’s  Inevitable  Demographic  Shift”  (speech  to  the  Economic  Club  of 
Canada, Toronto, 4 April 2012). 
6   For details on the ThirdQuarter program, see: www.thirdquarter.ca. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Canadian population. Improving the access to jobs for Aboriginal people is the right thing to 
do for many reasons. The demographic squeeze is just one more reason. This all points to 
the  importance  of  public  and  private  initiatives  to  successfully  launch  the  careers  of  more 
Aboriginal people in the workforce. 
And third, immigration is critical for the growth of the labour force. Without immigration, the 
Canadian population would be expected to shrink over the next 50 years. And here again, 
Manitoba  is  serving  as  an  example  for  others.  When  the  federal  government  introduced 
Provincial Nominee Programs to influence the regional distribution of immigrants and allow 
the provinces to address local labour needs, Manitoba took the lead in using the program.7 
As a result, although foreign migrants to Canada are more naturally attracted to our largest 
urban centres, Winnipeg, and Manitoba more broadly, punch above their weight at attracting 
foreign migrants. 
But attracting foreign migrants is only the first step. We must also tear down the barriers that 
keep educated and skilled immigrants from contributing to their full potential. Recent federal 
government initiatives to support improvements in the recognition of foreign credentials are a 
welcome step. Employers also have a role to play in revising their own hiring practices. 
Improving the efficiency of the labour market 
The second margin is to get more of the labour force working. 
This means ensuring that workers have the skills employers are seeking, which speaks to 
the  importance  of  ongoing  dialogue  between  industry,  labour  and  institutions  for  post-
secondary education. 
It  also  means  getting  workers  to  where  the  jobs  are  being  created.  Migration  has  always 
been an important adjustment mechanism for the Canadian economy and we see signs that 
workers are, in fact, becoming more mobile. Recent Bank research suggests that long travel 
distances across Canada may not be as great a barrier to labour mobility as they once were.8 
Over  the  past  decade  and  a  half,  people  have  moved  from  regions  with  excess  labour  to 
those  with  the  tightest  labour  markets,  leading  to  the  convergence  of  unemployment, 
participation and employment rates (Chart 12). By 2011, the gap or disparity in employment 
rates  across  the  10  provinces  was  at  its  lowest  level  since  1976  (as  far  back  as  data  are 
available) and not very different from the dispersion of employment rates across the United 
States. 
Nonetheless,  barriers  to  interprovincial  migration  that  are  not  related  to  distance,  such  as 
differences in occupational licensing, remain an obstacle. The New West Partnership Trade 
Agreement  could  be  an  important  step  to  bringing  down  such  barriers,  as  could  the  2009 
amendments to the Agreement on Internal Trade (AIT). 
Improving productivity 
The final margin is improving labour productivity. Indeed, over the longer term, productivity 
growth  has  the  greatest  potential  to  boost  prosperity.  Regrettably,  it  is  also  where  our 
performance has been the worst.9  
                                                
7   T. Carter, M. Pandey and J. Townsend, “The Manitoba Provincial Nominee Program: Attraction, Integration 
and Retention of Immigrants,” IRPP Study No. 10, October 2010. 
8   D.  Amirault,  D.  de  Munnik  and  S.  Miller,  “What  Drags  and  Drives  Mobility:  Explaining  Canada’s  Aggregate 
Migration Patterns,” Working Paper No. 2012–28, Bank of Canada, 2012. 
9   T.  Macklem,  “Canada’s  Competitive  Imperative:  Investing  in  Productivity  Gains”  (speech  to  Productivity 
Alberta, Edmonton, 1 February, 2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Productivity  growth  in  Canada  has  ranged  from  disappointing  to  dismal.  Since  2001, 
Canada’s  productivity  growth  has  slowed  to  historically  low  rates  and  has  languished  well 
below U.S. rates. From 2000 to 2011, productivity growth in the Canadian business sector 
averaged 1 per cent annually, compared with 2.4 per cent in the United States. As a result, 
Canadian firms today are only 78 per cent as productive as U.S. firms. 
While  some  aspects  of  Canada’s  productivity  performance  remain  a  puzzle,  there  are  a 
number of clear facts that point to obvious remedies. 
Workers  that  have  more  and  better  machinery  and  equipment  (M&E)  to  work  with, 
particularly  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT),  are  more  productive.  And 
Canadian businesses on average invest less in M&E and ICT than their U.S. counterparts. 
Between 1987 and 2010, Canadian investment per worker in M&E and ICT averaged 76 per 
cent  and  58  per  cent,  respectively,  of  that  invested  in  the  United  States.  By  2010,  on 
average, Canadian workers had only about half as much M&E and ICT capital stock to work 
with as their U.S. counterparts. 
With  a  persistently  strong  Canadian  dollar,  a  widening  competitiveness  gap,  low  interest 
rates, strong balance sheets and increasing labour scarcity on the horizon, the imperative for 
Canadian businesses to invest in M&E has rarely been more compelling. Recent investment 
performance has been solid but not spectacular. We must do better than solid. 
In addition to more M&E, workers need better skills. Canada has a well-educated workforce 
that  ranks  favourably  when  it  comes  to  primary  and  post-secondary  education.  However, 
compared with U.S. firms, Canadian firms lag in the employment of workers with advanced 
degrees,  in  the  educational  attainment  of  their  managers,  and  in  on-the-job  training. 
Canadian firms hire fewer employees with PhDs and other postgraduate degrees, especially 
in the sciences. Only one-third of managers in Canada have a university degree, compared 
with almost half of American managers.10 And only about a third of adult workers receive job-
related  education  and  professional  development  training  in  Canada,  compared  with  half  in 
the  United  States.11  Canadian  firms  need  to  put  more  emphasis  on  skills  when  hiring  and 
invest more in training to enhance the skills of existing workers. 
There  are  also  other  aspects  to  strengthening  productivity  growth,  including  research  and 
development, innovation and developing new markets but I must conclude. 
Conclusion 
The  health  of  the  Canadian  labour  market  is  vastly  improved  since  the  1970s  and  1980s. 
Low, stable and predictable inflation has been an important ingredient in this transformation. 
And Canadians can continue to rely on the Bank of Canada to deliver on its inflation target 
and, in doing so, support a better functioning and more stable labour market. 
Canada’s labour market has recovered from the recession better than most, and continues to 
expand at a modest pace. Most of the jobs created since the end of the recession have been 
full-time  and  in  sectors  that  pay  above-average  wages.  Much  of  the  slack  in  the  labour 
market  has  been  taken  up,  and  firms  are  increasingly  facing  difficulty  in  finding  suitable 
labour. Nevertheless, some slack remains and can be expected to persist in the near term. 
 
                                                
10   Institute  for  Competitiveness &  Prosperity,  “Management Matters”, Working  Paper  No. 12,  2009;  N.  Bloom, 
“Management and Productivity in Canada: What Does the Evidence Say?,” Industry Canada, Working Paper 
No. 2011–05, 2011. 
11   M. Goldenberg, “Employer Investment in Workplace Learning in Canada,” Discussion Paper for the Canadian 
Council on Learning, prepared by Canadian Policy Research Networks, 14 September 2006. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But looking ahead, as the slack is taken up and demographic trends slow the growth of the 
labour force, continued labour-market health will depend increasingly on reducing barriers to 
work,  connecting  workers  with  jobs,  and  facilitating  a  more  mobile  and  more  productive 
workforce. 
Thank you. 
 
Charts and tables 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
