Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Tackling financial exclusion in Pakistan through 
branchless banking 
Chief  guest  address  by  Mr  Kazi  Abdul  Muktadir,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  at  the  Branchless  Banking  Commercial  Launch  of  Waseela  Microfinance  Bank 
Limited, Karachi, 12 November 2012. 
 the 
like 
that 
I  would 
to  congratulate 
launch  of  Waseela  will  not  only  help 
Mr. Ghazanfar Azzam, 
President & CEO of Waseela MFB,  
Mr. Rashid Khan,  
CEO Mobilink 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen! Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning, 
I  am  extremely  delighted  to  join  you  on  the  occasion  of  this  commercial  launch  of 
branchless  banking  by  Waseela  MFB. 
the  sponsors, 
management,  and  staff  of  Waseela  Microfinance  Bank  Limited  on  this  special  occasion 
and  believe 
in  catalyzing  market 
development  especially  in  areas  of  agent  development  but  also  the  use  of  technology 
would  rapidly  scale  up  mobile  financial  services  to  the vastly underserved segments of 
society all over Pakistan. 
I  have  been  told  that  the  number  of  mobile  phone  subscribers  in  Pakistan  is  around 
120 million  and  Mobilink  has  the  largest  share  of  over  36  million  subscribers.  The  current 
tele-density is above 72% which is much higher than the level of financial access that hovers 
around 12 percent. This factor alone highlights  the  immense  potential  for  mobile  banking 
in  the  country.  The  role  played  by  the  Government,  PTA  and  the  Mobile  Operators  for 
achieving  this  high  level  of  penetration,  especially  under  our  existing  socio-economic 
conditions,  is highly commendable.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
There  is  an  emerging  consensus  amongst  policy  makers  around  the  world  that  mobile 
financial services  is  a  safe  and  sound  way  to  rapidly  improve  access to  financial  services 
for  poor  people.  G-20  leaders  in  their  last  summit  held  at  Toronto  in  2011  adopted 
9 Principles  for  Innovative  Financial  Inclusion  that  include  promoting  technological  and 
institutional  innovation  as  a  means  to  expand  formal  financial  system  access  and  its 
usage.  These  principles  aim  to  help  the  creation  of  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory 
environment  for  innovative  financial  inclusion.  Such  enabling  environment  will  assist  and 
determine the speed at which the financial services will be made available to the more than 
two billion people who are currently excluded, where access to financial services can make 
the difference between surviving and thriving. 
Innovative  modes  of  financial  services  delivery  can  have  a  transformative effect  on  poor 
households.  We  know  that  access  to  even  small  amounts  of  credit  can  dramatically 
improve 
in  urban  and  rural  areas. 
Awareness  is  growing  that  access  to  a  wider  set  of  financial  services  provides  poor 
people  with  capacity  to  increase  or  stabilize  their  income,  build  assets  and  have  much 
greater  resilience  to  economic  shocks.  Appropriate  and  affordable  savings  products, 
payment  and  money 
transfer  services  (both  domestic  and  international)  as  well  as 
insurance are all important. Gender discrimination  has excluded  women  who  have  toiled 
to  provide  and  support  financial  needs  through  enterprising  means  but  were  stymied 
due  to  negligible access from the formal financial sector. 
the  excluded  population  both 
the  welfare  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
At  the  same  time,  one billion  people  with  mobile  phones  in  the  world  do  not  even  have  a 
basic bank account. As the costs of information and communications technology shrink, the 
time is ripe to extend this technology to address financial exclusion. Technological innovation 
impacts the cost and access equation – making it economically  viable for financial service 
providers, to reach poor people, with a wider range of products and services. 
Innovation  also  extends  to  new  institutional  approaches.  Increasing  numbers  of  countries 
with large unbanked populations are pioneering policy and regulatory innovations that opens 
space for “banking beyond branches” with new approach to the delivery of formal financial 
services.  This  is  allowing  previously  excluded  customers  the  much  needed  access  to  an 
increasing range of basic financial services. 
Pakistan has one of the lowest financial penetration levels in the world with 56% of the adult 
population  totally  excluded,  and  another  32%  informally  served.  We  are  a  country  with  a 
population  of  180  million  living  in  geographically  diverse  areas.  Mobile  phone  subscription 
has  seen  explosive  growth  in  Pakistan.  In  contrast,  banking  accounts  are  owned  by 
approximately  30  million  customers  largely  belonging  to  high  income  segments  of  the 
society. With a network of a little over 10,500 bank branches, the coverage of branches is 
one of the lowest in the region. 
Developing  brick  and  mortar  branches  is  a  costly  proposition.  To  encourage  Financial 
Institutions  to  develop  alternative  delivery  channels,  SBP  in  2008,  introduced  Branchless 
Banking (BB) Regulations. The Regulations are applicable to all Commercial Banks, Islamic 
Banks and Microfinance Banks in Pakistan. 
These  Regulations  have  actually  catalyzed  in  the  deployment  of  a  number  of  branchless 
banking  initiatives  that  have  a  dual  advantages:  First,  there  is  an  enormous  scope  for 
expanding  outreach,  especially  in  the  hard-to-reach  rural  areas.  The  emerging  models 
relying on “banking agents” have greatly extended the distribution of financial services to the 
marginalized  and  deprived  segments.  Second,  alternative  delivery  channels  promise 
significant  cost  reduction  to  institutions.  Due  to  these  benefits,  the  expansion  in  the  retail 
network of microfinance has arisen overwhelmingly from agents and mobile phone channels. 
Recent  international  researches1  and  studies  prove  that  increase  in  mobile  penetration  in 
developing  countries  is  correlated  with  economic  growth. When  this  technology  is  used  to 
expand  financial  services,  the  benefits  that  accrue  are:  increase  in  savings  due  to 
incremental small savers, access to information improves, costs and time spent on traveling 
reduces,  new  employment  opportunities  emerge,  cost  and  savings  to  financial  institutions, 
and creation of a platform on which other businesses can also grow. 
Ladies & gentlemen, branchless banking is moving at a phenomenal pace in Pakistan, and it 
should  be  our  endeavor 
these  developments. 
Encouragingly, market environment for branchless banking is widely considered globally as 
one  of  the  best.  SBP  has  been  promoting  innovations  in  products  and  delivery  channels 
through  policy  and  regulatory  measures  and market  interventions.  SBP has  put  in  place  a 
“Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund”  under  the  DFID-funded  Financial  Inclusion  Program 
(FIP). I am glad to highlight that market has been responding actively to this stimulus. As a 
result,  users’  adoption  has  started  rising  at  an  increasing  rate,  and  is  likely  to  change  the 
landscape of retail banking in Pakistan in near future. This dynamic transition is endorsed by 
recent  branchless  banking  data,  with  a  transactional  volume  of  nearly  32  million  valuing 
to  achieve  maximum  benefits 
from 
                                                
1   (a) Waverman,  L.,  M.  Meschi,  and  M.  Fuss..  “The  Impact of  Telecoms  on  Economic  Growth  in  Developing 
(March).  http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/ 
Countries.”  Vodafone  Policy  Paper  Series  2 
152872/Vodafone%20 Survey.pdf. 
(b) Qiang C., and C. Rossotto. 2009. “Economic Impacts of Broadband.” In Information and Communication 
for  Development  Report:  Extending  Reach  and  Increasing  Impact,  ch.  3.  Washington,  DC:  World  Bank. 
www.worldbank.org/ic4d. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Rs. 140 billion during the single quarter of July–September, 2012 by only two players. These 
players have registered more than 1.8 Mobile-Wallet accounts largely of those people who 
have  previously  been  un-banked  and  under-banked.  Mobile  banking  is  also  facilitating 
repayment  of  microfinance  loans  and  we  are  seeing  increasing  number  of  partnerships 
between Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) and branchless banking providers 
Achievements in the Branchless Banking Services have already put Pakistan at the global 
centre stage of financial inclusion and innovation. The World Bank’s Consultative Group to 
Assist  the  Poor  (CGAP),  in  one  of  its  studies  has  also  recognized  Pakistan  as  one  of  the 
fastest growing branchless banking markets in the world, and a laboratory of innovation. We 
hope that with the entry of new players and scaling-up of the existing institutions the present 
growth momentum will build up strongly and progressively. 
Before I close, I would like to emphasize on our broader goal i.e. to provide inclusive financial 
services  to  poor  and  low  income  groups.  I firmly  believe  that microfinance  and  branchless 
banking  are  complementary  to  each  other,  and  together  they  will  bring  the  advantages  of 
inclusiveness,  convenience,  ubiquity,  and  efficiency.  Pakistan  offers  best  regulatory 
framework and industry infrastructure for microfinance, and I hope that our MFBs  will take 
advantage of such a favorable market environment by investing in innovative technologies 
and products to grow their businesses and expand access to financial services in Pakistan. 
Once again, I would like to congratulate Waseela Microfinance Bank Limited and Mobilink. I 
wish you every success, assure you of our support, and look forward to positive outcomes of 
this commercial launch and I hope today’s commercial launch of Waseela and its branchless 
banking will go a long way in tackling financial exclusion in Pakistan. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
