Daniel Mminele: Macro policy priorities during an extended period of 
global sub-par growth 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
JP Morgan Investor Seminar, Tokyo, 14 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
1 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen and thank you to JP  Morgan for inviting me to share 
some thoughts with you on what is indeed a very pertinent subject. The topic chosen for my 
contribution to this seminar, “Macro policy priorities in an extended period of global sub-par 
growth”, has indeed become a very real challenge for most policymakers around the world. 
Not surprisingly, your debates and discussions over the past two and a  half days highlight 
just how much of a challenge it is to generate the kind of growth needed in the pursuit of 
development  in  an  environment  where  previous  engines  of  global  expansion  have  almost 
“stalled”. This is particularly so in emerging economies.  
The fact is, the global financial crisis is now running into its fifth year and yet normalization 
still looks a long way away. Projections of economic growth made in the years prior to 2008, 
when increasingly stable price and policy expectations fostered hopes of stronger expansion 
on a sustainable basis, now look exceedingly optimistic. Between 2008 and 2012, if we take 
into account the latest projections of the International Monetary Fund, the world economy will 
have  grown  by  an  average  of  2.9  per  cent  a  year,  contrasting  with  4.8  per  cent  in  the 
preceding  five  years.  Few  countries  have  been  immune  to  this  pattern.  In  South  Africa, 
based on the latest Reserve Bank projections, the 2008–12 average growth is expected to 
be around 2.1 per cent, down from 4.8 per cent in the previous five years.  
The typical policy responses to slowing growth 
2 
Economic cycles have been present for as long as economic historians can remember, and 
even  the  policymaker  equipped  with  the  best  knowledge  and  intentions  would  struggle  to 
neutralize their impact. Nevertheless, macro policy should aim at smoothing out the potential 
variations  of  economic  activity  over  the  cycle,  and  in  so  doing,  limiting  the  risk  of  these 
variations causing unnecessary, permanent damage to different sectors of the economy. The 
shallower  the  recession,  the  lower  the  risk  is  that  normally-productive  employees  will  be 
forced into a long period of unemployment that can lead to a permanent loss of skills. The 
milder  the  downturn,  the  lower  the  risk  is  that fundamentally  sound,  yet temporarily  illiquid 
companies may be forced into bankruptcy.  
Both  sides  of  macroeconomic  policy  can  play  their  part.  On  the  fiscal  front,  maintaining  a 
relatively stable growth rate of public expenditure, even as revenues slow, can dampen the 
impact  of  private  demand  swings  on  overall  activity.  On the monetary  front,  a reduction  in 
interest  rates  may  ensure  the  continued  viability  of  otherwise  threatened  capital  spending 
projects;  lessen  the  burden  of  servicing  private  debts;  limit  corporate  and  individual 
bankruptcies  and  discourage  the  deferment  of  consumption.  Such  policies  were  indeed 
implemented  in  South  Africa  as  the  economy  went  into  recession  in  the  latter  months  of 
2008. The consolidated government budget balance was allowed to shift from a surplus of 
1.0 per cent of GDP in the 2007–08 fiscal year to a deficit of 6.5 per cent of GDP two years 
later, not through aggressive discretionary spending but by letting the “automatic stabilizers” 
work  as  described  above.  At  the  same  time,  the  repurchase  rate  of  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank  was  lowered  from  a  cyclical  peak  of  12.0  per  cent  in  October  2008  to 
7.0 per cent by the end of 2009, and to 5.5 per cent by the end of 2010.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Dealing with an unusual economic cycle 
3 
As 2008 drew to a close, it became evident that globally, the response of policymakers to the 
sharp  deterioration  in  economic  and  financial  conditions  was  bearing  fruit.  By  2010,  world 
economic  growth  had  rebounded  to  5.3  per  cent,  and  the  South  African  economy,  while 
lagging the pace of the global upswing, nonetheless reversed a 1.5 per cent contraction in 
2009  with  an  expansion  of  2.9  per  cent  in  the  following  year.  Yet  as  I  highlighted  in  my 
introductory comments, the pace of activity has fallen short of what we had been accustomed 
to in previous years. In many countries, including South Africa, the output gaps that opened 
up in the wake of the 2008–09 recession have not closed, implying that unemployment rates 
remain  stubbornly  elevated  by  recent  standards,  and  that  an  unusually  large  number  of 
companies operate far below capacity.  
The  nature  of  the  imbalances  that  built  up  during  the  pre-recession  boom  largely  explains 
this subdued, “L-shaped” recovery. Heavily-leveraged financial and household sectors had to 
undergo  a  phase  of  balance-sheet  “repair”  that  in  many  instances  is  still  taking  place. 
Households took advantage of interest rate relief to repay some of their liabilities, rather than 
fund  renewed  consumption  of  goods  and  services.  Faced  with  a  higher  share  of 
non-performing  loans,  banks tightened  lending criteria,  dampening  the stimulative  effect of 
lower central bank policy rates. As asset prices adjusted to more realistic levels, the implied 
negative wealth effect reigned in consumption and banks’ appetite for lending. The gradual 
reduction of excess housing inventories delayed any recovery in residential construction. We 
did  observe  these  developments  in  South  Africa,  even  though  the  pre-2008  degree  of 
private-sector leveraging had fallen short of what was seen in many developed economies, 
and as a result, the adjustment required was somewhat less brutal.  
For  a  while,  the  recovery  in  prices  of  South  Africa’s  commodity  exports,  a  direct 
consequence  of  Asia’s  strong recovery  in  2010  and  early  2011,  partly  offset the  impact of 
these  internal  adjustments.  Higher  commodity  prices  boosted  the  profits  of  resource 
exporters;  they  allowed  for  some  recovery  in  overall  employee  compensation;  and  as  the 
higher  terms  of  trade  encouraged  a  trade-weighted  appreciation  of  the  rand,  they  further 
boosted real disposable income via a decline in imported inflation. It was no coincidence that 
growth  in  South  Africa  in  2010  and  2011  was  strongest  in  the  consumer  sector,  and  in 
particular goods consumption.  
But even this “safety valve” seems to be gradually closing. South Africa’s terms of trade have 
now declined for three consecutive quarters up to the second quarter of this year. The most 
obvious impact of this deterioration has been on the current account deficit, which increased 
from  3.3  per  cent  of  GDP  on  average  in  2011  to  as  much  as  6.4  per  cent  in  the  second 
quarter of 2012, the largest shortfall since the third quarter of 2008. But economic growth has 
also borne the brunt from poorer terms of trade, as well as slowing global demand, domestic 
work  stoppages,  and  business  concerns  over  the  long-term  supply  of  energy  and  skilled 
labour. At the time of the September MPC meeting, the Reserve Bank projected GDP growth 
to  decelerate  to  2.6  per  cent  this  year  from  3.1  per  cent  in  2011,  and  to  re-accelerate  to 
3.4 per cent in 2013, but warned about possible downside risks to this forecast.  
The room for fiscal support is closing 
4 
How can policymakers respond to extended low growth? In most cases, it would be futile, 
and  indeed  erroneous  to  try  and  prevent  some  of  the  adjustments  mentioned  above. 
Healthier bank and household balance-sheets, more reasonably valued assets, and the end 
of demand-supply mismatches in the real estate sector are conditions necessary for a more 
solid,  sustainable  recovery.  Yet  policymakers  cannot  stand  idle  and  wait  for  these 
imbalances  to  resolve  themselves.  The  experience  of  the  1930s  is  there  to  teach  us  that 
failure  to  act,  or  an  anchoring  of  policy  to  standards  that  are  no  longer  adapted  to  the 
economic realities of the day, can easily turn low growth into a recession, and a recession 
into  a  depression.  If  structural  adjustments  in  an  economy  result  in  an  elevated  degree  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
slack for an unusually long period, then the macro policy mix should equally be characterized 
by an unusually long phase of accommodation. This way, the risk of permanent damage to 
the economic tissue will, if not removed, at least be mitigated.  
Yet should it be the fiscal or the monetary policymaker at the forefront of this response? Over 
an extended period, both policies are not perfect substitutes. Running large budget deficits 
for  several  years  (say,  for  as  long  as  the  output  gap  remains  sizeable),  will  quickly  raise 
public debt as a share of GDP. In turn, this will result in a greater share of state resources 
being absorbed by the service of that debt; a higher risk premium embedded into domestic 
interest rates as bondholders worry about fiscal sustainability; and potential capital outflows 
as a consequence thereof. At worst, deteriorating public finances could more than offset the 
impact  of  monetary  stimulus.  It  should  be  remembered  that  Spain,  currently  mired  in 
recession and facing an elevated credit risk premium on its sovereign debt, had the second 
largest budget surplus in the euro zone (2.2 per cent of GDP) in 2007, and a debt ratio of 
36 per cent of GDP. In a word, prior to the crisis, Spain did not have a fiscal problem.  
Prudent fiscal management for almost two decades means that South Africa does not face at 
present a meaningful fiscal constraint. At a projected 36 per cent of GDP in the present fiscal 
year, public debt is way below the levels seen in most developed economies, and relatively 
in  line  with  the  emerging  world’s  average.  Nonetheless,  the  situation  leaves  no  room  for 
complacency, and indeed the scope for responding to the current lack of strong economic 
momentum  with  additional  fiscal  stimulus  appears  very  limited.  The  South  African 
government  has  on  many  occasions  reaffirmed  its  commitment  to  gradually  reduce  the 
budget  deficit,  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  net  debt  to  GDP  ratio  stabilizes  no  higher  than 
40 per cent. It is in part for that reason that the National Budget presented in February 2012 
targets  a  reduction  in  the  deficit  from  4.6  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2012/13  to  3.0  per  cent  in 
2014/15.  
Does the responsibility now shift to the Reserve Bank? 
5 
Does this relative fiscal constraint mean that the responsibility of “sheltering” the economy 
from unnecessary strains largely rests on the shoulders of the Reserve Bank? Once again, 
such an argument must be nuanced. Monetary policy cannot, on its own, generate stronger 
and  sustainable  growth  in  the  long  run.  Ultimately,  all  it  can  do  is  provide  a  framework  of 
price  and  financial  stability  that  facilitates  the  private  sector’s  decision  to  invest,  save  and 
plan  for  the  future.  However,  persistent  economic  slack  normally  dampens  inflationary 
pressures, and as a result, the central bank should be able to keep the level of interest rates 
below their medium-term norm without endangering its long-term goals of price stability.  
This  ability,  however,  is  influenced  by  other  factors,  notably  the  stability  of  longer-term 
inflation expectations, the degree of rigidity in the wage and price formation process, and the 
level of imbalances in the economy and financial sector. Stable inflation expectations are an 
indication of the credibility of the central bank and of how confident economic agents are that 
it  will  not  tolerate  price  slippages  in  the  longer  run.  This  stability  therefore  significantly 
reduces  the  risk  of  undesirable  consequences  from  a  reduction  in  interest  rates.  It  is 
encouraging that in South Africa, broad-based measures of inflation expectations – based on 
surveys of businesses, trade unions as well as market analysts – remain anchored at around 
the  upper  end  of  the  target  range,  despite  the  recent  elevated  volatility  of  the  energy  and 
food components of the CPI basket.  
South  Africa  is  often  described  as  a  country  with  relatively  rigid  wage  and  price  settings. 
There is undeniably some truth in that assertion, and the relatively large losses in private-
sector  employment  in  the  recession  of  2008  and  2009  –  both  when  compared  to  the 
contraction  in  GDP  and  to  international  trends  –  seems  to  illustrate  the  sticky,  backward-
looking  pattern  of  wage  settlements  in  South  Africa.  Yet,  core  measures  of  inflation  
–  including  in  private  services,  where  labour  is  a  major  input  cost  –  remain  benign  by 
historical standards. The major impact of elevated wage demands so far seems to have been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
from 
taking 
instead 
its  cue 
the  EURUSD  movements, 
more on employment levels, as firms sought productivity gains to avoid having to raise prices 
more quickly.  
Admittedly,  the  tragedy  at  the  Marikana  platinum  mine  in  August  this  year,  followed  by  a 
spate of labour protests, some of them illegal and often violent, in other mining or economic 
sectors, has refocused the attention of financial markets and rating agencies alike on South 
Africa’s  labour  market  challenges. While  there  are  at  this  stage  no  indications  of  a  broad-
based, sharp acceleration in wages as a result of recent protests, the Reserve Bank will have 
to  carefully  monitor  possible  spillovers  of  any  such  development  into  prices  and  price 
expectations.  We  have  already  seen  an  impact  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  which 
almost  touched  R9.00  against  the  USD  about  a  week  ago.  The  rand  appears  to  have 
decoupled 
from  domestic 
developments,  including  the  credit  rating  downgrades,  widespread  strike  action  and  the 
current account deficit. Growth forecasts will most likely need to be revisited.  
As  for  the  recent  actions  by  rating  agencies,  these  were  obviously  unfortunate  and 
disappointing developments. The South African authorities are concerned about assessment 
of  the  South  African  credit  at  this  point  in  time  by  the  two  rating  agencies  that  recently 
adjusted their ratings. It has to be acknowledged, however, that some of the challenges they 
are pointing out, that as South Africans we need to deal with, are not new, are known to us 
and  are  in  fact  valid.  As  already  indicated,  we  will  have  to,  collectively  inside  and  outside 
government,  and  in  a  coordinated  and  consistent  manner,  engage  rating  agencies,  to 
communicate  the  strength  of  the  fundamental  underpinning  of  the  South  African  economy 
and  its  institutions,  and  more  clearly  convey  our  commitment  to  addressing  areas  of 
weakness and potential vulnerability highlighted, and to put South Africa on a different rating 
trajectory going forward.  
Macro-prudential  variables  are  also  key  to  a  central  bank’s  margin  of  manoeuvre  in 
responding to adverse economic shocks, and the Reserve Bank is paying particular attention 
to these indicators. Indeed, back in April this year, the IMF pointed out in its World Economic 
Outlook that emerging and developing economies needed to “avoid over-stimulating activity 
to make up for less demand from advanced economies”, pointing to the risk of overheating 
pressures from activity, credit growth or high commodity prices. But in contrast to some of its 
peers,  South  Africa  benefits  from  a  relative  absence  of  such  potentially  inflationary 
pressures.  Private  credit  growth  has  remained  in  single-digit  territory  for  more  than  three 
years now; home prices are failing to display any clear uptrend in real terms; and the banking 
sector’s  prudent  approach  to  lending  has  enabled  a  decline  in  impaired  advances  to 
4.4 per cent  of  total  loans  and  advances, from  5.5  per cent  a  year  earlier.  A  caveat  is the 
current account of the balance of payments, which has emerged as a risk to the exchange 
rate outlook.  
It is against this background, and noting the increase in downside risks to the economy from 
global developments, that the Monetary Policy Committee of the Reserve Bank decided on 
19 July 2012 to reduce its repurchase rate by 50 basis points, to 5.0 per cent. The MPC still 
deemed this stance to be appropriate as of its meeting of 20 September 2012, supported by 
projections of benign inflation over the forecasting period. As of that meeting, the Reserve 
Bank projected a relatively flat trajectory for consumer price inflation, averaging 5.3 per cent 
on the final quarter of 2012, 5.2 per cent in 2013 and 5.0 per cent in 2014. The MPC made it 
clear, however, that future global and domestic developments, and their potential impact on 
the  risks  to  the  outlook,  would  guide  decisions  going  forward.  The  potential  impact  on 
consumer  prices  of  future  wage  trends,  as  well  as  of  the  recent  rand  depreciation  –  if 
sustained over the coming months – will of course be closely monitored in that respect.  
Ultimately though, additional central bank policy action in response to a weakening growth 
outlook would only be able to limit deviations in economic output from its potential. To the 
extent that a prolonged moderation in economic growth is structural and not cyclical, these 
challenges are most effectively addressed by measures which are geared towards reducing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
an economy’s rigidities, such as facilitating a fair price formation process and clarifying the 
long-term outlook for potential investors. The best way a central bank can assist in attaining 
these goals, is through the entrenchment of price stability over the longer run.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
