Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
of 
IMF  mission,  Albanian  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana, 
2 October 2012. 
the 
 Dear journalists, 
During the last two weeks, intensive discussions have taken place between the IMF mission 
and  Albanian  authorities.  As  a  key  player  in  drafting  and  implementing  macroeconomic 
policies,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  active  in  these  discussions,  sharing  its  vision  on 
current and expected developments in the Albanian economy and concerns surrounding it, 
as well as optimum measures to address them.  
The  Albanian  economy  is  increasingly  facing  the  economic  growth  challenge.  While  the 
Albanian  economy  enjoys  consolidated  macroeconomic  stability  and  sound  financial 
foundations, aggregate demand has been weak during the first nine months of 2012. Both 
domestic  demand  and  foreign  one  suffer  from  high  uncertainty,  relatively  tight  lending 
standards, and limited space for discretionary and stimulating policies. In the global context, 
the  Albanian  economy  encountered  a  difficult  setting,  characterised  by  economic  growth 
problems, high risk premiums in financial markets and decreased appetite of these markets 
to  invest  in  emerging  economies.  In  the  domestic  context,  the  economy  continues  to  face 
relatively  low  consumption  and  private  investments,  as  well  as  an  absent  stimulus  by  the 
public sector as a result of the increasing orientation of the fiscal policy towards maintaining 
long-term stability of the public debt. 
In the presence of temporary shocks from the supply side, these factors were translated into 
negative  economic  growth  for  the  first  quarter.  According  to  our  estimations,  the  following 
months  have  recorded  improved  aggregate  demand  and  economic  activity,  yielding 
economic growth for 2012. This growth, however, remains relatively low and inadequate to 
ensure full production capacity utilisation. It has led to low inflationary pressures during 2012 
and is reflected in improved external position of the Albanian economy. 
The  banking  and  financial  system  remains  sound.  Banks  that  operate  in  Albania  are 
characterised  by  satisfactory  liquidity  and  capital  levels,  and fit for financial  intermediation. 
Transaction and risk indicators are also improving, as perceived in the financial markets and, 
following fluctuation in the first half of the year, interest rates have trended down. 
Given the above-mentioned circumstances, the monetary policy of the Bank of Albania has 
been  increasingly  stimulating.  During  the  past  year,  we  have  sequentially  eased  the 
monetary conditions; after five consecutive key interest rate cuts, the cost of money in the 
economy  reached  its  record  low.  Moreover,  through  our  monetary  operations,  we  have 
supplied the banking system with the liquidity it needs for smooth operation. Finally, through 
the  review  of  regulatory  norms  and  application  of  a  prudent  supervision  of  the  banking 
system,  we  have  managed  to  establish  a  stable  financial  environment  for  the  country’s 
long-term development. Boosted confidence of the public in the banking system was followed 
by rapid increase of bank deposits, thus reducing reliance on foreign short-term financing. All 
these  initiatives,  coordinated  with  other  policies,  have  proven  effective.  Inflation  remains 
subdued and in check, inflationary expectations are anchored, macroeconomic environment 
is steady and financial stability is consolidated. 
Looking ahead, the Bank of Albania holds that the Albanian economy will continue to face 
the  above-cited  concerns  over  2013  and  beyond.  Although  improving, economic  activity  is 
expected  to  remain  below  its  potential,  followed  by  low  inflationary  pressures,  creating 
premises  for  maintaining  stimulating  monetary  conditions  in  the  future.  Likewise,  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
projections suggest that external balances of the economy are expected to improve. On the 
other hand, slow economic growth rates may generate pressures on debt stability indicators, 
unless they are identified and taken into consideration in fiscal policy decisions. 
In Bank of Albania’s view, growth rate recovery will require combining the cyclical stimulus of 
the economy with structural measures that expand the growth potential. 
Regarding  the  cyclical  aspect,  the  Bank  of  Albania  holds  that  macroeconomic  policies  are 
rightfully  stimulating.  In  the  absence  of  space,  fiscal  policy  should  continue  to  be  oriented 
towards  long-term  stability  of  debt  indicators.  The  monetary  stimulus  is  expected  to  be 
transmitted more completely in the upcoming period. We continue to underline our message 
that  businesses  and  consumers  should  have  a  more  realistic  approach  on  sound 
perspectives  for  the  country’s  development  as  well  as  revise  up  their  consumption  and 
investment plans. 
In the structural aspect, we welcome reforms and initiatives that contribute to the country’s 
growth  potential, 
framework, 
enhancing  productivity  and  competitiveness  of  the  Albanian  economy,  attracting  foreign 
investments and maintaining and improving macroeconomic stability at home. 
The Bank of Albania is fully committed and engaged in the latter. Our key focus will continue 
to be: maintaining price stability and establishing pre-requisites to step-up financial stability. 
Therefore, we are convinced that we are providing a valuable service to long-term economic 
growth and welfare. 
through  developing 
infrastructure, 
improving 
legal 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
