Njuguna Ndung’u: Initiatives, developments and achievements of the 
Kenya Government Securities Market 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the FTSE-NSE Kenya Government Bonds Index, Nairobi, 3 October 2012. 
 The Chairman of the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE);  
Chief Executive, NSE, Mr Peter Mwangi;  
Officials of the FTSE Group;  
Capital and Financial Market Executives;  
Members of the Media;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
At the outset let me thank the Nairobi Securities Exchange Chief Executive for inviting me to 
participate  in  this  auspicious  moment  of  the  launch  of  the  FTSE-NSE  Kenya  Government 
Bonds Index. This achievement is indeed critical for the development of a robust domestic 
financial market in Kenya. Today’s event comes at a time when we as market players take 
pride in the success of our efforts in spearheading market development. This collaboration 
among market players has been instrumental in developing one of the fastest growing Bond 
Markets in Africa as the Kenyan Bond Market is ranked among the top in Africa. Ladies and 
Gentlemen:  let  me  take  a  few  minutes  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  initiatives  and 
developments  that  have  underlined  the  achievements  of  Kenya  Government  Securities 
Market. Over the last one decade, the Central Bank of Kenya in liaison with stakeholders in 
the financial sector has contributed significantly to the following successes:  
1. 
Longer maturity profile of domestic debt instruments: average maturity profile of 
government  securities  rose  from  8  months  or  ratio  of  76:24  in  Treasury  bills  to 
Bonds  in  June  2001  to  5  years  5  months  or  ratio  20:80  currently.  With  a 
well-functioning secondary bond market in place, the Government no longer faces 
rollover risks associated with short term debt instruments.  
Benchmark bonds implementation: successful implementation of Treasury Bonds 
benchmarks and reopening to increase their liquidity since April 2009 was a critical 
step  towards  addressing  the  Bond  market  fragmentation  problem  and  in  the 
development  of  a  reliable  yield  curve  in  our  market.  About  16  benchmark  bonds 
have so far been reopened bringing into the market more than Ksh.138 billion and 
providing critical financing for the national recurrent and development budget as per 
Government’s fiscal policy.  
Project-specific (infrastructure) bonds – The Government of Kenya took a bold 
step in February 2009 to issue the first project/sector specific bond with an aim to 
fund  key  infrastructure  projects  and  set  pace  for  public,  private  as  well  as 
supranational  agencies  to  tap  the  market  for  long  term  funding  through  bond 
issuance.  Five  infrastructure  bonds  worth  Ksh.130.85bn  have  so  far  been  issued 
thereby 
for  purposes  of 
diversification.  
Creating  more  investment  opportunities  to  spur  national  savings  –  The 
issuance  of  a  30-year  Savings  Development  Bond  in  2011  and  the  reduction  of 
minimum  entry  into  Treasury  bills  market  from  Ksh.1,000,000  to  Ksh.100,000  in 
January 2009 were key milestones towards promoting a savings culture among the 
populace and in widening the investor base for the Government Securities market.  
the  range  of  products 
the  market 
increasing 
in 
2.  
3.  
4.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
5.  
Putting in place the Automated Trading System (ATS) – The introduction of the 
ATS at the NSE in November 2009 was a great step towards achieving bond trading 
efficiency, effective pricing, increased market confidence and transparency as well 
as enhanced reliability and firming of the yield curve.  
Ladies and gentlemen, a well-developed and functioning financial market is regarded as the 
lubricant for the economy. In order to further enhance the proper functioning of the financial 
market,  the  Central  Bank  together  with  other  market  stakeholders  has  been  working  on  a 
number  of  initiatives  to  further  enhance  the  bond  market  so  as  to  support  the  country’s 
development agenda under Vision 2030. These reforms include:  
Development of the Over The Counter trading platform,  
• 
• 
Introduction of online bidding for government securities,  
• 
Implementation of government securities market makers.  
The step taken by the Nairobi Securities Exchange to introduce the FTSE NSE Government 
Bond Index is a welcome initiative for this market as the index will play a key role in providing 
a  benchmark  tool  for  measuring  market  performance.  It  will  also  facilitate  diversification 
through emergence of new financial products and market participants thereby encouraging 
foreign investors. Finally, it will have the benefit of opening up the market to the rest of the 
world and increasing Kenya’s financial sector competitiveness in the region and across the 
world. It surely does set the pace for the regional market. I wish therefore to congratulate the 
Nairobi Securities Exchange for the foresight of developing the bond index.  
With these remarks, ladies and gentlemen, I now declare the FTSE NSE Kenya Shilling 
Government Bond Index formerly launched.  
Thank you all for your listening 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
