Jwala Rambarran: Strengthening the national financial safety net – a new 
agenda for the Deposit Insurance Corporation of Trinidad and Tobago 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago and 
Chairman  of 
the 
25th anniversary celebrations of the Deposit Insurance Corporation of Trinidad and Tobago, 
Port of Spain, 5 November 2012. 
Insurance  Corporation  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at 
the  Deposit 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, On behalf of its Board of Management and Staff, I extend a sincere 
welcome  to  the  25th  Anniversary  celebrations  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (DIC). 
Anniversaries have a special significance for society. Children love to celebrate their birthday 
each year, and society often honours great people with a holiday on their birthday, even long 
after they have departed into the history books. Wedding anniversaries are also significant 
shared milestones. Ladies and Gentlemen, the DIC’s “silver” anniversary celebration comes 
at  a  time  when  the  financial  safety  net  has  once  again  become  a  topic  of  prominent 
discussions,  both  at  global  and  national  levels.  Indeed,  I  find  it  almost  uncanny  how  the 
conditions impacting recent disruptions in Trinidad and Tobago’s financial safety net, almost 
mirror the circumstances surrounding the origins of the DIC some 25 years ago.  
Regulatory failure 
Back then, you may recall that the Trinidad and Tobago economy was painfully adjusting to 
the  end  of  its  second  energy  boom.  The  sharp  contraction  of  economic  activity,  declining 
incomes  and  job  losses  partly  contributed  to  the  failure  of  many  non-bank  financial 
institutions in the mid-1980s. But the more causative factors for the non-bank crisis seemed 
to be absence of regulation, weak managerial competence, poor or non-existence credit risk 
management and concentrated lending.  
As Charles De Silva opined in his October 1990 article on “The Law and the Central Bank: 
Issues and Implications for Banking Supervision in Trinidad and Tobago”, that was presented 
at the 22nd Annual Conference of the then Regional Programme of Monetary Studies, “The 
non-bank  crisis  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  immediately  called  into  question  the  capacity  and 
competence  of  the  regulatory  authority.  But  although  there  were  limitations  in  regulatory 
capacity, the major and more decisive weaknesses were readily seen to be the inadequacies 
of the legislation itself.”  
Unfortunately,  the  collapse  of  several  finance  companies  and  trust  and  mortgage  finance 
companies was not averted. It is difficult, however, to know how long it took the officials at 
the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank to recognise the impending danger of the sheer 
size and rapid growth of non-bank activity in the economy. A heavy public outcry over the 
tardiness and reactive response on the part of the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank 
to protect their deposits, eventually led to the formation of the DIC in September 1986, more 
than 5 years after the Financial Institutions (Non-Banking) Act took effect in mid-1981, and 
more than 7 years after the Non-Banking Act was passed and assented to in 1979 but never 
proclaimed due to a still unexplained failure to publish the necessary regulations.  
The  cost  of  the  late  arrival  of  deposit  insurance  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  was  not  only 
reflected  in  the  heavy  financial  support  to  problem  institutions,  but  in  the  erosion  of  public 
trust  and  confidence  in  the  regulatory  authorities.  The  fledgling  DIC  immediately  became 
responsible for managing the deposit insurance payout of four insolvent institutions. By May 
1993,  the  Corporation  would  oversee  the  closure  of  four  more  failed  institutions. 
Nonetheless, the  DIC managed to  successfully  discharge  its mandate  and  to  contribute  to 
depositor confidence in the safety of their funds held in member financial institutions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Impact of global crisis on national safety nets 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  fast  forward  to  the  present,  our  experience  of  the  current 
global  financial  crisis  points  to  some  limitations  of  existing  national  safety  nets  for 
safeguarding financial stability. Deposit insurance, a key element of the national safety net, 
has proved to be inadequate at alleviating financial distress in many countries.  
You  may  recall  that  when  the  crisis  erupted  at  Northern  Rock  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the 
U.K.  authorities  were  eventually  forced  to  introduce  a  comprehensive  guarantee  for 
depositors and creditors to calm the markets and general public. Authorities in Ireland were 
also compelled to institute blanket guarantee schemes for virtually all bank liabilities, amid 
fears that the entire Irish banking sector was about to fail.  
Moreover,  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  highlighted  the  importance  and  urgency  of 
establishing a legal framework for dealing effectively with resolution of cross-border financial 
entities.  At  its  summit  in  Pittsburgh  in  October  2009,  the  G-20  leaders  called  for  the 
development  of  “resolution  tools  and  frameworks  for  the  effective  resolution  of  financial 
groups to help mitigate the disruption of financial institution failures and reduce moral hazard 
in the future.”  
Last  year,  the  G-20  leaders  endorsed  an  international  standard  –  the  Financial  Stability 
Board’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions – that lays 
down  what  resolution  regimes  need  to  look  like  in  different  jurisdictions  around  the  world 
without  severe  systemic  disruption  and  without  exposing  tax  payers  to  loss.  The  United 
States has put a resolution regime in place largely through the Dodd-Frank Act. Europe is 
supposed to be on the verge of doing so. Asia is expected to follow a similar FSB regime.  
Here at home, the collapse of CL Financial and the failure of CLICO and Clico Investment 
Bank  (CIB)  demonstrated  that  such  an  effective  resolution  framework  was  conspicuously 
missing,  and  is  still  missing.  It  also  compelled  the  government  to  provide  guarantees  to 
CLICO’s liabilities, and the DIC to liquidate CIB’s good but also, in some cases, poor quality 
assets,  in  what  is  now  turning  out  to  be  the  most  complex  liquidation  exercise  in  the 
Caribbean.  
As  you  can  appreciate,  these  rescue  actions  are  costly  and  run  the  risk  of  encouraging 
further  moral  hazard,  that  is,  financial  institutions  might  be  tempted  to  take  on  even  more 
risks in the future because they expect to be bailed out if their actions misfire.  
Best practices for deposit insurance systems 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  their  quest  to  build  safer  financial  systems,  many  countries  are 
rethinking the design of their deposit insurance systems. They are assisted, in this respect, 
by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  which  has  compiled  a  list  of  international  best 
practices for deposit insurance systems around the world.  
On the basis of its research, the IMF recommends the following best practices for a deposit 
insurance system:  
1. 
Be  explicitly  defined  in  law  and  regulation  with  a  mandate  and  measurable 
objectives clearly understood by member institutions and the general public;  
Be mandatory for financial institutions and accountable but free from unreasonable 
political interference;  
Maintain good relations with other agencies in the safety net, especially the Central 
Bank which is the lender of last resort;  
Allow  supervisors  a  set  of  prompt  corrective  actions,  resolve  failed  financial 
institutions  promptly,  and  provide  low  coverage  and  pay  out  or  transfer  resources 
quickly; and  
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
5. 
Have  timely  access  to  accurate  information  on  the  condition  of  its  members  to 
overcome the problem of asymmetric information when a financial institution knows 
its conditions better than anyone else, charge adequate risk-adjusted premia, invest 
its  fund  prudently,  and  have  government  backing  to  avoid  insolvency  when 
unexpected failures occur.  
New DIC initiatives 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the DIC can be neither tardy nor reactive in strengthening its part of 
the  national  financial  safety  net.  In  this  regard,  the  Board  of  Management  of  the  DIC  has 
formulated a strategic plan to make the Corporation’s operational framework more consistent 
with international best practices. Some of the major elements of the DIC’s strategic plan that 
are contemplated are as follows:  
• 
Enact legislative amendments to close several gaps in DIC’s enabling legislation as 
well as to harmonise it with the Companies Act and the FIA 2008;  
Begin  the  move  towards  an  integrated  deposit  insurance  system  by  expanding 
protection to cover depositors/shareholders of credit unions and policyholders (life) 
of insurance companies;  
Explore the feasibility of moving from a pure pay box model, in which the DIC comes 
in at the backend of the financial crisis, to that of a risk minimiser model, in which 
the  DIC  is  in  a  situation  where  red flags  are  raised  and  prompt  corrective  actions 
can be taken against member financial institutions;  
Prepare the DIC to become compliant with the Core Principles for Effective Deposit 
Insurance  Systems  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers. This would include an evaluation of the 
DIC as part of an IMF Financial Stability Assessment Programme, known as FSAP; 
and  
Establish a Memorandum of Understanding between the Central Bank and DIC to 
facilitate  information  sharing  on  member  institutions  and  adequate  alerts  for  a 
possible pay-out in the event of a pending failure/closure.  
    Conclusion 
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  must  caution  you  that,  in  the  face  of  fundamental 
macroeconomic  policy  errors  or  significant  contagion from  abroad,  even  a  good  system of 
deposit insurance cannot guarantee financial stability.  
We  must  remember  that  a  well-designed  deposit  insurance  system  is,  at  best,  just  one 
component  of  a  sound  financial  safety  net.  Deposit  insurance  must  be  part  of  a  carefully 
planned  financial  safety  net,  which  establishes  an  incentive-compatible  structure  that 
encourages  good  corporate  governance,  constructive  market  discipline,  and  effective 
prudential regulation and supervision.  
The  objective  is,  of  course,  to get to  a  position  where  taxpayer  monies  are  never  used  to 
provide solvency support to a failing financial institution, no matter how large or complex. For 
their part, the DIC’s Board of Management and Staff are committed to crafting a pro-active 
and  efficient  deposit  insurance  system to  ensure  continued  coverage for  all  those  who fall 
under its protective umbrella for another 25 years.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
