Graeme Wheeler: Central banking in a post-crisis world 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Admirals’ Breakfast Club, Auckland, 26 October 2012. 
 New Zealand’s vulnerability in international markets 
(I) 
In “Les Miserables”, Victor Hugo wrote of the vulnerability of a little black cat. 
“We all know the habit of cats of hesitating in an open doorway – hovering uncertainly at the 
risk of being crushed by the closing of the door.” 
New Zealand shares this sense of vulnerability. We are a small economy – around four and a 
half million people in a world of seven billion, producing output roughly three-quarters of that 
of  Queensland.  Our  vulnerability  is  increased  by  our  habit  of  not  saving  enough  for  our 
investment needs, resulting in a large accumulation of foreign debt. 
Yet,  we  face  the  world  with  tremendous  assets.  The  World  Bank  suggests  that  on  a  per 
capita basis, New Zealand is ranked eighth for natural capital (pastoral and crop land, forest 
resources and subsoil etc) with only oil producing countries ahead of it. We lead the world in 
renewable  natural  resource  related  capital.  OECD  comparisons  of  high  school  student 
attainment  place  us  seventh  among  71  countries.  Transparency  International  considers 
New Zealand the least corrupt country in the world, and the World Economic Forum ranks 
New Zealand among the best for the quality of its institutions, and the efficiency of its product 
markets and its financial markets. 
With these assets we should be capable of stronger economic growth. Internationally, and 
particularly  in  smaller  economies,  economic  growth  is  driven  by  the  private  sector  and  its 
ability  to  compete  on  global  markets.  We  need  to  reverse  the  slowdown  in  multifactor 
productivity growth since 2005 and the decline in value added in our tradables sector. And 
we  need  to  reverse  the  shift  of  resources  into  the  public  sector  and  other  non-traded 
activities. 
Our economy is continually buffeted by external shocks. Some are natural events, like the 
catastrophic  series  of  Christchurch  earthquakes  that  represent  the  sixth  largest  global 
insurance payout ever. Others reflect tectonic shifts in the global economy. These include the 
rapidly growing importance of East and South Asia in international trade and investment, the 
rising  global  demand  for  commodities,  and  the  changing  global  saving  and  investment 
patterns  associated  with  the  expanding  middle  class  in  developing  economies  and 
demographic  aging  in  the  western  economies  and  Japan.  The  integration  of  financial 
markets, reduction in trade barriers, and global diffusion of skill enhancing technologies, and 
especially information technologies, mean that economic shocks are transmitted more rapidly 
across the globe and business cycles become more synchronised. 
Overlaying  these  structural  shifts  are  enormous  economic  adjustments  flowing  from  the 
global financial crisis. Household balance sheets, especially for the lower and middle income 
classes, have been severely damaged in the US and large parts of Western Europe. This 
process of deleveraging debt and rebuilding wealth is likely to take several more years. For 
example, the Federal Reserve reports that median real net household wealth in the U.S. fell 
39 percent from 2007 to 2010 to levels last seen in 1992. In 2011, the median real level of 
US household income dropped to its lowest level since 1995. 
In many countries, the banking and commercial real estate sectors are still contracting, and 
the indebtedness of the banking sector in the Euro Area remains very high. Tensions remain 
around large current account imbalances, exchange rate pressures, slow growth, and high 
unemployment. Across much of the developed world, as in New Zealand, real incomes per 
capita have yet to recover to 2007 levels.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The world is very different from the heady days of 2003 – 2007 when the global economy 
grew  at  its  fastest  rate  in  four  decades  and  international  fora  debated  whether  the  growth 
dynamics  of  the  emerging  economies  were  becoming  decoupled  from  the  industrialised 
world.  No-one  believed  that  the  banking  system  could  fail  in  a  G7  economy  –  let  alone  a 
group  of  G7  economies.  Nor  did  they  contemplate  how  rapidly  fiscal  positions  could  be 
overwhelmed by lower tax revenues and pressures on governments to become investors and 
guarantors  of  last  resort  –  in  areas  well  beyond  their  traditional  investor  habitat  and  risk 
tolerance. 
We are in new territory for central banking. For the past three to four years policy rates in the 
U.S., the Euro Area and in many other countries have been at historic lows, some short-term 
government securities markets are returning negative  yields, and the Bank of International 
Settlements reports that the volume of central bank assets in the advanced countries – itself 
largely a result of massive liquidity injections – expanded to 25% of GDP, double the ratio of 
2007. Forward curves and forward guidance by the major central banks suggest that interest 
rates will remain at historic lows for at least another two to three years. 
These policy settings are unprecedented. The challenge will be to transition to more normal 
monetary conditions before high rates of inflation and widespread escalation in asset prices 
are generated. We have already seen bull markets in commodities, gold, and fixed income 
markets, and a rapid contraction in credit spreads in emerging markets and high yield debt 
as investors search for higher returns. 
With  this  international  backdrop,  and  with  internal  debate  over  New  Zealand’s  economic 
prospects,  there  has  been  public  commentary  on  the  appropriate  goals  for  the  Reserve 
Bank. This includes suggestions that the Reserve Bank should tolerate higher inflation, give 
greater  emphasis  to  economic  growth  and  unemployment,  target  nominal  income,  or  the 
exchange  rate,  or  interest  rates,  and  apply  loan  to  value  limits  to  contain  the  Auckland 
housing market. I will explore some of these issues. 
The importance of price stability and an efficient and stable financial system 
(II) 
Price  stability  and  financial  stability  remain  the  Reserve  Bank’s  central  objectives  for 
monetary  policy  and  prudential  policy.  These  provide  the  best  framework  for  achieving 
stronger  growth  in  output  and  employment  in  the  longer  term.  Price  stability  enables 
households,  businesses,  and  governments  to  plan  with  greater  certainty;  it  facilitates  long 
term  contracting;  lowers  the  inflation  risk  premia  embedded  in  interest  rates;  and  enables 
producers,  consumers,  and  investors  to  respond  to  opportunities  created  by  changing 
relative prices rather than diverting resources to hedge against inflation.  
The recent Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) reinforces the importance of price stability and 
introduces  the  goal  of  keeping  future  average  CPI  inflation  near  the  2  percent  target 
mid-point of the 1 percent to 3 percent range. Over time, attaining this outcome should help 
to anchor inflation expectations around the mid-point.  
Deep, efficient and well-regulated financial markets facilitate economic growth by helping to 
channel funds to their most productive uses and to allocate risk where it can best be borne. 
Where economic policies and regulatory structures are sound and conducive to competition, 
financial  markets  can  enhance  productivity  and  create  opportunities  for  saving,  accessing 
credit, and buffering people against difficult times. 
Over  the  past  four  years  the  world  has  again  witnessed  the  destructive  power  of 
dysfunctional  financial  markets.  Financial  sector  instability  can  arise  from  many  sources, 
including unrealistic expectations as to the sustainability of future yields on financial assets, 
excessive risk taking by investors, poorly designed macro-economic and regulatory policies, 
and through regional or global contagion from failures in offshore financial systems. 
The  importance  of  a  stable  and  well-functioning  financial  system  is  also  recognised  in  the 
PTA  with  its  emphasis  on  the  need  to  monitor  asset  prices  and  to  have  regard  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efficiency  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  the 
debate  in  central  banking  circles  had  been  how  hard  should  monetary  policy  lean  against 
asset  bubbles  in  order  to  diminish  the  spill-over  of  “wealth  effects”  into excessive  demand 
growth  and  inflation.  While  these  spill-overs  will  continue  to  be  an  important  policy 
consideration during buoyant asset markets, central bankers and fiscal authorities are now 
much  more  conscious  of  the  deflationary  impact  of  collapsing  asset  prices  and  the 
deleveraging it triggers, particularly if the banking system is put at risk and governments are 
called on for bailouts. 
For  these  reasons  the  Reserve  Bank  has  placed  a  high  priority  on  strengthening 
New Zealand’s  prudential  regime,  including  introducing  macro-prudential  instruments  and 
having an open bank resolution capability in place. Macro-prudential instruments are being 
developed in many countries and in our case we are focusing on instruments such as the 
core  funding  ratio,  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  adjustments  to  sectoral  risk  weights, 
and  housing  loan-to-value  ratio  limits.  These  instruments  are  expected  to  reinforce  the 
overall  tougher  approach  to  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  under  the  new  Basel  III 
regime.  We  need  to  ensure  that  we  have  well  governed  and  well  capitalised  financial 
institutions, with strong funding and liquidity buffers, and sound risk management practices.  
Although  macro-prudential  instruments  are  likely  to  be  used  infrequently,  they  will  provide 
additional buffers to the financial system that vary with the macro-credit cycle. Their purpose 
is  to  help  maintain  a  sound  and  efficient  financial  system,  but  in  most  instances  the 
instruments will also reinforce the stance of monetary policy.  
A Memorandum of Understanding between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the 
Reserve Bank is currently being discussed with  the Treasury. It will confirm the guidelines 
under  which  the  Bank  should  operate  macro-prudential  instruments  in  “promoting  the 
maintenance  of  a  sound  and  efficient financial  system”.  It  will  also  outline  the  consultation 
processes  with  the  Minister  and  the  Treasury  if  macro-prudential  intervention  is  under 
consideration, and prior to any decision to deploy macro-prudential policy instruments. 
Maintaining financial stability requires mechanisms to manage financial distress. Open Bank 
Resolution (OBR) will enable a distressed bank to continue operating, while placing the cost 
of  the  bank’s  failure  on  the  bank’s  shareholders  and  creditors,  rather  than  taxpayers. 
Although bank failures in New Zealand are very rare, OBR will provide the Government with 
a  real  alternative  to  bailout.  It  will  reduce  the  risks  of  moral  hazard,  and  strengthen  the 
incentives for banks to operate prudently and to pursue private sector solutions in the event 
of  crisis.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  working  with  banks  to  ensure  that  OBR  is  a  live  option  by 
30 June 2013. 
We  are  also  reviewing  other  financial  institutions  as  part  of  our  prudential  oversight 
responsibilities. This includes working with over 100 insurers in New Zealand to ensure that 
they meet the Reserve Bank’s new licensing standards by 7 September 2013. We are also 
working  to  establish  a  licensing framework for  around  60  non-bank  deposit  takers that  we 
currently regulate. 
Quantitative easing, targeting growth and the exchange rate 
(III) 
Pursuing price stability and using our prudential powers to promote financial system stability 
and efficiency, are the greatest contributions that the Reserve Bank can make to fostering 
New Zealand’s long term economic growth. We do not see any reason to adopt quantitative 
easing in New Zealand. Quantitative easing is being adopted by central banks that have little 
or no scope to lower interest rates in economies experiencing major deleveraging, and where 
deep  concerns  exist  about  generating  and  sustaining  economic  growth.  It  is  a  sign  of 
desperate  times  for  central  banks,  who  in  some  instances  are  shouldering  the  burden  of 
domestic policy paralysis over fiscal policy. Since the onset of the global financial crisis, the 
Federal  Reserve  has  expanded  its  balance  sheet  by  13  percent  of  GDP,  the  European 
Central Bank by 16 percent of GDP, the Bank of Japan by 10 percent of GDP, and the Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of  England  by  around  20  percent  of  GDP.  In  all  four  cases  the  official  cash  rate  is 
0.75 percent or less. In all four cases there is little evidence of any appreciable impact on 
economic growth. 
New  Zealand  is  in  a  very  different  situation. Our  economy  is  growing  at  an  annual  rate of 
around 2 percent and the Reserve Bank has scope to lower interest rates if needed. While 
annual CPI inflation has fallen to 0.8 percent, we expect inflation to head back towards the 
mid-point of the target range. We will continue to monitor inflation indicators, such as pricing 
intention  and  inflation  expectation  data,  closely  over  the  coming  months  as  stronger 
residential investment gets into full swing. 
We  do  not  see  scope  for  directing  monetary  policy  to  achieve  target  rates  of  economic 
growth. This lies beyond the capability of monetary policy. Trend rates of economic growth 
depend largely on the quantity and quality of human capital and the amount and productivity 
of the capital that labour has to work with. But, we do examine the state of the economy very 
closely  when  setting  monetary  policy.  We  study  a  range  of  economic  indicators  such  as 
building and manufacturing activity, measures of capacity, conditions in the labour market, 
trends in competitiveness, and forward indicators of orders and investment intentions. Doing 
so enables us to get a better feel for the pressures on resources and to assess whether there 
is scope to support stronger growth in demand while achieving our inflation objectives. 
There is considerable public debate on the exchange rate. Several external commentators, 
such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  suggest  that  the  exchange  rate  is 
over-valued in terms of economic fundamentals. Some of the strength in our exchange rate 
is a reflection of the weakness of the US dollar. On a bilateral basis the New Zealand dollar 
is especially strong against the US dollar, Euro and Sterling. Against the Australian dollar, it 
has tracked slightly below average. 
Ultimately, it is the relative rates of return between New Zealand and the rest of the world 
that explains the strength of the New Zealand dollar. These returns reflect developments in 
the economy and international demand for our products and services. Over the longer haul 
the  dollar  is  very  strongly  correlated  with  measures  of  the  terms  of  trade  or  commodity 
prices, and much of the strength of the New Zealand dollar is due to our terms of trade being 
close  to  a  40  year  high.  Exchange  rate  movements  can  also  reflect  differences  in  growth 
rates  between  economies,  differences  in  interest  rates,  perceptions  of  safe  havens,  and 
fluctuations in investor risk appetite.  
New  Zealand  is  not  alone  in  experiencing  upward  pressure  on  its  exchange  rate.  Several 
commodity  producing  countries,  and  countries  with  stronger  growth  rates  and  positive 
interest rate differentials compared to the U.S. and Euro Area, have experienced substantial 
currency appreciation since the global financial crisis. 
The  appreciation  in  our  exchange  rate  has  affected  the  tradables  sector  of  the  economy. 
Manufactured export volumes, although growing at around 3 percent a year since the global 
financial  crisis,  are  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  be;  investment  in  industries  such  as 
tourism  has  declined;  and  the  profitability  and  output  of  import  competing  industries  is 
reduced. On the  other  hand,  resources  shifted to  the  more  sheltered  and  less  competitive 
non-tradables sector where producers find it easier to raise prices. The high exchange rate 
does however, generate some important benefits to the economy. Consumers and producers 
benefit from  lower  import  prices,  and  interest  rates  are  lower  than  would  otherwise  be  the 
case.  
The Reserve Bank wishes to see a lower exchange rate provided it can be achieved without 
damaging  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  In  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis, 
institutions  such  as  the  IMF,  are  reviewing  the  scope  for  managing  capital  flows.  Capital 
controls  may  be  appropriate  in  some  circumstances,  perhaps  to  mitigate  problems  arising 
from  temporary  surges  in  capital  inflows  in  economies  with  weak  financial  sectors.  For  a 
debtor  country  like  New  Zealand,  an  open  capital  account  is  essential.  Introducing  capital 
controls,  instead  of  making  the  necessary  adjustments,  would  damage  the  credibility  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stability  of  New  Zealand’s  financial  sector,  and  increase  the  real  cost  of  capital  for 
New Zealand. 
Reducing interest rates can at times reduce pressure on the exchange rate but analysis of 
past  OCR  cuts  in  New  Zealand  shows  on  average  minimal  or  no  intra-day  impact  on  the 
exchange  rate,  and  even  less  impact  on  a  weekly  basis.  Analysis  of  “unexpected”  OCR 
changes with Trade Weighted Index changes following a rate decision still does not show a 
strong relationship to subsequent movements in the exchange rate. This reinforces the idea 
that the exchange rate primarily reflects returns in the broader economy rather than simply 
returns in the money market. 
We  set  the  OCR  such  that  the  inflation  outlook  remains  consistent  with  the  PTA  and  the 
financial  markets  understand  this.  If  we  reduced  the  OCR  without  sound  reasons  the 
exchange rate might drop initially but rise later when the inflationary implications of the rate 
cut became clear, especially if the belief was formed in the meantime that the central bank’s 
commitment to price stability was wavering. 
Foreign  currency  intervention  is  unlikely  to  have  a  sustained  impact  on  the  New  Zealand 
dollar, but can have an impact in the short term if the Reserve Bank makes the right calls 
about the exchange rate departing from fundamentals. The Reserve Bank has four criteria to 
assess whether intervention should be undertaken. These are: whether the exchange rate is 
exceptional relative to history; is the exchange rate justified; would intervention be consistent 
with the PTA; and whether the market conditions exist to successfully shift the value of the 
currency. Even if the first three criteria are satisfied at a point in time, it makes little sense to 
risk  incurring  losses  to  taxpayers  by  intervening  when  currency  flows  supporting  the  New 
Zealand dollar are particularly strong. But we will remain vigilant on these criteria and will be 
prepared to intervene if all conditions are met.  
So there are clear limits to what monetary policy and exchange rate intervention can do to 
lower the New Zealand dollar. In order to achieve a sustained reduction in the New Zealand 
dollar it would be necessary to alter the overall level and pattern of saving and investment in 
the  economy.  In  particular,  it  will  be  necessary  to  tackle  our  addiction  of  depending  on 
foreign savings to finance our consumption and investment. This dependency means that we 
have  persistently  needed  interest  rates  above  those  in  most  developed  economies  to 
maintain  inflation  at  target  levels  similar  to  those  being  followed  elsewhere.  Policies  that 
increase domestic savings, including reducing the government’s fiscal deficit, and to reduce 
the flow of resources into the public sector and other non-tradables sectors, would help to 
achieve a sustainable reduction in the exchange rate. 
Concluding comments 
(IV) 
Throughout  the  world,  monetary  policy  is  being  conducted  in  a  highly  challenging 
environment. Years of close to zero interest rates and massive liquidity injections in the U.S., 
Japan  and  Euro  Area  are  creating  negative  spill-overs  for  smaller  economies  such  as 
New Zealand. Difficult adjustments lie ahead as the major central banks try to re-establish 
more  normal  monetary  conditions  and  prevent  inflation  from  moving  beyond  target  levels. 
And, in New Zealand, we have never had to conduct monetary policy when a major part of 
the  economy  faces  a  concentrated  construction  programme  in  the  order  of  12  percent  of 
GDP – and insurance payouts in excess of this.  
Various  groups  in  our  economy  are  under  pressure  from  the  high  exchange  rate,  rising 
house prices, and those living off interest income worry about low yields. Monetary policy, by 
itself, cannot deliver quick fixes to achieve and sustain more rapid economic growth, lower 
unemployment, or maintain a lower exchange rate. Other policies are central for achieving 
these outcomes, but when they are applied, monetary policy can be supportive of them. 
In conducting monetary and prudential policy, the Reserve Bank will be consistent, open, and 
flexible  in  reflecting  on  new  information  and  data.  In  doing  so,  our  focus  will  remain  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
meeting  the  objectives  in  the  PTA  and  maintaining  New  Zealand’s  reputation  for  credible 
monetary policy outcomes and financial stability. This is the best contribution we can make to 
help bolster New Zealand’s rate of economic growth and serve New Zealanders. 
Graeme Wheeler 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
