Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Accelerating women’s economic empowerment 
– key to job and wealth creation; sub theme: financial inclusion 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tukiya  Kankasa-Mabula,  Deputy  Governor  (Administration)  of  the 
Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  2012  Month  of  the  Woman  Entrepreneur  (MOWE)  Conference, 
Lusaka, 26–27 September 2012. 
 The Chairperson, Zambia Federation of Associations of Women in Business  
Senior Government officials present  
Country Director UNDP  
Chairpersons of affiliated organizations  
Distinguished invited guests  
Members of the press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  to  thank  Zambia  Federation  of  Associations  of  Women  in 
Business  (ZAFWIB)  for  organising  this  very  important  conference,  with  an  emphasis  on 
achieving  greater  financial  inclusion  for  women  in  general  and  women  entrepreneurs  in 
particular.  
We commend the focused attention being paid by the ZAFWIB to the subject of this year’s 
theme  for  the  month  of  the  woman  entrepreneur  which  is:  “Accelerating  Women’s 
Economic  Empowerment  –  Key  to  Job  and  Wealth  Creation”  under  the  sub  theme: 
“Financial Inclusion”.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 
that  women 
entrepreneurs play an increasingly important role in the development process of an economy 
through job and wealth creation. According to the International Finance Corporation (IFC), an 
estimated 31 to 38 per cent of SMEs in developing countries are owned or run by women. 
The  figures  are  between  21  and  26  per  cent  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  In  other  literature, 
women have been credited with owning 48 per cent of MSMEs in Africa (NFNV). Therefore, 
women  are  increasingly  being  recognised  as  a  powerful  source  of  growth.  Indeed,  at  the 
Second  African  Women’s  Economic  Summit  held  in  Lagos  in  July  2012,  women  were 
recognised as the New Emerging Market. 
Chairperson, as you may be aware, the Zambian economy has been growing at an average 
rate  of  above  5%  in  the  recent  past.  Most  of  this  growth  has  been  broad  based  with 
economic  sectors,  such  as,  agriculture,  mining,  manufacturing  and  tourism  recording 
impressive growth rates. However, there is potential for further economic growth across all 
sub  sectors  if  the  potential  of  women  entrepreneurs  can  be  harnessed.  Limited  access  to 
affordable financial services such as savings, loans, remittances and insurance services by 
the vast majority of the population, especially for women and the SME sector is acting as a 
constraint to the growth impetus.  
It  is  recognised  that  many  women,  together  with  the  businesses  they  run  are  financially 
excluded.  This  is  also  acknowledged  in  a  2011  Report  by  the  Gender  and  Development 
Division  on  the  study  tour  to  Tanzania  and  Rwanda,  regarding  women’s  economic 
empowerment. The Report states that “there is evidence that gender disparities in national 
development still exist in Zambia and one of the areas of concern is access to finance by 
women entrepreneurs. In order to address this situation, one of the objectives in the Sixth 
it  has  been  established 
in  many  countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
National  Development  Plan  is  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  women  to  participate  in  national 
development”.1 The Report further states that “due to weak economic position such as lack 
of collateral required by most financial institutions, most women, especially the rural women, 
are unable to access investment capital to engage in business and other economic activities 
as individuals”.  
Access  to  affordable  financial  services  –  especially  credit  and  insurance  –  enhances 
livelihood opportunities and empowers women and other marginalized groups to take charge 
of their lives as well as improve their social and economic equity.  
This is why financial inclusion is considered to be critical for achieving inclusive growth and 
poverty reduction.  
What do we mean by financial inclusion 
Women’s financial inclusion has been described as “a state in which women as individual, 
members  of  households  and  entrepreneurs,  have  access  to  the  full  range  of  financial 
products  and  services  from  convenient  responsible  formal  service  providers,  offered 
effectively, responsibly and sustainably and at a reasonable cost to clients” These products 
include payments, savings, credit, insurance and pensions.  
The Finscope survey of 2005 and 2009 showed that access to financial services in Zambia 
has been low with results indicating only a marginal increase from 33.7% in 2005 to 37.3% in 
2009.  This  signifies  that  further  efforts  are  required.  The  2009  survey  also  revealed 
disparities  in  terms  of  financial  access  by  gender,  with  male  access  at  41%  while  that  of 
females was at only 34%. This was with regard to access to any financial product, formal or 
informal. With regard to the formal banking sector, only 14 per cent of Zambian adults were 
banked.  Further  broken  down,  17  present  of  Zambian  males  were  banked  compared  to 
12 per cent of females.  
Distinguished Guests, there are a variety of reasons that have been identified for financial 
exclusion  in  our  country.  In  remote  and  sparsely  populated  areas  with  poor  infrastructure, 
physical  access  itself  acts  as  a  deterrent.  From  the  demand  side,  lack  of  awareness,  low 
incomes, social exclusion, illiteracy, and lack of collateral among others act as barriers. From 
the  supply  side,  distance  from  branches,  high  transaction  costs  and  cost  of  borrowing, 
cumbersome  documentation  and  procedures,  as  well  as  unsuitable  products,  are  common 
reasons for exclusion.  
Chairperson, some of the challenges faced by  women entrepreneurs regarding access to 
finance have been specifically identified as follows:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Lack of collateral/ discriminatory property rights;  
Financial illiteracy;  
Lack of awareness of development finance;  
Lack of financial confidence;  
Lack of appropriate products;  
Uncertain business climate;  
Inadequate financial skills;  
Lack of banking facilities;  
Cumbersome application procedures and complicated forms to complete;  
                                                
1  A Report on the Study Tour to Tanzania and Rwanda, 20–26 June, 2011, Gender in Development Division. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  High cost of finance.  
Poor  gender  disaggregated  data  which  limits  market  information  on  what  women 
want and need  
Most businesses are informal and in lower value areas  
Bank of Zambia response 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  has  responded  by  putting  in  place  measures  to  maintain  a  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  which  have  resulted  in  significant  reduction  in  inflation; 
downward movement in interest rates; and a fairly stable exchange rate. The Bank of Zambia 
is  also  the  lead  implementer  of  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  on  behalf  of  the 
Government of the Republic of Zambia.  
As you may be aware, the Zambian government formulated the FSDP as a comprehensive 
strategy for addressing challenges in the Zambia financial sector. Under the second phase of 
the  FSDP,  access  to  finance  by  the  various  strata  of  society,  including  access  based  on 
gender is identified as a key weakness to be addressed.  
The development of the FSDP and its implementation, therefore, reflects the priority attached 
by the government to this subject.  
The  Bank  of  Zambia  as  the  lead  coordinator  for  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan 
(FSDP)  has  also  incorporated  Financial  Inclusion  as  one  of  the  key  objectives  under  its 
Strategic  Plan  for  the  period  2012  –  2015,  namely;  to  increase  financial  inclusion  to 
50 per cent of the population by 2015.  
The strategies under this objective include the following:  
1.  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
Develop an index to measure the depth and breadth of financial services in Zambia.  
Promote agency banking and mobile banking.  
Develop guidelines for branchless banking framework.  
Establish a unified collateral registry framework.  
Establish Financial Education Coordinating Unit (FECU).  
Undertake financial education interventions specific to BoZ mandate.  
Revise legal and regulatory framework to promote financial inclusion.  
Develop incentive mechanisms to encourage outreach of financial services to rural 
areas and other financially excluded citizens.  
In  order  to  ensure  that  persons  who  are  excluded,  both  in  urban  and  rural  areas  do  not 
encounter difficulties in opening bank accounts, the know your customer (KYC) procedures 
for opening and operating accounts has been simplified. The simplified procedure or relaxed 
„KYC‟  note  allows  banks  to  use  various  forms  of  reference  documentation  such  as 
community leaders other than the traditional approach used in the past.  
In  addition,  over  the  years,  there  have  been  a  number  of  positive  developments  in  the 
economy.  Some  of  these  include  easier  access  to  banking  services  through  lower  bank 
account  opening  balances;  relaxed  KYC  procedures  for  opening  and  operating  accounts; 
improved payments systems through mobile banking, e-money, increased numbers of ATMs 
and  point  of  sale  terminals,  and  improved  access  to  foreign  exchange  through  various 
bureau  de  change  across  the  country.  We  have  also  seen  a  broader  range  of  financial 
services, including products tailored for women.  
Under  the  second  phase  of  the  FSDP,  Government  is  implementing  a  number  of 
programmes, and building capacity for key stakeholders. Specific milestones include: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
(i)  
(ii) 
(iii)  
(iv)  
Development  of  a  rural  finance  policy  –  a  draft  report  has  been  developed  and 
among others, focuses on proposals for developing warehouse certificate systems, 
supporting  financial  services  providers  towards  rural  banking  as  well  as  agency 
banking and initiatives for rural branch expansions (e.g. Natsave).  
 Establishment  of  development  fund  –  DBZ  is  now  the  appointed  apex  body  for 
wholesale  funds  and  is  also  expected  to  launch  an  enterprise  development  fund 
co-financed with the Zambia Development Agency (ZDA).  
Launch of the National Strategy on Financial Education – this strategy which  was 
launched in July 2012 will centre on increasing financial literacy levels in the country 
with  education  programmes  targeted  at  children  (in  schools);  youth,  male  and 
female  adults  and  MSMEs  as  well  as  teachable  moments.  The  Bank  intends  to 
partner with Women‟s organisations to ensure proper coverage of women.  
Development  of  awareness  campaigns  –  related  to  the  above,  BoZ  and  other 
financial  sector  regulators  are  involved  in  awareness  programmes  through  media 
briefs,  trade  and  commercial  shows,  radio  and  TV  programmes  as  well  as  road 
shows.  
The  Bank  of  Zambia  has  also  entered  into  a  partnership  with  the  ILO  to  implement  the 
FAMOS  Check  Tool  which  should  assist  banks  to  better  serve  their  FAMOS  clients.  The 
Bank  has  also  embraced  many  stakeholders,  including  some  women’s  organisations,  onto 
the FAMOS Implementation Task Force.  
The  Bank  has  also  licensed  a  credit  reference  bureau  which  will  ultimately  help  to  create 
credit histories for financial market participants that may serve as alternative to collateral.  
Message to women entrepreneurs and women’s organisations  
I am very pleased with your initiative to engage the central Bank. You should equally engage 
the  financial  service  providers  individually  and  through  their  associations  to  make  them 
appreciate the needs of the women entrepreneurs.  
You should facilitate training in assertiveness for your members and to take advantage of all 
available financial literacy education. You should encourage a good credit culture (which is 
already embraced by many women). You must aspire to grow from the informal to the formal 
and from SMEs to large corporations. You must not just wait for the targeted funds (which 
have a role to play) also seek to access other relevant products in the market. Seek to be 
informed. Make yourselves visible.  
 Message for banks and other financial service providers 
• 
• 
Explore the women’s market segment as a viable and profitable segment;  
Create  innovate  products  that  respond  to  the  needs  and  wants  of  the  women’s 
market segment;  
Find new ways of mitigating risk;  
Promote  greater  workplace  diversity  and  promote  more  women  into  senior 
management positions; and  
Assist women to be more financially literate.  
• 
On  our  part,  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  create  an  enabling  environment  through 
policies, legislation and regulation that facilitate greater financial inclusion of women.  
Chairperson,  once  again,  allow  me  to  applaud  the  sponsors,  led  by  ZAFWIB,  for 
successfully organizing this important event on the Month of the Woman Entrepreneur for the 
8th  consecutive  year  as  well  as  for  holding  this  year’s  annual  conference.  As  Bank  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Zambia,  we  are  delighted  to  play  a  positive  role  as  it  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  build 
relationships amongst various stakeholders.  
Let me  also,  in  this regard,  implore  participants  to  visit  the  various  stands  in  the  Financial 
Exhibition and engage the financial service providers for additional insights into the theme for 
this  year’s  Month  of  the  Woman  Entrepreneur  which  is:  “Accelerating  Women’s  Economic 
Empowerment – Key to Job and Wealth Creation” under the sub theme: “Financial Inclusion.”  
Lastly,  I  wish  to  sincerely  thank  Lee  Anne  Singh,  a  woman  entrepreneur  for  graciously 
providing the exhibition tent free of charge.  
I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Banks  and  other  financial  service  providers  that  have 
responded  at  short  notice  to  mount  the  Financial  Exhibition.  Take  full  advantage  of  their 
presence here.  
As I conclude, I wish you all the very best in your deliberations over the next two days, and 
declare, with these few words, this national conference officially open.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
