Christian Noyer: The euro area is moving in the right direction 
Speech with Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  Financial 
Forum, Tokyo, 3 December 2012. 
 Mr Governor, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a real pleasure to be with you today and I want to thank the whole Paris Europlace team 
for its excellent organization of this event in Japan. 
 I would like to start by taking stock of the current situation:  
• 
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  weak.  Real  GDP  contracted  by  0.1%  in  the 
third  quarter  after  a  0.2%  contraction  in  the  second  quarter.  This  weak  trend  is 
expected  to  continue  over  the  coming  months.  It  is  a  difficult  period  which  has 
notably resulted in very high unemployment across the whole area. But it needs to 
be understood that this weak activity is in large part due to the necessary process of 
balance sheet adjustment in the financial and non-financial sectors. This process is 
underway,  it  has  already  yielded  significant  results  and  is  a  prerequisite  for  the 
strong and lasting recovery to come.  
The  euro  area’s  financial  situation  has  improved  over  the  past  few  months. 
i) Long-term  sovereign  bond  yields  have  fallen  sharply  for  several  countries  –  in 
Spain for example, the 10-year yield has shed around 200 basis points since July – 
and have remained at very low levels for the “core” countries (slightly above 2% for 
France for instance);  
ii) We are seeing US money market funds coming back to invest in the euro area; 
iii) We are seeing more unsecured issues and issues of corporate bonds. 
  A lack of fiscal discipline;  
A loss of competitiveness;  
Incomplete European integration. 
These are all positive signs – among others – that point to a gradual return of confidence in 
the euro area. 
I  think  I  can  say  that  the  fundamental  causes  of  the  euro  area  crisis  have  now  been  fully 
taken on board by all of the players, so that everyone has a clear and fair view of their own 
responsibilities. Three causes for the crisis can be identified:  
• 
• 
• 
I would like to show you that the euro area is now moving decisively in the right direction to 
address each of these causes. 
Governments  are  consolidating  their  public  finances  and  competitiveness  and 
European integration is moving forward. 
First, the efforts already made on the fiscal front by euro area countries are already bearing 
fruit: the primary position of the euro area should be close to balance by the end of 2012, 
which is a remarkable achievement compared to the other major economic areas. The public 
deficit  of  the  euro  area  has  shrunk  from  6.3%  in  2009  to  4.1%  in  2011.  At  the  current 
juncture, this is clearly an asset for us and an element of confidence both for the markets and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economic  agents,  and  needs  to  be  further  enhanced.  In  addition  to  these  efforts  at  the 
national  level,  a  much  stronger  framework  for  common  discipline  has  been  put  in  place, 
which  represents  a  major  step  forward  towards  a  more  integrated  economic  union.  It  is 
crucial that all of the efforts in this area are pursued with determination. 
Now turning to competitiveness, here too the progress already made in terms of structural 
reforms and the adjustment of unit production costs in many countries is very encouraging. 
Never in the recent past have the European economies been reformed so much in such a 
short space of time. I could cite many examples, in Spain (labour market and financial sector 
reforms),  Italy  (pension  and  services  market  reforms)  and  in  France,  where  an  important 
pension reform was made in 2010 and where structural reforms on the labour market and on 
the goods and services market are in preparation. 
These  structural  reforms  constitute  the  necessary  foundation  for  dynamic  and  sustainable 
growth  in  the  future  and  they  must  be  vigorously  pursued.  Furthermore,  at  the  European 
level,  the  new  Stability  Pact  includes  a  surveillance  mechanism  for  macroeconomic 
imbalances, which had been missing up till now. 
Lastly, the institutions that underpin the euro area are in the process of being strengthened 
extremely rapidly as a result of the crisis. 
• 
I  just  mentioned  the  substantially  reinforced  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  discipline 
framework:  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  this  is  a  very  important  step  given  the 
transfers  of  sovereignty  that  it  represents.  We  are  moving  towards  a  stronger 
economic union; 
The European Stability Mechanism has a firepower of EUR 700 billion to directly buy 
government  bonds,  provide  collateral  or  lend  funds.  It  will  also  be  able  to  directly 
lend money to banks in difficulty without increasing the debt of their home countries. 
It is a powerful crisis resolution tool that Europe has equipped itself with; 
The work on the establishment of the banking union is moving forward rapidly too. 
The  Commission’s  report  that  was  submitted  a  few  weeks  ago  sets  out  a  clear 
framework:  all  banks  in  the  euro  area  will  quickly  become  subject  to  a  single 
supervisory mechanism under the authority of the ECB. Day-to-day supervision will 
be  performed  by  the  national  supervisors,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of 
decentralisation  that  has  already  proved  its  effectiveness  in  the  implementation  of 
the  single  monetary  policy  within  the  Eurosystem.  The  principle  underlying  this 
single supervisory mechanism is that the severity of the crisis in the euro area has 
largely been due to the vicious circle that developed between banking and sovereign 
risk. To break this link, we need to have a genuine institutionalised banking union 
that  ensures  not  only  the  same  supervision  throughout  the  euro  area,  but  also 
identical  rules,  an  integrated  bank  crisis  resolution  mechanism  and  a  common 
deposit guarantee scheme. 
  We are moving towards the banking union that was missing from monetary union. 
Given these elements, it is clear that the ultimate responsibility for exiting the crisis lies with 
governments,  at  national  level  –  implementing  reforms,  consolidating  public  finances  and 
restoring  competitiveness  –  and  at  the  collective  level  –  agreeing  on  and  implementing  a 
more  coherent  and  comprehensive  institutional  framework  around  monetary  union.  These 
reforms are obviously – and fortunately – the fruit of a democratic process and can only be 
that. But the corollary to this is that these necessary reforms cannot be immediate: they take 
time, first to be implemented and then to yield their effects. And the time of the markets is not 
that of democracy, as you know. Doubts and delays create nervousness, volatility and worry 
in financial markets, which often lead to sharp rises in interest rates for countries deemed to 
be vulnerable. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Since the onset of the crisis and these episodes of extreme and, in part, unjustified tensions, 
the  Eurosystem  has  acted  with  firmness,  creativity  and  determination  in  order  to  restore 
confidence and stability. 
The  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem  is  contributing  to  restoring 
confidence, a key element for the success of the adjustment process. 
A reminder of the policies implemented by the ECB and their underpinning. 
You will remember that the first response to the financial turmoil in the summer of 2007 came 
from  the  Eurosystem,  which  injected  liquidity  of  over  EUR  90  billion  into  the  European 
interbank  system  which  was  on  the  verge  of  seizing  up  completely.  Since  then,  the 
Eurosystem  has  provided  concrete  and  often  crucial 
the  different 
manifestations of the euro area crisis. To do so, it has redesigned its policy measures both 
from a qualitative point of view – by creating new instruments – and a quantitative point of 
view (the size of its balance sheet has trebled since the start of the crisis). 
As regards instruments, we have used both:  
• 
The “standard” instrument par excellence: interest rates. The ECB’s monetary policy 
has been very accommodative for several years, with key interest rates currently at 
historically low levels and negative real interest rates in large parts of the euro area.  
A  broad  range  of  “non-standard”  instruments  that  can  be  grouped  into  two 
categories: i) liquidity-providing instruments (with the fixed rate full allotment policy, 
the expansion of eligible collateral, and the extension of maturities up to three years 
with the VLTROs) and ii) instruments making it possible to intervene directly on the 
most dysfunctional market segments (the CBPP and SMP). 
responses 
to 
 This  diversification  and  broadening  of  the  Eurosystem’s  interventions  has  naturally  raised 
questions  about  the  ultimate  goals  pursued,  the  methods  used  and  the  possible  risks 
incurred. In this critical period, we were convinced of the need to build a solid, robust and 
clearly defined foundation for our actions. In particular:  
• 
We have always acted and will continue to act within the framework of the mandate 
assigned  to  us  by  the  Treaty:  our  priority  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability, 
defined  as  an  inflation  rate  below,  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Fears 
concerning the possible inflationary effects of our policies are therefore completely 
unfounded.  
Moreover, we have always acted, and will continue to act, totally independently from 
the political authorities. It has always been perfectly clear that the responses to the 
real roots of the crisis can only be provided by the governments themselves and that 
monetary  policy  can  never  durably  mitigate  political  shortcomings.  Thus  fears 
regarding the financing of euro area States are also groundless. 
 Focus on OMTs 
I would like to conclude by presenting in greater detail the most recent ECB measure, known 
as Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
To understand the logic and power of this instrument, we need to make a brief excursion into 
monetary policy theory (before lunch… sorry! But it’s not that complicated). 
As you know, central bank monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the real economy via 
several different channels. In the euro area, with bank loans accounting for three quarters of 
the  economy’s  total  financing,  the  “credit  channel”  is  by  far  the  most  significant  vector.  In 
normal times, if the ECB lowers its key rates, the banks’ financing costs decrease, allowing 
them to pass these lower costs on to the lending rates they offer to customers, companies or 
households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
However, we noticed that this channel was no longer functioning correctly in the euro area. In 
fact, we noticed that a drop in key rates was feeding through to lower lending rates in certain 
parts  of  the  euro  area,  but  not  everywhere.  This  means  a  fundamental  aspect  of  our 
monetary  policy  and  of  its  efficacy  –  i.e. its singleness  – was  impaired.  As  a  result,  major 
differences in bank lending rates appeared across euro area countries, which could not be 
explained by disparities by the fundamentals of the countries concerned. For example, two 
hotels with the same activities and financial characteristics and located on each side of the 
Austro-Italian border are obliged to borrow at substantially different rates. This is not because 
of a real difference in the credit risk. In reality, this rate differential stems from the fact that 
certain segments of the financial markets had developed fears regarding a possible break-up 
of the euro area. They were adding to the rates they were offering certain countries a risk 
premium to cover a “re-denomination” of bonds into the local currency. 
In this context, we felt it was vitally important to defuse these unfounded fears that were not 
only fragmenting the euro area’s financial markets, but also, in the longer term, threatening to 
undermine the effectiveness of our monetary policy. That is why we created the OMT which 
will consist of an ex ante unlimited intervention on the secondary market to acquire sovereign 
bonds for which we consider the risk premium applied by the markets is unjustifiably high. 
The  OMT  will  therefore  represent  a  massive  and  effective  backstop  to  the  unjustifiable 
increase in sovereign yields and will allow us to counter the fragmentation of the euro area’s 
markets  and  restore  the  proper  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy.  The  use  of  this 
instrument will be subject to very strict conditions: States must have previously negotiated a 
programme with the ESM and must respect their commitments regarding fiscal consolidation, 
financial  reforms  and  competitiveness.  This  should  enable  a  return  of  confidence  and 
stability, not just in the short and medium term thanks to our action, but also on a longer term 
basis. 
 Today, the euro area is advancing with determination in the right direction. The Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy  is  a  source  of  immediate  confidence  and  stability.  Its  governments  are 
making fiscal, structural, financial and institutional reforms that will ensure the future stability 
and growth of the euro area. 
Our determination is total and our efforts must be continued relentlessly. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
