Lars E O Svensson: Monetary policy, debt and unemployment 
Speech  by  Prof  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting at SNS – Centre for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm, 14 November 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Karolina  Ekholm,  Kerstin  Hallsten,  Per  Jansson,  Christina  Nyman,  Ulf  Söderström  and 
Anders Vredin for valuable discussions and comments. Mikael Apel, Gabriela Guibourg and Staffan Viotti have 
contributed  to  this  speech.  The  views  expressed  are  my  own,  and  are  not  necessarily  shared  by  the  other 
members of the Executive Board or by other employees of the Riksbank.  
It can scarcely have escaped the attention of those who follow monetary policy in Sweden 
that  the members  of  the  Executive  Board  have  held  differing  opinions for  some time  now. 
Most  people  have  probably  also  noted  that  a  minority  of  the  Executive  Board  members  – 
consisting of my colleague Karolina Ekholm and myself, in case anyone was not aware of 
this  –  has  advocated  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  than  the  one  that  has  been 
conducted and that the Riksbank intends to conduct in accordance with the repo-rate path 
advocated by the majority during the coming period.  
However,  I  am  not  as  convinced  that  everyone  has  a  clear  idea  of  exactly  what  the 
differences  of  opinion  entail.  Many  people  have  recently  criticised 
the  Riksbank’s 
communication for being unclear, with some claiming that it has sometimes been difficult to 
understand exactly why some decisions have been taken and why they have been judged to 
be better than the alternatives.1  
What I intend to do here today is to provide my view of where the main divisions are and to 
describe how I came to the conclusions that I hold. I believe and hope that this review of the 
arguments can straighten out some potential questions and that it will form a good basis for 
continued discussions.  
Differences in views regarding monetary policy and what it can achieve 
Let me start by pointing out that lack of agreement among a monetary policy committee is 
not  a  problem  in  itself.  The  actual  purpose  of  having  a  group  of  individuals  decide  on 
monetary  policy  is  to  create  the  right  conditions  for  better  decisions;  it  is  namely  so  that 
groups tend to make better decisions than individual decision-makers. This is partly because 
the  members’  experiences  and  skills  are  pooled  and  partly  because  the  group  acts  as  an 
insurance against the particular preferences of one individual being able to govern monetary 
policy;  it  means  there  are  ”checks  and  balances”.  The  fact  that  different  members  make 
slightly different assessments and reach different conclusions is thus not so remarkable.  
However, in the case of the Riksbank, the differences between the minority and the majority 
have been so great and so persistent that it has become evident that they are not merely 
temporary differences in, for instance, the assessment of economic developments. It rather 
seems to be a case of more profound differences in the ways of regarding monetary policy 
and what it can achieve. This need not necessarily be a problem, either. But it does require, 
at  least,  that  a  thorough  analysis  is  made  of  the  differences  and  that  one  attempts  to 
evaluate, as far as possible, both points of view. 
The arguments in favour of a higher policy rate 
So how has the policy conducted by the Riksbank in recent years been justified? Why hasn’t 
the  Executive  Board  wanted  to  conduct  the  more  expansionary  policy  advocated  by  the 
                                                
1  See, for example, Calmfors (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
minority?  Such  a  policy  would  have  had  better  target  attainment  in  terms  of  inflation  and 
unemployment, with higher inflation closer to the target and lower unemployment closer to a 
long-run sustainable rate. My view is that the arguments have not been particularly clear, at 
least earlier on, and that the stated motives have varied.2 Recently, however, the arguments 
appear  to  have  converged  somewhat.  The  main  arguments  against  a  more  expansionary 
policy that have been put forward lately are that this type of policy would be too risky, given 
the size of household debt.3 Let me therefore use this argument as a starting point for my 
reasoning. 
The  discussion  among  the  Executive  Board  members  to  a  large  extent  reflects  a  broader 
international  debate  on  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  on 
whether household debt is too high and, if so, whether monetary policy should be used to try 
to  limit  indebtedness  –  although  the  Swedish  debate  does  contain  a  number  of  specific 
characteristics.  In  brief,  one  can  say  that  those  who  believe  the  repo  rate  should  be  held 
extra high appear to think as follows.4 If the interest rate is too low, households take on too 
much debt. A large share of the loans households take on are used to buy housing, which 
also pushes up housing prices. If indebtedness and house purchases are based on overly 
optimistic  calculations,  there  is  a  risk  of  a  heavy  fall  in  housing  prices  when  the  mood 
changes, for some reason. If prices were to fall, many households would find themselves in a 
situation  where  their  assets  have  substantially  declined  in  value,  while  their  debt  remains 
unchanged.  They  may  then  want  to  pay  off  some  of  their  debt  to  come  down  to  a  more 
suitable  level.  This  means  they  will  prioritise  saving  over  consumption.  Demand  in  the 
economy will then decline and unemployment will increase. During this process, the banks 
may suffer loan losses that in a worst case scenario could become so great that the banks 
fail or need assistance. This would threaten financial stability.  
By  holding  the  repo  rate  higher, they  say  that the  central  bank  can reduce  the risk  of  this 
happening.  While  a  higher  interest  rate  means  that  demand  is  lower  and  unemployment 
higher  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case,  and  that  inflation  may  undershoot  the 
target, this “insurance premium” may be worth paying if it means that one can avoid a much 
worse outcome in the future. This would appear to be the reasoning pursued. 
This chain of reasoning may appear fairly intuitive. But it contains at least a couple of critical 
statements that require closer examination. The first statement is that the level of household 
debt  in  Sweden  today  entails  sufficiently  large  risks  that  it  needs  to  be  addressed.  The 
second is that a higher repo rate could tangibly reduce these risks and that the lower risk is 
worth the lower inflation and higher unemployment caused by the higher repo rate. That is, 
the insurance premium in terms of lower inflation and higher unemployment is worth paying. 
There is also a third statement implied, that is, that there is no better instrument available, 
with greater or the same effect on the risks and less effect on inflation and unemployment. 
Let me examine these statements more closely, starting with the second and third ones.  
The repo rate is not a suitable instrument  
Regardless of whether or not household debt is currently considered to entail major risks, it is 
important to discuss what instruments are appropriate to use to limit these risks, if necessary. 
An important question right now, as opinions are divided with regard to the risks entailed in 
household  indebtedness,  is  whether  the  repo  rate  and  monetary  policy  are  appropriate 
                                                
2 
In Svensson (2011b) I take up some arguments for and against the repo-rate increases that began in summer 
2010.  
3  See, for instance, Ingves (2012) and Jansson (2012). 
4  A policy where the policy rate is used to counteract the build-up of credit and debt that is considered a risk is 
usually referred to as the central bank “leaning against the wind”. For a description of the arguments for and 
against such a policy, see for instance Mishkin (2011).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
instruments for limiting potential risks or whether there are other instruments available that 
would work better.  
Housing  prices  and  indebtedness  are  closely  related  –  household  debt  mainly  consists  of 
mortgages,  and  mortgages  have  a  stable  relationship  to  housing  prices.  An  important 
question  is  therefore  how  monetary  policy  affects  housing  prices.  There  is  considerable 
research in this field that has used different approaches and data from different countries and 
periods.  While  there  is  some  variation  in  the  results,  the  typical  result  –  which  was  also 
obtained  in  the  Riksbank’s  own  inquiry  into  the  risks  in  the  housing  market5  –  is  that 
monetary policy has little effect on housing prices. A policy rate that is one percentage point 
higher, gives housing prices that are only around 3 per cent lower in 2–3 years. This means 
that one has to adjust the interest rate drastically to be able to affect housing prices and thus 
indirectly household indebtedness. This in turn has very negative effects in the form of higher 
unemployment and lower inflation. Reducing housing prices in Sweden (or preventing them 
from increasing further) by 10 per cent would appear to need such a large increase in the 
repo  rate  that  GDP  would  fall  by  around  6  percentage  points  and  unemployment  would 
increase  by  roughly  3  percentage  points  (150,000  people).6  Using  monetary  policy  and 
increasing  the  policy  rate  to  push  down  housing  prices  thus  has  very  high  real  economic 
costs – the insurance premium one has to pay in the form of increased unemployment is thus 
unreasonably high. 
As a comparison with the insurance premium of 6 per cent of GDP in the above example, it 
can be said that during the 1990s crisis GDP fell from the peak prior to the crisis in the third 
quarter of 1990 to the trough in the first quarter of 1993 by around 5 per cent. During the 
crisis 2008–2009, GDP fell from a peak prior to the crisis in the fourth quarter of 2007 to a 
trough in the first quarter of 2009 by around 7.5 per cent. These falls are thus in the same 
magnitude as the insurance premium. If the premium and the damage are about the same 
size, is it a sensible insurance policy? 
It is actually possible that in certain special situations effects may arise from relatively small 
increases in the interest rate, when combined with words of warning from the central bank 
and  financial  supervisory  authorities.  As  Charles  Bean,  deputy  governor  of  the  Bank  of 
England, said in his paper presented at the Jackson Hole conference in 2010: ”[T]here may 
be times when a mixture of words and modest interest rate action can be effective in cooling 
excessive  market  exuberance[.]”7  However,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  such  effect  from  limited 
interest  rate  increases  has  been  actually  proved.  Moreover,  there  is  hardly  anyone  who 
would claim that the Swedish housing and mortgage market is characterised by “excessive 
market exuberance”. As far as I know, no one has referred to any indicators of exaggerated 
and  unrealistic  optimism  regarding  current  developments  in  housing  prices.  In  his  paper, 
Bean  reaches  the  same  conclusion  that  is  supported  today  by  extensive  research  and 
practical experience: “[G]enerally speaking, monetary policy seems too weak an instrument 
reliably  to  moderate  a  credit/asset–price  boom  without  inflicting  unacceptable  collateral 
damage on activity. Instead, with an additional objective of managing credit growth and asset 
                                                
5  Sveriges Riksbank (2011). 
6  Results  using  Swedish  data  in  Claussen,  Jonsson  and  Lagerwall  (2011)  entail  a  reduction  (or  avoiding  an 
increase) in housing prices of 10 per cent during a seven-year period normally requiring a policy rate increase 
that  leads  to  GDP  being  6 per  cent  lower  than it  would  otherwise  have  been.  Under  the  assumption  of  an 
Okun coefficient of 2, this means an increase in unemployment of 3 percentage points. Assenmacher-Wesche 
and  Gerlach  (2010)  find,  using  data  from  18  countries,  that  a  reduction  in  property  prices  of  10  per  cent 
normally requires a policy rate increase that leads to GDP being 4 per cent lower than it would otherwise have 
been and thus with the same Okun coefficient, to unemployment being 2 percentage points higher.  
7  Bean, Paustian, Penalver and Taylor (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
prices  in  order  to  avoid  financial  instability,  one  really  wants  another  instrument  that  acts 
more directly on the source of the problem.”8  
Given that the policy rate has such small effects on housing prices and such large effects on 
inflation and unemployment, it quite simply does not appear possible to use monetary policy 
and the policy rate to limit household debt at present, without clear prejudice to the mandate 
to maintain price stability and attain the highest sustainable rate of employment.9 
Monetary policy can hardly affect real housing prices and loan-to-value ratios in the 
long run 
Another important issue is whether monetary policy can affect real housing prices and loan-
to-value ratios in the long run and thus affect household debt. A fundamental and generally-
accepted  insight  in  modern  macroeconomics  is  that  monetary  policy  cannot  affect  real 
variables such as production, employment, unemployment, in the long run.10 Monetary policy 
can  only  affect  nominal  variables  in  the  long  run,  for  instance,  prices,  inflation  and  the 
exchange  rate.  According  to  the  same  generally-accepted  insight,  monetary  policy  cannot 
affect real interest rates and real asset prices in the long run. Nor can monetary policy affect 
the size of the housing stock and its real value in the long run, nor the way it is funded by 
means  of  borrowing  and  own  capital.  This  is  instead  determined  by  by  real  and  structural 
conditions in the economy, including the functioning of the housing and mortgage markets 
and the housing and tax policies conducted. Monetary policy can only affect real variables 
during a limited period of time and means that only for a limited period they can deviate from 
their long-run sustainable paths of development. As I mentioned earlier, monetary policy has 
very little effect on housing prices and debt even in the short run.  
People sometimes talk about the “long-run effects of today’s monetary policy” on household 
debt, but according to this reasoning, monetary policy has no long-run effect on household 
debt.11 Monetary policy is stabilisation policy, not structural policy. Influencing household debt 
in the long run thus requires structural policy, such as fiscal, tax and housing policy, as well 
as financial stability policy, so-called macroprudential policy.  
A task for macroprudential policy 
The  large  negative  effects  on  the  economy  as  a  whole  mean  that  it  is  hardly  possible  at 
present to use the policy rate and monetary policy to influence housing prices and household 
indebtedness  without  prejudice  to  the  mandate  of  price  stability  and  highest  sustainable 
employment. It is better to use other, more direct means, which do not entail such large real 
                                                
8  Bernanke  (2010,  2011)  reaches  the  same  conclusion.  Bernanke  (2010,  Slide  9)  also  shows  that  for 
20 countries the relationship between how expansionary monetary policy is (measured as deviations from a 
Taylor rule) and how house prices have developed is very weak, not statistically significant, and only explains 
5 per cent of the variability in the increase in housing prices between the countries. 
9  According  to  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  “[t]he  objective  for  monetary  policy  is  to  maintain  price  stability”, 
According  to  Government  Bill  1997/98:40,  “[a]s  an  authority  under  the  Riksdag,  the  Riksbank,  without 
prejudice to the price stability market, should furthermore support the goals of general economic policy with a 
view  to  maintaining  a  sustainable  rate  of  growth  and  high  employment”.    (My  italics.)  I  interprete  “high 
employment” as “highest sustainable employment”. 
10  One exception is when average inflation deviates from average inflation expectations for a long period of time. 
Then  average  inflation  below  inflation  expectations  will  increase  average  unemployment,  see  Svensson 
(2012a). 
11  According to Englund’s (2011) article on the development of housing prices and explanations for this in the 
Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks in the housing markets, monetary policy plays no role here and real housing 
prices are explained by real quantities. In the general equilibrium model for housing prices calculated using 
Swedish  data  by  Walentin  and  Sellin  (2010)  and  which  is  also  used  by  Claussen,  Jonsson  and  Lagerwall 
(2011), monetary policy has no long-run effect on housing prices or household debt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economic costs. Examples of such measures include the loan-to-value cap, regulations on 
deductions for mortgage rates, taxes, capital adequacy requirements, risk weights and so on. 
Keeping  an  eye  on  risks  related  to  household  debt  is  a  task  for  the  policy  area  known  as 
macroprudential  policy.  As  yet,  there  is  no  fully-developed  framework  for  macroprudential 
policy in Sweden. The financial crisis committee, which was appointed by the Government, is 
currently  looking  into  the  design  of  such  a  framework  –  for  instance,  which  tools  should  be 
used and by whom. However, some measures belonging to the macroprudential toolbox have 
nevertheless  been  implemented  and  apparently  to  good  effect  –  here  I  am  thinking  of 
Finansinspektionen's  loan-to-value  cap.  According  to  the  report  on  the  housing  market  that 
Finansinspektionen published in March 2012, the loan-to-value cap has had the intended effect 
and the loan-to-value ratio for new mortgages is now falling for the first time for many years. 
A short-cut in the reasoning 
Monetary  policy  thus  has  relatively  little  effect  on  housing  prices  and  household  debt,  but 
relatively  large  effect  on  inflation  and  unemployment.  Moreover,  there  are  other,  better 
instruments  than  the  repo  rate  available.  One  can  therefore  claim  that  the  first  statement 
above,  that  household  debt  in  Sweden  today  entails  sufficiently  large  risks  to  need  to  be 
addressed, does not have any significance for monetary policy. It is not monetary policy that 
should  be  used  if  household  debt  needs  to  be  addressed.  But  let  me  nevertheless  also 
discuss the first statement.  
How should we regard household debt in Sweden at present? This is where I perceive that 
those who advocate a higher repo rate because of household debt tend to take a short cut in 
their reasoning. They usually refer to the financial crisis and developments in other countries 
as a warning example of how badly things can go if one allows debt to build up and housing 
prices  to  rise.  They  then  express  concern  for  Swedish  household  sector  debt  and  say  – 
without mentioning the research that has shown that monetary policy has very little effect on 
housing  prices  and  debt  –  that  a  higher  repo  rate  is  necessary  to  prevent  developments 
similar to those in the countries that were hit hardest in the financial crisis. Sometimes one 
adds an argument that basically states that even if we cannot see any immediate threats in 
Sweden at present, this does not mean that they do not exist. In many of the countries where 
things  have  gone  very  badly,  people  did  not  see  the  risks,  they  say,  so  not  seeing  a  risk 
doesn’t mean there isn’t one – a variation of the argument that “this time is (not) different”.12  
Let me emphasise that I certainly do not mean that risks linked to high indebtedness should 
be ignored. In the light of events in recent years I find it difficult to imagine that anyone would 
fail  to  agree  that  governments,  legislators  and  financial  supervisory  authorities  should  do 
everything  in  their  power  to  prevent  and  limit  the  consequences  of  future  crises.  But  I 
nevertheless feel that the argument that household debt entails major risks and needs to be 
addressed must be substantiated in a sufficiently convincing manner.  
After all, there is always a small risk that things can go badly wrong. If one is content to refer 
to  this,  one  could  justify  more  or  less  any  type  of  policy.  What  one  must  try  to  make 
sufficiently credible is the risk that things will go badly wrong is sufficiently large that it needs 
to be addressed. One must also be able to show that the proposed changes have sufficient 
effect on the risks in relation to the costs of the measures taken.  
It  is  not  enough,  in  my  opinion,  to  express  concern  for  high  indebtedness  and  refer  to  the 
financial  crisis.  One  must,  as  far  as  possible,  make  an  assessment  of  households’  entire 
                                                
12  This alludes to a book on financial crises from an historical perspective by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), This 
Time  is  Different,  Princeton  University  Press.  The  title  of  the  book  is  ironic  and  refers  to  the  fact  that 
immediately prior to each financial crisis there has been a tendency to regard the current situation as special 
and quite different from previous crises. However, many who refer to the book appear to have missed the fact 
that monetary policy has a very obscure rule as reason for financial crises there. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
financial situation, including their balance sheets with both assets and liabilities, as well as their 
debt-servicing ability, on the basis of the facts and analyses at hand. It is important to try to 
answer questions such as “What signs point to households having excessive debt?”, “To what 
extent  can  housing  prices  be  explained  by  economic  and  structural  factors?”  and  “How 
vulnerable are  Swedish  banks and households?” All in all,  it is  important to assess  whether 
household debt is sustainable and whether households have sufficient resilience to shocks in 
the  form  of  higher  interest  rates,  a  fall  in  housing  prices  and  increased  unemployment,  and 
what consequences such shocks could have for the banks and for the macro economy.  
How great are the risks from household debt? 
So  what  do  the  available  facts  and  surveys  tell  us?  With  regard  to  the  sustainability  of 
housing  prices,  the  Riksbank’s  own  inquiry  into  the  risks  in  the  housing  market,  which  I 
mentioned earlier, indicates for example that housing prices can essentially be explained by 
what  are  usually  termed  fundamentals,  namely  growth  in  disposable  incomes,  a  long-run 
trend towards falling real mortgage rates, the abolition of wealth and property taxes, a ceiling 
for  municipal  property  taxes  and  little  new  construction.  There  are  no  signs  that  Swedish 
houses  are  overvalued  –  that  there  is  a  housing  bubble.  As  housing  prices  are  due  to 
fundamentals,  these  must  change  for  housing  prices  to  change,  and  changes  in 
fundamentals  normally  occur  fairly  slowly.  This  reduces  the  risk  of  large  falls  in  housing 
prices.13  If fundamentals are  at  sustainable  levels,  housing  prices  will  also  be  sustainable. 
The increase in housing prices now appears to have slowed down and they are roughly at 
the same levels as at the end of 2010 (Figure 1). 
Figure 1  
Prices of single-family dwellings and tenant-owned apartments 
Index January 2008 = 100 
Valueguard (single-family house)
Mäklarstatistik (single-family house)
Valueguard (tenant-owned apartment)
Mäklarstatistik (tenant-owned apartment)
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
05
07
09
11
Sources: Mäklarstatistik and Valueguard 
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
                                                 
13  One example of a fundamental relationship that changed suddenly was the drastic reduction in the right to 
make deductions for mortgage interest that were included in the tax reform at the beginning of the 1990s. The 
mortgage  rate  after  tax  increased  drastically  for  many  borrowers.  Even  the  real  interest  rate  increased 
drastically, despite the severe recession. This is something that one can hardly expect to happen within the 
current inflation targeting regime. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Is household indebtedness sustainable? Opinions on this are divided, but allow me to begin 
by  pointing  out  here  that  households  have  very  strong  balance  sheets. Household  debt  in 
relation to disposable income, the debt ratio, has increased over several years and the debt 
ratio  is  now  around  170  per  cent  of  disposable  income  (see  Figure  2). However,  the  debt 
ratio has stopped growing as of 2011 and the Riksbank’s forecast for the coming three years 
is for an unchanged debt ratio. Households have total assets, excluding collective pension 
insurances, that have grown in line with their debt and they are approximately 510 per cent of 
disposable incomes, that is, three times as large as their debt. Households’ gross solvency, 
net  assets  (own  capital)  in  relation  to  total  assets,  is  thus  approximately  70  per  cent.  The 
relationship  between  household  debt  and financial  and  real  assets  (the latter  consisting of 
own  homes,  second  homes  and  tenant-owned  apartments)  has  been  relatively  stable  and 
without  a  trend  for  several  decades.  Households’  increased  debt  in  relation  to  disposable 
incomes has thus been accompanied by a corresponding increase in net wealth in relation to 
disposable  income.  Households  also  have  collective  pension  claims  of  more  than  120  per 
cent of their disposable income.  
Figure 2 
Households’ assets and debt in relation to disposable income 
Per cent 
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
81
Real assets (own home, tenant-
owned apartments, second homes)
Total assets (excluding collective
pensions)
Debt
Total own saving, excluding
collective charges (right scale)
85
89
93
97
01
05
09
13
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank  
12
9
6
3
0
-3
-6
 Households’  “leverage  ratio”,  net  wealth  over  total  assets,  compared  with  the  relationship 
between capital and total assets among the banks and some large Swedish listed companies 
in  2011  (Figure  3).  Households  thus  have  a  leverage  ratio  comparable  with  the  best- 
capitalised  listed  companies  and  much  greater  than  the  banks’  very  small  ratios  between 
capital and total assets.14 Swedish households are also well capitalised from an international 
perspective.15 
                                                
14  Households,  unlike  the  large  listed  companies,  have  a  separate  disposable  income  that  mainly  consists  of 
wages and that can be seen as return on the household’s human capital. Households’ human capital is not 
included  in  the  normal  balance  sheet  for  households.  To  assess  the  value  of  human  capital  one  can 
conservatively take the present value of 20 years of disposable income (many young households will work for 
a much longer period). With a 5 per cent interest rate after tax and a disposable income that grows by 4 per 
cent  the  current  value  of  this  will  be  roughly  1  800  per  cent  of  disposable  income.  The  average  remaining 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Households’  interest  payments  on  their  debt  is  not  high  from  an  historical  perspective.  At 
present, it is just over 4 per cent of disposable income. With a high mortgage rate of 7 per 
cent before tax, the mortgage rate after tax will be around 5 per cent. With an interest rate 
after  tax  of  5  per  cent,  the  interest  payment  will  be  5  per  cent  of  170  per  cent,  which  is 
8.5 per cent of disposable income. This is not particularly high, especially in comparison with 
the  cost  of  renting  a  home,  which  can  be  on  average  20  per  cent  of  disposable  income. 
When  assessing  whether  households’  debt  ratio  of  170  per  cent  in  relation  to  disposable 
income is sustainable in the long run, however, the most relevant indicator is the households’ 
net  debt  service,  that  is,  the  debt  service  households  must  pay  to  keep  the  debt  ratio 
constant. Then it is necessary to take into account the fact that disposable income increases 
over time. With a disposable income that can be expected to grow by 4 per cent in the long 
run,  therefore,  4  per  cent  should  be  deducted  from  the  mortgage  rate  before  tax  of  5  per 
cent. There then remains only 1 per cent of the debt of 170 per cent, that is, the net debt 
service  required  in  the  long  run  to  keep  the  debt  ratio  constant  is  only  1.7  per  cent  of 
disposable income.16 With this reasoning, a debt ratio of 170 per cent is sustainable with a 
considerable margin.  
Figure 3  
Capital over assets for households, some large listed companies  
and Swedish banks 
Per cent 
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Sources: Dagens Industri (capital/assets 2011 for listed companies and Swedish banks) and 
the Riksbank (household net wealth/assets). 
                                                                                                                                                    
surplus  of  disposable  income  in  a  “left-to-live-on”  analysis  –  which  is  described  in  footnote  17  –  is  around 
58 per cent. The current value of this surplus is then around 1 000 per cent of disposable income. When these 
figures  are  compared  with  a  debt  of  170  per  cent  and  added  to  real  and  financial  assets  of  510  per  cent, 
households’ leverage ratio and debt-servicing ability undoubtedly appear to be pretty good. 
15  Isaksen, Lassenius Kramp, Funch Sørensen and Vester Sørensen (2011). 
16  A high mortgage rate after tax could be 5 per cent. A long-run level for the repo rate of 4 per cent plus an 
historically-high spread of 3 percentage points gives a mortgage rate before tax of 7 per cent and after tax of 
approximately  5  per  cent  ((1-0.3)x7=4.9).  From  this  we  should  deduct  a  figure  for  sustainable  growth  in 
disposable income, say 4 per cent – 2 per cent real growth and 2 per cent inflation. This leaves us with 1 per 
cent. See Svensson (2012b). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The household debt situation is also analysed in Finansinpektionen’s (the Swedish financial 
supervisory authority) report, The Swedish Mortgage Market. Finansinspektionen observes in 
this report that the loan-to-value cap has had an effect. Households’ loan-to-value ratios for 
new loans fell in 2011, and the percentage of houses with a loan-to-value ratio of more than 
85 per cent has halved since 2009, to just under nine per cent. The banks make stringent 
credit  assessments  of  borrowers  using  a  “left-to-live-on”  calculation  with  a  high  mortgage 
rate.17 Stress tests also show that most households that have taken out a new mortgage and 
which should be the most vulnerable, have a good debt-servicing ability and are resilient to 
increases  in  interest  rates,  falls  in  housing  prices  and  increases  in  unemployment.18  In 
contrast to what was the case during the 1990s crisis, however, large interest rate increases 
probably will not coincide with high unemployment. Finansinspektionen’s conclusion is that 
“Only  a  limited  portion  of  the  households  are  affected  even  when  simultaneously  applying 
assumptions  of  sharp  drops  in  house  prices  and  sharp  rises  in  unemployment,  which 
indicates that Swedish mortgages are currently not a threat to financial stability.“ Moreover, 
this  resilience  has  also  been  tested  in  real  time.  The  financial  crisis  2008–2009  hit 
households in Sweden through a large fall in GDP, a rapid increase in unemployment and 
housing prices that fell by 10–20 per cent depending on which statistics you use (Figure 1). 
The euro crisis has recently entailed a new stress test. Swedish households and mortgage 
borrowers have also passed this test with flying colours.  
The Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks in the housing market also observed that resilience in 
the Swedish mortgage market was good. It estimated the effects on the economy of a fall in 
housing  prices  of  20  per  cent  and  concluded  that  the  effects  would  be  relatively  small, 
particularly if they are counteracted by a more expansionary monetary policy.19 
One  important  indicator  of  sustainability  and  resilience  is  the  household  saving  ratio. 
Swedish households’ saving ratio is now historically high, while it was very low prior to the 
1990s  crisis,  minus  3  per  cent  at  its  lowest  (Figure  2).  A  high  saving  ratio  means  that 
households are increasing their real and financial assets and that their consumption is not 
funded  by  loans.  A  low  saving  ratio  and  a  loan-funded  consumption  boom,  which  was  the 
case in Sweden prior to the 1990s crisis and in the United States prior to the most recent 
crisis,  is  on  the  other  hand  problematic  and  not  sustainable.  Studies  indicate  that  the 
probability  of  suffering  a  large  fall  in  housing  prices  almost  doubles  if  the  saving  ratio  is 
unusually low.20  
An important difference between Sweden and countries that have experienced severe falls in 
housing prices, such as Ireland, Spain and the United States, is that the latter have also had 
a  construction  boom  (see  Figure  4).  This  gradually  led  to  an  over-production  of  housing, 
which  in  turn  contributed  to  housing  prices  falling  even  more  once  the  market  began  to 
weaken. A construction boom appears to be an important – perhaps necessary – ingredient 
in the recipe for crisis in the property sector. 
                                                
17  A  “left-to-live-on”  calculation  estimates  the  difference  between  disposable  income  and  housing  and 
maintenance costs, possible alimony payments and a standard for households’ cost of living. The banks take 
into account the borrower’s whole loan situation and assume on average a mortgage rate of around 8 per cent 
when calculating interest costs and assume some amortisation will be made. Finansinspektionen (2012). 
18  A stress test of housing prices in the report shows that a large price fall of 40 per cent and an increase in 
unemployment of 20 percentage points without unemployment benefit means that only 10 per cent of the new 
mortgage  borrowers  have  a  loan-to-value  ratio  of  over  100  per  cent  and  a  deficit  in  a  “left-to-live-on” 
calculation. (Finansinspektionen 2012, Figure 17). 
19  Claussen, Jonsson and Lagerwall (2011). In the minutes of the monetary policy meeting held in June 2010 
(Sveriges Riksbank 2010), I show that a more expansionary monetary policy than is assumed in Claussen, 
Jonsson and Lagerwall (2011) can almost neutralise the effects on inflation and GDP of a fall in house prices, 
even taking into account the zero lower bound for the repo rate. 
20  Armelius and Dillén (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Another  important  difference  between  the  current  situation  in  Sweden  and  the  situation  in 
Sweden prior to the 1990s crisis and in the Baltic countries, Ireland, Portugal and Spain prior 
to the most recent crisis, is that the economies in the latter cases were clearly overheated 
with  unsustainable  growth  and  price  and  wage  inflation.  One  can  scarcely  claim  that  the 
Swedish economy is overheated today or even that the construction and housing sectors are 
overheated. As I said, housing prices appear to have levelled off (Figure 1). 
Figure 4  
Housing investment 
Per cent of GDP 
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Central Statistics Office Ireland, Federal Statistical 
Office, Germany, National Statistics Institute, Spain and Statistics Sweden 
 So how is the lenders’, that is the banks’, resilience? A lack of financial strength in the banks 
created major problems in Sweden during the 1990s crisis and is also causing problems for 
several  countries  in  Europe  now.  But  according  to  the  Riksbank’s  own  Financial  Stability 
Reports,  the  banking  system  in  Sweden  is  currently  well-capitalised  and  functioning 
smoothly.21  Even  if  we  were  thus  to  see  a  fall  in  housing  prices,  which,  contrary  to 
expectations, led to problems in the housing sector as a whole, there is only a small risk that 
this in turn would lead to problems for the banks. Here it is worth noting that during the crisis 
in the 1990s, when housing prices fell dramatically, it was not the loans to households that 
caused major loan losses, but the loans on commercial property. 
The conclusion that I reach overall with regard to the question of risks linked to households’ 
current  debt  is  that  it  does  not  appear  possible  to  prove  that  they  are  a threat  to financial 
stability or to the macro economy. But this is not the main reason why I say that monetary 
policy should not be used to limit household debt – the main reason is that monetary policy 
and the policy rate are unsuitable for this purpose.  
                                                
21  See, for instance, Financial Stability Report 2012:1. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Why more expansionary monetary policy? 
A  well-balanced  monetary  policy  is  normally  a  question  of  finding  an  appropriate  balance 
between  stabilising  inflation  around  2  per  cent  and  stabilising  the  real  economy  around  a 
sustainable  path.  The  real-economy  indicator  that  in  my  opinion  is  the  most  appropriate  to 
focus on is unemployment.22 Monetary policy should thus try to stabilise unemployment around 
the rate that is assessed as sustainable in the long run. How well are the targets met? 
Inflation  is  currently  very  low.  In  October,  CPI  inflation  was  0.4  per  cent.  According  to  the 
Riksbank’s forecasts it will be below one per cent as an annual average in both 2012 and 
2013. However, CPI inflation is affected by the Riksbank’s repo rate changes and the cuts in 
recent years have contributed to the low CPI inflation. But CPIF inflation, which gives a better 
picture of inflationary pressures in periods of large interest rate adjustments, will be around 
one per cent as an annual average in 2012 and 2013. Thus, inflation is far below the target, 
whichever  measure  one  uses.  According  to  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s 
assessment of the Swedish economy in August 2012, both CPI and CPIF inflation will be well 
below the target in both 2013 and 2014, despite the forecasts assuming a much lower repo-
rate path than the Riksbank’s.23 Sweden has the lowest inflation in the European Union.  
What about developments in the real economy? The outlook is poorer than before for both 
the  world  economy  and  the  Swedish  economy.  Swedish  exports  have  slowed  down 
substantially and growth is now expected to be weaker. Unemployment is very high, 7.8 per 
cent  in  September,  when  seasonally-adjusted,  and  moreover  it  is  rising  (Figure  5).  This 
means that unemployment in Sweden is as high as that in the United States and almost as 
high as in the United Kingdom (7.9 per cent). At the same time, unemployment is much lower 
in  other  countries  that  should  reasonably  be  comparable  with  Sweden,  such  as  Germany 
(5.4  per  cent),  the  Netherlands  (5.4  per  cent),  Austria  (4.4  per  cent)  and  Norway  (3  per 
cent).24  
                                                
22  I describe this in more detail in, for instance, Svensson (2011a). 
23  National Institute of Economic Research (2012, Figures 12 and 43). 
24  Data gathered from Eurostat and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. As a result of the differences in publication 
dates  between  the  countries,  the  most  recent  figures  refer  to  July  with  regard  to  the  United  Kingdom  and 
Norway, and to September for the Netherlands, Germany, Austria, Sweden and the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Figure 5  
Unemployment  
Per cent of the labour force, seasonally-adjusted data 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Austria
Norway
USA
Sweden
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Germany
90
05
Sources: The Bureau of Labor Statistics and Eurostat 
95
00
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
 I am sure most people would agree with me that actual unemployment is much higher now 
than any reasonable estimate of long-run sustainable rate of unemployment, even if I know 
of course that estimates of long-run sustainable rate of unemployment are uncertain.25  
Why has monetary policy been so stringent that it now results in such low inflation and such 
high  unemployment,  a  target  fulfilment  that  must  be  regarded  as  very  poor?  Why  did  the 
Riksbank begin to raise the repo rate in summer 2010, despite the fact that the forecast for 
CPIF  inflation  was  below  the  target  and  the  forecast  for  unemployment  was  above  any 
reasonable estimate of the long-run sustainable rate of unemployment?26 The reason could 
be  that monetary  policy  has  been  aimed  at  limiting  household  debt,  although this  purpose 
was  not  as  clearly  stated  as  has  been  the  case  more  recently.  A  more  expansionary 
monetary policy, in line with what Karolina Ekholm and I have advocated, would have led to a 
better outcome in terms of inflation and unemployment.  
                                                
25  By  the  long-run  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment,  also  known  as  the  long-run  equilibrium  rate  of 
unemployment, I refer to the rate of unemployment in steady state, where the economy is in a state of what is 
known as balanced growth, the effect of all shocks has waned and expectations are fulfilled. This should not 
be confused with other more short-run equilibrium concepts. According to Rogerson (1997), this is the only 
equilibrium concept for unemployment that is well-defined. The Ministry of Finance’s (2011) assessment from 
April  2011  entails  a  long-run  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  of  5  per  cent.  The  National  Institute  of 
Economic  Research’s  (2011)  assessment  from  December  2011  entails  a  long-run  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment of 5.8 per cent. The Riksbank's (2012b) assessment from July 2012 lies in an interval with a 
midpoint of 6.25 per cent. My own assessment is that the Riksbank’s midpoint is an overestimate of around 
0.75  percentage  points  and  that  long-run  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  is  thus  around  5.5  per  cent 
(Sveriges Riksbank 2012a, appendix). 
26  In Svensson (2011b) I note that the forecasts for inflation and unemployment looked similar for Sweden and 
the United States in summer 2010 and that in this situation the Federal Reserve held its policy rate close to 
zero  and  began  to  prepare  QE2,  the  second  round  of  its  quantitative  easing,  while  the  Riksbank  began  to 
raise its policy rate.   
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
How high is the cost of the current policy? How much lower would unemployment have been 
with  a more  expansionary  monetary  policy?  Let  us  assume that  inflation  would  have  been 
1 percentage point higher and thus been closer to the target now. According to an empirical 
estimation  using  Swedish  data,  a  1  percentage  point  higher  inflation  rate  leads  to  around 
1.3 percentage  points 
fewer 
unemployed.27 This could perhaps give rise to 4 per cent higher housing prices, according to 
the results from Claussen, Jonsson and Lagerwall (2011).28 Would this have increased the 
risks in household debt so much that it would nevertheless be better to have 65,000 more 
unemployed?29 Not as far as I can see.  
lower  unemployment,  corresponding 
to  around  65,000 
Positive with an open debate 
As I have discussed, much of the debate conducted has been based on the differences in 
opinion  regarding  whether  household  debt  entails  risks  to  financial  stability  and  the  macro 
economy, whether monetary policy is a suitable means for influencing household debt and 
whether it is worth holding back inflation and keeping unemployment up to reduce the risks of 
indebtedness. As according to extensive research in the field, monetary policy has little effect 
on  household  debt  but  large,  negative  consequences  in  the  form  of  low  inflation  and  high 
unemployment  and  there  are  more  effective  means  that  are  already  used,  I  draw  the 
conclusion that monetary policy should not be used to try to influence debt. Moreover, in my 
opinion  it  is  not  clear  that the  current  level  of  household  debt  entails  any  risks  to financial 
stability or the macro economy. But once again – potential risks should and can be managed 
using  other  means  than  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  should  instead  be  aimed  at 
maintaining price stability and attaining the lowest sustainable rate of unemployment.  
Let me conclude on a positive note. Previously, as I see it, it was not so easy to determine 
where the main dividing line went in views on monetary policy, and the discussion therefore 
tended to have less focus than it ought to. Recently, the dividing line has become clearer, 
which is good.  
A situation that I nevertheless believe there is fairly considerable agreement on is that there 
are other tools than the repo rate better suited to managing household debt and promoting 
financial stability. Monetary policy should be “the last line of defence”, not the first line. As I 
noted earlier, a potential framework for macroprudential policy is being investigated. Once a 
framework  is  in  place,  monetary  policy  will  be  “unburdened”  in  that  one  of  the  tasks  that 
some people feel it should carry out will be removed – namely to prevent a substantial build-
up of debt in the household sector. This means that the differences of opinion on monetary 
policy should decline considerably. And hopefully this will happen fairly soon. 
In  Sweden  we  have  deliberately  chosen  to  have  a  high  degree  of  openness  regarding 
monetary  policy.  This  means  that  the  discussions  conducted  by  the  Executive  Board  take 
place on an open stage, almost, through the publication of the minutes from the monetary 
policy  meetings  and  through  the  speeches  held.  In  many  other  central  banks  these 
differences of opinion never see the light of day.  
                                                
27  Svensson  (2012a).  The  estimate  is  of  course  uncertain.  As  shown  in  Svensson  (2012a),  a  95-per  cent 
confidence 
interval  between 
1/1.1= 0.9 percentage points and 1/0.4=2.5 percentage points, corresponding to a confidence interval for the 
estimate  65,000  unemployed  between  45,000  and  125,000.    An  estimate  using  the  Riksbank’s  model 
Ramses, in accordance with the effects of various repo-rate paths as described in Svensson (2010), leads to 
roughly the same estimate of 1.2 percentage points.  
the  estimate  1.3(=1/0.75)  percentage  points  gives  an 
interval 
for 
28  If 3 percentage points lower unemployment corresponds to around 10 per cent higher housing prices, then 
1.3 per cent higher unemployment will give roughly 1.3*10/3 = 4.3 per cent higher housing prices. 
29  With even higher inflation and an inflation rate above the target, which according to Qvigstad’s (2005) criteria 
is justified when unemployment is higher than the long-run sustainable level, unemployment could have been 
even lower, and housing prices marginally higher. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
This openness naturally has consequences, and not all of them positive. For example, there 
may  sometimes  be  a  little  too  much  focus  on  the  potential  antagonism  and  differences  of 
opinion within the Board – and in the worst case on a person rather than a policy. But one 
positive  effect that  people  perhaps  do  not  think about  is  that topical  and  important  issues, 
often those in the forefront of academic research, are quickly implemented in the Riksbank’s 
practical work. The fact that the Executive Board publicly debates what role the policy rate 
should  play  to  influence  household  debt  means  that  the  Riksbank’s  analysis  apparatus  is 
activated on this issue to a greater extent than would have been the case without this open 
discussion.  
Although I would not say that there are any more concrete results yet, there is definitely a lot 
of deliberation being put into this issue. I do not believe that this would have been the case – 
at least not to the same extent – if all of the Board members were agreed that the repo rate 
should  be  held  slightly  higher to  subdue  household  debt. In  other  words,  the  open  debate 
hopefully helps us to move forward in this field.  
References 
Armelius, Hanna and Hans Dillén, “The relation between household saving and falls in house 
prices”, Economic Commentary no. 4, 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Katrin,  and  Stefan  Gerlach  (2010),  “Monetary  policy  and  financial 
imbalances: Facts and fiction”, Economic Policy 25, pp. 437–482. 
Bean, C., M. Paustian, A. Penalver and T. Taylor (2011), “Monetary Policy After the Fall”, in 
Macroeconomic  Challenges:  The  Decade  Ahead,  pp.  267–328,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City. 
Bernanke,  Ben  (2010),  AER  Papers  and  Proceedings  [speech  at  AEA  meeting,  January 
2010] 
Bernanke, Ben (2011), ”The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and 
Practice”,  speech  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  56th  Economic  Conference, 
18 October 2011.  
Calmfors,  Lars  (2012),  “Riksbanken  måste  bli  tydligare  (The  Riksbank  must  be  clearer), 
column in the Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter on 13 September. 
Claussen,  Carl  Andreas,  Magnus  Jonsson  and Björn  Lagerwall  (2011), “A  macroeconomic 
analysis of housing prices in Sweden”, in Sveriges Riksbank (2011), pp. 67–95. 
Englund, Peter (2011), “Swedish house prices  in an international perspective”, in Sveriges 
Riksbank (2011), pp. 23–65. 
Finansinspektionen (2012),”The Swedish Mortgage Market”, 13 March 2012. 
Ingves,  Stefan  (2012),  “Stora  risker  med  alltför  låg  ränta”(major  risks  with  an  overly  low 
interest rate), Svenska Dagbladet newspaper, 18 October. 
Isaksen, Jacob, Paul Lassenius Kramp, Louise Funch Sørensen and Søren Vester Sørensen 
(2011), ” Household Balance Sheets and Debt – an International Country Study”, Danmarks 
Nationalbank Monetary Review, 4th Quarter 2011, Part 2, pp. 39–81. 
Jansson,  Per  (2012),  ”My  view  on  inflation  targeting”,  speech  at  Karlstad  University, 
11 October. 
National Institute of Economic Research (2012), The Swedish Economy, August 2012. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2011),  ”Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Lessons  from  the  Crisis”,  NBER 
Working Paper No. 16755. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Qvigstad,  Jan  F.  (2005),  “When  Does  an  Interest  Rate  Path  ‘Look  Good’?  Criteria  for  an 
Appropriate Future Interest Rate Path – A Practician’s Approach”, Staff Memo No. 2005/6, 
Norges Bank. 
Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different,  Princeton 
University Press. 
Rogerson, Richard (1997), “Theory Ahead of Language in the Economics of Unemployment”, 
Journal of Economic Perspective 11 (Winter), pp. 73–92. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010), “Why a lower repo-rate path?” speech held at Umeå University, 
24 February 2010.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2011a),  "For  a  better  monetary  policy:  Focus  on  inflation  and 
unemployment”, speech at Luleå University on 8 March 2011. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O. (2011b), “Practical  Monetary  Policy,  Examples  from  Sweden  and  the 
United States”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011, pp. 289–332. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2012a), “The Possible Unemployment Cost of Average Inflation below 
a Credible Target”, working paper, www.larseosvensson.net. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2012b),  “Utmaningar  för  Riksbanken  –  penningpolitik  och  finansiell 
stabilitet,"(Challenges for the Riksbank – monetary policy and financial stability) Ekonomisk 
Debatt no. 5 2012, year 40, 17–29. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2010), “Minutes of the monetary policy meeting”, no. 3, 30 June 2010. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2011), The Riksbank's inquiry into risks in the Swedish housing market, 
www.riksbank.se. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012a), “Minutes of the monetary policy meeting”, no. 3, 3 July 2012. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012b), Monetary Policy Report, July 2012. 
Walentin, Karl, and Peter Sellin (2010), “Housing Collateral and the Monetary Transmission 
Mechanism”, Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper No. 239. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
