Glenn Stevens: Producing prosperity 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Committee 
for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (CEDA)  Annual  Dinner,  Melbourne,  20  November 
2012. 
 Thank you for the invitation to join you for your Annual Dinner.  
Financial  markets  and  policymakers  have  been  living  in  a  more  or  less  continual  state  of 
anxiety for over five years. While it was poor-quality lending in the US mortgage market that 
proved to be a key cause of problems, from quite early on it became apparent that European 
banks also had serious difficulties, because of their exposure to securities of doubtful quality, 
their high leverage and their need to fund US dollar portfolios on a short-term basis. It was in 
August 2007 that those acute funding difficulties first became apparent in European markets.  
Five years on, US banks have made a lot of progress in working through their asset quality 
problems  and  their  capital  deficiencies.  At  times  the  process  was  not  pretty,  but  the 
US system is in better shape today as a result. US taxpayers have earned a positive return 
on the investments in major banks that were made at the height of the crisis.  
In Europe progress has been much slower. There are various reasons for that, not least the 
sheer complexity of coordinating the process of evaluating and strengthening balance sheets 
across so many countries, where the national capacities to assist are so different, and within 
the  strictures  of  a  currency  union.  This  exacerbates,  and  in  turn  is  compounded  by,  the 
deterioration in economic conditions in Europe, which feeds back to bank asset quality and 
sovereign creditworthiness.  
It is perhaps no surprise then that the news seems to have been dominated by the ebb and 
flow of anxiety over things like: whether or not the “troika” will recommend further funding for 
Greece; whether a national constitutional court will strike down a government’s participation 
in  initiatives  that  will  assist  other  countries;  or  whether  the  populace  in  a  country  under 
pressure will reach the end of its tolerance for “austerity” – and so on. There is “event risk” 
almost weekly. This is the European drama.  
Unfortunately,  it  is,  I  suspect,  set  to  continue  that  way  for  quite  some  time.  Over  recent 
months financial market sentiment has improved, from despair to mere gloom, as a result of 
a number of important steps that have been taken and commitments that have been made. It 
is right that this improvement in sentiment has occurred – it recognises the determination of 
the  Europeans  to  save  the  euro,  which  should  not  be  underestimated.  But  there  is  much 
more to do, and it will take a considerable time. So while good progress is being made, we 
will not, any time soon, see a point at which the “euro problem” can be seen as past. The 
world will have to live with euro area anxiety for some years yet as a normal state of affairs.  
In  the  meantime  the  US  economy  has  continued  its  slow  healing.  The  US  housing  sector 
has,  it  would  appear,  finally  turned.  Now  the  election  is  past,  the  so-called  “fiscal  cliff”  is 
rapidly coming into focus – a new source of event risk. But if one is prepared to assume that 
the  US  political  system  will  not,  in  the  end,  preside  over  an  unintentional  massive  fiscal 
contraction next year, the risks to the US economy probably look more balanced than they 
have been for a while. An upside surprise would be as likely as a downside one. It would be 
fascinating  if,  in  another  year,  we  find  ourselves  looking  back  at  a  US  economy  that  had 
outperformed  expectations.  (There  is  still  of  course  a  critical  need  for  the  US  to  craft  a 
measured  and  credible  path  back  to  fiscal  sustainability.  That  particular  drama  could 
continue as long as the European one.)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  it  is  appropriate  to  turn  our  gaze  to  our  own  part  of  the  world,  especially  in  the 
current period of discussion about “the Asian Century”. Two years ago, when I last spoke to 
CEDA’s Annual Dinner, a key feature of my presentation was this chart.1  
Graph 1  
  This evening I can show how the chart looks when updated for two more years of data and 
our revised estimates for the near-term outlook. The terms of trade ended up rising further 
than  assumed  two  years  ago,  and  have  then  fallen  back  from  the  peak,  though  the  level 
recorded in the most recent quarter is about 7 per cent higher than was in the forecast two 
years ago.2  
The event is sufficiently unusual that we can add one twist to the chart. Instead of a five-year 
average,  we  can  show  a  decade-long  average.  The  chart  in  fact  shows  an  eleven-year 
average, which allows the measure to be centred on the current year. To do this of course 
we need to make a five-year-ahead assumption. We have assumed that the terms of trade 
decline steadily, at a pace a little faster than implied by forecasts of private analysts. What is 
unusual about this event is not just the peak level observed, but the apparent persistence of 
high  levels.  The  terms  of  trade  will  very  likely  record  over  a  decade  an  average  level 
50 per cent higher than the previous long-term mean. That is a big deal. Even with a more 
pessimistic assumption – say that commodity prices fall by twice as much over the next five 
years –  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  easily  the  biggest,  and  the  most persistent,  terms  of 
trade event for a very long time.  
 
                                                
1  See Stevens G (2010), ‘The Challenge of Prosperity’, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 69–75. 
2 
I noted two years ago that a ship load of iron ore, which five years previously had had the same value as 
2,200 flat screen television sets, was by late 2010 buying 22,000 such TVs – an increase in that particular 
“terms of trade” of a factor of ten. As of the current quarter the figure is 28,000. At the peak, it reached 38,000. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2  
  
Still, the terms of trade have peaked, and will probably have fallen by about 15 per cent by 
the end of this year. Further declines over time are likely. So while a high level of the terms of 
trade continues to add to the level of national income, we can no longer expect that a rising 
terms of trade will be adding to growth in living standards. We are entering a new phase.  
This is not so much because of the “end of the mining boom”. As a matter of fact, talk of the 
“end of the mining boom” has been somewhat overhyped. The “boom” is not so much ended 
as simply evolving, as these events would be expected to. Thoughtful commentators have 
already pointed out on a number of occasions that there are three phases to the “boom”.  
The first was the rise in prices – something that began as far back as about 2004. The peak 
in prices was more than a year ago now. The Reserve Bank began noting that prices had 
declined in our monthly interest rate announcements in October 2011. But relative prices for 
natural resources are still high. At this point, the terms of trade are down to the “peak” seen 
in the September quarter of 2008, which was of course a fifty-year high.  
The second phase of the “boom” is the rise in resource sector physical investment. This is 
aimed at taking advantage of expected high demand for iron ore, coal, natural gas and other 
commodities  over  the  medium  term,  at  prices  which  are  attractive  relative  to  costs  of 
production, including the cost of capital. The peak in this build-up lies ahead. It has, for some 
time, been our expectation that it will occur in 2013 or 2014; that expectation seems to be 
firming up. The actual level of the peak is probably going to be a bit lower than we thought 
six months ago, in view of the somewhat lower, and more variable, prices for iron ore and 
coal observed in recent months.  
But it’s worth putting that downward revision into perspective. For fifty years, resource sector 
investment  was  typically  between  1  and  2 per cent  of  GDP,  with  cyclical  peaks  at  about 
3 per cent (Graph 3). The uncertainty now is over whether it will peak at closer to 8 per cent 
of  GDP  than  9 per cent.  What  isn’t  uncertain  is  that  either  number  is  very  high  by  any 
historical standard.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Graph 3  
  It’s also worth observing that, in any episode of this nature, there will always come a point 
when some potential projects, conceived at the time when prices were at their highest and 
when  costs  were  about  to  start  mounting  quickly  as  well,  have  to  be  shelved.  Actually,  if 
projects that rely on extremes of pricing and optimism can be shelved before they get too far, 
that  is  preferable  to  having  them  continue.  More  generally  some  important  parts  of  the 
resources sector have now reached a point where the costs of further expansion in capacity, 
relative to those that might be expected elsewhere in the world, are a much more important 
factor in investment decisions than they were a couple of years ago.  
The third phase of the “boom” is when the capacity to extract and export higher quantities of 
resources is actually used. This phase has begun for iron ore but it is mostly still ahead of us, 
especially  for  gas.  The  main  uncertainty  is  really  over  the  prices  that  will  be  achieved  as 
higher supply – and not just in Australia – comes on stream. Such uncertainty is, and always 
has been, part and parcel of the business of investing in resource extraction.  
Perhaps what people have found a little unnerving over the past year is that as the prospect 
of  rising  supply  of  key  natural  resources  gets  closer,  and  prices  have  declined  from  their 
peaks, the Chinese economy has been in transition to slower growth. It was inevitable that 
China  would  slow  to  some  extent,  from  the  very  rapid  pace  seen  for  much  of  the  past 
decade. The signs it needed to do so were quite evident: increasing general price inflation, 
escalating  property  prices,  doubts  about  the  process  of  credit  growth  and  credit  risk 
management, and so on. But just how big a slowing was occurring? For much of this year, 
that  was  the  question  that  people  have  been  trying  to  answer.  My  assessment  is  that  the 
slowdown has been more material than had been expected a year ago, but not disastrously 
so. There are some signs that the moderation may have run its course, though further data 
are needed before such a view could be offered with confidence.  
So  the  Chinese  economy  has  not  crashed.  But  neither  is  it  likely  to  return  to  the  sorts  of 
double-digit  percentage  rates  of  growth  in  real  GDP,  and  15 per  cent  growth  rates  for 
industrial production, that we saw for some years. People expecting that to resume are likely 
to experience disappointment.  
These trends are entirely consistent with two propositions that we have advanced over the 
past  several  years.  The  first  was  that  China’s  economy  would  have  an  important  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
increasing  weight  in  the  regional  and  global  economies.  China’s  economy  is  nearly  three 
times the size it was a decade ago. One corollary of this is that even “moderate” growth in 
China is quantitatively significant. If China grew by, say, “only” 7 per cent in 2013, that would 
add more to global GDP than the 10 per cent growth recorded in 2003.3  
The  second  proposition  was  that  China,  like  all  economies,  has  a  business  cycle.  It  is 
affected by what happens elsewhere in the world, and by its own internal dynamics, including 
the decisions of its policymakers. Swings in China’s economic performance are increasingly 
affecting  Australia’s  economy  and  that  of  the  region  –  and  the  world.  Hence  the  focus  on 
monthly data reports from China these days in our business press, in addition to the focus on 
the Chinese political situation. The Chinese “purchasing managers index” is now as keenly 
awaited, and is as potentially market moving, as the original US PMI measure, known these 
days as “ISM”.4 There is some tentative evidence that Chinese data “surprises” have become 
increasingly  influential  in  driving  movements  in  Australian  financial  prices  such  as  the 
exchange rate and share prices.  
Turning then to Australia, two years ago I noted that we could not know how much of the rise 
in  the  terms  of trade  would  be  permanent,  and  that  there  was  therefore  a  case  to  save  a 
good proportion of the additional national income until it became clearer what the long-run 
prospects might be. In a manner of speaking, we have, as a community, done something like 
that.  The  marked  rise  in  the  rate  of  saving  by  households  in  2008  and  2009  has  been 
sustained.  Corporations  have  also  increased  their  saving  considerably  over  the  past  five 
years, opting to repay debt and lower their gearing ratios.  
Admittedly,  government  saving  has  been  lower  for  a  time,  for  countercyclical  purposes, 
though  that  is  now  scheduled  to  rise  as  well.  For  the  nation  as  a  whole,  the  fact  that  the 
current account deficit has been lower on average in the past few years than in the period 
from 1985 to 2005, at the same time as the share of business investment in GDP has been 
exceptionally high, indicates that national saving has been higher. In fact it has been at its 
highest share of national income since the late 1980s.  
This change can be seen as a sensible response to an unusually high level of the terms of 
trade. Something else has also been at work, though, in household behaviour. I have spoken 
about this before but it bears saying again, because it is fundamental to understanding the 
current  economic  situation.5  After  a period 
levels  of  confidence, 
macroeconomic  stability,  easy  availability  of  credit  and  rising  asset  values  saw  Australian 
households borrow more and save less, households have over recent years changed their 
behaviour in respect of spending, saving and borrowing. They have gone back towards what 
was once considered as “normal”.6  
This really had nothing to do with the resource boom. But it has had important implications 
for some key business sectors. Financial institutions are finding that growth in credit is now a 
single-digit number, not a double-digit one as it had been for so long. Businesses that in the 
earlier  period  of  optimism  derived  earnings from  high  rates  of turnover  in  asset  markets  – 
real estate agents, stock brokers, for example – face challenges, given that turnover is now 
greatly reduced.  
in  which  high 
                                                
3 
In 2003, China’s growth in real GDP of 10 per cent added 0.8 of a percentage point to global GDP. If China’s 
growth in 2013 is 7 per cent, that will add a full percentage point to global GDP. 
I  am  old  enough  to  remember  when  the  ISM  index  was  referred  to  as  the  “NAPM”  index,  compiled  by  the 
National Association of Purchasing Management. 
4 
5  Stevens G (2011), ‘The Cautious Consumer’, RBA Bulletin, September, pp 77–82. 
6  The focus on households is not to deny that businesses have also become more circumspect about debt as 
well. But corporate leverage did not really rise much in the preceding decade, at least outside a few celebrated 
instances.  It  was  the  change  in  household  debt  that  was  the  defining  feature  of  the  period  from  the  early 
1990s to about 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The retail sector now faces different consumers. It is not actually that consumers have no 
income to spend, nor that their confidence levels are that low, nor that their saving rate is that 
high. Measures of confidence that date back to the 1970s show it to be roughly at its long-run 
average. The household saving rate as measured by the Australian Statistician, at just over 
10 per cent, is not, in fact, high in the broader sweep of history (Graph 4).  
Graph 4  
 To be sure, confidence was persistently very high for years up to 2008, and saving was very 
low – even falling to about zero, as measured, at one point. But that period was unusual. I 
don’t think it will return. Moreover consumers are much more knowledgeable about prices as 
a  result  of  information  technology,  and  have  at  their  disposal  ways  of  responding  to  that 
information that a decade or more ago they did not have. This is putting pressure on retail 
business models, on wholesaling and distribution, and also on segments of the retail property 
sector.  
Given  that  the  change  to  household  behaviour  was  probably  inevitable,  the  income  boost 
from the terms of trade arrived at a rather fortuitous time. It helped to accommodate a rise in 
household  saving  and  a  slowdown  in  the  build-up  of  debt  in  a  fairly  benign  fashion.  The 
weakness  of  some  other  parts  of  private  demand,  and  openness  to  imports  with  a  high 
exchange rate has also meant that a very large expansion in mining investment has been 
accommodated  without  overheating  the  economy  overall.  As  it  was,  total  real  private  final 
demand in Australia rose by 6 per cent in 2011/12, well above trend.  
With  the  peak  in  the  investment  phase  of  the  mining  boom  now  coming  into  view,  the 
question naturally arises as to how the balance between the various types of demand in the 
economy will unfold. Mining investment will contribute less to growth in domestic demand in 
the current fiscal year than it did last year, and less again next year. Working in the other 
direction, it is likely that export volume growth will begin to strengthen as the capacity being 
installed in the resource sector is used. That would show up as GDP growth, though it may 
be  predominantly  reflected  as  higher  measured  productivity  rather  than  generating  a  large 
volume of extra employment.  
The  question  will  be  whether  other  areas  of  domestic  demand  start  to  strengthen.  Many 
households  have  made  progress  in  reducing  debt  burdens.  At  some  point  that  might  be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expected  to  lead  to  such  households  feeling  more  inclined  to  spend.  But  a  complex 
interaction of factors – asset values and expectations about job security to mention two – will 
be  at  work  in  ways  that  are  not  amenable  to  accurate  short-term  forecasting.  Overall,  our 
assumption is that consumption will probably continue to grow at about trend pace, in line 
with income.  
Public demand is scheduled to be subdued as governments seek to return budget positions 
to  surplus. The  near-term  outlook for  business  investment  spending  outside  the  resources 
and resource-related sectors is subdued, judging by currently available leading indicators. In 
most  cycles,  it  takes  time  for  this  sort  of  investment  to  turn;  this  episode  looks  like  no 
exception. The exchange rate may also have some role in helping the needed re-balancing. 
While  it’s  not  surprising that the  Australian  dollar  has  been  very  strong given  the  terms of 
trade event we have had, it is surprising that it has not declined much, at least so far, given 
that  the  terms  of  trade  peaked  more  than  a  year  ago.  A  lower  exchange  rate  would,  of 
course, need to be accompanied by a pace of growth of domestic unit costs below that seen 
for much of the past five years, in order to maintain low inflation.  
One  area  of  stronger  potential  demand  growth  is  dwelling  construction,  which  has  been 
unusually weak. It is not clear, actually, that the degree of weakness has been adequately 
explained. Various explanations have been offered – interest rates too high, housing prices 
falling, zoning restrictions, planning delays, construction costs, lack of “confidence”, all have 
featured. At present, at least some of the pre-conditions one might expect to be needed for 
higher  construction  seem  to  be  coming  into  place.  Interest  rates  have  declined,  dwelling 
prices  seem  to  have  stopped  falling,  rental  yields  have  risen,  and  the  availability  of 
tradespeople is assessed as having improved. We have, moreover, seen a rise in approvals 
to build. So there is some evidence of a turning point, albeit a belated one.  
Will the net effect of these developments mean that aggregate demand rises roughly in line 
with the economy’s supply potential over the next couple of years, or will a significant gap 
emerge? That is the question the Reserve Bank Board is trying to answer every month when 
it sits down to decide the stance of monetary policy.  
As of the most recent meeting, as the minutes released earlier today show, the Board felt 
that further easing might be required over time. The Board was also conscious, though, that 
a  significant  easing  of  policy  had  already  been  put  in  place, the  effects  of  which  were  still 
coming through  and  would  be  for  a  while.  In  addition,  the  latest  inflation  data,  while  not  a 
major  problem,  were  a  bit  on  the  high  side,  and  the  gloom  internationally  had  lifted  just  a 
little. So it seemed prudent to sit still for the moment. Looking ahead, the question we will be 
asking  is  whether  the  current  settings  will  appropriately  foster  conditions  that  will  be 
consistent with our objectives – sustainable growth and inflation at 2–3 per cent.  
Over the long run, though, the bigger question, for all of us here tonight and in the business 
and policy making community generally, isn’t about the monthly interest rate decision. The 
big  question  is:  what  is  the  sustainable  growth  rate  of  the  economy?  Beyond  its  role  of 
preserving the value of money, monetary policy can do little to affect that sustainable growth 
rate.  Moreover,  the  initial  contribution  of  rising  mineral  prices  to  our  standard  of  living  has 
now run its course. To be sure, a higher capital stock devoted to extracting resources at high 
prices, assuming they continue, will make its contribution for many years – to the extent that 
Australians own some of that capital, work with it or receive tax revenues. But the biggest 
contribution to growing living standards will be what it has always been other than in periods 
(usually not long-lived) of exceptional luck, and that is productivity performance. I noted two 
years ago that while our terms of trade are handed to us, for better or worse, by international 
relative prices, the efficiency with which we work is a variable we can actually do something 
about.7  
                                                
7  See Stevens G (2010), ‘The Challenge of Prosperity’, RBA Bulletin, December, p 75. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
For  some  years  there  had  been  evidence  of  a  slowing  in  productivity  growth,  beyond  the 
unusual factors clearly at work in a couple of sectors (mining and utilities). The most recent 
data  on  productivity  show  signs  of  a  pick-up  in  the  year  2011/12,  which  is  encouraging 
(Graph 5).  
Graph 5  
  It is much too soon to conclude that a new, stronger trend is emerging – in this field much 
longer  runs  of  data  are  needed.  In  my  opinion,  the  accelerated  structural  change  we  are 
seeing  in  the  economy  for  various  reasons  is  likely  to  result  in  some  improvement  in 
productivity performance. But the most that can be said, at this stage, is that the data are not 
inconsistent with that hypothesis.  
At this point when talking about productivity, I usually become circumspect. One reason is 
that I know that people might ask what we might do to improve productivity performance, and 
I am acutely aware that the improvement has to be delivered in enterprises all around the 
country  –  the  ones  associated  with  CEDA  and  millions  more.  Productivity  does  not  rise 
simply because of exhortation or official pronouncements.  
As for policy measures, at a meeting in Brisbane earlier this year, I said:  
The Productivity Commission has a long list of things to do. My answer to what 
we can do about productivity is: go get the list and do them.8  
                                                
8  The background to this is that, as part of our preparations for possible questions about productivity from the 
House Economics Committee, I had at one stage asked the Reserve Bank staff to compile a list of areas of 
reform that the Productivity Commission had covered at various times. It was this list I had in mind when I 
made the comment in June. At one hearing of the House Economics Committee I in fact read from such a list. 
See House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics (2011), Reserve Bank of Australia Annual 
Report  2010,  HRSCE,  Melbourne,  26  August.  Available  at  <http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/ 
committees/commrep/306ee889-2f7e-4661-964b-5264b58b7169/toc_pdf/Standing%20Committee%20on%20 
Economics_2011_08_26_393_Official_DISTRIBUTED.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf#search=%22committe
es/commrep/306ee889-2f7e-4661-964b-5264b58b7169/0001%22>. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
That comment elicited some attention. The Chairman of the Productivity Commission was, I 
am led to understand, inundated with media demands for “the list” and had to explain that it 
didn’t quite exist in that form. But Chairman Gary Banks has very kindly drawn one together, 
in his final public speech at the end of a very distinguished tenure in that position.9 His list is 
a rather more complete one than mine. In fact it is a set of lists, under three headings: things 
that affect incentives, things that affect capabilities and things that affect flexibility. What was 
perhaps most striking was the comment in the conclusion that no single policy offered the 
secret to success.  
To quote:  
Rather, what is needed is an approach to “productivity policy” that embraces both 
the drivers and enablers of firm performance, and is consistently applied. That in 
turn  requires  policy-making  processes  that  can  achieve  clarity  about  problems, 
reach  agreed  objectives  and  ensure  the  proper  testing  of  proposed  solutions 
(including  on  the  “detail”  and  with  those  most  affected).  The  beneficial  and 
enduring structural reforms of the 1980s and 1990s are testimony to the value of 
these  policy-making  fundamentals.  Good  process  in  policy  formulation  is 
accordingly  the  most  important  thing  of  all  on  the  “to  do  list”,  if  we  are  serious 
about securing Australia’s future productivity and the prosperity that depends on 
it.10  
It couldn’t have been better put.  
As the “mining boom” moves from its second to its third phase over the next year or two, the 
world economy will continue to present its own challenges. Australia will, as always, need to 
adapt  to  the  changing  circumstances.  Looking much further  ahead,  to  “the  Asian  century”, 
our opportunities are large. But to grasp them, that same adaptability, combined with a clear 
focus and steadiness of purpose will be key. We need to produce our sought after prosperity; 
it won’t just come to us. All of us have our role to play, CEDA and its members included. I 
wish you every success.  
                                                
9  See  Banks  G  (2012),  ‘Productivity  policies:  The  “to  do”  list’,  Speech  at  the  Economic  and  Social  Outlook 
Conference,  ‘Securing  the  Future’,  Melbourne,  1  November.  Available  at  <http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/ 
assets/pdf_file/0009/120312/productivity-policies.pdf>. 
10  See Banks G (2012), op. cit. p 20. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
