Benoît Cœuré: Restoring trust in the Economic and Monetary Union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Forum Eco Libération ESCP “Reprendre confiance en (l’)Europe”, panel discussion: 
“L’Euro méfiance, c’est fini?”, Paris, 1 December 2012. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  panel  that  touches  on  a  topic  very  close  to  our 
hearts at the ECB: trust in our common currency, the euro.1  
In  any  society,  the  monetary  contract  fundamentally  rests  on  trust,  and  I  will  borrow  the 
explanation from my co-panellist, Michel Aglietta: “Money involves trust because it is a debt 
between society as a whole and each of its members.”2 Remember that credit comes from 
credere and fiduciary comes from fidere, both verbs meaning to trust in Latin.  
As for trust in a central bank, well, that is secured and reaffirmed by permanent assessment 
of  the  central  bank’s  performance  against  its  mandate  and  strategy.  Such  an  assessment 
has become very complicated as a result of the global financial crisis. Communication about 
the intentions and policy actions of a central bank has long been focused on its decisions on 
the level of the short-term interest rate and, in the case of some central banks, on the likely 
direction  of  that rate.  But  in  a  deep financial  crisis  this  channel  of  policy  interventions  and 
communication  becomes  less  significant.  Compared  with  standard  practices,  non-standard 
instruments of policy are arcane tools which are difficult to describe and interpret.  
Today I will try to illustrate how the ECB has fulfilled its mandate in an environment in which 
our traditional instruments have been tested to their limits. As you know, this situation led us 
–  and  many  other  major  central  banks  –  to  vastly  expand  our  toolkit  of  policy  initiatives. 
Communication and the accountability of policies involving non-standard measures need to 
be  intensified  during  a  crisis  such  as  the  current  one.  In  this  vein,  I  will  explain  how  to 
interpret the latest decision to conduct outright monetary transactions (OMTs) in secondary 
markets  for  sovereign  bonds.  I  will  conclude  with  some  remarks  on  the  democratic 
accountability of the central bank in these testing conditions.  
Mandate and strategy of the central bank 
A central bank receives legitimacy when it is assigned a clear mandate by the people in its 
jurisdiction. A mandate is a simple statement of duty. The Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union, for example, assigns the ECB the pursuit of a “primary objective of price 
stability  over  the  medium  term”.  This  formulation  establishes  –  at  nothing  less  than 
international Treaty level – a hierarchy of priorities. First, the ECB has to ensure that price 
stability  is  accomplished  over  the  medium  term.  Price  stability  is,  by  the  way,  the  most 
important contribution that monetary policy can make to achieving high levels of economic 
activity  and  employment.  Then,  and  provided  that  precedence  is  respected,  the  ECB  can 
support  the  economic  policies  of  the  EU  on  a  broader  scale.  The  legal  formulation  of  the 
Treaty  is  an  abstract  determination  of  priorities.  To  define  the  objective  precisely  and 
establish a relationship between the objective and the policy – consistently conducted and 
communicated – a strategy is needed. 
                                                
1  
I  wish  to  thank  Tobias  Linzert,  Stefano  Nardelli,  Massimo  Rostagno  and  Arthur  Saint-Guilhem  for  their 
contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
2   Michel  Aglietta:  “Money:  a  matter  of  credit  and  trust”,  Journées  internationales  d’économie  monétaire  et 
bancaire, Lyon, 6–7 juin 2002. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The strategy of the ECB makes the Treaty mandate more precise in three respects. First, it 
provides  a  quantitative  definition  of  “price  stability”  by  indicating  a  range  for  year-on-year 
changes  in  the  harmonised  index  of  consumer  prices  which  the  ECB  considers  consistent 
with  conditions  of  stable  prices.  That  does  not  necessarily  mean  zero  inflation.  The  price 
stability range that the ECB considers equivalent to “stable prices” covers positive inflation 
rates lower than 2%.  
Second, the strategy identifies, within that range, inflation levels which the Governing Council 
of the ECB aims for, in its monthly policy decision. We aim at inflation rates that are below, 
but close to, 2%. In the identification of its policy orientation, the ECB bears in mind that an 
inflation rate too close to zero restrains the conduct of policy in deep recessions and it also 
filters out a host of factors that distort the measurement of the policy-relevant drift in prices.3 
Third,  the  strategy  describes  and  structures  a  host  of  economic  and  monetary  variables 
which can signal risks to price stability before they materialise. This set includes important 
monetary  and  financial  variables  which  influence  the  way  monetary  policy  intentions  are 
transmitted to price-setting decisions in the medium term.  
As I said, the strategy turns the Treaty assignment into an action plan which, if I may borrow 
from  performance  management  jargon,  I  would  call  S.M.A.R.T.  —  Specific,  Measurable, 
Attainable, Relevant and Timely.  
Let  me  focus  on  the  “M”  and  “A”.  The  action  plan  is  measurable,  and  we  can  assess  the 
ECB’s progress towards that goal by looking at its record. Prices since the start of the euro 
have indeed been stable and in line with our definition. The average inflation rate over the 
past 13 years has been slightly higher than 2%.4 The goal was attainable and it was attained. 
Monetary policy and lack of trust in the integrity of the euro area 
Over the summer the price of bonds issued by some governments in the euro area fell on 
concerns that investors’ claims could be discharged by the issuer in a currency other than 
the euro, the currency of denomination.  
The prospect of a disintegrating monetary union is harmful for both weak and strong member 
countries. Weak economies experience a currency run, which in the single financial space of 
a  monetary  union  translates  into  two  phenomena:  loss  of  value  for  any  liability  issued  by 
domestic borrowers – including the sovereign – and a depleting deposit base for domestic 
banks. Here, the scramble for liquidity and the flight from bank liabilities act as a powerful 
shock  on  domestic  money  demand.  This  is  a  money  demand  shock  of  the  worst  possible 
kind,  one  which  shrinks  the  money  multiplier  and  puts  downward  pressures  on  domestic 
consumer  prices.  At  the  same  time,  countries  perceived  as  safe  havens  are  the  target  of 
significant capital inflows, which mainly take place via cross-border bank transfers. In these 
receiving countries, the monetary base expands. But in order to induce local depositors to 
hold  the  excess  cash  which  they  are  receiving,  the  expected  return  on  all  the  competing 
assets has to fall. This means that the prices of a wide range of securities and of real capital 
are bid up on impact. Asset price inflation looms. 
What  is  the  role  of  the  central  bank  which  finds  itself  in  the  middle  of  these  panic 
transactions?  
                                                
3   Monetary  policy  should  offset  the  genuine  drift  in  the  nominal  scale  of  the  economy,  which  measures  the 
progressive loss of purchasing power of the currency. It should not resist increases in prices that reflect the 
rising quality of the goods and services included in the consumer basket, or equilibrium adjustments in the 
price level of economies in a catching-up phase, the so-called “Balassa-Samuelson effect”. 
4   Annual  rate  of  change  of  HICP  (overall  index,  monthly  data,  and  source:  Eurostat).  The  average  is 
2.06% between January 1999 and October 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Integrity and financial cohesion are, jointly, an absolute pre-condition for the Treaty objective 
of price stability to be and to remain a measurable objective for which the ECB can be held 
accountable, and in that sense, they are undoubtedly part of its mandate. The mere prospect 
of  a  reversible  currency  area  –  for  all  or  some  of  its  members  –  makes  the  geographical 
domain for measurement undefined. In addition, and worse, it debases the unit of account 
function of the euro, not only for a subset of members, but for all of them.  
Furthermore, the stability of the financial system is a pre-condition for the strategy of the ECB 
to remain a meaningful guide for action. If price discovery in financial markets is perturbed, 
the chain of asset price changes which monetary policy depends upon to transmit its impulse 
to  the  economy  becomes  dysfunctional  and  unpredictable.  As  a  consequence,  the  single 
objective of price stability becomes un attainable.  
It is against this background that in the summer the ECB took two decisions. First, to restore 
the conditions for our S.M.A.R.T. strategy to be applicable as a concrete guide for monetary 
policy. Second, to combat the cause of the disease, not its symptoms, but within the precise 
confines  of  our  mandate.  According  to  our  diagnosis,  the  cause  was  the  pricing  of  a 
catastrophic event – exit from the euro – into governments’ debt valuations. The symptom 
was – once more – an acute liquidity crisis for banks.  
The  framework  of  the  outright  monetary  transactions  (OMTs)  is  now  well  known.  Here,  I’ll 
limit my remarks to one specific aspect of this new policy initiative, which we announced in 
early  August.  It’s  the  fact  that  this  initiative  is  entirely  in  the  tradition  of  our  non-standard 
monetary policy instruments. Let me explain.  
Broadly speaking, there are two approaches to non-standard monetary policy. The first one 
can be referred to as “quantitative easing”. It focuses on the importance of portfolio balance 
channels in the transmission mechanism. In essence, it aims to inject further stimulus in a 
situation in which the policy rate is constrained by its lower bound.5  
Under  the  second  approach  to  non-standard  policies,  a  central  bank  does  not  aim  to 
withdraw  duration  risk  from  the  economy.  It  relies  on  the  market-functioning  channel  and 
aims  to  reduce  the  spread  between  the  yield  paid  by  risky  securities  or  standard  loan 
contracts and risk-free securities with the same maturity. It does not necessarily aim to inject 
additional stimulus in lower-bound conditions, but to repair a breakdown in asset pricing and 
in the functioning of the credit market.  
So far, the ECB has consistently adopted the second approach to non-standard policies. In 
the early phase of the crisis, we re-absorbed the liquidity risk and the market counterparty 
risk that banks were facing in interbank transactions. In keeping with this second approach, 
the aim was to repair the functioning of the market, not to add stimulus in a situation in which 
the policy rate was still positive.  
OMTs,  as  their  name  suggests,  will  operate  through  outright  transactions,  not  lending 
operations. But, in essence, they have the same purpose as the non-standard measures we 
adopted  in  2008  and  2009:  to  price  out  a  type  of  catastrophic  risk  premium  that  investors 
demand in conditions of market paralysis. It was break down risk in the early stage of the 
crisis, the risk that the payments system would seize up completely. It is break- up risk now.  
                                                
5   The policy intervention works by reducing the supply of long-duration securities considered as risk-free and 
increasing the supply of zero-duration reserves. To the extent that private investors do not view these assets 
as  perfect  substitutes,  in  order  for  private  investors  to  be  willing  to  make  those  portfolio  adjustments,  the 
expected return on the long-duration securities has to fall. With less duration risk to hold in the aggregate, the 
market should require a lower premium to hold that risk. To the extent that the pricing of long-dated risk-free 
securities  provides  a  floor  for  the  pricing  of  any  other  types  of  long-dated  securities,  this  operation  is 
expansionary as it lowers the whole yield structure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
There  is  another  parallel  between  our  early  liquidity  operations  with  banks  and  OMTs.  In 
providing  liquidity  to  our  banking  counterparties,  we  cannot  and  do  not  want  to  subsidise 
banks that are failing. Our liquidity support is not and should not be equity support. Likewise, 
in pricing out the break-up risk in sovereign debt securities, we cannot and do not want to 
subsidise governments. Our interventions can only take place in the secondary market: they 
are not fiscal transfers and adequate safeguards are attached so that they do not become 
so. 
While  banks  are  subject  to  solvency  regulations,  governments  –  because  of  sovereign 
immunity  –  are  not.  So,  we  need  a  supranational  structure  which  guarantees  that 
government  solvency  –  fiscal  sustainability  and  macroeconomic  viability  –  is  in  place  and 
sufficiently constrains national policies. This is why  we need programme conditionality and 
multilateral  surveillance  as  a  precondition  to  initiate  OMTs.  Without  successful  policy 
reforms, there will be no OMTs.  
On the issue of possible inflation risks stemming from OMTs, let me assure you that, from a 
pure liquidity perspective, OMTs will not inject one euro more into the economy. All possible 
purchases will be fully sterilised through the absorption of the additional liquidity elsewhere. 
How should the ECB be held accountable?  
Before I conclude, let me briefly turn to the issue of accountability, which – as I said in my 
introduction  –  is  essential  to  secure  and  reaffirm  trust  in  the  central  bank.  For  the  ECB, 
accountability to the people of Europe is not only a matter of good accountability practices. It 
is important for the central bank of a currency union to reach out to the whole euro area, to 
people  in  all  parts  of  Europe  and  to  spread  trust  in  our  currency,  our  institution  and  our 
policies.  
As I mentioned, the ECB is accountable to the people of the European Union and – as that 
Union  is  a  representative  democracy  –  to  the  European  Parliament,  which  is  the  only 
European  institution  elected  by  popular  vote.  Our  President  regularly  visits  Parliament  to 
report on and explain the ECB’s policies. The Governors of the national central banks in the 
Eurosystem have similar hearings before their national parliaments.  
In  addition,  we  have  a  continuous  dialogue  with  all  relevant  institutions  involved  in  the 
European  political  process,  such  as  the  European  Commission,  and  we  have  regular 
exchanges  with  the  finance  ministries  of  the  euro  area  Member  States.  We  also  regularly 
report on and publish our monetary policy decisions. This panel today is one such occasion. 
Especially in times of crisis, when policies become less conventional and more complex, it is 
all the more important to carefully explain our decisions. We do this, but – I also realise – we 
could  do  better:  we  have  to  steadily  adapt  our  communication  channels  and  satisfy  the 
increased  demand  for  clear  and  timely  information  in  the  unconventional  times  we  are 
passing through. It is also clear to us that any additional task entrusted to the ECB (such as 
banking  supervision,  currently  under  discussion)  must  be  matched  by  additional  reporting 
and accountability channels. 
Looking ahead: completing the architecture of EMU  
Let me conclude. The euro deserves trust – and trust in the euro as a currency depends on 
trust in the euro as a project. The ECB, with the legitimacy provided by the fulfilment of its 
mandate, will do everything within this mandate to ensure price stability in the euro area and 
therefore trust in the euro as a currency. But trust in the euro as a project relies on a more 
complex framework and structures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In a recent article,6 the German philosopher Jürgen Habermas and his co-authors argue that 
a rallying cry of the American War of Independence – “No taxation without representation” – 
has a new and unexpected resonance in today’s Europe. Once we create scope in the euro 
area for policies that result in redistributive effects across national boundaries – they write – 
European  legislators  who  represent  the  people  must  be  able  to  decide  and  vote  on  these 
policies. I tend to sympathise with this view.  
European  leaders  have  a  great  opportunity  to  rectify  the  now  apparent  failings  of  EMU’s 
institutional structures. In particular, the financial market architecture must be at the centre of 
our discussions on the future of EMU.  
The intellectual foundation of the monetary union is Robert Mundell’s insight that exchange 
rate stability, financial integration and national monetary policies are incompatible objectives: 
a concept that has been called “Mundell’s trilemma”, or the “impossible trinity”. We now find 
ourselves  bound  by  a  concept  that  Dirk  Schoenmaker  has called  the  “financial  trilemma”:7 
namely,  that  pursuing  simultaneously  financial  stability,  financial  integration  and  national 
financial policies is unfeasible. Any two of the three assignments can be combined, but not 
all  three.  In  this  crisis,  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  but  national  responsibility  for 
financial  policies  has  resulted  in  financial  instability.  We  can  solve  this  trilemma  either  by 
going  back  to  financial  markets  delimited  by  national  borders  or  by  passing  financial  and 
crisis management policies to the euro area level. The latter is the only viable solution. It is 
the most conducive to economic growth, as it will help European companies and households 
reap the benefits of a single financial market based on a deep pool of savings.  
Some  institutional  reforms  have  already  been  undertaken.  They  represent  a  great  step 
forward. We have made national fiscal policies more responsible under the Fiscal Compact, 
and subject to stronger surveillance. We have created a permanent solidarity framework – 
the European Stability Mechanism. It can provide financial assistance to Member States in 
difficulty, thereby reducing threats to financial stability in the euro area as a whole.  
But  we  need  continuous  efforts,  particularly  in  the  area  of  financial  policies.  The  “Four 
Presidents” of the EU were mandated to provide a vision for Europe. In the context of our 
discussion  today,  I  would  say  that  they  were  tasked  with  identifying  and  outlining  the 
minimum conditions to ensure the full viability of the euro area – which are the same as the 
minimum conditions to ensure continued trust in the euro.  
Four  pillars  have  been  identified:  a  banking  union  with  a  single  supervision  and  common 
resolution  framework;  a  fiscal  union  to  prevent  and  correct  unsustainable  fiscal  paths;  an 
economic union that can guarantee sufficient competitiveness to sustain high employment; 
and a political union that can deeply engage euro area citizens.  
As I discussed accountability, let me say a word on the last pillar, political union. I think that 
the general issue here is to clarify who does what, to establish a network of responsibilities. 
The notion that the euro is a currency without a state is in my view misguided. The euro is a 
currency  with  a  state  –  but  it’s  a  state  whose  branches  of  government  are  not  yet  clearly 
defined. The ECB is part of the construction of Economic and Monetary Union, with a very 
clear but very limited mandate. The other parts – I am thinking in particular of the delineation 
between  the  Commission  and  the  Council  –  still  require  clarification.  The  proposal  put 
forward by Jean-Claude Trichet of a “euro area Treasury” would be an important step in that 
direction. The ECB is independent and fully accountable, but it needs clearly identifiable and 
fully empowered interlocutors.  
                                                
6   Peter  Bofinger,  Jürgen  Habermas  and  Julian  Nida-Rümelin:  “Einspruch  gegen  die  Fassadendemokratie”, 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 3 August 2012. 
7   Dirk Schoenmaker (2011): “The Financial Trilemma”, Economic Letters 111 (2011) 57–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
We all have in mind Robert Schumann’s prediction that “Europe will be built through concrete 
achievements  which  first  create  a  de  facto  solidarity”.  Now  that  the  euro  area  crisis  has 
created  de  facto  solidarity,  there  is  a  need  for  concrete  achievements  to  complete  EMU. 
This,  together  with  the  individual  commitment  of  each  government  to  restore  balanced 
growth and employment, is a necessary condition for lasting stability.  
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
