Øystein Olsen: Monetary policy from the perspective of a commodity-
exporting country 
Dinner speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2012. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
I would like to thank the ECB for hosting this conference on a topic that is a core interest for 
us in Norges Bank. It is a pleasure to visit the ECB in Frankfurt. In my remarks tonight, I will 
give  you  a  glimpse  into  the  historical  background  for  our  economic  framework  and  the 
conduct of monetary policy in Norway today. 
As you know, Norway is in the fortunate position of having ownership rights to large natural 
resources. Oil was discovered in the North Sea in 1969. Back then, it soon became clear that 
oil and gas would be a source of substantial wealth – and government expenditure and social 
programmes expanded rapidly. 
By 1977, a surplus on the current account had turned into a deficit of 12 percent of GDP. The 
deficit  was  three  times  larger  than  that  of  Italy  and  Spain  last  year.  Predictably,  we  also 
experienced  a  contraction  in  the  non-oil  tradable  sector.  Fiscal  policy  had  fuelled  a 
boom-bust economy and had to be reversed and tightened. Many Norwegians experienced a 
decline in real income. 
When  oil  prices  fell  in  1986,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  hit  again.  We  experienced  a 
collapse in house prices, as well as a severe banking crisis, a foreign exchange crisis, fiscal 
deficits  and  high  inflation.  Hermod  Skånland,  the  Norwegian  central  bank  governor  at  that 
time, summarised the causes of the crisis as “bad banking, bad policy and bad luck.” 
Efforts were now focused on bringing public spending under control, while large parts of the 
banking system were nationalised. Unemployment soared. Monetary policy aimed at a stable 
krone exchange rate, resulting in high real interest rates. But with a binding commitment to a 
fixed exchange rate, inflation was brought under control. 
The banking crisis and the downturn in the early 1990s made clear how vulnerable our small 
open  economy  was  to  terms-of-trade  shocks  and  that  our  banks  needed  to  be  properly 
regulated.  Furthermore,  it  became  evident  to  policymakers  how  hard  it  is  to  conduct 
countercyclical economic policy, or even to avoid being procyclical. 
In  the  following  years,  structural  reforms  were  implemented  in  order  to  increase  growth 
capacity,  including  a  major  general  tax  reform.  The  tax  code  had  already  been  tailored  to 
capture the economic rent in the petroleum sector – the petroleum company tax rate is about 
80  percent.  Confidence  in  monetary  policy  gradually  gained  a  firmer  footing,  after  a 
succession of devaluations had come to a halt. Inflation and the real interest rate declined, 
and cost competitiveness improved considerably. 
Norway has not experienced a really pronounced economic downturn since the crisis around 
1990. We have been helped by good luck, in terms of favourable terms-of-trade shocks and 
a relatively flexible labour market, which has allowed labour supply to grow. The economy 
was fairly robust when the financial crisis hit in 2008, in sharp contrast to our situation back in 
the 1980s. A more robust policy framework has improved the functioning of the economy. 
The Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund was passed in 1990. At the time, in the 
midst of a deep recession, many doubted that any petroleum revenues would ever be saved. 
Projections  indicated  that  offshore  petroleum  production  would  peak  in  the  early  1990s. 
However, the government’s cash flow from the petroleum sector started to increase sharply, 
and  a  strategy  for  the  management  of  the  fund  was  needed.  The  policy  guidelines  were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
clarified in 2001, and rules governing the interaction between Norway’s petroleum wealth and 
fiscal policy were established: 
• 
• 
All government revenues from the oil sector are to be transferred to the fund.  
According to the fiscal rule, the government must only spend, on average over the 
cycle, the expected real return on the fund – stipulated at 4 per cent – in the annual 
budget.  
All of the fund’s capital is to be invested in international markets.  
• 
After nearly three decades of spending the petroleum revenues more or less as they came 
in, the fiscal rule enabled the government to save for future generations. At the same time, 
the  rule  made  fiscal  policy  more  robust:  By  decoupling  spending  from  current  petroleum 
revenues,  the  fiscal  rule  provides  for  a  gradual  and  sustainable  phasing-in  of  petroleum 
revenue  spending.  The  guidelines  ensure  the  necessary  flexibility  to  allow  automatic 
stabilisers  to  work,  and  they  allow  for  careful  countercyclical  policy.  The  savings  plan  has 
remained intact and the Fund has now reached a size of nearly NOK 4 trillion, or 130 percent 
of GDP. 
When  the  fiscal  rule  was  introduced  in  2001,  Norges  Bank  was  charged  with  the  task  of 
keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  Thus,  our  traditional  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was 
abandoned. A clear division of responsibilities between monetary and fiscal policy was now 
established. 
Norges  Bank’s  conduct of monetary  policy  is  geared  towards  low  and  stable  inflation. The 
operational target of monetary policy is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over 
time. When setting the key policy rate, we also take into account the impact of the interest 
rate on output and employment. In addition we give weight to the risk that a prolonged period 
of low interest rates can lead to elevated risk-taking and excessive debt accumulation in the 
household and business sectors. Inflation targeting has become more flexible. 
The present economic situation in much of the rest of Europe stands in contrast to ours. In 
Norway, domestic activity is high, and particularly so in the oil industry and the construction 
sector.  Unemployment  remains  low  and  stable.  But  the  Norwegian  economy  is  not 
unaffected  by  the  turbulence  abroad.  Weak  demand  from  Europe  and  a  strong  krone 
exchange rate are holding back some segments of the Norwegian export industry. 
Even though capacity utilisation is above a normal level, the key policy rate in Norway is low 
because inflation is low and interest rates abroad are very low. These factors are limiting how 
quickly the key policy rate in Norway can be raised. 
Despite  some  disturbances  to  the  economy  over  the  past  decade,  inflation  in  Norway  has 
been  low  and  stable,  showing  that  monetary  policy  has  functioned  effectively.  With  firmly 
anchored  inflation  expectations,  Norges  Bank  has  also  been  able  to  consider  economic 
stability  when  setting  the  key  policy  rate.  We  are  constantly  learning  more  about  the 
interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  and  as  mentioned  inflation 
targeting  in  Norway  has  become  more  flexible.  At  the  same  time,  we  cannot  overburden 
monetary  policy.  In  balancing  the  various  considerations,  we  will  adhere  to  the  primary 
objective of monetary policy – low and stable inflation. 
It is too early to say whether Norway has really managed to contain the Dutch disease. Our 
framework has still not been tested against a large and persistent negative oil price shock. 
From  a  high  starting  point,  wages  have  grown  faster  in  Norway  than  among  our  trading 
partners for the past ten years. Our currency has appreciated considerably in real terms. I 
believe  the  real  test  of  our  framework  will  come  when  the  present  boom  in  the  petroleum 
industry – at some point – is reversed. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
