Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s new flora and fauna banknotes and coins 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
unveiling of Fiji’s new design flora and fauna banknotes and coins, Lami, 12 December 2012. 
 Your Excellency, The President of Fiji, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau 
First Lady, Adi Koila Nailatikau 
The Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Commodore Voreqe Bainimarama 
Ministers 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Board Directors of the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Distinguished Guests 
Management and Staff of the Reserve Bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula vinaka and a very warm welcome to you all on this very special occasion. I say “special” 
because  it  is  extremely  rare  that  we  get  to  change  the  designs  on  all  our  currency 
denominations at one time! 
Today,  we  will  unveil  Fiji’s  new  flora  and  fauna  banknotes  and  coins,  a  new  $2  coin  to 
replace the $2 note and, for the first time, a banknote using the polymer (plastic) substrate. 
These are the biggest currency design changes the Reserve Bank has undertaken in recent 
times  and  we  are  indeed  honoured  that  you  could  be  here  with  us  today  to  celebrate  this 
milestone. 
While we are all eager to unveil our new currency and see what the response is, please allow 
me  to  take  you  back  in  time  for  just  a  few  moments  and  reminisce  a  little  over  the  old 
currency with which many of us were raised. For the younger generation, this is a piece of 
history that I wish to share with you. 
Our first truly Fijian currency  was introduced 78 years ago in January 1934, emulating the 
pounds,  shillings  and  pence  system  of  our  British  colonial  period.  It  took  us  35  years  to 
realise that a decimal system was much easier on the brain and it was in January 1969, that 
we made the changeover to the present decimal currency, or dollars and cents. Those of us 
old enough will recall that we started with the 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 cent coins and 50 cent, $1, 
$5, $10 and $20 notes. 
Over the years as transaction patterns and volumes changed we adapted by changing our 
notes  and  coins  structure.  In  1970,  the  50  cent  note  was  coined.  In  1995,  we  coined  the 
$1 note  and  introduced  a  higher  $50  note  denomination.12  years  later  in  2007,  we 
introduced the $100 note which is currently our “flagship” denomination. At the same time we 
also issued banknotes of different sizes, mainly to assist the visually impaired. In 2008, we 
ceased the issuance of 1 and 2 cents coins and in 2009 we introduced smaller and lighter 
coins to achieve cost efficiency. These new coins featured different edges, again to assist 
the visually impaired. 
This currency journey has been a long and interesting one, with many fascinating chapters. 
At  each  new  stage  of  our  progress  towards  currency  modernisation,  changes  were 
introduced,  either  in  the  form  of  design,  size,  security  features  or  metal  composition.  Our 
notes, however, have always been of the cotton-based/paper variety – until today! 
Some of us may be still keeping a few old notes and coins. I suggest you keep them well, for 
they will appreciate in value over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies and gentlemen, for the first time in 78 years, with the exception of our two millennium 
banknotes which featured Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara and Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, we will be 
parting  ways  from  a  long  standing  tradition  of  having  the  effigy  of  a  British  Royal  on  the 
obverse or front of our notes and coins. We started with King George V in 1934 and are now 
ending with Queen Elizabeth II. While some of us will be saddened by this we need to look 
ahead  and  embrace  change,  especially  when  it  is  a  change  that  embraces  our  very  own 
heritage  and  unique  biodiversity.  Our  currency,  from  today,  will  feature  a  number  of  Fiji’s 
iconic  flora  and  fauna.  Some  of  these  species  are  not  found  anywhere  else  in  the  world. 
Some of them are critically endangered and some of them are sadly believed to be extinct, 
since they have not been sighted for some time. 
So  what  better  way  to  embrace  and  share  our  uniqueness  and  heritage  than  on  our  own 
currency. All Fijians  will  get to know and recognise the importance of what we have. Who 
honestly knew what a saqāmoli was before we put it on the $1 coin? 
Today we will all probably learn something new about the flora and fauna around us. In fact I 
could almost guarantee this. And like the saqāmoli, these Fiji treasures will become everyday 
reminders  when  we  look  at  our  coins  or  notes  –  everyday  reminders  to  protect  the 
uniqueness with which we have been blessed. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, like all other issuers of currency, the Reserve Bank must ensure the 
integrity  of  our  notes  and  coins. We need them to  be  readily  acceptable  to  the  public  and 
easily  distinguishable  from  counterfeits  or  the  currency  of  other  countries.  Print  and  copy 
technology  development  moves  so  fast  now  and  it  is  imperative  that  we  move  with  the 
changes. If we don’t, the counterfeiters will have a field day. Usually, as custodians of Fiji’s 
currency, the Reserve Bank will undertake a review every 10 years, or sooner if there is a 
need. 
Changing the designs and security features on our currency is a complex exercise; one that 
requires a lot of research and planning. It is also important to have a vision of what we wish 
to achieve and a consensus from the decision makers. In this latest review I am pleased to 
say that we were able to strike a perfect balance between these requirements. We were able 
to bring together the necessary pre-requisites from within our local community and our very 
reputable international suppliers to achieve what we think are outstanding results. The proof 
however remains to be seen after the unveiling, when you will also be the judges. 
Let  me  briefly  take  you  through  the  journey  of  this  latest  review  which  began  in  February 
2010, the period when we were commemorating the International Year of Biodiversity. 
In July 2010, the Reserve Bank obtained approval from the Cabinet to carry out a review of 
our existing designs, banknote substrates and possible coining of the $2 note, an exercise 
that the RBF is mandated to carry out under the RBF Act. This approval also included the 
replacement of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II’s effigy with abstract or non-portrait designs. 
It  was  at  this  time  that  we  had  an  initial  meeting  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  internal  Currency 
Technical  Committee  (CTC)  which  was  mandated  to  explore  new  design  banknotes  and 
coins  that  would  exclude  the  royal  effigy  and  that  would  reflect  our  national  and  cultural 
heritage.  This  committee  is  chaired  by  the  Governor  and  includes  four  other  members  of 
executive  management  and  members  of  the  Bank’s  Currency  team  who  provide  technical 
expertise.  The  CTC  was  also  requested  to  review  the  current  banknote  substrate  and  the 
option of coining the existing $2 note. We were looking for a modern new currency design 
and structure that would reflect Fiji and suit the Fijians of today. 
The selection of the all-important subjects and designs for our currency was the job of the 
Currency Design Committee (CDC) which was established in July 2010, with the approval of 
the  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Finance.  The  members  of  the  CDC  were  drawn  from 
various  cross  sections  of  our  Fiji  community,  some  of  whom  had  already  provided  their 
valuable expertise in previous currency review exercises. Each are experts in their respective 
fields. We also sought other expert advice when necessary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mr. Robin Yarrow (Chairman) 
Ms. Sagale Buadromo 
Ratu Isoa Gavidi 
Mr. Ikbal Jannif 
Mr. Radike Qereqeretabua 
Mr. Manoa Rasigatale 
Dr. Dick Watling 
The CDC in the early stages of its deliberations, considered a number of options including 
historical landmarks, Fiji’s Coat of Arms, various industries, national heritage items and our 
unique  flora  and  fauna.  After  a  series  of  meetings  entailing  many  hours  of  discussion  on 
short  listing  design  subjects,  the  Currency  Design  committee  selected  the  final  design 
subjects in November 2010 keeping in context the relevance of the designs to our culture, 
daily lives and the unique bio diversity of Fiji. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we are indebted to the members of the Currency Design Committee 
for their vital contribution. I would like to therefore take this opportunity to acknowledge and 
warmly thank them. 
They are: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vinaka vakalevu to all the members of the Currency Design Committee for a job well done. 
With the Design Committee having set the platform by providing the design subjects it was 
then left to the Technical Committee to work with the artists from the selected Mint (Royal 
Canadian Mint) and Printer (De La Rue Currency) to put the final designs together. This also 
involved, among other things, obtaining permission to use copyright photographic material, 
deciding  on the  metallic  content,  sizes  and  edges  of the  coins  including finalizing  the  new 
$2 coin, deciding on the banknote substrates, colours, sizes and security features. 
All  of  this  entailed  many  hours  of  work  and  I  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  sincere 
thanks and appreciation to our Technical Committee. In particular, I would like to single out 
and thank Susan Kumar, Chief Manager Currency & Corporate Services and Ravi Kamoda, 
Manager  Currency.  Susan  and  Ravi  worked  tirelessly  around  the  clock  with  their  team  to 
ensure work progressed smoothly towards the deadline we had set for today. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  final  designs  and  other  technical  characteristics  of  the  new 
currency  were  approved  by  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  in  November  2010.  The  approval 
included,  for  the  first  time  ever,  a  $2  coin  and  a  polymer  or  plastic  note  in  the 
$5 denomination. 
the 
recommendations in March 2011 and it was then left to the Technical Committee to work with 
our suppliers to produce the final products.  
At  this  point,  I  would  just  like  to  add  that  it  is  only  prudent  to  undertake  these  structural 
developments over time to achieve cost efficiencies where possible given the rising cost of 
metals and raw materials required to produce currency. A $2 coin is estimated to yield an 
average of 15 years in circulation compared to the current $2 banknote which only yields less 
than a year’s circulation life due to its lack of durability contributed by the high level of usage. 
Polymer  banknotes  also  have  their  own  benefits  in  terms  of  durability  under  normal 
conditions,  lasting  approximately  two  and  a  half  times  longer  than  paper  banknotes  but 
costing  approximately  1.5  times  more.  This  means  that  we  will  be  ordering  fewer  notes 
thereby saving costs for the nation. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  introduction  of  our  first  polymer  banknote  should  not  be 
necessarily seen as a sign of future changes. We are quite pleased with the performance of 
our  higher  denomination  paper  substrate  banknotes  which  are  wearing  well  in  circulation 
given our geography, climate conditions and cash handling practices. These paper banknote 
further  approved 
I  am  pleased 
the  Cabinet 
to  say 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
substrates have also been strengthened with a platinum coating giving them extra durability. 
We should therefore see overall improvements in banknote quality with the new series. 
At  this  point  let  me  acknowledge  the  presence  here  today  of  executives  and  technicians 
representing our banknote and coin suppliers. 
From De La Rue Currency, we welcome Tim Jones, Brooke Banks, Gill Sugg, Dani Douglas, 
and artist and senior designer Luis Morris. During the early design stages, Brooke and Luis 
were  in  Fiji  and  worked  closely  with  both  the  Design  and  Technical  Committees.  Luis’ 
drawings are truly special. 
From  Royal  Canadian  Mint,  we  welcome  Ian  Bennett,  Beverly  Lepine,  Peter  Ho,  and  Jeff 
Hanke. As with the notes, the artwork on the coins is equally special. 
Thank  you  all  for  accepting  our  invitation  and  travelling  the  long  distance  to  celebrate this 
milestone with us. We are truly appreciative of the dedicated support and goodwill you have 
shown us during our collaboration towards what is a unique set of currency notes and coins. 
I also take this opportunity to thank those who have provided their rare, unique photographs 
and  images  of  the  flora  and  fauna  we  have  used  on  our  new  notes  and  coins,  on  our 
educational and promotional materials, and on our collector’s items. 
Thank you to: - 
• 
Dr. William Beckon and Post Fiji Limited for an image of a beautiful parrot found in 
the misty highlands of Kadavu. 
James Siers of Ba for an image of an iconic Fijian flower. I understand Mr. Siers is 
not well and we wish him a speedy recovery. 
Jone Niukula for images of an endemic insect species that only emerges once every 
so many years, 
Dr. Jorg Kretzschmar for images of a truly iconic bird that graces our ocean for days 
at a time and which is otherwise rarely seen. 
Dr.  Paddy  Ryan  and  Aaron  Jenkins  for  images  of  a  fresh  water  fish  species  with 
truly unique characteristics. 
    Ladies and Gentlemen, I am led to believe by all who have collaborated on this project that 
we have something truly special. We have a new set of currency in vibrant colours featuring 
true national treasures. 
There  will  be  many  local  and  international  collectors  of  currency  notes  and  coins  who  are 
looking for something unique. The celebration of our biodiversity on our money is just that. 
The  interest  is  so  promising  that  we  have  already  received  numerous  enquiries  and  a 
number  of  orders  from  banknote  and  coin  collectors  around  the  world  even  before  the 
unveiling. 
We  recognize  this  growing  interest  and  have  worked  with  our  suppliers  to  provide  limited 
numbers of special collector items. Let me say a few words on what we have. 
For the first time, the Reserve Bank has produced a limited edition all-denomination set of 
coloured coins. This is a one-of-a-kind coin set depicting the flora and fauna designs in their 
natural colours on the front of each coin. Specially packaged uncirculated coin sets will also 
be available for those who just want to own a piece of history. 
For the notes, collectors can either buy specially packaged individual denominations or the 
full set with matching serial numbers. Uncut banknote sheets of 20 notes and 25 notes will 
also be available. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ladies and Gentlemen, my sincere apologies for the self-advertising. I will not draw out the 
suspense  any  longer.  I  am  confident  that  we  all  will  be  proud  of  our  new  banknotes  and 
coins. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  I  once  again 
extend my sincere gratitude to His Excellency,  The President for agreeing to be our Chief 
Guest and to you all for kindly accepting our invitation. 
We are truly humbled by your presence. 
Vinaka vakalevu and God bless Fiji!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
