Vítor Constâncio: Opening remarks at the second conference of the 
ESCB Macroprudential Research (MaRs) Network 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the second 
conference  of  the  ESCB  Macroprudential  Research  (MaRs)  Network,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
30 October 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  and  open  the  second  conference  of  the  Macroprudential 
Research Network (MaRs). I am particularly happy to see that our conference has attracted 
such a large and diverse group of speakers and participants, combining intellectual brilliance 
with practical experience. All the relevant institutions and sectors having an interest in, and a 
contribution to make to, the macro-prudential field are represented in this room.  
“Setting  the  scene”  today,  let  me  start  my  remarks  by  recalling  what  MaRs  is  about  and 
illustrating a few key directions in the endeavour.  
1.  
The origin and purpose of the ESCB Macroprudential Research Network 
(MaRs) 
As you know, MaRs is a research initiative involving central banks from the whole European 
Union, i.e. from the European System of Central Banks. It was established by the ESCB in 
the spring of 2010, upon the proposal of our Heads of Research.1 
Against  the  background  of  the  crisis,  which  started  in  the  summer  of  2007  and  reached 
systemic  dimensions  in  September  2008,  a  stimulus  was  required  to  push  forward  our 
research on systemic risk and on analytical tools supporting macro-prudential oversight. So, 
we  set  up  MaRs  with  the  objective  of  “developing  core  conceptual  frameworks,  models 
and/or  tools  that  would  provide  research  support  in  order  to  improve  macro-prudential 
supervision in the EU”.  
This  is  not  to  say  that  central  banks  did  not  have  any  systemic  risk  and  macro-prudential 
research before the crisis. Quite the contrary is true: it is the very tradition of central banks to 
take  a  systemic  perspective,  in  particular  in  financial  stability  matters.  Most  central  banks 
already  had  their  own  Financial  Stability  Reviews  for  which  many  analytical  tools  were 
developed.  
MaRs, however, puts our systemic risk work on a much broader basis than was previously 
the  case.  As  you  know,  central  banks  treasure  the  strong  scientific  foundations  of  their 
policies very much. In my view, our interaction with the academic community, based not only 
on  substantial  state-of-the-art  in-house  research,  but  also  on  continuous  “peer  review”  of 
central bank policies through external research is a major asset. 
Some main orientations and selected first messages of MaRs 
2.  
Let me now illustrate MaRs’ three main orientations. The network has three work streams: 
1. 
macro-financial  models  linking  financial  stability  and  the  performance  of  the 
economy; 
early warning systems and systemic risk indicators; and 
2. 
                                                
1   A 
the 
overview 
brief 
of 
be 
http://www.ecb.int/home/html/researcher_mars.en.html. 
network 
can 
found 
on 
the  ECB’s  website 
here  at: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
assessing contagion risks. 
3. 
As regards the first work stream, MaRs identifies the lack of widely accepted theoretical and 
empirical  frameworks  that  thoroughly  integrate  realistic  characterisations  of  widespread 
financial instability in aggregate models as one of the main weaknesses of contemporaneous 
economics  laid  bare  by  the  crisis.  It  is  true  that  there  were  already  some  effects  that  had 
been included in macro models, basically related to the Financial Accelerator developed by 
Bernanke and Gertler. This is, however, only a mechanism that would aggravate a crisis, but 
was  not  strong  enough  to  trigger  one.  Recently,  Adrian,  Colla  and  Shin  examined  which 
frictions  should,  at  a  minimum,  be  included  to  be  relevant.2  They  concluded  from  the 
evidence of the crisis that five stylized facts should be reflected in macro-financial models: 
coexistence of bank and bond finance, substitution from bank to bond financing, increasing 
credit spreads, stickiness of equity prices and procyclicality of bank leverage.  
Other  researchers  point  to  some  different  factors.  We  need  the  academic  community  and 
policy authorities engaged in research to improve this situation. Only when we have detailed 
and well-tested models and frameworks with this feature will we be on safe ground to base 
macro-prudential regulatory policies to contain systemic risk on the scientific foundations that 
we aspire for. The benefit from a policy perspective is that with such an approach, one can 
compare the benefits and the costs of new or scrapped and tightened or loosened regulation.  
The network has developed several theoretical and empirical tools that integrate widespread 
financial instability into models of the aggregate economy. These develop the transmission 
channels  between  financial  instability  and  the  overall  economy  in  detail,  and  assess  the 
performance of alternative policies to address systemic risk. The network is also engaged in 
a joint cross-country project involving ten euro area central banks to develop a quantitative 
model for assessing alternative macro-prudential regulatory policies.  
A second main orientation of MaRs has been to develop early warning systems and systemic 
risk indicators further. Many of the tools it developed are already used in ESCB members’ 
policy work. For example, the Composite Indicator of Systemic Stress (short CISS),3 which 
was developed here at the ECB, has been used in our Financial Stability Review and has 
now been included in the new Risk Dashboard that the ESRB released after its last meeting 
in September.4  
Research in this direction has also led to the creation of a homogeneous database of various 
types of crisis in EU countries. This database, which was established by researchers from 
the Czech National Bank with the input of all ESCB members, has just been made available 
to interested researchers on the ECB’s website.5 
A  last  major  orientation  of  MaRs  is  the  assessment  of  contagion  risks.  This  concerns 
particularly  the  cross-border  connectedness  of  banks  and  associated  contagion  risks  in 
Europe, notably via dysfunctional money markets. In view of the experiences of the last few 
years  in  Europe,  sovereign  contagion  effects  received  considerable  attention.  A  whole 
“battery”  of  models  and  analytical  tools  for  measuring  and  assessing  sovereign  contagion 
was  developed.  Several  of these  models  are  regularly  run  here  in  the  ECB  as  part  of  our 
surveillance of contagion risks.  
                                                
2   Tobias Adrian, Paolo Colla and H. Song Shin (2012), “Which financial frictions? Parsing the evidence from the 
Financial Crisis of 2007–2009”, Federal Reserve of New York Staff Reports. 
3   See  D.  Hollo,  M.  Kremer  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2011),  CISS  –  A  composite  indicator  of  systemic  stress  in  the 
financial system, ECB Working Paper, no. 1426, March. 
(2012),  ESRB 
4   European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
(http://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/dashboard/120920_ESRB_risk_dashboard.pdf?). 
5   The link to the database is http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1485-annexes.zip. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
risk  dashboard, 
issue  No 1,  20 September 
The assessment of contagion risk is one field where borrowing from disciplines other than 
economics can be useful. A number of promising efforts use the theory of complex networks 
to model interbank exposures, showing how asset fire sales can amplify interbank contagion. 
For our Financial Stability Review and in our work for the ESRB, We are already using one of 
this  models  to  assess  the  second-round  impact  of  banks’  cross-exposures  to  complement 
the top-down stress tests that we regularly conduct on a sample of 90 EU banks. 
3.  
A few policy developments on the use of macro-prudential regulatory 
instruments in Europe  
In  parallel  with  the  research  efforts  undertaken  to  develop  the  scientific  foundations  for 
macro-prudential  instruments  further,  there  is  important  policy  work  going  on  in  Europe 
regarding these instruments. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), under the aegis of 
its  Advisory  Technical  Committee,  has  established  an  Instruments  Working  Group  that  is 
looking  into  a  range  of  issues  relating  to  those  policy  instruments.6  This  includes,  for 
example, an ongoing effort to define a “core set” of instruments that should be available for 
macro-prudential policies throughout the EU.  
A  dedicated  work  stream  under  the  Instruments  Working  Group  will  also  work  on  ESRB 
guidance for the use of the counter-cyclical capital buffer as contained in the EU’s proposal 
for a capital requirements directive and regulation (CRD IV/CRR), planned to come into force 
in the EU in 2013.7 
The  group  has  worked  on  guiding  principles  for  the  macro-prudential  mandate  of  national 
authorities.  This  resulted  in  an  ESRB  recommendation  that  was  published  in  December 
2011.  It  requires  Member  States  to  ensure  that  their  macro-prudential  authorities  have 
control over appropriate instruments for achieving their objectives.8 
Given  the  panel  discussion  tomorrow,  I  will  not  dwell  much  on  the  progress  with  Europe’s 
banking union. Let me just recall that the Commission’s proposal for the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  –  apart  from  the  obvious  micro-prudential  aspects  –  directly  affects  macro-
prudential policy and its implementation. It suggest that the ECB would have the exclusive 
competence within the euro area “to set counter-cyclical buffer rates and any other measures 
aimed  at  addressing  systemic  or macro-prudential  risks  in  the  cases  specifically  set  out  in 
Union  acts”.9  A  priori,  the  combination  of  aspects  of  micro-prudential,  say  for  large  and 
complex banks, and macro-prudential instruments in a common hand can be a good thing. 
Most  of  the  macro-prudential  instruments  discussed  so  far  are  very  similar  or  identical  to 
micro-prudential instruments. Simply put, they are used with a different, broader, objective to 
contain systemic risk. By putting both sets of instruments in the same hands, conflicts in their 
use could probably be avoided. 
                                                
6   See ESRB (2012), Annual report 2011, May 2012. 
7   Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the access to the activity of credit 
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Directive 
2002/87/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the  supplementary  supervision  of  credit 
institutions, insurance undertakings and investment firms in a financial conglomerate, COM(2011) 453 final, 
Brussels,  20  July  2011,  and  Proposal  for  a  Regulation  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on 
prudential  requirements  for  credit institutions  and  investment  firms,  COM(2011)  452  final,  Brussels,  20  July 
2011. 
8   Recommendation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  of  22  December  2011  on  the  macro-prudential 
mandate of national authorities (ESRB/2011/3). 
9   Proposal for a Council Regulation conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies 
relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions, COM(2012) 511 final, Brussels, 12 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
4. Concluding remarks  
Let me to conclude by quoting Oscar Wilde: “You know more than you think you know, just 
as you know less than you want to know”. ESCB Governors are very pleased with the MaRs 
report and how much progress the network has made. The interaction with “the rest of the 
world”  today  and  tomorrow  should  fertilise  the  work  further.  I  wish  you  many  fruitful 
discussions in this regard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
