Duvvuri Subbarao: G 20 and India 
Text  of  the  46th  A  D  Shroff  Memorial  Lecture  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 20 November 2012. 
 My sincere thanks to the Forum of Free Enterprise and Shri Minoo Shroff for inviting me to deliver the A.D. Shroff 
Memorial Lecture. It is an honour to which I attach a lot of value. 
A.D. Shroff 
Even as he had no privileged background, A.D. Shroff rose to become one of the country’s 
most eminent and respected professionals in the financial world of his time. From the Board 
of Tata  Sons,  where  he  was  the financial  adviser,  he  went  on to  become  the  chairman  of 
New India Assurance and then of Bank of India prior to these institutions being nationalized. 
At a time when Nehruvian socialist ideology dominated economic thinking, the development 
paradigm was shaped by the Feldman-Mahalanobis model and the public sector was at the 
commanding heights of the economy, Shroff had the courage of conviction to argue for an 
increased  role  for  the  private  sector  in  a  market  economy.  It  was  these  intellectual 
foundations  that  inspired  the  Bombay  Plan  of  1944  of  which  Shroff  was  one  of  the 
co-authors. 
The Reserve Bank recognized Shroff’s expertise and innovative thinking early on when, in 
1953, it set up a committee under his chairmanship to examine how the flow of finance to the 
private sector could be enlarged. The Shroff Committee recommendations played a key role 
in defining the basis for institution building in the financial sector – ICICI and at a later date 
IDBI, were set up as development financial institutions, a deposit insurance corporation in the 
shape of DICGC came in the early sixties and the Committee’s suggestion of setting up unit 
trusts  as  vehicles  to  channelize  small  savings  into  investments  provided  the  basis  for  the 
later day UTI. 
The  Shroff  Committee  recommendations  were  seminal  and  have  been  acknowledged. 
Perhaps less known is the fact that A.D. Shroff was the deputy governor that the Reserve 
Bank never had. Sir Osborne Smith, the first Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), 
asked for  him  as  the  deputy  governor  of  RBI  in  1936  but  the  proposal was  vetoed  by  the 
British government which felt that Shroff was too close to the Congress Party. It is ironic that 
this  perceived  “Congress  Economist”  went  on  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  virulent 
critics  of  the  Congress  Government’s  economic  policies  during  the  second  and  third  plan 
periods. 
Clearly a man ahead of his time, A.D. Shroff understood the importance of private investment 
in nation building in a liberalized, market driven environment. Like every great idea awaiting 
its time, the liberalization that he so fervently advocated had not fully arrived in the country till 
the early nineties – a quarter century after he passed away. 
The economic liberalization that we started in the nineties has meant India integrating with 
the rest of the world, a process that is still work in progress. Over the last ten years, India’s 
two way trade flows as a proportion of GDP have doubled; our two way current and capital 
flows as a proportion of GDP have more than doubled. The experience of the global financial 
crisis and now the Eurozone crisis has taught us that even as we benefit from integration, 
because of that very integration, we become vulnerable to global shocks. 
India’s  embrace  of  globalization  and  the  remarkable  transition  the  economy  went  through 
after the economic reforms of the 1990s are an eloquent testimony to eminent thinkers with 
foresight  and  conviction  like  A.D.  Shroff.  I  can  think  of  no  better  way  of  honouring  the 
memory of a visionary like him than talking about India’s enlarged stake and growing role in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
global economic policy making. In particular, I will focus on the G 20 and India’s interests in 
this very vital international forum. 
G 20 
The G 20, as all of you know, has been in the forefront of battling the financial crises – the 
global  financial  crisis  of  2008/09  and  the  Eurozone  crisis  since  2010  –  that  have  taken  a 
devastating toll on global growth and welfare. Indeed when the history of this crisis is written, 
the London G 20 Summit in April 2009 will be acknowledged as the clear turning point when 
world  leaders  showed  extraordinary  determination  and  unity.  Sure,  there  were  differences, 
but they were debated and discussed, and compromises were made so as to reach the final 
goal  –  of  ending  the  crisis.  This  resulted  in  an  agreed  package  of  measures  having  both 
domestic  and  international  components  but  all  of  them  to  be  implemented  in  coordination, 
and  indeed  in  synchronization  where  necessary.  The  entire  range  of  crisis  response 
measures – accommodative monetary stance, fiscal stimulus, debt and deposit guarantees, 
capital  injection,  asset  purchases,  currency  swaps,  keeping  markets  open  –  all  derived  in 
varying degrees from the G 20 package. 
Five years on the crisis is still with us; only its epicenter and the main actors have changed. 
During  these five  years,  the  world  has  also  become  privy  to  the  differences  on  some  vital 
issues  within  the  G  20  membership.  Understandably  therefore,  there  are  concerns  and 
apprehensions that the vaunted unity and sense of purpose that the G 20 showed earlier on 
are dissipating. 
My  own  view  is  that  these  differences  should  not  be  exaggerated.  After  all,  in  a  world 
comprising nation states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. There are 
bound  to  be  differences  when  the  agenda  is  so  broad  and  country  level  compulsions  are 
seen  to  be  clashing  with  global  interests. What  is  important  is  that  we  are  able  to  resolve 
these  differences  with  the  realization  that  in  a  globalizing  world,  no  country  can  be  an 
“island”. What happens anywhere affects economies everywhere. Global financial stability is 
a global public good, and there can be no more an effective forum than the G 20 to steer the 
world towards globally optimal solutions. 
Having set that context, I will now address the following questions: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
What is the G 20 and how does it function? 
Why is the G 20 important? 
What  have  been/are  the  main  issues  on  the  G  20  agenda  and  India’s  concerns 
regarding them? 
What are the future challenges for the G 20?  
(iv) 
What is the G 20? 
The  G  20  is  an  informal  club  with  19  member  countries  and  the  European  Union  which 
together represent 90 per cent of global GDP, 80 per cent of global trade and two-thirds of 
the global population. 
Contrary  to  popular  belief,  the  G  20  is  not  a  new  international  grouping  triggered  by  the 
global financial crisis. It was, in fact, triggered by an earlier crisis, the Asian crisis of 1997. 
Although, it has been meeting regularly since 1997, it acquired a higher profile and credibility 
in the aftermath of the global financial crisis during which time it was elevated from a Finance 
Ministers’ forum to a Leaders’ forum. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The chair of the G 20 rotates every year from country to country. The chair country takes the 
lead in formulating and driving the agenda. The G 20 leaders meet at the summit level once 
a  year.1  Besides,  the  Finance  Ministers  and  central  bank governors  of G  20  meet  twice  a 
year. All the meetings are typically held in, and hosted by, the chair country. The President of 
the World  Bank  and  the  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF  attend  the  G  20  meetings,  thereby 
ensuring that the activities of the G 20 are integrated into the agenda of the Bretton Woods 
Institutions where necessary. There are also other invitees to the G 20 meetings such as the 
OECD, UNDP and the regional development banks. 
Why is the G 20 important? 
The G 20 can be seen as a watermark in international economic diplomacy in at least two 
ways. 
First, it is a major step forward from the old divisive style of global governance of the Bretton 
Woods  system  characterized  by  little  communication  and  much  acrimony  between  major 
developed  (G  8)  who  were  largely  seen  as  donors,  and  developing  (G  77)  countries  that 
were seen as the recipients of bilateral and multilateral aid. Differences in perception remain, 
but  there  is  now  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  donor-recipient  equation,  a  better  appreciation  of 
each other’s viewpoint, and an emerging consensus on what increasingly appears to be an 
incipient new international order through G 20 reports and declarations to which both sets of 
countries are committed. 
This new style of international governance had been in the making for some time. The bigger 
EMEs, particularly the BRICS,2 were growing at a much faster pace than OECD countries for 
a long time, and were becoming increasingly systemically important. It became clear that for 
any multilateral economic consultative process managing globalization to be effective, their 
inclusion  in  the  process  was  imperative.  Even  prior  to  the  global  crisis,  the  G  8  found  it 
expedient to invite the big emerging economies – the G 5 (Brazil, India, China, Mexico and 
South Africa) – to their Summits as special invitees, but only to select sessions in what was 
termed  the  Heligandamm  process.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  simply  underscored  the 
need to associate major emerging economies in global economic governance. From being 
the  sources  of  constant  instability  in  the  global  economy,  some  of  the  larger  emerging 
economies are now increasingly seen as nodes of stability and growth.  
The  second  factor  that  makes  the  G  20  unique  is  its  attempt  to  coordinate  the 
macroeconomic policies of systemically important economies to make them more effective in 
a world where national macroeconomic policy instruments are being blunted via rapid global 
integration  through  trade  and  financial  markets.  Following  its  concerted  and  coordinated 
policy response to the crisis, the G 20 set about the task of addressing reform of the global 
economic and financial architecture, and to remove long-standing structural impediments to 
strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  global  growth  going  forward  by  launching  its  signature 
“mutual assessment process” which is increasingly seen as the heart and soul of the G 20. 
The success of this process is important for global financial stability, as I will explain later. 
                                                
1  During the crisis, the Leaders met twice a year. Now, the frequency has reverted to the standard pattern of 
once  a  year.  Post-crisis,  seven  Leaders’  Summits  have  been  held: Washington  (November  2008),  London 
(March 2009), Pittsburgh (October 2009), Toronto (June 2010), Seoul (November 2010), Cannes (November 
2011) and Los Cabos (June 2012).  
2  Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa comprise the BRICS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Main issues on the G 20 agenda 
In that context of the origins and importance of G 20, let me now turn to some of the main 
issues  on  the  G  20  agenda  after the  world  surfaced from  the  depth  of the  2008/09 global 
financial crisis. I will also give the Indian perspective where appropriate. 
Global rebalancing 
The first issue I want to address is global imbalances. Almost everyone is agreed that one of 
the root causes of the global financial crisis is the build-up of global imbalances. In as much 
as  global  imbalances  –  no  matter  whether  they  were  caused  by  a  “consumption  binge”  in 
advanced  economies  or  a  “savings  glut”  in  EMEs  –  were  the  root  cause  of  the  crisis, 
reducing imbalances is a necessary condition for restoring global financial stability.  
The post-crisis debate on global imbalances has three interrelated facets. The first is the role 
of  exchange  rates  in  global  rebalancing.  The  second  relates  to  capital  flows  into  EMEs 
raising  the  familiar  challenge  of  managing  the  impossible  trinity.  And  the  third  facet  is  the 
framework for the adjustment process. Let me turn to these one by one. 
First,  on  the  role  of  exchange  rates  –  a  prime  lever  for  redressal  of  external  imbalances. 
Global rebalancing will require deficit economies to save more and consume less. They need 
to  depend for growth more  on  external  demand  which  calls  for  a real  depreciation  of  their 
currencies. The surplus economies will need to mirror these efforts – save less and spend 
more,  and  shift  from  external  to  domestic  demand.  They  need  to  let  their  currencies 
appreciate.  The  problem  though  is  that  while  the  adjustment  by  deficit  and  surplus 
economies  has  to  be  symmetric,  the  incentives  they  face  are  asymmetric.  Managing 
currency tensions will require a shared understanding on keeping exchange rates aligned to 
economic fundamentals, and an agreement that currency interventions should be resorted to 
not  as  an  instrument  of  trade  policy  but  only  to  manage  disruptions  to  macroeconomic 
stability. 
That  takes  me  to  the  second  facet  of  global  imbalances  –  capital  flows.  The  problem  of 
capital  flows  came  centre  stage  in  the  aftermath  of  the  quantitative  easing  by  advanced 
economy  central  banks  when  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  global  system  found  its  way  into 
faster growing EMEs. The most high profile problems thrown up by capital flows, in excess of 
a  country’s  absorptive  capacity,  are  erosion  of  monetary  policy  effectiveness,  currency 
appreciation and loss of competitiveness. Speculative capital flows could also lead to asset 
and commodity bubbles potentially threatening both financial and economic stability. 
In the G 20 debate on capital flows, popularly but mistakenly referred to as “currency wars”, 
EMEs agitated mainly two points. First, that in as much as lumpy and volatile capital flows 
are  a  spillover  from  the  quantitative  easing  of  advanced  economies,  the  burden  of 
adjustment  has  to  be  shared.  Second,  that  capital  controls  should  be  understood  as 
legitimate and acceptable defence against speculative capital flows.  
Global imbalances and their correction were the main concern in the G20 Framework and 
Mutual  Assessment  Process  (MAP)  exercise.  The  MAP  exercise  is  aimed  at  making 
countries  commit  to  external  sector  policies  that  lead  to  strong,  sustained  and  balanced 
growth  at  the  global  level.  The  understanding  is  that  global  imbalances,  especially 
imbalances built on the strength of undervalued exchange rates accompanied by a build-up 
of reserves, threaten the stability of the global economy due to the possibility of disorderly 
unwinding. 
China’s  exchange  rate  policies  were  at  the  centre  of  the  debate  in  the  G  20.  As  on  date, 
China’s current account surplus (in relation to its GDP) has declined from the pre-crisis peak, 
and China’s real effective exchange rate has also appreciated since 2005, even though it is 
widely believed that it needs to appreciate further. In the meanwhile, however, the cumulative 
surpluses of oil producing countries (mostly OPEC, Russia and Norway) have increased and 
now account for the lion’s share of global current account surpluses. While global imbalances 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have declined in the post-crisis period, their nature and composition continue to evolve. It is 
important that the MAP exercise in the G 20 keeps a watch on changes in the composition, 
nature  and  distribution  of  global  imbalances  and  their  implications,  and  to  steer  the  work 
towards their underlying causes. 
Now let me comment briefly on the India perspective on the global imbalance problem. India 
did  not  contribute  to  the  generation  or  transmission  of  global  imbalances.  As  much  as  we 
want to enhance our export competitiveness, we believe that it should come from improved 
productivity rather than an artificially calibrated exchange rate. Our exchange rate is largely 
market driven, and we intervene in the forex market only to manage volatility in the rate and 
to  prevent  macroeconomic  disruptions.  As  a  developing  economy,  we  run  a  large  current 
account deficit (CAD) that has in recent period expanded relative to our historical record. We 
need capital flows to finance the CAD. We have an express preference for equity flows over 
debt flows, for direct investment over portfolio investment and for long term over short term 
flows and. We are moving gradually towards opening our capital account along a roadmap, 
the roadmap itself being recalibrated to the evolving global situation. Our policy, in short, is 
festina lente which is Latin for “make haste slowly”. 
India co-chairs, along with Canada, the G 20 Framework “MAP” Working Group (FWG). This 
provides  India  an  opportunity  not  only  to  get  an  early  preview  of  the  macro  and  micro 
consequences of global initiatives, but also to actively contribute to such initiatives. India’s 
suggestions  on  the  role  infrastructure  investment  can  play  in  the  global  recovery  and 
rebalancing is a case in point. As a co-chair, it may be important to ensure that the work of 
the  FWG  is  not  seen  as  merely  a  technical  exercise  but  as  an  effort  towards  a  genuine 
dialogue on macroeconomic policies of the 20 most significant economies and for engaging 
in a cooperative game that results in greater policy coordination which is a public good. 
laws, 
institutions  and 
incumbency  which  he  referred 
Global reserve currency 
The global crisis has revived the familiar concerns about the robustness of the international 
monetary  system,  and  in  particular  about  the global  reserve  currency  and  the  provision  of 
liquidity  in  times  of  stress.  The  system  we  now  have  is  that  the  US  dollar  is  the  world’s 
reserve currency by virtue of the dominant size of the US economy, its share in global trade 
and the preponderant use of dollar in foreign trade and foreign exchange transactions. And 
as  Barry  Eichengreen  told  us  in  his  book  on  the  story  of  the  dollar,3  the  reserve  currency 
status  depends  also  on  a  host  of  intangible  factors  such  as  strategic  and  military 
relationships, 
to  as  “network 
externalities”. 
In line with the Triffin paradox, the US has met the obligation of an issuer of reserve currency 
by running fiscal and external deficits while enjoying the “exorbitant privilege” of not having to 
make the necessary adjustment to bridge the deficits. With no pressure to reduce the deficit, 
a  dominant  economy  can  potentially  create  imbalances  at  the  global  level  as  indeed 
happened in the build up to the crisis. An argument can be made that even in the context of a 
single  reserve  currency,  global  imbalances  are  not  inevitable.  The  US  could  not  have  run 
persistent  deficits  had  not  the  EMEs  provided  the  demand  side  impetus  by  accumulating 
reserve assets either for trade advantage or as a measure of self-insurance against external 
shocks. 
The problem with the world having only a single reserve currency came to the fore during the 
crisis  as  many  countries  faced  dollar  liquidity  problems  as  a  consequence  of  swift 
deleveraging  by  foreign  creditors  and  foreign  investors.  Paradoxically,  even  as  the  US 
                                                
3  Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System by 
Barry Eichengreen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
economy  was  in  a  downturn,  and  its  central  bank  resorted  to  extraordinary  quantitative 
easing, the dollar strengthened as a result of flight to safety. 
Based  on  the  experience  of the  crisis,  several  reform  proposals  have  been  put forward  to 
address  the  problems  arising  from  a  single  reserve  currency.  One  is  to  have  a  menu  of 
alternative reserve currencies. But this cannot happen by fiat. To be a serious contender as 
an alternative, a currency has to fulfill some exacting criteria. It has to be fully convertible and 
its  exchange  rate  should  be  determined  by  market  fundamentals;  it  should  acquire  a 
significant  share  in  world  trade; the currency  issuing  country  should  have  liquid,  open  and 
large  financial  markets  and  also  the  policy  credibility  to  inspire  the  confidence  of  potential 
investors. In short, the “exorbitant privilege” of a reserve currency comes with an “exorbitant 
responsibility”. 
A second solution to the single reserve currency issue is to develop the SDR as a reserve 
currency. This does not seem to be a feasible option. For the SDR to be an effective reserve 
currency, it has to fulfil several conditions: the SDR has to be accepted as a liability of the 
IMF,  it  has  to  be  automatically  acceptable  as  a  medium  of  payment  in  cross-border 
transactions;  it  should  be  freely  tradeable  and  its  price  has  to  be  determined  by  forces  of 
demand and supply. 
Another  option,  a  third  possible  solution,  is  to  expand  the  SDR  basket  by  including  the 
currencies of countries that are increasingly important economically and politically. With the 
increasing  economic  weight  of  emerging  markets,  it  seems  inconceivable  that  emerging 
markets will not want to see their currencies play a greater role in international transactions. 
Recent  initiatives  by  some  EMEs,  especially  China  and  Russia,  aim  at  facilitating 
international use of their currencies. The exclusion of emerging markets currencies makes 
emerging  markets  bystanders  of  the  system  rather  than  stakeholders.  Integration  of 
emerging markets into the international monetary system could increase their incentives to 
gear  their  policy  conduct  towards  contributing  to  the  stability  of  the  system.  However,  the 
pros and cons of this alternative have yet to be fully studied. In particular, we have to reckon 
with  the  question  of  whether  emerging  market  currencies,  not  being  fully  convertible,  can 
meet the demanding criteria required for inclusion in the SDR. 
The fourth option is not actually an alternative, but is in part a solution. It aims at reducing the 
need for self-insurance and thereby the dependence on a reserve currency by supporting a 
multilateral  option  of  a prearranged  line  of  credit  that  can  be  easily  and  quickly  accessed. 
The IMF has designed some line of credit specifically with this objective in view. 
None of the above solutions fully addresses the problems arising from a single global reserve 
currency.  What  this  underscores  is  that  at  the  global  level  we  need  to  explore  these  and 
other  options  for  protecting  ourselves  from  the  vulnerabilities  that  we  confront  as  a 
consequence of a single reserve currency. 
India’s own position on the global reserve currency is that the world will be better served by 
increasing the number of reserve currencies, but this has to happen in an organic way, not 
by 
the 
vulnerabilities of the global currency system. Also, the US has the responsibility of ensuring 
that every country has access to dollar liquidity, especially in times of stress. 
According  to this  view,  countries  cannot  be  asked  to  desist from  building  up reserves  and 
depend  entirely  on  external  safety-nets.  Foreign exchange  reserves  should  invariably  form 
the first line of defence. On top of that, they need currency swap arrangements. In fact, the 
US obligation, by virtue of its status as the issuer of the global reserve currency, to provide 
dollar  swap  facilities  to  all  large  economies,  including  India,  is  one  of  the  issues  that  we 
discussed in the Ministerial Level Indo-US Dialogue last month. 
fiat.  Meanwhile  countries  need  safety-nets 
themselves  against 
to  protect 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Protectionism 
In the post-crisis world, there may not actually be “deglobalization” but the earlier orthodoxy 
that  globalization  is  an  unmixed  blessing  is  being  increasingly  challenged.  The  rationale 
behind globalization was, and hopefully is, that even as advanced countries may see some 
low end jobs being outsourced, they will still benefit from globalization because for every low 
end job gone, another high end job – that is more skill intensive, more productive – will be 
created. If this does not happen rapidly enough or visibly enough, protectionist pressures will 
arise, and rapidly become vociferous and politically compelling. 
Recent international developments mark an “ironic reversal” in the fears about globalization. 
Previously, it was the EMEs which feared that integration into the world economy would lead 
to  welfare  loss  at  home.  Those  fears  have  now  given  way  to  apprehensions  in  advanced 
economies that globalization means losing jobs to cheap labour abroad. 
Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  G  20  leaders  were  determined  not  to  repeat  the 
mistakes of the 1930s when the brunt of protectionism exacerbated the Great Depression. 
However,  there  is  concern  in  some  quarters  that  even  as  open  protectionism  has  been 
resisted relatively well during the current crisis, opaque protectionism has been on the rise. 
Opaque protectionism takes the form of resorting to measures such as anti-dumping actions, 
safeguards, preferential treatment of domestic firms in bailout packages and discriminatory 
procurement  practices.  To  strengthen  multilateral  trade  discipline,  the  need  for  a  quick 
conclusion  of  the  Doha  Round  can  hardly  be  overemphasized.  In  a  world  with  growing 
worries  about  the  debt  creating  stimulus  packages,  a  Doha  Round  agreement  should  be 
welcomed as a non-debt creating stimulus to the global economy. 
India opposes protectionism in all its forms. However, at the same time, we have to respect 
the  WTO-consistent  policy  space  available  to  the  developing  countries  to  pursue  their 
legitimate  objectives  of  growth,  development  and  stability.  We  are  encouraged  by  the 
analysis of the recent trade monitoring report jointly released by WTO, OECD and UNCTAD 
on G 20 economies which shows that majority of the trade measures taken by India in the 
review period were either trade facilitative or roll back measures. 
IMF quota and governance 
The global economic and financial crisis of 2008 exposed critical weaknesses in the structure 
of the International Financial Architecture as well as in its governance. The G 20 has been 
trying  to  address  these  governance  and  structural  weaknesses  while  at  the  same  time 
endeavouring to stabilize the global economy through a process of mutual consultations and 
policy co-operation. An important motivation for these reforms is that the global economy has 
undergone fundamental changes in the past decade and a half and these changes have not 
been reflected appropriately in the International Financial Architecture. 
While agreement has been reached in the G 20 for effecting major reforms, implementation 
has so far has been disappointing. The agreement for IMF quota and governance reforms in 
2010 has not yet been implemented. India’s major concern is that we should adhere to the 
timeline for completing the IMF Quota reforms by January 2013, so that it serves as the basis 
for the 15th General Review of Quotas to be completed no later than January 2014. 
There  has  been  some  criticism  that  IMF  quota  and  governance  issues  should  be  settled 
within the IMF management and not at the G 20. The dominant view though has been that 
the G 20 should continue to be the main forum for overall guidance not only on the direction 
that  the  comprehensive  review  of  the  formula  should  take  but  on  continued  reform  of  the 
International Financial Architecture, as it may be difficult to reform this from the inside in view 
of  its  flawed  and  outmoded  shareholding  structure.  The  G  20  has  played  a  crucial  role  in 
steering discussions on the quota formula in the past and it will be unfortunate if this aspect 
is diluted going forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Global  institutions  can  only  be  legitimate  and  credible  if  their  vote  share  and  governance 
structure  reflect  members’  share  in  the  world  economy.  It  is  in  this  context  that  India  and 
other  emerging  countries  believe  that  GDP  should  have  predominant  weight  in  the  quota 
formula as it is the most robust measure of relative economic weights in the global economy. 
Financial sector reforms 
Received  wisdom  today  is  that  financial  deregulation  shares  the  honours  with  global 
imbalances as being one of the twin villains of the crisis. Not surprisingly therefore, reforms 
to the financial sector regulation have been on top of the G 20 agenda. 
The broad contours of the international initiatives spearhead by the G 20 on financial sector 
reform rest on four broad pillars: regulation, supervision, resolution, especially in respect of 
global  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (or  SIFIs),  and  assessment  of  the 
implementation  of  new  standards.  So  far,  one  pillar  that  has  received  substantial  public 
attention is regulatory reform, where there have already been some notable achievements, 
including agreement on the new Basel III capital and liquidity standards. 
However,  the  process  of  regulatory  reforms  that  is  proceeding  across  various  jurisdictions 
has come to pose new challenges especially as the global economy continues to be marked 
by new risks. The uncertain and uneven recovery has led to calls in some quarters to dilute 
or slow the financial reform initiatives. While there may be a case for some back loading of 
difficult adjustments to strengthen the recovery of the financial sector, any weakness in our 
resolve or commitment to reform will sow the seeds for a fresh crisis down the line. The key 
task is therefore to fully implement what has been agreed in a cooperative manner. 
All G 20 members have committed to the implementation of the Basel III package. However, 
major  jurisdictions  have  come  out  with  their  own  regulatory  standards.  It  is  important  that 
there is no disharmony that could be confusing. We need to guard against the possibility of 
regulatory  arbitrage.  If  comparable  standards  are  not  implemented  in  all  jurisdictions 
simultaneously, financial activity  will  likely migrate to less regulated jurisdictions as well as 
into shadow banking with disruptive consequences for the entire global financial system. 
As we move forward in the area of regulation, the investment needs of the emerging market 
and developing economies also deserve special attention. There are two important points in 
this  regard.  First,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  financial  intermediaries  in  emerging  and 
developing  economies  are  not  disadvantaged  in  the  new  regulatory  framework,  especially 
since the opportunities and challenges in their systems are quite different. 
Second, the more demanding regulatory standards should not lead to deleveraging by global 
financial  institutions  out  of  emerging  markets.  It  should  be  noted  in  this  regard  that  the 
financial regulatory reform has so far focused on reducing systemic risks, and rightly so, but 
not  much  attention  has  been  devoted  to  redirecting  savings  from  investment  in  volatile 
financial assets to financing investment in the real economy, where the impact on growth and 
jobs is more tangible and direct. We need to recognize that it is income from the real sector 
that must ultimately pay for the profits of the financial sector. Standards setting bodies should 
design incentives in a manner that helps redirect global savings into investment in the real 
economy,  particularly  in  infrastructure,  supports  demand  and  enhances  long-term  potential 
growth thereby fulfilling the original role of intermediating for growth and development of the 
real economy. 
Collaboration between financial authorities on these issues is an important, albeit a difficult 
and  painstaking  task.  Collaboration  becomes  difficult  especially  when  it  entails  profound 
structural  changes  in  the  face  of  volatile  financial  markets  and  anemic  growth.  Yet,  it  is 
precisely  these  challenges  that  make  it  so  vital  that  the  regulatory  response  in  the  G  20 
should  be  well  coordinated  internationally  to  ensure  that  the  new  regulatory  framework  is 
effective and globally implemented and the follies of the past that led to the financial crisis 
are not repeated. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Future challenges for the G 20 
I have so far discussed some of the major items on the agenda of the G 20. Let me now look 
ahead to the challenges that confront the G 20 on the way forward. 
The first challenge is drawing a balance between short term compulsions and medium term 
sustainability.  A  case  in  point  is  the  intense  debate  in  the  advanced  economies  on  fiscal 
austerity  vs  growth.  Everyone  is  agreed  that  long  term  fiscal  consolidation  is  critical  to 
macroeconomic sustainability. At the same time, everyone is also aware of the pains of fiscal 
adjustment in the short-term. If fiscal profligacy is seen as consumption of future income and 
shifting the burden to a future generation, fiscal austerity should be seen as the price for the 
necessary  correction  so  that  burden  sharing  across  generations  is  fair  and  optimal.  If  the 
compulsions of short-term and long-term policies point in different directions, how can these 
be harmonized, especially since the long-term is a stringing together of the short-terms? How 
can  G  20  commitments  and  the  “Mutual  Assessment  Process”  (MAP)  commitments  and 
assessments accommodate such dynamic policy shifts? 
The  second  challenge  for  the  G  20  is  to  nudge  countries’  policies  in  mutually  agreed 
directions  and  hold  sovereigns  accountable  for  commitments  given,  especially  since  these 
are not legally binding and there is no enforcement mechanism. This is particularly difficult in 
vigorous  democracies  where  the  popular  perception  could  be  that  national  interests  are 
being  compromised  for  the  sake  of  global  stability.  How  can  national  leaders  build  and 
nurture, within their national boundaries, a constituency for the global optimal? 
Seeking firm, forward looking commitments, or pointed criticism of policy frameworks of other 
countries, on the lines of the European Union, or even the OECD, style of functioning, may 
be  difficult  and  divisive  at  this  stage.  A  more  ambitious  style  of  global  governance  would 
understandably take some time to take shape. At this stage the issue really is monitoring and 
assessing  whether  the  general  direction  of  G 20  member  country  policies  is  heading  in  a 
mutually  consistent  and  agreed  fashion  over  the  medium  to  long-term,  and  how  the  G  20 
processes  can  help  countries  navigate  their  domestic  legislative,  regulatory  and  judicial 
processes such that commonly agreed policies are adopted. 
The  third  challenge  for  the  G 20  is  that  the  success  of  domestic  policy  actions  in  an 
increasingly  globalizing  world  with  growing  policy  and  market  spillovers  is  linked  to  global 
outcomes.  If  rebalancing  is  uncoordinated,  the  outcomes  could  be  even  worse.  Policy 
co-operation  is  therefore  potentially  win-win,  since  economic  integration  has  moved  far 
ahead of political integration. While this is most clearly manifest in the case of the euro zone, 
to a great extent, the challenges ahead before the G 20 may be similar. In this sense, the 
G 20  can  be  seen  as  a  brave  new  experiment  to  push  the  boundaries  of  globalization  to 
harvest this cooperation dividend. 
Summary and conclusion 
Let me now conclude. I began with explaining the importance of G 20 and how it acquitted 
itself  quite  credibly  in  managing  the  global  financial  crisis.  I  have  also  dealt  with  some 
criticism  of  the  G  20  for  its  seeming  failure  to  address  post  crisis  issues  with  the  same 
alacrity and unity of purpose. I then went on to address some of the major items on the G 20 
agenda, and where appropriate, indicated the Indian position on these issues. Finally, I listed 
the three big challenges on the way forward for the G 20 experiment. 
The G 20 is by all accounts a bold initiative. It is unique from earlier international initiatives in 
the sense that it is not formed by a charter, has no mandate for global governance and its 
decisions are not legally binding and enforceable. In short it is based on the realization that in 
a globalizing world, our futures are all tied together and the only way we can all prosper is 
though  policy  cooperation  and  on  the  belief  that  the  only  way  global  governance  can  be 
pursued is through an honour code. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Can the G 20 survive? What would the late Shri Shroff have said? Pragmatist that he was, 
he  would  have  said  that  the  only  way  the  G 20  can  survive  is  by  showing  exemplary 
leadership in resolving our most pressing challenges at the global level.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
