Már Guðmundsson: To what extent do international and EU reform 
proposals address the fault lines in cross-border banking? 
Keynote address by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 
Eighth  High-Level  Meeting  for  the  Middle  East  &  North  Africa  Region  “Recent  policy 
developments  for  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector”,  Abu  Dhabi, 
28 November 2012. 
 Governor, chairmen and participants,  
Let me begin by thanking the organisers for inviting me to address this impressive gathering 
and thus enabling me to visit this fascinating place.  
In my speech I will discuss the risks in cross-border banking that manifested themselves in 
the  crisis  and  what  has  been  done  since  to  address  them.  The  bottom  line  is  that,  at  the 
global  level,  we  had  developed  significant  cross-border  banking  operations  that  were  only 
very partly covered by the safety net of lender of last resort (LOLR), deposit insurance and 
adequate  resolution  powers,  and  the  associated  regulation  and  supervision.  I  use  the 
metaphor of a fault line to describe this.  
But first I want to tell you a little more about the origin of my perspective on these issues. It 
comes first from my tenure at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) from 2004–2009, 
where I was involved in work on these issues, with the BIS International Banking Statistics 
providing  a  constant  point  of  reference.  But  more  importantly,  it  comes  from  my  current 
position  as  a  policymaker  from  a  small,  open  economy  where  the  collapse  of  three 
cross-border banks was the most noticeable event in the unfolding of the financial crisis that 
hit the country in 2008. The combined balance sheets of these banks was 10 times Iceland’s 
GDP, and their combined bankruptcy, measured in terms of balance sheets, ranks second in 
size  in  the  international  history  of  corporate  failures,  only  after  Lehman  Brothers.  And  this 
happened in a country that ranks among the smallest in the world. I will use the case of these 
banks  to  illustrate  current  problems  with  cross-border  banking  more  generally  and  as  a 
yardstick against which to measure current reform proposals.  
Cross-border  banking  expanded  significantly  in  the  years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  as  is 
witnessed, for instance, by the growth in cross-border banking claims measured by the BIS 
International  Banking  Statistics.  Attending 
this  growth  was  a  steady  build-up  of 
cross-currency liquidity risk. Such risk can take two forms: currency mismatches and maturity 
mismatches  between foreign  currency  assets  and  liabilities.  To  take  an example,  the  euro 
area as a whole had a more or less balanced current account position. A fact that drew less 
attention  before  the  crisis,  however,  was  that  European  banks  had  built  up  huge 
USD-denominated balance sheets that had mismatches, especially in terms of maturity. This 
became  a  major  problem  when  there  was  a  run  on  dollar-denominated  bank  liabilities  of 
non-US international banks post-Lehman. Many big European banking names might not still 
be  with  us  had  it  not  been for  the  USD  swap  lines granted  to  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB), the Bank of England (BoE), and the Swiss National Bank (SNB).  
So the financial crisis revealed a major fault line in cross-border banking in the form of large 
foreign  currency  balance  sheets  featuring  significant  maturity  mismatches,  but  with  limited 
LOLR facilities in terms of foreign currency. Maturity mismatches are, of course, the bread 
and  butter  of  banking,  and  we  know  how  to  deal  with  the  risk  in  a  domestic  setting:  with 
central  bank  LOLR  operations  and  deposit  insurance  complemented  by  regulation  and 
supervision,  partly  to  deal  with  the  moral  hazard  issues  created  by  this  safety  net.  This 
process  is  facilitated  by  two  factors.  First,  and  abstracting  from  leakages  through  the 
FX market,  the  funds  withdrawn  from  banks  during  a  domestic  run  flow  in  one  form  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
another to the central bank, which can then redirect them back to the banks. Second, central 
banks have a very large short-run capacity to expand their balance sheets.  
In  the  current  setting,  it  is  far  from  guaranteed  that  this  process  can  be  replicated  at  the 
international  level.  In  normal  times,  of  course,  managing  liquidity  across  currencies  from 
countries with free movement of capital and relatively developed capital markets is not much 
of  an  issue.  In  these  conditions,  foreign  exchange  swap  markets  can  speedily  be  used  to 
convert liquidity from one currency to another at spreads that closely reflect the differences in 
domestic money market rates in the two countries concerned. But as we saw so clearly in 
2008, this mechanism has a tendency to break down in a time of a financial crisis – precisely 
when it is most needed.  
Central  banks  can  lend  out  their  foreign  exchange  reserves,  of  course,  but  there  is  a 
well-known limit to that process. Some form of global liquidity provision is therefore needed. 
The  swap  lines  granted  during  this  crisis  were  precisely  that,  and  most  studies  seem  to 
support  the  conclusion  that  they  made  the  crucial  difference  in  relieving  strains  in  banks’ 
foreign  exchange  funding.  To  a  significant  degree,  this  was  the  domestic  LOLR  process 
replicated at the international level.  
We have a solution, then, at least at the conceptual level. But it is not clear that it is a robust 
solution in practise. The swap lines are not at present a permanent and a reliable feature of 
the  international  monetary  system;  for  instance,  they  have  been  strongly  challenged  in 
political  discussion  in  the  US.  Furthermore,  there  are  important  unresolved  governance 
issues, such as who should decide which countries get a swap line and which do not. It is 
thus an important item on the reform agenda to clarify the extent to which standing foreign 
currency LOLR facilities for solvent cross-border banks can be set up without going through 
national governments.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  case  of  the  Icelandic  banks,  which  highlights  these  issues  in  an 
extreme form and at the same time throws light on the flaws in the EU setup for cross-border 
banking.  
When  its  three  cross-border  banks  failed  in  the  first  week  of  October  2008,  Iceland  was 
already  on  its  way  into  a  recession  partly  related  to  macroeconomic  imbalances  that 
accumulated during 2005–2007. The banking collapse and the associated wealth loss and 
further depreciation of the currency significantly deepened the ensuing recession.  
Before  the  collapse,  the  banking  system  had  expanded  very  rapidly,  growing  in  just  five 
years  from  a  combined  balance  sheet  of  less  than  2  times  GDP  (at  the  end  of  2003)  to 
almost  10  times  GDP  (in  mid-2008).  Most  of  this  expansion  was  cross-border,  and  a 
significant  part  of  it  was  really  off-border,  having  very  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both 
financing and investment took place abroad.  
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
these banks were faced  with a  wholesale run on their foreign currency liabilities and  were 
therefore heading towards a default on those liabilities in the absence of LOLR assistance in 
foreign  currency.  However,  given  the  size  of  the  balance  sheets  involved  (10  times  GDP 
overall,  nearly  three-fourths  of  it  in  foreign  currency),  it  was  impossible  for  the  Icelandic 
authorities to provide such assistance on their own and could have been catastrophic for the 
credit of the sovereign if they had made a full-scale attempt to do so.  
The  Icelandic  authorities  were  assuming,  however,  that  the  banks  were  solvent.  Their 
published  CAD  ratios  were  well  above  the  8%  threshold,  and  as  late  as  August  2008, the 
Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority had deemed them able to withstand severe capital 
shocks.  Now,  however,  we  know  that  this  was  probably  not  truly  the  case,  as  there  were 
hidden  vulnerabilities  in  their  capital  positions.  Be  that  as  it  may,  with  the  solvency 
assumption in mind, the authorities tried to build defences against potential foreign currency 
liquidity problems at the banks by negotiating swap lines and tapping foreign capital markets, 
in both cases with limited success.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There  was  also  a  failed  attempt  to  nationalise  one  of the  banks  in  late  September.  It  was 
fortunate that it failed, as nationalising the bank would have turned a bank foreign currency 
refining problem into a sovereign problem, with the serious risk that the sovereign might have 
defaulted on such foreign currency payments. In this light, and given the lack of international 
co-operation,  the  Icelandic  authorities  were  forced  to  consider  radical  solutions.  Although 
they were not necessarily articulated fully at the time, these solutions entailed several goals: 
to preserve a functioning domestic payment system, ring-fence the state in the case of bank 
failures,  limit  the  socialisation  of  private  sector  losses,  and  create  the  conditions  for 
rebuilding a domestic banking system.  
The  adopted  solution  included  a  declaration  that  all  deposits  in  Iceland  were  safe  and  all 
deposits in Icelandic-headquartered banks were given priority over other unsecured claims. 
The Financial Supervisory Authority was granted broad-based powers to intervene in failing 
institutions, and the Government was authorised to inject capital into new domestic banks.  
This so-called Emergency Act thus allowed new domestic banks to be created when the old 
cross-border  banks  failed  and  were  placed  in  special  resolution  regimes  followed  by 
winding-up  proceedings.  The  new  banking  system  amounted  to  around  1.7  times  GDP, 
compared  to  10  for  the  old  banking  system.  As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  domestic 
payment  system  functioned  more  or  less  seamlessly  throughout,  and  customers  had 
continuous access to their deposits.  
I have expanded at some length on the measures taken when the banks failed, as there are 
still a number of misconceptions about the process in international discussions. There have 
been  claims  that  Iceland  allowed  its  banking  system  to  collapse,  with  what  now  seem 
reasonable results, and that others should consider doing the same. The fact is that Iceland 
kept  the  domestic  part  of  the  banking  system  running  throughout;  otherwise,  the 
consequences would have been dire. Some have claimed that the banks were nationalised. 
They were not. The old banks are private companies. They are in winding-up proceedings 
governed by law; they are not under the control of the Government. The Government has a 
majority stake in only one of the new banks. Others have claimed that Iceland defaulted and 
got away with it. The opposite is true. The credit of the sovereign was preserved, and all debt 
obligations  have  been  paid  on  time.  This  is  why  the  sovereign  has  been  able  to  tap 
international capital markets twice so far since the crisis struck, and why its five-year CDS 
spread is currently below 180 points.  
Why did the Government give a verbal blanket guarantee for domestic deposits only and not 
for deposits in the banks’ foreign branches? After all, this distinction probably added fuel to 
the  fire  of  the  so-called  Icesave  dispute  about  the  settlement  of  deposit  guarantees  in 
Landsbanki’s Dutch and British branches. The short answer is that such a guarantee would 
never have been credible. As a result, it would not have stopped the run on these deposits 
and, if attempted, might have bankrupted the Government. At the time, the Central Bank of 
Iceland’s FX reserves amounted to 2½ billion euros, while the foreign currency deposits in 
Landsbanki’s  Dutch  and  British  branches  totalled  11½  billion  euros  and  payment  of  the 
EU minimum  deposit  insurance  would  have  required  4½  billion  euros.  The  sovereign  was 
completely  closed  off  from  foreign  capital  markets  at  that  point.  Furthermore,  in  economic 
terms, given that these deposits were used to a significant degree to finance illiquid assets in 
these same countries, such a payment, if possible, would have amounted to a net transfer of 
resources  from  Iceland  to  these  countries  at  a  time  when  Iceland  was  going  through  its 
deepest financial and economic crisis in the post-war period! That made no sense. This case 
also  highlights  the  link  that  must  exist  between  the  LOLR  function  and  deposit  insurance, 
which,  in  the  absence  of  clear  prior  arrangements  for  currency  swaps  or  another  such 
mechanism, must be mostly in the same currency in order to work. The EU framework for 
this was therefore deeply flawed, as is currently being recognised in the plans for a banking 
union.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Why  were  these  huge  risks  in  the  Icelandic  banking  system  allowed  to  build  up?  I  do  not 
think we yet have the research and the consensus to provide a reasonably undisputed list of 
the main causal factors in this process; however, I think four factors will rank highly on that 
list.  These  are  Iceland’s  membership  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  in  1994, 
privatisation of the Icelandic banking system in the early 2000s in a manner that placed the 
major banks in the hands of risk-loving investment bankers, the global conditions of ample 
and cheap credit that prevailed in the years prior to the international financial crisis, and the 
tendency in Iceland both to adopt international and EU regulations without critical analysis of 
Iceland-specific risks and to base supervision to a significant degree on mechanical checks 
of adherence to those regulations.  
Let me expand a bit on the EEA part, as it is highly relevant to my topic. The EEA Agreement 
is  basically  a  mechanism  through  which  EFTA  countries  like  Iceland  and  Norway  were 
allowed to participate in the EU single market, which includes free movement of capital and 
provision  of  financial  services.  The  underlying  principles  are  those  of  home  licensing  for 
operation anywhere in the area and of a level playing field for competition, where size and 
location are not supposed to matter. It therefore goes against the underlying principles of this 
framework to consider the size of banks relative to GDP as a metric for concern, as is now so 
rightly in fashion. This so-called European “Passport” enabled the Icelandic banks to operate 
throughout the EEA, including through branches in other EEA countries.  
We now know that there are deep flaws in this framework and that these flaws are important 
elements in the current euro area crisis. A key issue here is the contradiction between the 
European  Passport  rights,  on  the  one  hand,  and  national  supervision,  national  deposit 
insurance, and national crisis management and resolution regimes, on the other. This is what 
recent  proposals  of  a  banking  union  are  supposed  to  address.  All  of  these  problems  are 
much aggravated when different currencies come into play, and for EEA countries and EU 
countries outside the euro area, this framework also has embedded in it a potentially huge 
foreign currency liquidity risk in the banking system that is not covered by a LOLR.  
I  have  now  described  the  fault  lines  in  cross-border  banking,  both  at  the  global  and  the 
EU/EEA level, and how they burst open in a particularly violent form in the case of Iceland. 
But what is and what should be done about this? The problem with giving a precise answer 
to this question is that what needs to be done at the national level  will depend on what is 
ultimately done at the global level, and for countries that are part of the EU single market it 
also depends on what is done at that level. In turn, necessary reforms at the EU or global 
level  are  put  in  place  partly  to  avoid  national  responses  that  would  unduly  fragment  the 
international financial system or, in the case of the EU, undermine the single market and the 
eurozone.  
Bearing in mind that circularity, let me start at the national level. The key issue here is that, 
as long as global risks and EU flaws are not dealt with, individual countries are forced to take 
action to protect themselves: action that might contribute further to the retreat of cross-border 
banking  and  financial  globalisation  more  generally.  Such  action  might  take  the  form  of 
restricting  international  activities  of  home  banks,  placing  much  stricter  prudential  limits  on 
foreign currency maturity mismatches, limiting FX lending to unhedged parties, and deciding 
that deposit insurance shall be paid only in the local currency. The Central Bank of Iceland 
has recently issued a report called Prudential rules following capital controls, which includes 
all of the above. These rules are foreseen to be in place as long as Iceland is not a part of 
banking union and the eurozone. The problem is that it is not clear it this point whether these 
rules are compatible with the EU single market, of which Iceland is a member. They would 
certainly not be so if pre-crisis interpretations still prevailed. But times are changing.  
Let me then move to the EU level. As a response to the crisis on the eurozone, the EU is 
currently  considering  banking  union  that  will  include  common  supervision  and  deposit 
insurance and a common resolution mechanism to deal with failing banks. This makes very 
good sense and will, with time, take care of the flaws for eurozone countries. However, it will 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
only  solve  part  of  the  problem  for  EU  countries  outside  the  eurozone,  as  it  will  leave  the 
currency problem – or, in other words, the LOLR problem. The same applies to single market 
participants that are not members of the EU, such as Iceland and Norway, and even more so 
if they cannot opt into the banking union. This raises the crucial question of how the banking 
union will affect the single market more generally, and here the UK seems to be an important 
case.  
What  should  happen  at  the  global  level  is  somewhat  less  clear  to  me.  Some  temporary 
retrenchment  is  probably  not  undesirable  at  this  point,  as  cross-border  banking  –  and 
perhaps  financial  globalisation  more  generally  –  far  outpaced  developments  in  public 
frameworks. The issue of global liquidity provision to banks needs further exploration. And 
finally, if countries are increasingly taking unilateral action to protect themselves, someone – 
probably the IMF – must monitor the process. Going forward, some ground rules might have 
to be considered so that we are not faced with too serious unintended consequences for the 
global system.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
