Dimitar Bogov: When pressures on prices are relieved, we will stimulate 
economic growth 
Interview  with  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, in “Kapital” weekly magazine, published on 8 November 2012. 
 Bank affairs are always possible 
In the countries in the region banking affairs have erupted, in connection with criminal 
activities  of  some  banks  in  conjunction  with  politicians.  What  is  the  situation  in 
Macedonia? Is everything under control in the banking sector? 
NBRM  controls  the  banks  in  terms  of  their  compliance  with  the  regulations,  the  quality  of 
corporate  governance,  and  assesses  the  risks  that  banks  undertake  in  their  operations. 
Banking  supervision  is  a  strong  prevention  against  criminal  operation.  But  that  does  not 
mean that as anywhere in the world, banking affairs could not take place also in the banking 
sector in Macedonia.  
Spasijka Jovanova 
The  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  lowered  the  forecasts  for  the 
economic  growth  this  year  to  1  percent  and  raised  the  concerns  of  inflation.  The 
condition when no growth is registered, i.e. there is a downturn, and there is higher 
inflation, is called stagflation, which is the worst stage of an economic crisis. Is the 
Macedonian economy in such a stage? 
I would not agree that the Macedonian economy is entering stagflation. However, there were 
unusual  movements  in  the  world  economy.  On  the  one  hand,  European  economies  are  in 
recession, the US economy has been struggling to return to the path of growth, and more 
recently,  fast-growing  economies  such  as  Brazil,  India,  China,  Turkey  have  also  slowed 
down. In such circumstances, it would be logical for the prices on the commodity exchanges 
worldwide to fall. But it is not happening. Prices of oil and basic agricultural products are not 
falling, but maintain the previously achieved high level or even continue to rise. In part, this is 
due to the overly relaxed monetary policy of the Fed, the ECB and the Bank of England, as 
well as the debt crisis in the Euro area, which “urge” investors to invest in real goods on the 
commodity  exchanges.  The  rest  is  a  consequence  of  the  so-called  supply  shocks,  i.e. 
political  tensions  in  the  Arab  world  and  the  Middle  East,  as  well  as  the  drought  in  the 
countries that are the largest producers of grain. In such conditions, despite the slowdown of 
economic growth, Macedonia is facing a higher imported inflation. 
In conditions of such an emphasized economic crisis, how will the monetary policy be 
put  into  operation  to  encourage  economic  growth?  You  claim  that  the  NBRM  can 
contribute only by keeping price stability, but obviously it is undermined. 
Price stability is neither undermined nor will it be. In August and September, a higher than 
usual monthly price increase for this time of the year was registered, due to one-off factors 
that I have already explained. Their effect will soon be exhausted and the increase will stop 
as  pressures  from  the  demand  side  have  been  completely  absent.  Temporarily  higher 
inflation does not mean that price stability is undermined. Over the last two years, inflation in 
the  Euro  area  has  continuously  been  well  above  the  ECB’s  target,  but  no  one  gets  upset 
about it, as it is clear that it is not a consequence of overheated domestic demand. Monetary 
policy cannot prevent the initial impact on prices from the supply shocks, but it can prevent 
the transmission effect on other prices. NBRM will not allow price stability to be undermined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
You have recently admitted that monetary policy is facing several challenges, which 
call  for  contrasting  reactions.  Can  you  explain  what  you  think  specifically  and  how 
you would solve this problem in the monetary sphere? 
If  there  had  not  been  price  shocks  of  the  global  commodity  exchanges,  the  NBRM  would 
have had room for further easing of the monetary policy. However, due to the pressures from 
international prices we must give a clear signal that we will not allow undermining of price 
stability, while simultaneously adjusting the monetary policy to the slower economic growth. It 
is a great challenge, a difficult task, but not impossible. Now is the time when many central 
banks apply unconventional monetary policy measures to respond to the unusual economic 
trends. At the moment we are sure that risks to price stability undermining are eliminated, we 
will apply monetary measures appropriate for the slower economic growth. 
Маy pressures be coming from the fiscal policy? 
So far, they have not, and I hope it will remain that way. The best confirmation of that are the 
balances in the economy. After all, exactly because of that, we had room for the so far most 
relaxed monetary policy without jeopardizing the stability of prices, Denar exchange rate and 
the banking system. 
Banks’ non-performing loans will decrease 
This  year,  liquidity  was  the  biggest  problem  of  the  companies.  The  figures  showed 
that the indebtedness in the real sector is huge, over Euro 5 billion, with the country’s 
debt  to  the  companies  being  over  Euro  220  million.  In  such  circumstances,  banks 
have reduced lending to firms to a minimum and they struggle with the growth of bad 
loans. Can we expect the situation to improve? 
In  the  statistics  that  are  known  to  me  I  have  not  found  such  figures.  However,  when 
economic  growth  and  exports  slow  down  and  budgetary  payments  are  late,  usually  the 
liquidity of companies deteriorates. Therefore they are late in the settlement of obligations to 
the banks. Despite that, non-performing loans of the Macedonian banks amount to about 10 
percent, which is the lowest share in the region from Slovenia to Greece. Announced debt 
repayments from the budget will contribute to the reduction of the debts among companies, 
and  finally  debts  toward  the  banks.  So  it  is  logical  to  expect  stabilization,  and  perhaps 
reduction of the level of banks’ bad loans. 
Banks  which  have  huge  excess  liquidity,  have  reservations  regarding  lending  to 
companies, and they locate the reason in the emphasized risks. Is the placement of 
those funds in Treasury bills and Central Bank bills a solution, even at the cost of a 
decline in the economy? 
The monetary policy is trying to trigger a certain behavior of the banks which it considers is 
appropriate at a particular time. But banks independently manage excess liquidity and it is 
their decision whether more will be placed in the form of loans or in risk-free securities. At the 
beginning  of  the  second  quarter,  with  several  measures  we  released  substantial  excess 
liquidity  placed  in  CB  bills  over  the  level  that  we  considered  it  was  necessary  to  be 
maintained. It is a fact that banks placed only a small part of that surplus in loans. One of the 
reasons is certainly the perception of banks for increased risks in the domestic and global 
economy.  But  just  as  important,  if  not  even  more  important  reason  are  the  corporate 
strategies of the banking groups in the Euro area that are owners of the Macedonian banks. 
Some of these banking groups have serious problems in their home countries. Although their 
banks in Macedonia have excellent capitalization and record liquidity, they must implement 
the strategy of their foreign parent banks, which due to the insufficient capital, refrain from 
lending  in  all  countries  where  they  are  present.  NBRM  cannot  require  those  banks  to 
increase  lending,  but  we  undertake  everything  we  can  to  prevent  a  reduction  in  their  loan 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
portfolios.  Obviously,  this  is  another  area  where  we  have  a  spillover  of  the  negative 
developments in the Euro area into our economy.  
What will be the credit growth this year, and what do you expect it to be next year? 
The estimate for this year is about 7 percent, and for the next year it is somewhat higher. 
In which direction will the interest rates on loans and deposits move next year? 
The downward trend is likely to continue, although at a slower pace. 
The European Central Bank reduced the basic interest rate to 0.75 percent in order to 
stimulate  the  economic  growth.  The  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia 
maintains it at 3.75 percent. Why not reducing it down to 1 percent in our country, too, 
which will reduce the interest rates on loans as well? 
In  a  highly  euroized  economy  as  the  Macedonian,  it  is  necessary  to  motivate  economic 
agents to  demand  Denars,  not  Euros. Therefore,  interest  rate  parity  on Denars  and  Euros 
must be kept at an appropriate level that stimulates the demand for Denars. In the last three 
years we have reduced that parity from 8 percent to only 3 percent. Further reduction is a 
process that depends on the resilience of the economy. 
Macedonia will have to save more 
What are your expectations for the Macedonian economy in 2013, which is expected to 
be perhaps more difficult and more turbulent than this year? What, according to you, 
will be the biggest economic challenges and problems next year? 
It  will  be  another  year  full  of  uncertainty  for  the  world  and  especially  for  the  European 
economy. Thus, the export demand for Macedonian products is unlikely to improve. So, we 
cannot  expect  that  to  boost  economic  growth.  However,  our  expectation  for  the  economic 
growth  in  Macedonia  is  to  be  much  better  than  this  year,  driven  by  diversification  of  the 
production into new export-oriented facilities that started to work this year, or will start to work 
in  the  next  year,  as  well  as  infrastructural  facilities  for  which  funding  has  already  been 
secured from foreign sources. 
Both  politicians  and  economists  globally  are  of  a  divided  opinion  in  terms  of  the 
economic policy that should be conducted in order to emerge from the crisis. Some 
advocate austerity, others encourage spending to stimulate growth. Which policy you 
prefer and think is right for Macedonia? 
According  to  me,  those  are  “false”  discussions.  If  a  country  has  a  room  for  increased 
spending, certainly now is the time to stimulate the economy. But unfortunately, there are not 
many such countries worldwide. Developed economies were spending more than they could 
afford for years, and now they do not have any room for fiscal stimulus left. It is easy to say 
that  now  you  have  to  encourage  consumption  in  Greece,  Spain,  Italy,  Portugal,  USA,  etc. 
Who  will  finance  this  consumption?  Just  as  banks  refuse  to  provide  new  loans  to 
overindebted customers, investors are not willing to finance increased spending of budgets. 
In the economics there is a saying that “there is no free lunch.” In the end someone has to 
pay the bill. The time has come for the developed economies to pay the bill and now there is 
no  other  choice  but  austerity.  This  is  a  time  of  painful  structural  reforms,  revision  of  the 
generosity  of  social  care  in  accordance  with  the  possibilities  of  the  economy.  As  for 
Macedonia, as a result of many years of prudent fiscal policies, we had room for stimulus in 
these few  years.  But  this  room  in  the  medium  term  will  be  exhausted  and  we  will  have  to 
save more. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Macedonian companies lend to their parent companies in the Euro area 
What  are  the  expectations  for  the  deposits  in  2013?  Can  we  expect  further  growth, 
especially of Denar deposits? 
Households’ saving is likely to continue at the usual growth rate of at least 10 percent per 
year, mostly in Denars. It is harder to predict the trend with companies. This year there were 
significant capital outflows in the form of dividends and loans from foreign-owned companies 
to their parent companies abroad. Obviously, Macedonian companies are still profitable and 
they financially help their parent companies in the troubled Euro area countries. It negatively 
influences the deposit potential of companies. It is uncertain whether this trend will continue 
next year. 
Why do you always connect the issue of the exchange rate policy with devaluation? Is 
it possible to open a debate in the country, on the economic model, the effects that it 
provides and the exchange rate regime and its efficiency vis-a-vis the economy? 
Currently,  we  have  a  real  exchange  rate  of the  Denar.  Demand  and  supply  are  balanced. 
NBRM very rarely intervenes in the foreign exchange market. As a result of the credibility of 
the  Denar  and  the  National  Bank  created  over  the  past  15  years,  we  have  completely 
eliminated  the  speculative  demand  for  foreign  exchange.  But  experience  has  shown  that 
immediately when the change in the exchange rate is mentioned, a speculative demand for 
foreign  exchange  appears  and  disturbs  the  balance  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.  This 
would  cause  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  higher  inflation  and  ultimately  much  higher 
interest  rates  than  the  current  ones.  Who  would  benefit  from  that?  You  take  a  selected 
sample  of  countries  with  flexible  exchange  rate  that  have  higher  economic  growth  than 
Macedonia  and  you  offer  it  as  evidence  that  such  policy  gives  better  results.  I  will  find 
another  sample  of  countries  with  flexible  exchange  rate  that  have  lower  growth  than 
Macedonia. It is not economic analysis, it is manipulation. I am still waiting for someone to 
offer a plausible analysis of how the change of the exchange rate regime will boost economic 
growth. Except naive statements in the media, so far no one has offered such an analysis. In 
the economic literature, it has long been concluded that the exchange rate regime does not 
affect economic growth. 
Do  you  think  that  Macedonia  has  an  efficient  economic  model  and  exchange  rate 
regime  if  it  records  economic  growth  rates  which  do  not  exceed  3–4  percent,  and 
everybody agrees that it is necessary to have growth of over 8 percent? 
It is very naive to link economic growth only with the exchange rate regime. Economic growth 
is a very complex phenomenon that depends on about a hundred of factors. Competitiveness 
of an economy does not depend only on the exchange rate. Take the global competitiveness 
index of the World Economic Forum. It takes into account more than one hundred indicators 
for  measuring  the  competitiveness  of  countries.  If  someone  believes  that  Macedonia  will 
realize  an  8  percent  growth  rate  only  if  the  exchange  rate  regime  is  changed,  I  am  left 
speechless.  The  change  in  the  exchange  rate  is  used  as  an  instrument  for  improving  the 
competitiveness only  when the country has failed to improve other factors and there is no 
other choice. But it is only a short term solution that will quickly exhaust the effects, because 
devaluation  will  bring  high  inflation  and  in  the  end  only  the  nominal  exchange  rate  is 
changed, and the real exchange rate will remain the same. And then again demands for a 
new  devaluation.  Look  at  the  history  of  the  European  Monetary  Union.  What  was  the 
exchange  rate  policy  of  Greece,  Italy,  Spain,  before  the  introduction  of  the  ECU  (the 
predecessor  of  the  Euro).  Instead  of  structural  reforms,  they  constantly  corrected  their 
weaknesses  with  a  devaluation  of the  exchange  rate. When  they  entered  the  Euro  area  it 
was no longer possible and it has led to what we see today. They require internal devaluation 
of about 30 percent to restore lost competitiveness. By contrast, countries such as Austria, 
the Netherlands (Denmark, which still has its own currency) have always led policy of a fixed 
exchange  rate  pegged to  the German  Mark. To  be  competitive,  they  had  to  increase  their 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efficiency  with  structural  measures.  Therefore  these  countries  have  no  problems  with 
competitiveness today. 
In a recent interview you gave for Banks and Businesses you recommended that the 
competitiveness  of  the  Macedonian  economy  must  be  improved  through  complex 
reforms and dedicated work that includes everybody. Do you see such progress? 
Yes, I see such progress. The ranking of Doing Business, of the World Economic Forum, is a 
benchmark  for  what  has  been  done  in  the  area  of  ??improving  the  conditions  for  higher 
economic growth. It is the only  way to create higher economic growth. It is a process that 
should never stop. Better ranking on these lists does not mean that we will immediately have 
higher  economic  growth.  It  takes  time,  we  should  continuously  improve  the  conditions  for 
doing business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
