Deepak Mohanty: Money market and monetary operations in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Seminar on “Issues in financial markets”, Mumbai, 15 December 2012. 
 The  assistance  provided  by  Sitikantha  Pattanaik,  Jeevan  Khundrakpam,  Binod  Bhoi  and  Rajeev  Jain  is 
acknowledged.  
I  thank  Mr.  G.  Mahalingam  for  the  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  in  this  distinguished 
panel  on  money  market.  This  forum  which  brings  together  the  Reserve  Bank  and 
practitioners  in  the  financial  market,  is  important  not  only  from  the  perspective  of  market 
development  but  also  for  fostering  a  better  understanding  of  monetary  operations.  Money 
market  is  at  the  heart  of  monetary  operations.  Over  the  last  decade,  there  has  been 
substantial development in the Indian money market in terms of depth, variety of instruments 
and efficiency. This has enabled the Reserve Bank to change its monetary operations from 
direct quantity based instruments to indirect interest rate based instruments to enhance the 
efficiency  of  monetary  transmission  consistent with  international  best  practice.  Against  this 
background,  I  will  briefly  capture  the  developments  in  the  money  market  and  discuss  the 
experience  with  the  recently  modified  operating  procedure  of  monetary  policy  before 
concluding with some thoughts on the way forward. 
Role of money market 
Money market can be defined as a market for short-term funds with maturities ranging from 
overnight  to  one  year  and  includes  financial  instruments  that  are  considered  to  be  close 
substitutes of money. It provides an equilibrating mechanism for demand and supply of short-
term funds and in the process provides an avenue for central bank intervention in influencing 
both  the  quantum  and  cost  of  liquidity  in  the  financial  system,  consistent  with  the  overall 
stance of monetary policy. In the process, money market plays a central role in the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism by providing a key link in the operations of monetary policy to 
financial markets and ultimately, to the real economy. In fact, money market is the first and 
the most important stage in the chain of monetary policy transmission. 
Typically,  the  monetary  policy  instrument,  effectively  the  price  of  central  bank  liquidity,  is 
directly set by the central bank. In view of limited control over long-term interest rates, central 
banks adopt a strategy to exert direct influence on short-term interest rates. Changes in the 
short-term policy rate provide signals to financial markets, whereby different segments of the 
financial system respond by adjusting their rates of return on various instruments, depending 
on  their  sensitivity  and  the  efficacy  of  the  transmission  mechanism.  How  quickly  and 
effectively  the  monetary  policy  actions  influence  the  spectrum  of  market  interest  rates 
depends upon the level of development of various segments of financial markets, particularly 
the money market. Cross-country studies suggest that as domestic financial markets grow, 
transmission of monetary policy through various channels becomes better. 
As a crucial initial link in the chain through which monetary policy aims at achieving ultimate 
goals relating to inflation and growth, money market developments are closely monitored and 
influenced by central banks. Besides expecting money market rates to respond to policy rate 
changes  in  a  well  anchored  manner,  central  banks  aim  at  ensuring  appropriate  liquidity 
conditions  through  discretionary  liquidity  management  operations  so  that  money  market 
functions normally. Money market is also an important funding market for banks and financial 
institutions,  and  at  times,  even  for  corporates.  Stressed  conditions  in  the  money  markets 
could increase moral hazard with banks expecting a central bank to function as the lender of 
first resort. Following the recent global financial crisis, money market funding for the financial 
system  effectively  got  replaced  with  central  bank  funding  in  advanced  countries.  Money 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
market  rates  (like  LIBOR  and  EURIBOR)  are  standard  benchmarks  for  pricing  of  bonds, 
loans  and  other  financial  products.  Market  manipulation  of  this  key  benchmark  –  as 
reportedly happened to LIBOR recently – though undermined the faith in money market. A 
sound money market would have to ensure conditions where banks can conduct business 
safely. 
Money  market  transactions  could  be  both  secured  and  unsecured,  i.e.,  without  collaterals. 
What  does  one  expect  from  the  secured  and  unsecured  markets?  The  unsecured  market 
should  primarily  promote  market  discipline.  Loans  being  uncollateralised  in  this  market, 
lenders  are  directly  exposed  to  the  risk  of  non-repayment.  This  works  as  an  incentive  for 
them to address information asymmetry by collecting information about borrowers. It is the 
constant  peer  monitoring  that  promotes  market  discipline.  In  the  secured  segment  of  the 
money market, the lender may address credit risk concerns by asking for sound collaterals 
and  also  applying  some  haircuts,  but  the  peer  monitoring  could  potentially  then  be  less 
emphasised. Conditions of market stress can lead to collateral scarcity and falling value of 
collaterals  could  stifle  even  the  secured  money  market.  Illiquidity  spiral  from  the  financial 
markets, i.e., when financial instruments held as assets turn illiquid, may lead to a situation 
where central banks would be required to dilute the collateral standards for liquidity injection, 
and  even  exchange  good  quality  securities  against  securities  facing  illiquidity  risks.  This 
becomes necessary to unfreeze the markets in general. After the global crisis, asset quality, 
particularly liquidity, has received greater policy focus. 
Money market rates also reflect market expectations of how the policy rate could evolve in 
the  near  term.  As  per  standard  expectations  hypothesis,  money  market  rates  for  different 
time  duration  should  equal  expected  future  short-term  rates,  plus  term  premium  and  risk 
premium. Bernanke (2004)1 had examined how expectations of the likely future course of the 
federal funds rate respond to the Fed’s policy actions and statements and noted that “...Our 
findings  support  the  view  that  FOMC  statements  have  proven  a  powerful  tool  for  affecting 
market expectations about the future course of the federal funds rate”. 
Empirical research suggests that if the shortest end of the money market, which is influenced 
the most by policy rate, is stable, or less volatile, then it may help in keeping term premium 
lower,  compared  to  a  period  when  volatile  short  rates  get  transmitted  to  the  entire  money 
market and simultaneously the term premium rises. 
With  the  sophistication  of  financial  markets  rendering  the  money,  output  and  price 
relationship unstable, by the early 1980s, major central banks began to emphasise on the 
price channel, i.e., policy interest rate for monetary policy transmission. As a result, the role 
of money market became all the more important for signaling and transmission of monetary 
policy.  Thus,  the  development  of  money  markets  across  countries  in  terms  of  instruments 
and  participants  with  varying  risk  profiles  has  necessitated  changes  in  the  operating 
procedures of monetary policy. 
In  the  case  of  India,  the  ultimate  goals  of  monetary  policy,  i.e.,  price  stability  and  growth, 
have remained unchanged over the years. In the recent years, financial stability has been 
considered  as  an  additional  objective  of  monetary  policy.  However,  operational  and 
intermediate objectives of monetary policy have undergone periodic changes in response to 
changes in the economic and financial environment. The development of the money market 
over the years and relative stability in the call money market enabled the Reserve Bank to 
move  away  from  quantity-based  instruments  to  price-based  instruments  under  its  multiple 
indicators approach adopted since 1998. Accordingly, the overnight call rate, which was used 
implicitly as operating target since the institution of liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) in 2000, 
became explicit after the adoption of a new operating procedure in May 2011. 
                                                 
1  Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2004),  “Central  Bank  Talk  and  Monetary  Policy”,  At  the  Japan  Society  Corporate 
Luncheon, New York, October 7. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Money market in India 
Financial reforms in India began in the early 1990s. However, various segments of domestic 
financial  markets,  viz., money  market,  debt  market  and  forex  market  underwent  significant 
shifts mainly from the 1990s. Earlier, the Indian money market was characterised by paucity 
of instruments, lack of depth and distortions in the market micro-structure. It mainly consisted 
of uncollateralised call market, treasury bills, commercial bills and participation certificates. 
Following  the  recommendations  of  the  Chakravarty  Committee  (1985),  the  Reserve  Bank 
adopted a monetary targeting framework. At the same time, efforts were made to develop the 
money market following the recommendations of Vaghul Committee (1987). In this regard, 
important  developments  were:  (i)  setting  up  of  the  Discount  and  Finance  House  of  India 
(DFHI) in 1988 to impart liquidity to money market instruments and help the development of 
secondary markets in such instruments; (ii) introduction of instruments such as certificate of 
deposits  (CDs)  in  1989  and  commercial  papers  in  1990  and  inter-bank  participation 
certificates with and without risk in 1988 to increase the range of instruments; and (iii) freeing 
of call money rates by May 1989 to enable price discovery. However, the functioning of the 
market  continued  to  be  hindered  by  a  number  of  structural  rigidities  such  as  skewed 
distribution  of  liquidity  and  the  prevalence  of  administered  deposit  and  lending  rates  of 
banks. 
Recognising  these  rigidities,  the  pace  of  reforms  in  money  market  was  accelerated. 
Following the recommendations of an Internal Working Group (1997) and the Narasimham 
Committee (1998), a comprehensive set of measures was undertaken by the Reserve Bank 
to develop the money market. These included: (i) withdrawal of interest rate ceilings in the 
money market; (ii) introduction of auctions in treasury bills; (iii) gradual move away from the 
cash credit system to a loan-based system. Maturities of other existing instruments such as 
CP  and  CDs  were  also  gradually  shortened  to  encourage  wider  participation.  Most 
importantly,  the  ad  hoc  treasury  bills  were  abolished  in  1997  thereby  putting  a  stop  to 
automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit. This enhanced the instrument independence of the 
Reserve Bank (Table 1). 
Major Developments in Money Market since the 1990s 
Table 1 
Abolition of ad hoc treasury bills in April 1997 
Full fledged LAF in June 2000. 
CBLO for corporate and non-bank participants introduced in 2003  
Minimum maturity of CPs shortened by October 2004  
Prudential limits on exposure of banks and PDs to call/notice market in April 2005  
Maturity of CDs gradually shortened by April 2005  
Transformation of call money market into a pure inter-bank market by August 2005  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8.  Widening of collateral base by making state government securities (SDLs) eligible for LAF 
operations since April 2007 
Operationalisation of a screen-based negotiated system (NDS-CALL) for all dealings in the 
call/notice and the term money markets in September 2006. The reporting of all such 
transactions made compulsory through NDS-CALL in November 2012.  
9. 
10.  Repo in corporate bonds allowed in March 2010. 
11.  Operationalisation of a reporting platform for secondary market transactions in CPs and CDs 
in July 2010.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  migrate 
More  importantly,  efforts  were  made  to  transform  the  call  money  market  into  primarily  an 
inter-bank  market,  while  encouraging  other  market  participants 
towards 
collateralised  segments  of  the  market,  thereby  increasing  overall  market  stability  and 
diversification. In order to facilitate the phasing out of corporate and the non-banks from the 
call money market, new instruments such as market repos and collateralised borrowing and 
lending  obligations  (CBLO)  were  introduced  to  provide  them  avenues  for  managing  their 
short-term  liquidity.  Non-bank  entities  completely  exited  the  call  money  market  by  August 
2005.  In  order  to  minimise  the  default  risk  and  ensure  balanced  development  of  various 
market  segments,  the  Reserve  Bank  instituted  prudential  limits  on  exposure  of  banks  and 
primary dealers (PDs) to the call/notice money market. In April 2005, these limits were linked 
to capital funds (sum of Tier I and Tier II capital) for scheduled commercial banks. 
In  order  to  improve  transparency  and  efficiency  in  the  money  market,  reporting  of  all 
call/notice  money  market  transactions  through  negotiated  dealing  system  (NDS)  within 
15 minutes  of  conclusion  of  the  transaction  was  made  mandatory.  Furthermore,  a  screen-
based negotiated quote-driven system for all dealings in the call/notice and the term money 
markets  (NDS-CALL),  developed  by  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Limited  (CCIL),  was 
operationalised in September 2006 to ensure better price discovery. 
Beginning  in  June  2000,  the  Reserve  Bank  introduced  a  full-fledged  liquidity  adjustment 
facility (LAF) and it was operated through overnight fixed rate repo and reverse repo from 
November 2004. This helped to develop interest rate as an important instrument of monetary 
transmission. It also provided greater flexibility to the Reserve Bank in determining both the 
quantum of liquidity as well as the rates by responding to the needs of the system on a daily 
basis (Chart 1). 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the development of various constituents of the money market, the most significant aspect 
was  the  growth  of  the  collateralised  market  vis-à-vis  the  uncollateralised  market.  Over  the 
last decade, while the daily turnover in the call money market either stagnated or declined, 
that  of  the  collateralised  segment,  market  repo  plus  CBLO,  increased  manifold  (Chart  2). 
Since  2007–08,  both  the  CP  and  CD  volumes  have  also  increased  very  significantly 
(Chart 3).  Furthermore,  issuance  of  91-treasury  bills  has  also  increased  sharply  (Chart  4). 
The overall money market now is much larger relative to GDP than a decade ago. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 
Alongside,  the  rates  of  return  on  various  instruments  in  the  money  market  have  shown 
greater co-movement, especially since the introduction of LAF (Table 2 & Chart 5). 
 Table 2 
Interest Rates in the Money Market 
(Percent per annum: Annual Averages) 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Monetary operating procedure 
The development of money market as well as its growing inter-linkages with other segments 
of financial markets enabled the Reserve Bank to alter the operating procedures of monetary 
policy consistent with the objectives of the monetary policy. Based on the recommendations 
of  Chakravarty  Committee  (1985),  a  monetary  targeting  framework  with  feedback  was 
introduced during the mid-1980s, under which reserve money was used as operating target 
and  broad  money  (M3)  as  an  intermediate  target.  By  the  mid-1990s,  this  framework  was 
rendered  increasingly  inadequate  due  to  several  developments.  Structural  reforms  and 
financial liberalisation led to a paradigm shift in the financing of government and commercial 
sectors with increasingly market-determined interest rates and exchange rate. Development 
in the various segments of the financial market led to deepening of the financial sector. This 
provided the Reserve Bank to effectively transmit policy signals through indirect instruments 
such as interest rates. On the other hand, increase in liquidity emanating from capital inflows 
raised the ratio of net foreign assets to reserve money and rendered the control of monetary 
aggregates more difficult. With financial innovations, the stability in the demand function for 
money also came under question. 
Recognising these challenges and the growing complexities of monetary management, the 
Reserve Bank switched to a multiple indicators approach in 1998–99. Under this approach, a 
host of macroeconomic indicators including interest rates in different segments of financial 
markets, along with other indicators on currency, lending by banks and financial institutions, 
fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions 
in  foreign  exchange  available  on  high  frequency  basis  are  juxtaposed  with  output  data  for 
drawing implications for monetary policy formulation. However, the approach itself continued 
to  evolve  and  was  further  augmented  by  forward-looking  indicators  drawn  from  Reserve 
Bank’s various surveys and a panel of parsimonious time series models (Mohanty, 2011).2  
Along with the multiple indicators approach, operating procedure also underwent a change 
following the recommendation of Narasimham Committee II (1998). The RBI introduced the 
                                                 
2  Mohanty,  Deepak  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  Framework  in  India:  Experience  with  Multiple-Indicators 
Approach”, RBI Bulletin, March 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF) in April 1999, under which liquidity injection was 
done at the Bank Rate and liquidity absorption was through fixed reverse repo rate. The ILAF 
gradually  transited  into  a  full-fledged  liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  with  periodic 
modifications based on experience and development of financial markets and the payment 
system.  The  LAF  was  operated  through  overnight  fixed  rate  repo  and  reverse  repo  from 
November 2004, which provided an informal corridor for the call money rate. 
Though the LAF helped to develop interest rate as an instrument of monetary transmission, 
two  major  weaknesses  came  to  the  fore.  First  was  the  lack  of  a  single  policy  rate,  as  the 
operating  policy  rate  alternated  between  repo  during  deficit  liquidity  situation  and  reverse 
repo  rate  during  surplus  liquidity  condition.  Second  was  the  lack  of  a  firm  corridor,  as  the 
effective overnight interest rates dipped (rose) below (above) the reverse repo (repo) rate in 
extreme  surplus  (deficit)  conditions.  Recognising  these  shortcomings,  a  new  operating 
procedure was put in place in May 2011.  
Let  me  elaborate  on  the  key  features  of  the  new  operating  procedure.  First,  the  weighted 
average  overnight  call  money  rate  was  explicitly  recognised  as  the  operating  target  of 
monetary policy.3 Second, the repo rate was made the only one independently varying policy 
rate.  Third,  a  new  Marginal  Standing  Facility  (MSF)  was  instituted  under  which  scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) could borrow overnight at 100 basis points above the repo rate up 
to  one  per  cent  of  their  respective  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL).  This  limit  was 
subsequently raised to two per cent of NDTL and in addition, SCBs were allowed to borrow 
funds under MSF on overnight basis against their excess SLR holdings as well. Moreover, 
the  Bank  Rate  being  the  discount  rate  was  aligned  to  the  MSF  rate.  Fourth,  the  revised 
corridor was defined with a fixed width of 200 basis points. The repo rate was placed in the 
middle of the corridor, with the reverse repo rate at 100 basis points below it and the MSF 
rate as well as the Bank Rate at 100 basis points above it (Chart 6). Thus, under the new 
operating procedure, all the three other rates announced by the Reserve Bank, i.e., reverse 
repo rate, MSF rate and the Bank Rate, are linked to the single policy repo rate. 
The new operating procedure was expected to improve the implementation and transmission 
of  monetary  policy  for  the  following  reasons.  First,  explicit  announcement  of  an  operating 
target  makes  market  participants  clear  about  the  desired  policy  impact.  Second,  a  single 
policy rate removes the confusion arising out of policy rate alternating between the repo and 
the reverse repo rates, and makes signalling of monetary policy stance more accurate. Third, 
MSF provides a safety valve against unanticipated liquidity shocks. Fourth, a fixed interest 
rate corridor set by MSF rate and reverse repo rate, reduces uncertainty and communication 
difficulties and helps keep the overnight average call money rate close to the repo rate. 
Let me now turn to a brief evaluation of the experience with the new operating procedure. In 
the  implementation  of  the  new  procedure,  the  Reserve  Bank  prefers  to  keep  the  systemic 
liquidity  in  deficit  mode  as  monetary  transmission  is  found  to  be  more  effective  in  this 
situation (RBI, 2011).4 The Reserve Bank also announced an indicative liquidity comfort zone 
of (+)/(–) 1.0 per cent of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of banks. 
                                                  
3  Even though the share of call money market in the overnight money market is lower than that of collateralised 
segment,  the  weighted  overnight  call  rate  is  used  as  operating  target.  This  is  partly  on  account  of  high 
correlation between the overnight call money rate and the collaterallised money market rate at 0.9. The issue 
was examined in detail by the Working Group on Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy which observed that 
the transmission of policy rate to the overnight call money rate is stronger than the overnight money market 
rate. In addition, the call money market is a pure inter-bank market and, hence, better reflects the net liquidity 
situation. 
4  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (2011),  Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  Operating  Procedure  of  Monetary  Policy 
(Chairman: Deepak Mohanty), March. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Since  May  2011,  the  liquidity  conditions  can  be  broadly  divided  into  three  distinct  phases. 
After  generally  remaining  within  the  Reserve  Bank’s  comfort  zone  during  the  first  phase 
during May–October 2011, the liquidity deficit crossed the one per cent of NDTL level during 
November  2011  to  June  2012.  This  large  liquidity  deficit  was  mainly  caused  by  forex 
intervention  and  increased  divergence  between  credit  and  deposit  growth.  The  deficit 
conditions were further aggravated by frictional factors like the build-up of government cash 
balances with the Reserve Bank that persisted longer than anticipated and the increase in 
currency  in  circulation.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  to  actively  manage  liquidity 
through  injection  of  liquidity  by  way  of  open  market  operations  (OMOs)  and  cut  in  cash 
reserve ratio (CRR) of banks. This was supported by decline in currency in circulation and a 
reduction  in  government  cash  balances  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  As  a  result,  there  was  a 
significant easing of liquidity conditions since July 2012 with the extent of the deficit broadly 
returning to the Reserve Bank’s comfort level of one per cent of NDTL (Chart 7).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Since its implementation, the systemic liquidity has been in deficit mode, which has helped in 
better transmission of policy rate to various segments of money markets. First, the overnight 
interest rate has been more stable since its implementation (Chart 8). 
 
 Second,  the  repo  rate  and  weighted  call  rate  are  far  more  closely  aligned  under  the  new 
operating procedure than earlier; implying improved transmission of monetary policy in terms 
of movement in call money market interest rate (Chart 9). 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third, the call money rate in turn is observed to be better aligned with other money market 
interest rates after the implementation of new operating procedure than before (Chart 10). 
  Conclusion  
Let  me  conclude.  Our  experience  shows  that  the  development  of  money  market  and 
refinements  in  operating  procedures  of  monetary  policy  have  moved  in  tandem.  Financial 
sector reforms along with Reserve Bank’s emphasis on development of various segments of 
financial  market  enabled  shifts  in  operating  procedures  based  on  direct  quantity-based 
instruments to indirect interest rate-based instruments. The Reserve Bank has been able to 
better transmit monetary policy signals in the money market through a single policy repo rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Evidence so far suggests a significant improvement in monetary policy transmission under 
the new operating framework. In order to reinforce this process, I make three suggestions. 
First, there has been a swift transmission of policy rate at the short-end of money market, 
partly  due  to  the  prevalence  of  market  liquidity  in  deficit  mode.  However,  ensuring  market 
liquidity  in  a  deficit  mode  of  desired  level  on  a  sustained  basis  is  contingent  on  Reserve 
Bank’s  ability  to  effectively  conduct  OMOs  and  the  market  appetite  for  such  operations. 
Hence, there is a need to develop the market micro-structure and further enhance secondary 
market transactions in government securities to facilitate smooth conduct of OMOs. 
Second,  the  LAF  is  not  the  appropriate  instrument  for  managing  the  liquidity  of  more 
enduring nature. As the system is expected to be in deficit, there is a need to develop term 
repo to minimise daily requirement of liquidity. 
Third,  notwithstanding  significant  advances  in  developing  the  market,  the  term  structure  in 
the money market is incomplete. It is, therefore, desirable to extend the yield curve beyond 
the overnight rate by developing a term-money market. 
Thank you.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
