Marzunisham Omar: Credit reporting and risk management 
Welcoming remarks by Mr  Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the BNM-IFC 4th Credit Reporting and Risk Management Training, Central Bank 
of Malaysia, 9 November 2012. 
 It  is my  great  pleasure to  welcome  you  to  Malaysia  and  to  the fourth  series  of the  “Credit 
Reporting  and  Risk  Management  Training”,  jointly  organised  by  the  International  Finance 
Corporation  (IFC)  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  This  annual  workshop  aims  to  support  an 
exchange  of  views  and  experiences  amongst  experts  and  practitioners  on  the  latest 
development in credit reporting methodologies and the role of credit registries in preserving 
financial  stability,  enhancing  access  to  finance  and  promoting  more  inclusive  financial 
systems. 
Bank Negara Malaysia actively supports the promotion of greater regional and international 
collaboration in central  banking and financial services. We believe that  experience sharing 
amongst  policymakers  and  practitioners  is  a  very  effective  way  of  building  capacity  in 
organisations. Since 2008, more than 3,500 officials from 88 countries have participated in 
the various knowledge sharing programmes organised or hosted by the Bank. 
This particular workshop led by the IFC, is of special interest. It aims to provide participants 
better understanding of a key infrastructure in enabling well informed credit decisions to be 
made based on borrowers’ repayment track records. 
Credit information sharing is an important element in the financial system and has important 
consequences  on  the  functioning  of  the  credit  market,  financial  intermediation,  financial 
stability  and  overall  economic  development  of  a  nation.  The  sharing  of  credit  information 
reduces  asymmetries  of  information  and  search  costs,  thereby  enhancing  access  to 
financing to a broader spectrum of the population. It also allows for more effective risk-based 
pricing,  which  could  lower  the  cost  of financing for  borrowers  with good  credit  background 
and history. With the availability of non-traditional data provided by credit reporting agencies, 
borrowers  demonstrating  strong  financial  characters  are  able  to  leverage  on  such 
“reputational collateral” to obtain borrowings at favorable terms and rates. 
For lenders, credit information helps to strengthen the entire chain of credit evaluation and 
credit risk management. The availability of a wide range of credit information on a real-time 
basis  facilitates  advancements  in  risk  and  decision-making  analysis,  thus  contributing 
towards institutional soundness. For regulators, this will enhance the stability of the overall 
financial  system.  Additionally,  from  a  social  perspective,  the  sharing  of  credit  information 
contributes towards inculcating financial discipline and avoiding incidences of imprudent and 
excessive borrowings among borrowers. All these, combined, would definitely enhance the 
overall credit culture in an economy. 
The  benefits  of  having  a  well  functioning  credit  reporting  infrastructure  are  evidenced  in 
Malaysia.  The  Central  Credit  Reference  Information  System,  or  better  known  as  CCRIS, 
which is owned and operated by Bank Negara Malaysia, enables real time access to both 
positive  and  negative  credit  information  on  all  borrowers  in  the  banking  system  and  of  a 
selected group of non-banks. The system contains more than 22 million outstanding credit 
accounts  and  7.9  million  borrower  records.  The  comprehensive  nature  of  the  information 
facilitates the development and validation of credit scoring models by the banking institutions, 
leading to more robust credit decisions. Information provided through CCRIS allows financial 
institutions to look beyond collateral and cash flow statements, to understand the borrowers’ 
track  record  in  making  payments.  This  undoubtedly  contributes  to  higher  loan  growth  and 
better  asset  quality.  Since  the  inception  of  CCRIS  in  2001,  loan  outstanding  grew  at  an 
annual average rate of 8.9%, while the overall impairment ratio showed a significant decline 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
from  its  peak  of  16.2%  in  2001  to  2.2%  currently.  The World  Bank,  in  its  Doing  Business 
Report,  has  ranked  Malaysia  No.  1  for  five  consecutive  years  in  the  category  of  “Getting 
Credit”. 
Another example is the Credit Bureau Malaysia (CBM) which was established to assist SMEs 
build credible credit records from transactions outside the regulated banking system such as 
transactions with suppliers and utility companies. With this credible credit record, SMEs that 
utilise  the  formal  banking  system  for  the  first  time  will  be  able  to  more  effectively  obtain 
access to finance. CBM also has a comprehensive credit scoring methodology which helps 
banking institutions assess the credit worthiness of potential customers. Further, CBM plays 
an important role in educating SMEs on how credit scores are calculated and how borrowers 
can improve their business operations and transaction conduct to improve their credit scores. 
At end-September 2012, CBM has 28,337 SME members and had produced 707,164 credit 
reports. 
The  development  and  growth  of  credit  information  registries  needs  to  be  supported  by  a 
robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  As  the  recovery  in  the  global  economy 
continues to be weighed down by uncertainties, greater attention is been focused on the role 
and  scope  of  shadow  banking  entities  in  transmitting  risks  to  the  overall  financial  system. 
Such  entities  include  those  outside  the  regulated  banking  system  that  are  involved  in  the 
extension of credit to borrowers or facilitate the credit intermediation process. Whilst credit 
information registries are not directly involved in the provision of credit, it plays a significant 
role  in  facilitating  and  enabling  the  expansion  and  outreach  of  credit  intermediation  by 
making available credit information to lenders. If the infrastructure is not well-managed and 
not subjected to appropriate oversight, it could inadvertently result in significant build up in 
leverage in the economy. 
In addition, the legislative framework is also critical in facilitating cross-border data flow, an 
area  that  I  foresee  will  be  the  next,  if  not  already,  major  area  of  discussion  in  the  credit 
reporting industry. With globalisation and the increasing ease of movement of human capital 
and businesses across borders, we cannot deny that there will be an increase in the amount 
of credit extended across borders as well. It may be worthwhile, as we  discuss on current 
matters during the course of this training, to bear in mind and have foresight on the potential 
challenges  that  may  surface  from  cross-border  sharing  of  information,  including  the 
differences in legislative frameworks across different countries, confidentiality of information 
and network integration. 
Therefore,  I  note  with  interest  that  this  workshop  will  also  discuss  the  legal  framework 
surrounding the credit reporting industry. In Malaysia, the Credit Reporting Agencies Act was 
gazetted in 2010, and is in the midst of being operationalised. The Act allows for the sharing 
of  credit  information  in  a  regulated  environment,  primarily  seeking  to strike  a  balance 
between  providing  lenders  with  information  for  risk  management  purposes,  and  protecting 
borrowers’ rights to privacy. A Registrar has been set-up to oversee the implementation of 
the Act. The Office of the Registrar has regular engagements with credit reporting agencies 
to effectively implement the Act and ensure minimal disruption to the entire operations of the 
industry. 
While the benefits of a sound credit registry infrastructure are evident, it is critical to educate 
consumers  on  how  to  use  their  credit  reports  and  to  manage  their  level  of  debt.  Financial 
education  is,  therefore,  an  important  pillar  which  complements  the  work  being  done  in 
enhancing  credit  information  reporting.  Proficiency  in  financial  knowledge  will  contribute 
towards greater empowerment and competent financial decisions on the part of consumers, 
and also result in improved financial services by financial institutions. In Malaysia, financial 
education  for  adults  is  implemented  through  financial  capability  programmes,  such  as  the 
POWER! Programme, which focuses on specific life events targeting identified groups such 
as  young  adults,  low  income  households  and  public  sector  officials.  For  example,  one 
specific  programme  which  was  launched  last  month  in  collaboration  with  the  Government 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
aims to reach out to 120,000 individuals from low income households by 2015. The Central 
Bank  also  has  a  customer  service  centre for the  general  public to  walk-in  or call-in  if they 
have  inquiries,  or  need  to  print  their  credit  report.  The  CCRIS  kiosks  use  bio-metric 
identification embedded within the national Identification Card, and the report is produced in 
less than a minute without any charge. 
I believe that a holistic approach, combining credit information infrastructure with appropriate 
financial  education  interventions  and  avenues  of  outreach  to  consumers,  will  lead  to  more 
prudent financial management behaviours. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  International  Finance  Corporation  for  its 
leadership in the area of credit information reporting, and look forward to continuing to build 
on our long working relationship. I trust that we will have a productive exchange of ideas to 
further enhance the roles of credit reporting agencies in the area of risk management and to 
advance the credit reporting industry as a whole. On that note, I wish you a successful and 
productive programme, and a pleasant stay in Kuala Lumpur. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
