Mark Carney: Guidance 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, to the CFA Society Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 11 December 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss guidance. 
Guidance is fundamentally about managing expectations, so let me manage yours up front. 
This speech is primarily about policy guidance; it will not itself provide new policy guidance. 
We  all  need  guidance  from  time  to  time  –  we  look  to  our  parents,  teachers,  partners  and 
peers for their help to make life, career or major financial decisions. Ultimately, though, these 
decisions are ours to make, and the consequences ours to bear. 
Taking  responsibility  is  why  you  became  Chartered  Financial  Analysts:  to  learn  how  to 
analyse information, to make difficult valuation and credit decisions, and to bear the risks and 
reap the rewards that result. You rely on accurate and full disclosure by the companies you 
analyse. Without it, you could not do your jobs; and, indeed, financial markets could not do 
theirs of bringing together savers and investors to allocate capital efficiently. With more CFA 
Charter holders per capita than any other major jurisdiction, Canada is favoured by such an 
emphasis on fundamental analysis at the core of our system. 
Beyond  disclosure,  what  else  can  be  usefully  conveyed?  Does  the  communication  of 
companies’  expectations  of  performance  serve  a  purpose?  What  about  central  bank 
expectations about future policy? 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  discuss  where  such  guidance  can  be  effective  and  when  it  may  be 
warranted.  My  main  message  is  while  transparency  is  critical  to  well-functioning  capital 
markets and effective monetary policy, forward guidance of policy is best used sparingly in 
normal times. In extraordinary times, however, conditional guidance can be used to resolve 
time inconsistencies and achieve a better path for the economy. 
First, allow me to address the private sector use of guidance and its impact on the financial 
markets. 
Company disclosure 
An ongoing focus of regulators is ensuring that company disclosure is full, fair and timely. 
The  crisis  demonstrated  the  need  for  better  disclosure  by  financial  institutions.  Insufficient 
and  inconsistent  disclosure  by  financial  institutions  contributed  to  uncertainty  and  eroded 
market  confidence.  This  led  to  a  withdrawal  of  market  liquidity,  depressed  valuations  and 
increased funding pressures. 
Regulators  and  market  participants  are  addressing  these  shortcomings.  An  Enhanced 
Disclosure Task Force was formed last May at the initiative of the Financial Stability Board. 
This private sector Task Force is a unique undertaking that brings together senior officials 
from the banking sector, investors, analysts, rating agencies and audit firms, in consultation 
with international standard-setting bodies and national regulators. In its October report, the 
Task Force outlined principles and recommendations for improved risk disclosures that are 
better  aligned  with  banks’  risk  management  and  business  strategies.  Together  with 
regulatory  initiatives  and  capital  increases,  these  measures  will  contribute  to  improved 
market confidence in financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Earnings guidance 
That  companies  should  communicate  material  facts  about  their  businesses,  and  do  so  to 
everyone at the same time, is no longer controversial.1 There are, however, differing views 
as to whether companies should also provide their expectations of how their businesses will 
perform. 
Most research finds little evidence that earnings guidance systematically improves company 
valuations,  increases  shareholder  returns  or  reduces  market  volatility.2  Some  even  argue 
that forward earnings guidance can be harmful, focusing both financial market and company 
management  attention  on  a  short-term  “numbers  game”  at  the  expense  of  long-term 
business  fundamentals.3  Accordingly,  a  number  of  companies  have  stopped  providing 
earnings  guidance,  with  research  finding  that  these  companies  do  see  a  subsequent 
increase in analyst forecast dispersion and a decrease in forecast accuracy – but no change 
in actual market volatility.4  
research  and  experience  demonstrate 
Is central bank communication different? 
First  and  foremost,  central  banks  pursue  transparency  to  be  accountable  in  democratic 
societies.  Moreover, 
that  clear  and  open 
communications also enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. In particular, successful 
monetary policy requires transparency around two aspects of the policy approach – what we 
are trying to achieve and how we go about achieving it. 
With respect to the former, Canada has benefitted from a clear objective for monetary policy 
since  the  adoption  of  an  explicit  inflation  target  in  1991.  As  Canadians  have  come  to 
understand  the  Bank’s  policy  objective  and  have  gained  confidence  in  its  attainment  over 
time, inflation expectations have become firmly anchored around the 2 per cent target. 
This  confidence  allows  households  and  firms  to  make  longer-term  plans  with  greater 
confidence,  aligning  their  savings,  investment  and  spending  decisions  with  a  common 
inflation-control  objective.  These  actions  collectively  serve  to  make  the  inflation  target 
self-reinforcing.  They  also  give  the  Bank  greater  latitude  to  respond  aggressively  to 
economic shocks without fear of dislodging longer-term inflation expectations. In short, the 
common understanding of our monetary policy objective makes its attainment easier. 
Of  course,  it  would  be  quite  remarkable  if  simply  communicating  the  monetary  policy 
objective were sufficient to ensure its achievement. The conduct of policy obviously matters 
as  well.  The  Bank  of  Canada  implements  policy  through  changes  in  the  target  overnight 
interest rate, which has a limited direct impact on saving, investment and spending decisions. 
Far more important is the impact the Bank’s actions have on the broader spectrum of market 
interest rates, domestic asset prices and the exchange rate. 
What matters to these asset prices, however, is not so much the current setting of the policy 
interest  rate  but,  rather,  its  expected  path  over  time.  Thus  monetary  policy  affects  the 
                                                
1   Regulation Fair Disclosure was adopted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in 2000 to address 
the problem of selective disclosure of information by publicly traded companies and other issuers. Regulation 
FD provides that when an issuer discloses material non-public information to certain individuals or entities, the 
issuer must make full public disclosure of that information. 
2   J.L.  Rogers,  D.J.  Skinner  and  A.  Van  Buskirk,  “Earnings  Guidance  and  Market  Uncertainty,”  Journal  of 
Accounting and Economics 48, no. 1 (2009): 90–109. 
3   P.  Hsieh,  T.  Koller  and  S.R.  Rajan,  “The  Misguided  Practice  of  Earnings  Guidance,”  Perspectives  on 
Corporate Finance and Strategy, The McKinsey Quarterly, No. 19 (Spring 2006). 
4   S. Chen, D. Matsumoto and S. Rajgopal, “Is Silence Golden? An Empirical Analysis of Firms that Stop Giving 
Quarterly Earnings Guidance,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 51 (2011): 134–50. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economy  primarily  through  policy-rate  expectations.5  The  more  those  expectations  are 
aligned  with  the  policy  path  necessary  to  achieve  the  policy  objective,  the  higher  the 
probability the policy objective will be achieved.6  
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  become  significantly  more  transparent.  We  now  explain  our 
decisions eight times a year and provide rich supplemental detail in our quarterly Monetary 
Policy Report.7 These communications are designed both to report the Bank’s views on the 
forces at work on the Canadian economy and to help households, firms and financial market 
participants understand how the Bank will respond to those forces over time. The goal here 
is, in effect, to allow markets and the public to “think along with us,” not only promoting the 
appropriate  formation  of  policy  expectations  given  current  information,  but  also  allowing 
those expectations to evolve efficiently as new information is received. 
We would have an easy time communicating our “reaction function” if we followed a simple 
mechanical rule. Life would indeed be easier if we could be so rigid. But achieving our target 
requires that  we  take  a flexible  policy  approach,  one  informed  by  considered  analysis  and 
judgment. That is one reason why transparency – and occasionally guidance – matters. 
Guidance in normal times to help achieve the monetary policy goal 
In  a  perfect  world,  guidance  would  be  unnecessary.  The  inherent  uncertainty  in  economic 
outcomes and thus in the policy path would be widely understood. With full information and 
efficient markets, monetary policy expectations would effectively take care of themselves – 
knowing a central bank’s inflation objective and its reaction function would be sufficient for 
markets and the public to form and evolve their expectations, without the need for any direct 
guidance from the central bank. 
In the real world, monetary policy guidance can be useful in providing additional information. 
But this is not assured. How to get guidance right remains a subject of considerable debate. 
One approach is to provide advance signals to markets, using stock phrases or code words. 
Not surprisingly, this sort of signalling helps market participants predict policy decisions in the 
near  term.8  But  it  is  not  clear  that  fulfilling  promises  helps  market  participants  understand 
why those decisions are taken.9 Without this understanding, market participants may be even 
less  able  to  form  efficient  expectations  over  time,  thus  increasing  their  reliance  on  explicit 
guidance  from  the  central  bank.  Ultimately,  the  risk  is  that  markets  turn  into  an  echo 
chamber, to the benefit of no one. 
Some other central banks directly disclose their policy interest rate forecast. “Putting it all out 
there”  is,  on  its  face,  an  appealing  approach.  It  avoids  the  challenge  of  trying  to  perfectly 
                                                
5   J.  Boivin,  “How  People  Think  and  How  It  Matters,”  a  speech  delivered  to  the  Canadian  Association  for 
Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 23 August 2011. 
6   Note the contrast here to company earnings guidance, where expectations are essentially irrelevant to how 
the business actually performs, except indirectly through their effect on valuations and, thus, company funding 
conditions. 
7   J.  Murray  “Monetary  Policy  Decision-Making  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,”  a  speech  delivered  to  the  Mortgage 
Brokers Association of B.C., Vancouver, British Columbia, 7 May 2012. 
8   See  C.  Rosa  and  G.  Verga,  “The  Impact  of  Central  Bank  Announcements  on  Asset  Prices  in  Real  Time,” 
International Journal of Central Banking 4 no. 2 (June 2008): 175–217. 
9   C. Fay, T. Gravelle, “Has the Inclusion of Forward-Looking Statements in Monetary Policy Communications 
Made the Bank of Canada More Transparent?” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper 2010–15, November, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
calibrate verbal guidance. It also makes it easier to illustrate how monetary policy interacts 
with the economy.10  
In  practice,  however,  it  does  not  appear  that  markets  take  systematic  account  of  the 
guidance offered by a published path beyond the very near term. Overall research has not 
generally found that publishing a path leads to better outcomes.11  
At the Bank of Canada, we take a different approach. We seek to provide the appropriate 
degree of transparency regarding how we intend to achieve our policy objective by regularly 
reporting on the forces we see at work on the economy and helping markets and the public 
understand how policy responds. 
The  Bank  occasionally  provides  guidance  in  normal  times  to  give  some  sense  of  the 
imminence and degree of prospective policy action. We seek to place that guidance in the 
context of the most important economic and financial factors that will determine whether it is 
prophetic. This guidance is never a promise, however. Actual policy will always respond to 
the economic and financial outlook as it evolves. Market expectations of policy should do the 
same, reflecting differences in perspectives amid a common understanding of our objective. 
Let me offer some specific examples where the provision of additional  guidance in normal 
times on the path of interest rates might be helpful. 
Headwinds and the neutral policy rate 
First, through the spring and summer of 2011, it became clear that some Canadian market 
participants were making the short-hand assumption that the policy interest rate needed to 
be at neutral when inflation was on target and the output gap was closed.12 It was not fully 
appreciated that, in an environment of material headwinds, the last two conditions would only 
be  satisfied  if  the  policy  rate  remained  at  a  more  stimulative  level  to  offset  the  impact  of 
weaker foreign demand on the domestic economy. To clarify our approach and guide market 
participants, we inserted a Box in our July 2011 Monetary Policy Report (Charts 1 and 2). 
This helped reduce unrealistic views of the pace of future tightening. 
Communicating the links between price stability and financial stability 
A  second  example  concerns  the  links  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Our 
flexible inflation-targeting framework requires that we re-evaluate – and communicate – the 
optimal path for returning inflation to target, taking due consideration of the consequences for 
volatility in output and financial markets. The variation in that optimal path has resulted in an 
inflation-targeting horizon as short as 2 quarters and as long as 11 quarters since the Bank 
began publishing its projections for inflation in 1998. 
The  global  crisis  was  a  stark  reminder  that  economic  stability  and  financial  stability  are 
inextricably  linked,  and  that  pursuing  the  first  without  due  regard  for  the  second  risks 
                                                
10   Publishing the policy rate forecast path corresponding to the central bank’s forecasts of growth and inflation 
helps to communicate both the central bank’s prevailing views on the economy and its policy reaction function, 
which in turn should help policy expectations evolve efficiently as new information arrives. 
11   11. See,  for  example,  M.  Andersson  and  B.  Hofmann,  “Gauging  the  Effectiveness  of  Quantitative  Forward 
Guidance  Evidence  from  Three  Inflation  Targeters,”  European  Central  Bank,  Working  Paper  No.  1098, 
October  2009;  C.  E.  Walsh,  “Optimal  Economic  Transparency,”  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking  3 
no. 1 (March 2007): 5–36; and G.-A. Detmers and D. Nautz, “The Information Content of Central Bank Interest 
Rate  Projections:  Evidence  from  New  Zealand,”  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Discussion  Paper 
No. 2012/03. 
12   level  of  the  neutral  rate  itself  is,  of  course,  subject  to  some  debate.  For  example,  see  D.  Laidler,  “Natural 
Hazards: Some Pitfalls on the Path to a Neutral Interest Rate,” Backgrounder No.140, C.D. Howe Institute, 
July 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
achieving  neither.  While  the  primary  tools  to  deal  with  financial  stability  are  micro-  and 
macroprudential regulation and supervision, it may be appropriate in some circumstances for 
monetary policy to contribute to financial stability directly by complementing macroprudential 
policy.13  
More specifically, because the consequences of financial excesses may be felt over a longer 
horizon than other economic disturbances, the potential may exist for tension between price 
and  financial  stability  considerations  over  the  typical  monetary  policy  horizon.  In  current 
circumstances,  the  Bank  may  want  to  set  interest  rates  higher  than  would  otherwise  be 
warranted to bring inflation back to target within the typical six- to eight-quarter time frame. 
But that flexibility does not exist in a vacuum, and should never be used by stealth. 
The  most  recent  Financial  System  Review  elaborates  on  risks  related  to  household 
imbalances in Canada. Their evolution may be a factor affecting the timing and degree of any 
withdrawal  of  monetary  stimulus.  If  the  Bank  were  to  lean  against  such  imbalances,  we 
would clearly say we are doing so, and indicate how much longer we expect it would take for 
inflation to return to the 2 per cent target. 
Our current guidance is that “some modest withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus will likely 
be required, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. The timing and degree 
of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against global and domestic developments, 
including the evolution of imbalances in the household sector.” 
Our  current  guidance  indicates  that  some  policy  action  may  be  necessary,  encouraging  a 
degree  of  prudence  in  household  borrowing.  The  share  of  new  fixed  rate  mortgages  has 
almost  doubled  to  90  per  cent  this  year,  reflecting  the  combination  of  attractively  priced 
fixed-rate mortgages and the tightening bias of the Bank of Canada. 
Guidance as an unconventional policy tool 
While  the  Bank  believes  it  appropriate  to  be  sparing  in  forward  policy  guidance  under 
ordinary circumstances, the calculus changes under extraordinary ones. When conventional 
monetary  policy  has  been  exhausted  at  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB)  on  nominal  interest 
rates, the additional stimulus that is likely to be called for is impossible to achieve using the 
conventional interest rate tool. Extraordinary forward guidance is one unconventional policy 
tool, along with quantitative easing and credit easing.14  
The  Bank  of  Canada  used  extraordinary  forward  guidance  in  April  2009,  when  the  policy 
interest rate was at its lowest possible level and additional stimulus was needed. At the time, 
we  committed  to  holding  the  policy  rate  at  that  level  through  the  second  quarter  of  2010, 
conditional on the outlook for inflation. In effect, we substituted duration and greater certainty 
regarding the interest rate outlook for the negative interest rate setting that would have been 
warranted  but  could  not  be  achieved.  The  Bank’s  conditional  commitment  succeeded  in 
changing  market  expectations  of  the  future  path  of  interest  rates,  providing  the  desired 
stimulus and thereby underpinning a rebound in growth and inflation in Canada (Chart 3).15 
When  the  inflation  outlook  –  the  explicit  condition  –  changed,  the  path  of  interest  rates 
changed accordingly. 
                                                
13   Bank of Canada, Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target, November 2011. 
14   Bank of Canada, “Framework for Conducting Monetary Policy at Low Interest Rates,” MPR, April 2009. 
15   See Z. He, “Evaluating the Effect of the Bank of Canada’s Conditional Commitment Policy,” Discussion Paper 
No.  2010–11,  Bank  of  Canada,  2010;  and  M.  Woodford  “Methods  of  Policy  Accommodation  at  the 
Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound,”  paper  presented  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  “The  Changing  Policy 
Landscape,” 31 August – 1 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Our conditional commitment worked because it was exceptional, explicit and anchored in a 
highly  credible  inflation-targeting  framework.  It  also  worked  because  we  “put  our  money 
where our mouths were” by extending the almost $30 billion exceptional liquidity programs 
we  had  in  place  for  the  duration  of  the  conditional  commitment.  And  it  worked  because  it 
reached  beyond  central  bank  watchers  to  make  a  clear,  simple  statement  directly  to 
Canadians. 
Obviously  the  optimal  policy  path  will  differ  for  central  banks,  depending  on  their 
circumstances and mandates. For example, the Federal Reserve indicated at its September 
meeting  that  its  policy  rate  could  be  expected  to  remain  at  exceptionally  low  levels  until 
mid-2015,  and  provided  additional  certainty  with  respect  to  its  reaction  function  by  linking 
future unconventional monetary policy to substantial improvements in the outlook for the U.S. 
labour market. Further, it indicated that it will leave highly accommodative policy in place “for 
a  considerable  time  after  the  economic  recovery  strengthens.”  The  Fed  also  expanded  its 
large-scale  asset  purchases,  dubbed  “QE3,”  consistent  with  this  enhanced  forward 
guidance.16  
Guidance and time inconsistency 
Doing  more  may  require  overcoming  the  familiar  monetary  policy  challenge  of  time 
inconsistency – but not as it has been conventionally understood.17  
Today,  to  achieve  a  better  path  for  the  economy  over  time,  a  central  bank  may  need  to 
commit  credibly  to  maintaining  highly  accommodative  policy  even  after  the  economy  and, 
potentially,  inflation  picks  up.  Market  participants  may  doubt  the  willingness  of  an 
inflation-targeting central bank to respect this commitment if inflation goes temporarily above 
target. These  doubts  reduce  the  effective  stimulus  of  the  commitment  and  delay  the 
recovery. 
To “tie its hands,” a central bank could publicly announce precise numerical thresholds for 
inflation and unemployment that must be met before reducing stimulus.18 This could reinforce 
the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  stimulative  policy  in  the  future  and  thus  enhance  the 
stimulative impact of its policies in the present, helping the economy escape from the liquidity 
trap. 
Further enhancing guidance may require a change in framework 
From our perspective, thresholds exhaust the guidance options available to a central bank 
operating under flexible inflation targeting. 
If  yet  further  stimulus  were  required,  the  policy  framework  itself  would  likely  have  to  be 
changed.19  For  example,  adopting  a  nominal  GDP  (NGDP)-level  target  could  in  many 
respects be more powerful than employing thresholds under flexible inflation targeting. This 
is  because  doing  so  would  add  “history  dependence”  to  monetary  policy.  Under  NGDP 
                                                
16   U.S. Federal Reserve, Federal Open Market Committee Press Release, 13 September 2012. 
17   In the days before independent central banks, governments could not credibly commit to maintaining low and 
stable  inflation,  since  they  subsequently  had  the  incentive  to  violate  that  commitment  by  engineering  a 
growth-boosting inflation surprise. This time inconsistency led to the unfavourable stagflation equilibrium of the 
1970s, and ultimately resulted in the widespread operational independence of central banks. See F. Kydland 
and  E.  Prescott,  “Rules  Rather  Than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal  Plans,”  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 85 (3) (1977): 473–92. 
18   See, for instance, C. L. Evans, “Perspectives on Current Economic Issues,” a speech delivered to the Bank of 
Ann Arbor Breakfast, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 18 September 2012. 
19   In most jurisdictions, including Canada, a change in the policy framework would require the approval of the 
political authority. In some others, it would require a change in the constitution. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
targeting, bygones are not bygones and the central bank is compelled to make up for past 
misses on the path of nominal GDP (Chart 4). 
Bank  of  Canada  research  shows  that,  under  normal  circumstances,  the  gains  from  better 
exploiting the expectations channel through a history-dependent framework are likely to be 
modest, and may be further diluted if key conditions are not met. Most notably, people must 
generally understand what the central bank is doing – an admittedly high bar.20  
However,  when  policy  rates  are  stuck  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  there  could  be  a  more 
favourable  case  for  NGDP  targeting.  The  exceptional  nature  of  the  situation,  and  the 
magnitude  of  the  gaps  involved,  could  make  such  a  policy  more  credible  and  easier  to 
understand.21  
Of course, the benefits of such a regime change would have to be weighed carefully against 
the  effectiveness  of  other  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  under  the  proven, 
flexible inflation-targeting framework. 
Conclusion 
Companies can talk about their future performance, but cannot guarantee its delivery. 
Central banks can talk about the future path of policy, and we can, at least on the surface, 
deliver. 
However, in ordinary times, achieving our objective will mean delivering a path of policy that 
adjusts  as  economic  circumstances  evolve.  Therefore,  that  path  cannot  be  predicted  with 
certainty  in  advance.  In the  Bank’s  view,  this  limits  the  effectiveness  of policy  guidance  to 
relatively special circumstances. 
In  extraordinary  times,  policy  guidance  may  be  more  appropriate,  and,  as  the  Bank  has 
demonstrated  with  its  conditional  commitment,  it  can  be  highly  effective.  But,  in  more 
extreme circumstances, even such a conditional commitment may prove insufficient. In order 
to provide even greater stimulus when at the ZLB, central banks can further “restrain” their 
future policy path through pre-commitment or history-dependence. 
In  all  cases,  central  banks  must  be  mindful  of  the  impact  on  financial  stability  of  what 
amounts to a “low for long” interest rate environment. This puts a premium on co-ordination 
among the relevant authorities to provide active macroprudential management. 
Our  goal,  as  always,  is  to  ensure  that  households,  firms  and  investors  can  make  their 
decisions in a stable macro environment. 
That will ensure that the fundamental analysis that CFAs perform every day plays a central 
role in capital allocation, business investment and ultimately jobs and growth. 
                                                
20   In particular, for the benefits of a history-dependent monetary policy framework such as NGDP targeting to be 
realised,  people  must  be  forward-looking,  fully  conversant  with  the  implications  of  the  regime  and  trust 
policy-makers to live up to their commitment. As Bank research has shown, if these conditions do not fully 
hold, these approaches could in fact prove destabilising to the economy and damaging to the central bank’s 
credibility. 
21   21. Depending on the depth and duration of the ZLB episode, our calculations suggest that the adoption of a 
(temporary)  price-level  target,  if  well  understood  and  credible,  could  eliminate  more  than  half  of  the  losses 
associated  with  the  impossibility  of  providing  additional  monetary  stimulus  through  a  lower  policy  rate.  See 
R. Amano  and  M.  Shukayev,  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal  Interest  Rates,”  Bank  of 
Canada Review, Summer 2010 and C. l. Evans, “Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing 
a  State-Contingent  Price-Level  Target,”  remarks  delivered  before  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston's 
55th Economic Conference, Boston MA, October 16, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 