Francois  Groepe:  The  role  of  Chartered  Accountants  in  grass  roots 
development  and  accelerating 
realisation  and  economic 
emancipation of the majority in South Africa through better management 
of  government  resources  and  efficiently  delivering  services  to  the 
masses 
the 
Address by Mr Francois Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
launch of SAICA Northern Region Trainees Committee, Park Town, 29 November 2012. 
 I  wish  to  thank  SAICA  and  the  Chairperson  of  the  SAICA  Northern  Region  Trainees 
Committee for inviting me to speak and to be part of this momentous occasion. I believe that 
the  topic  is  very  relevant  against  the  backdrop  of  the  significant  levels  of  inequality  in  our 
country as reflected in the most recently estimated Gini-coefficient of 0,69. The top ten per 
cent  of  the  population  earn  approximately  58  per  cent  of  the  income  and  the  bottom 
50 per cent  less  than  eight  per  cent.  We  furthermore  have  had  to  contend  with  an 
unemployment rate currently of 25,5 per cent in the third quarter of this year, much of it likely 
structural.  
Global economy  
In considering the economic conditions in South Africa, one is compelled to take cognisance 
of  global  economic  developments  due  to  the  impact  they  have  on  local  economic 
developments and the risks of spillover. Economic activity in both the advanced economies 
and  the  emerging  market  economies  continue  to  disappoint,  while  continued  uncertainty 
further  weighs  on  the  outlook.  Although  the  US  recorded  an  uptick  in  growth  in  Q3/2012, 
there is an expectation of lower growth in 2013, due to the risk of a fiscal cliff. In the event 
that the fiscal cliff is avoided, there remains a real possibility that the agreed settlement may 
include some degree of fiscal consolidation as well as an increase in the effective taxation 
rates, which may act as a drag on consumption expenditure.  
The Euro area contracted in Q3/2012 and is now in technical recession. There is a possibility 
that recessionary conditions may continue for two reasons, namely:  
• 
An  accentuated  drag  on  growth  due  to  the  continued  fiscal  austerity  measures, 
amidst  indications  that  fiscal  multipliers  may  be  higher  than  previously  estimated; 
and  
A number of the leading indicators seem to suggest that growth prospects are tilted 
to the downside.  
 Unemployment levels in Europe remain at elevated levels historically, the social implications 
of  which  should  not  be  underestimated.  A  further  concern  is  that  cyclical  unemployment 
could evolve into structural unemployment. This could add a further dimension to an already 
challenging and complex set of circumstances.  
Emerging  market  economies  have  decelerated  recently  and  this  has  spilled  over  and 
amongst others, impacted negatively on world trade volumes.  
Domestic economy  
South  Africa  continues  to  suffer  from  the  aftermath  of  the  tragic  events  that  occurred 
recently. Economic activity has slowed down sharply, particularly in the mining sector. The 
recent downgrade of the country’s sovereign credit rating, as well as increased uncertainty, 
may impact negatively on both FDI as well as investment by the household sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
The export performance of domestic companies continues to deteriorate. Latest estimates by 
the SARB show that the country’s global exports have declined over the past 50 years. Some 
of the factors contributing to this trend in recent times are:  
(i)  
The decline in the contribution of gold mining sector to growth and the decline in the 
role of gold globally;  
Binding constraints related to infrastructure bottlenecks;  
Skills shortages and mismatch;  
The  dominance  of  low-cost  production  bases  which  are  export  oriented  in  many 
emerging market economies; and  
Sluggish growth in SA’s key trading partners.  
(v)  
Economic  activity  on  the  production  side  has  changed  noticeably  when  compared  to  the 
1980s. The agriculture and mining (primary) sectors have shrunk since then and contribute 
less  than  5  per  cent  to  GDP.  Although  the  manufacturing  sector  has  shrunk  as  well,  it 
contributes  roughly  around  15  per  cent.  Significant  growth  has  emanated  from  the  tertiary 
sector,  with  finance,  insurance,  real  estate  and  the  business  services  sector  contributing 
around 21 per cent. Government services have also aided economic activity in line with the 
countercyclical spending.  
On  the  expenditure  side,  growth  has  been  largely  driven  by  final  demand  –  in  particular 
consumption expenditure by households. Consumption expenditure by general government, 
which has been driven by countercyclical fiscal policy, in particular on-going spending on the 
expanded  public  works  programme,  which  is  aimed  at  labour  intensive  infrastructure 
projects. However, under-spending by national, provincial and local governments continued 
to subtract from growth in capital formation, in particular social infrastructure.  
At some level, albeit at non-spectacular growth rates, all of these factors have helped with 
dealing with the cyclical aspect of unemployment, although since the beginning of the most 
recent recession, the unemployment rate has risen and hovers above 25 per cent.  
In the period 2004 to 2007, the average annual growth rate was well above 4 per cent and 
unemployment reached a record low level of 21 per cent. This is an indication that sustained 
elevated growth rates are required to reduce the levels of unemployment in a meaningful 
manner.  
Role of chartered accountants  
In the most recent World Competiveness Report, the deteriorating state capacity was one of 
the  areas  that  contributed  to  the  slide  in  the  country’s  ranking  to  52nd  place  out  of 
144 countries that were ranked. Some of the more problematic areas identified included an 
inefficient bureaucracy, corruption and policy instability.  
On the positive side South Africa was recognised to be at the forefront of governance and 
was ranked number one in the following areas:  
• 
• 
• 
It is therefore evident that South Africa’s auditing and accounting professionals are among 
the  best  in  the  world,  and  I  do  believe  that  accountants  have  an  important  role  to  play  in 
ensuring that some of the structural challenges in this country are addressed effectively. The 
profession  can  make  a  tangible  contribution  towards  ensuring  that  the  public  sector  is 
capacitated  to  deal  with  its  many  challenges,  using  the  skills  and  aptitude  that  members 
Strength of Auditing and reporting;  
Regulation of securities exchange; and  
Efficacy of corporate Boards;  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
acquire  during  their  academic  and  practical  training,  and  which  include  skills  such  as 
analytical ability, professionalism, integrity, understanding complexity, etc.  
It  is  also  important  that  members  of  the  profession  respond  positively  to  the  call  of  public 
service and that members do not only become service providers to the public sector, but that 
they also join the ranks of the public service in order to address the shortage of skills within 
that  sector.  In  this  context  they  have  much  to  contribute  to  root  out  corruption,  design 
monitoring  and  early  warning  systems  so  as  to  ensure  improved  service  delivery,  institute 
controls that would minimise instances of wasteful and fruitless expenditure, design reports 
so  that  politicians  and  officials  have  access  to  accurate  and  timely  information,  and  which 
should contribute to improved decision-making and policy outcomes.  
Conclusion  
In conclusion, in order for us as a country to move forward it is important that we all own up 
to the responsibility that  we have to ensure that South Africa reaches its full potential and 
that it thrives and succeeds at all levels. Our challenges are daunting but not insurmountable! 
If we all display a positive ‘can do’ attitude and one that places the national interest first, we 
can achieve higher levels of economic growth, reduce the stubborn levels of unemployment 
and successfully address the dual challenge of poverty and inequality.  
The  time  has  come  for  us  to  adopt  an  attitude  of  ‘South  Africa  First’  and  to  respond 
affirmatively  to  a  similar  challenge  JF  Kennedy  put  to  his  compatriots  during  his  inaugural 
speech, “And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you… ask what 
you can do for your country.”  
So lets us all begin by asking what we as loyal and committed South Africans can do for our 
country, South Africa, and let us strive to be the change we would so much like to see.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
