G Padmanabhan: Technology enabled transformation in the financial 
sector 
Keynote address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  GM/CIOs  Conference  of  the  Institute  for  Development  &  Research  in  Banking 
Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, 17 December 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Smt  K  Nikhila  in  the  preparation  of  this  speech  and  comments  on  the  draft  from 
S/Shri S Ganeshkumar and A Madhavan gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr  Sambamurthy,  Members  of  Faculty,  CIOs  and  GMs  of  banks,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I 
thank  the  IDRBT  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  erudite  audience.  The  issues  that  I  have 
chosen  to  flag;  I  hope,  would  generate  adequate  interest  and  be  the  basis  for  further 
deliberations leading to some concrete suggestions. We, in the Reserve Bank would eagerly 
look forward to such outcomes, as these can be useful to set the road map for technology 
adoption in the Indian financial sector in the years to come. 
Introductory thoughts 
Information and communication technology is playing a vital role across many industries and 
sectors,  resulting  in  a  positive  impact  on  economic  development  cutting  across  the 
geographical  barriers.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the financial  sector  and  more  particularly 
banking industry was one of the very first to utilize information technology way back in the 
1960s,  and  has  thus  the  record  of  influencing  the  development  process  through  the 
technology. The banking sector is an example in which information technology infrastructures 
have  had  implications  on  the  economic  development  of  many  nations  across  jurisdictions. 
Studies show that information technology coupled with knowledge management hold much 
potential for propelling the development process (Okpaku, 2003). 
Since  the  1990s,  the  banking  sector  in  India  has  seen  greater  emphasis  being  placed  on 
technology and innovation. Banks began to use technology initially with a view to take care of 
their  internal  requirements  pertaining  to  book  keeping,  balancing  and  for  transactions 
processing; the all-pervasive face of Information Technology soon enabled banks to provide 
better quality of services at greater speed. Internet banking and mobile banking have made it 
possible for customers to access banking services literally and virtually from anywhere and 
anytime. The biggest barriers, time and distance, to access banking services were crossed 
by leveraging technology. The sector has also moved rapidly towards universal banking and 
electronic transactions, which changed the way banking is done, during the last decade or 
so. 
Take the case of payment systems, an area which I am familiar with and where technology 
has brought in a sea-change. Till 1990s, one could make payments in this country through 
two predominant means – cash and cheque. Today, a tech-savvy customer is empowered to 
choose  a  desired  service  from  slew  of  products  –  card  payments,  NEFT  transfer,  RTGS 
transfer,  ECS/NECS  payments,  mobile  payments  etc.  Further,  after  using  any  of  these 
payment  methods,  the  first  instrument  he  turns  to  is  his  mobile  phone  for  confirmatory 
messages,  a  feature  unique  to  India.  What  would  you  imagine  as  the  future  scenario? 
Consider this: “the future of payments is the elimination of POS terminals and checkout lines 
that  require  an  associate  in  a  store  to  scan  and  bag  purchases  item  by  item.  The  most 
frictionless  solution  is  not  a  smart  phone  but  a  collection  of  sensor  networks  that 
automatically  identify  the  buyer,  scan  the  items  to  be  purchased,  and  process  payments 
without human intervention. No lines, no taps, no swipes, no associates, no cash registers. 
Just  wireless  sensors  and  networks  that  automatically  process  transactions,  manage 
inventory,  etc…  Our  grand  kids  won’t  be  carrying  a  wallet  even  if  it’s  digital…  Biometric 
factoring is not that far away. You’ve heard of fingerprinting and retina scans. The distance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
between pupils is unique even between twins. You’ll be able to walk into a store that knows 
how much you have available [if you’ve made that information available], what you usually 
spend  based  on  which  a  personalized  deal  is  offered.  Your  pre-set  rules  and  the  store’s 
pre-set rules will negotiate, and the store will offer you a set of options.” The impact of social 
commerce  is  also  evident,  so  much  so  that  one  could  expect  to  get  discounts  and  other 
rewards based on your influence on friends’ purchases.”1 
To restate the future scenario more directly, in the next few years, there will be substantial 
challenges for the banking industry. Customers will become increasingly individualistic and, 
at the same time, more discerning in their relationships with banks. Ubiquitous information 
and the power of social media inputs will result in customers comparing offerings across the 
market;  evaluating  the  service  levels  of  different  banks  and  also  demanding  transactions 
increasingly on their own terms – a mimic of the corporate sector. This may well signal the 
sunset  phase  of  the  hitherto  traditional  segmentation  approaches  and  “go-to  market” 
techniques.  There  would  be  dramatic  changes  in  the  levels  of  competition  in  the  retail 
banking  space  with  the  predicted  entry  of  non  banks.  Banks,  may  have  to  look  at 
opportunities particularly with respect to harnessing product, service and process innovation 
to serve customers better, and to create a niche in an increasingly crowded marketplace. 
Two  main  trends  that  may  stand  out  here,  as  the  most  significant  forces  that  will  drive 
industry  change  are  increasing  customer  centric  products  and  intensifying  competition. 
Further, the other trends that may change the way we do banking in the future would be – 
managing human capital, regulations and technologies – and these may strongly contribute 
to and reinforce the effects of intensifying competition and customer empowerment on banks’ 
strategic choices.2 Are we ready? And could these be the niche areas of focussed research 
for the IDRBT? 
Before moving on to the next set of issues, let me set out a few more questions. If IT is to 
rule our lives, how do we measure whether IT has delivered? IT has certainly enabled banks 
to increase its business multiple times with less of man power. But is this sufficient? What 
has been the customer experience? Do banks study the customer satisfaction levels after a 
new product is offered? Are there tools or techniques available to measure the impact of IT? 
Can  IDRBT  and  the  experts  here  suggest  tangible  methods  of  measuring  the  success  or 
failure of IT deployment? 
Mind the gap – issues in IT delivery in the banking sector 
Though IT is increasingly becoming an invaluable and powerful tool in driving development, 
supporting  growth,  promoting  innovation,  and  enhancing  competitiveness  in  the  banking 
context in India, there are several potential areas where technology can deliver better.  
Financial inclusion 
Technology  plays  a  major  role  in  financial  inclusion,  a  sustainable  banking  theme  very 
relevant to a country like India that has a large unbanked population. For example, handheld 
devices, used by bank agents to draw people living in remote areas into the banking fold, run 
on  technology.  Internet  and  mobile  technologies  are  trying  to  reach  out  to  the  populace 
starved of banking services as well. Financial institutions are also joining forces with network 
operators in providing access to mobile based payment services even to those who do not 
have bank accounts. These product and channel innovations require robust and scalable ICT 
platforms. 
                                                
1   Lisa Morgan- “Making Change: The Future of Payments is ease of use.” 
2   The paradox of Banking 2015 - IBM paper. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If we want to move the mobile financial services sector beyond payments space and create 
products  that  reach  every  level  of  society,  we  have  to  be  creative.  The  industry  requires 
product innovation that focuses on customer desires, usage patterns, and needs, and then 
translate these findings into viable products. For example, in Uganda, Grameen Foundation’s 
AppLab  is  partnering  with  MTN  and  CGAP  to  do  this  by  launching  a  product  incubator: 
AppLab  Money.  This  product  AppLab  Money  reportedly  uses  several  complementary 
research methods to understand the financial lives of the poor. 
In this context, are our efforts good enough? Where can we do more? Isn’t it time for 
introspection? 
Innovation  
Today, banking is becoming increasingly complex and banks which fail to use technology to 
take their services to the common man and tap the potential of the rural sector will stand to 
lose. Ultimately, technology would be the key enabler and differentiator in accomplishing this 
objective. When we look at technology, the scope for innovation is immense – in the field of 
financial  inclusion  itself,  right  from  biometric  based  systems  to  mobile  based  to  simple 
Interactive Voice Response based applications. But it cannot be a one-size-fits-all approach. 
This however, does not reduce the importance of standardisation and interoperability which 
would result in higher efficiency and more choices. Further, many initiatives using technology 
would  be  impossible  to  pursue  without  the  active  participation  and  support  of  several 
stakeholders. Thus the need of the hour is collaborative innovation. 
Do banks recognise the power of innovation to create higher customer satisfaction, 
loyalty and bank productivity through their products/processes/channels? 
Data integrity 
The  policy  and  decision-making  processes  are  becoming  more  information  intensive, 
therefore,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure quality  of  data  and  its  timely  submission  by  banks  not 
only  to  the  regulator  but  to  the  banks’  managements  as  well.  This  area  requires  more 
attention,  given  that  data  quality  may  have  an  impact  on  the  reputation  of  banks  besides 
posing other risks. You would appreciate that accurate data is a sine-qua non for improving 
the  quality  of  MIS  and  an  effective  Decision  Support  System  (DSS).  By  adopting  an 
automated  process for  submission  of  returns, the  banks  would  be  able to  submit  accurate 
and  timely  data  without  any  manual  intervention  to  the  regulator.  Inter  alia,  this  process 
would also assist the banks in terms of improved timelines, enhanced data quality, improved 
efficiency  of  processes. Towards  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  initiated  the  Automated  Data 
Flow Project. The deadline for banks to automate all their returns is March 2013. 
Are the banks braced up to meet the deadline?  
Cost of transactions  
Technology  has  been  helping  in  delivering  affordable  financial  services  with  greater 
efficiency without compromising on levels of safety, security and reliability. Perhaps the most 
significant  contribution  of  technology  has  been  in  attempting  to  bring  down  the  cost  of 
financial services by using economies of scale. Technology has also been used in removing 
geographical barriers and reaching out to the unbanked – the poor are unreached but not 
unreachable.  The  use  of  electronic  payment  modes  to  disburse  the  governments  social 
benefit transfers illustrates this point. Technology should be used in such a manner that you 
have a diversified product range to bridge the supply gap at the same time keeping in view 
the customers convenience in mind. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Has IT delivered in India in terms of reducing the costs? If not why? Is the 
Government/ Regulatory intervention the best way forward? What are the advantages 
or dangers to such an approach? 
Channel security 
To compete successfully in today’s tough market place, financial institutions need to retain 
the trust  of their  customers  –a  trust  which  relies  not only  on  their capacity  to  deliver  good 
value  services,  but  also  on  their  ability  to  protect  people,  assets,  premises  and  the  highly 
sensitive  data  they  hold.  There  is  always  an  element  of  hidden  fear  as  far  as  IT  based 
operations are concerned, the fear of the unknown. Banks need to ensure that the best of 
controls  and  security  measures  are  in  place.  Customer  education  is  the  key  to  customer 
trust. 
Are there steps taken towards customer education as far as IT based service delivery 
channels are concerned? Are these adequate? 
How to bridge the Gap?  
Having  identified  some  of  the  gaps,  let  me  now  try  and  offer  suggestions  to  bridge  these 
gaps. 
IT and business alignment 
Alignment can be described as the timely and appropriate application of IT in harmony with 
business  objectives,  strategies  and  requirements.  Alignment  occurs  when  the  respective 
strategies are interwoven in such a way that the right things are done to deliver greater value 
to  the  organisation.  After  all,  a  successful  alignment  is  a  two  way  relationship,  a  give  and 
take  between  IT  and  business.  Though  IT  has  the  capability  to  reduce  costs,  standardise 
processes, the benefits of successful IT-business alignment are beyond these i.e. increased 
efficiency  of  implementation  &  integration,  reduced  cycle  time,  increased  enterprise  agility 
and the ultimate benefit of improving the bottom line. Until recently IT played a docile role in 
business  planning.  It  is  now  time  for  banks  to  move  over  from  being  merely  an 
implementation tool to shaping business strategy. The principal difficulty is that there are few 
instances of business oriented IT strategies as most are focussed on technology products of 
one shape or another. This makes it all the more challenging to align the IT and business 
strategies. 
Managing outsourcing 
IT  outsourcing  is  a  growing  phenomenon  in  developing  economies.  The  challenges  of 
outsourcing  range  from  selection  of  ideal  outsourcing  partner  to  dynamic  issues  of 
knowledge transfer, security risks, legal concerns, vendor dependency, etc. This concern has 
heightened  in  recent  years  and  these  issues  may  be  dealt  with  in  synchronization  with 
general governance principles. As we look to external IT service providers for assisting us to 
innovate and optimize, we must assess how mature our outsourcing capability is to utilize the 
right engagement models and align ourselves with the appropriate providers. 
Before  initiating  the  process  of  outsourcing  any  service/application,  it  is  necessary  to 
examine whether the outsourced function meets the business needs and strategic objectives. 
Identification of the nature of the activities undertaken by the vendor and the inherent risks of 
the activity are also important. It is recommended that due diligence in selecting, contracting, 
supervising  and  monitoring  of  the  vendor  is  adopted.  Diligence  in  vendor  selection  also 
requires  a  reasonable  inquiry  into  the  ability  and  suitability  of  the  vendor  to  meet  the 
requirements  for  the  proposed  service.  Well  defined  and  enforceable  Service  Level 
Agreements  (SLAs)  with  the  vendor  will  establish  the  performance  standard  and  service 
quality expected under the agreement. As part of meeting principles of governance, it may be 
ensured that there is a documented, accepted procedure which governs service expectations 
and obligations including change management.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Combating cyber crime 
In a networked world, there are no real safe harbours—like a ship which can be attacked by 
pirates  anywhere,  a  service  delivery  offering  on  the  network  is  generally  available  to 
everyone else on the network; in some cases this may well be the gateway for entry to the 
bank’s main systems as well. Cyber security is a collective concern that is comprehensive in 
scope—the  Internet  has  no  national  boundaries. Whereas  security  is  typically  regulated  at 
the government level, cyber security is national, international, public and private in character 
– all in the same context. Today, there are Government initiatives aimed at enhancing cyber 
security which is complemented by cyber risk management and security provided by private 
entities  that  manage  and  operate  most  ICT  infrastructure.  Such  security  cannot  be 
adequately assured by market forces or regulation; rather, it requires a novel mix of solutions 
involving  a  range  of  stakeholders  working  both  in  their  own  domains  and  in  concert.  No 
single  strategy,  set  of  governance  arrangements,  or  operational  practices  will  be  right  for 
every country. Cyber security issues now top the list of risks to watch. While such importance 
is ascribed for cyber security in general, banks, as prime targets of financial fraud and crime, 
need to be extra vigilant as far as cyber security is concerned and this needs to be ingrained 
in each and every offering made available using IT. The role of organisations such as IDRBT 
assume significance in this regard.  
To share some important findings: 
• 
India is seeing an increase in the number of cyber attacks, from 2,565 in 2008 to 
8,266 in 2009 and 10,315 in 2010 (source: CERT-In). India is one of the top three 
countries in the world in terms of malicious activities.3 India has been responsible for 
sending out 16 percent of all spam according to the results of IBM’s “X-Force 2012 
Mid-Year Trend and Risk Report’’, ahead of the 15% level of the USA. Some of the 
cyber security threats (malware and virus) reported by CERT-In are DNS Changer 
malware, Zeus BOT, stuxnet and spyeye. 
According to a report by Japanese security company Trend Micro, hackers are now 
increasingly targeting Indian financial institutions with the latest variants of malware 
like SpyEye and Zeus to siphon larger amounts of money from bank accounts. It has 
reported a whopping 187 per cent rise in phishing attacks being reported on various 
Indian  brands  in  May  this  year  over  the  previous  month  and  points  out  that 
significantly, all phishing are targeted on the banking sector.4 
 In this context, the questions that arise are:  
• 
• 
How secure are we? 
How  literate  and  aware  are  our  employees  about  the  IT  governance  and  cyber 
security?  
Is there an organisation culture for detecting and reporting of violations?  
Is there a zero tolerance policy about breeches of policies? 
Do business partners share and observe your governance and security policy?  
• 
• 
• 
All these assume significance in view of the fact that the internal threats from employees and 
third party service providers are as critical as external threats. 
                                                
3   Source: Symantec Intelligence Quarterly: July - September, 2011. 
4   http://newindianexpress.com/business/article551583.ece. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Governance in IT 
Is IT governance all about IT? A consistent IT Governance policy provides institutions with 
tools  which  ensure  that  IT  investment  drives  business  to  meet  its  goals.  IT  Governance 
depends strongly on corporate governance and the overall corporate strategy, which means 
that  IT  strategy  and  IT  processes  should  be  in  consonance  with  business  goals.  In  other 
words, it means that IT Governance provides tools to manage IT structures and processes in 
order to appropriately support business strategy. 
Implementing IT Governance in banks can be very challenging. For addressing the structural 
inadequacies in the areas of IT governance – information, data, information security – there 
is  an  imperative  need  to  have  synergy  among  these  areas.  Adoption  of  a  structured 
IT Governance framework would enable banks to manage their businesses in a manner that 
would  bring  about  benefits  to  their  customers  as  also  facilitate  the growth  of  banks  in  this 
fiercely  competitive  world.  Banks’  investments  in  IT  are  most  fruitful  when  they  match 
technology  strategy  with  business  strategy,  implement  systems  in  a  disciplined  way,  and 
balance value creation with increased IT capabilities. 
Human capital – development of knowledge and talent marketplace 
Though  the  face  of  banking  industry  has  undergone  a  sea  change  in  the  years  that  have 
gone  by,  you  would  agree  with  one  characteristic  of  the  industry  that  has  remained 
unchanged is people. The banks succeed or fail depending on the quality of their workforce 
talent at every level—the front lines, middle management and executive leadership. Banks 
should look at workforce talent as the primary engine for sustained, competitive advantage 
and for creating a workforce in which people at every level are capable of contributing with 
high  levels  of  performance  leveraging  on  technology.  It’s  about  creating  a  IT  culture  of 
excellence. It is the HR teams that will give banks the competitive advantage in the years to 
come.  
Analytics – to drive up customer confidence  
The  power  of  predictive  analytics  is  undisputable.  It  has  made  deep  inroads  into  several 
industries  and  is  now  doing  the  same  in  banking.  So,  what’s  new?  Haven’t  banks  –  the 
producers  and  consumers  of  more  data  than  most  other  industries,  been  mining  it  since 
ages? Yes, but data mining and analytics aren’t the same thing. To cut a long story short, the 
latest analytics solutions have the ability to process petabytes of data into predictive insights, 
in near real time. This means that in theory, banks can derive key insights into the outcome 
of  an  action,  even  as  they  execute  it.  In  practical  terms,  this  could  mean  the  difference 
between stopping fraud in mid-transaction or raising the alarm after the deed is done. Now 
banks should be looking at leveraging predictive analytics to acquire and retain customers, 
manage  campaigns  and  improve  cross  sales.  They  also  have  the  opportunity  to  refine 
customer understanding to a different level, with the help of analytics, which would improve 
customer centricity. 
Concluding thoughts 
At this stage, I would like to acknowledge the contributions made by you all. As CIOs and IT 
managers, you have all excelled in bringing about the much needed change in the banking 
sector. A decade back we could see on the sign boards “fully computerised branch” which 
now  could  perhaps  be  changed  to  “fully  automated  transaction  processing  branch”.  We 
cannot,  however,  rest  with  this. We  need  to  strive  towards  higher  levels,  each  one  of  you 
becoming  a  super  CIO5  –  A  CIO  who  can  function  as  that  lever  and  who  can  make  a 
difference to the bank’s productivity. Since I am addressing a group of CIOs, I would like to 
                                                
5   CIO Anniversary Issue – November 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
leave  you  with  some  thoughts  as  to  how  you  can  transform  into  super  CIOs  by  using 
technology differently: 
Use big data 
Banks would need to think about Big data. Collecting and analysing transactional data will 
give  banks  more  insight  into  their  customer’s  preferences.  It  can  be  used  to  create  new 
products and services and allow banks to remedy emerging problems in an efficient manner. 
However there is one word of caution, you may need skilled personnel to work on the tools to 
analyse the data. 
Lead 
What CIOs need is independent thought, open-mindedness, flexibility and the ability to learn 
continuously. Technology expects you to be a student for all your life. You also need to have 
that ‘‘fire in your belly’’ to lead a team. Leadership is an art. Master IT. This may also mean 
that  you  may  have  to  press  pause  button  while  engaging  the  top  management  once  in  a 
while for effectively bridging gaps between the IT and business teams. 
Collaborate 
To  increase  efficiency  and  ensure  regulatory  compliance,  banks  need  better  methods  of 
gathering  and  reporting  data  from  all  their  verticals.  Most  banks  struggle  with  multiple 
back-office  systems  and  silo  based  information. To  address these  issues  in  earnest, there 
will be a need for new and improved business process management tools in the times ahead 
and hence a great deal of collaboration among all. 
Stay secure 
New  technologies  being  adopted  everyday  are  opening  doors  for  new  threats.  To  combat 
these, we need new weapons. In the first place we need to identify information that needs to 
be  secure  and  protected  at  all  times.  Further  we  need  to  put  in  effective  security  for 
accessing,  sharing  and  controlling  important  documents  across  the  extended  and  mobile 
enterprise  on  any  device.  You  would  appreciate  that  controlling  sensitive  or  confidential 
documents  is  more  difficult  than  controlling  records  in  databases.  Most  organisations 
including banks focus the majority of their security resources on the network rather than their 
applications. Banks would need to prioritise their application security to avoid being “sitting 
ducks” for impending attacks. There’s a silver lining here. According to a report,6 security in 
the banking vertical worldwide has shown its dedication to security. During 2011–12, banking 
websites have had the highest remediation rate at 74%. 
Go Cloud but with caution  
The rapid emergence of cloud computing is transforming the way financial institutions think 
about how they consume their IT resources. The Cloud is here to stay. We all know it but are 
worried whether or not to acknowledge it. This is because we are worried about the security 
and  data  integrity  in  the  Cloud.  Cloud  computing,  which  in  the  most  basic  of  terms,  offers 
unlimited  computing  resource  as  a  service  on  a  pay-per-use  basis,  is  proven  to  directly 
translate to less upfront capital expense and reduced IT overheads, offering a cost-effective, 
simple  alternative  to  accessing  enterprise-level  IT  without  the  associated  costs.  But  world 
over,  financial  sector  is  treading  with  caution  in  adopting  this  technology.  Indian  financial 
sector  needs  to  be  conscious  of  this  reality,  at  least  until  such  time,  the  industry  evolves 
Indian standards for cloud computing. 
                                                
6   Whitehat Security Website Statistics report 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Source  
Outsourcing  is  still  in.  It  may  have  taken  on  new  names  like  the  cloud  but  traditional 
outsourcing is not really extinct. CIOs need to work towards improving their relationship with 
their  vendor  so  that  banks  may  finally  look,  in  the  long  run,  towards  increasing  their 
productivity.  In  order  to  cut  outsourcing  costs,  banks  may  look  towards  setting  clear 
expectations from the vendor, take control of the project, and choose the vendor wisely. At 
times,  banks  may  look  towards  being  reasonable  in  their  negotiations,  at  times  “put  the 
contract away”, partner with them to bring about change and be nice; of course not at the 
cost of expecting sub-optimal performance!! 
Manage Mobile  
The mobile revolution has created a sort of new world order. It has the potential to change 
the way banks do business. It is up to the banks to take cue. While banks are embracing the 
mobile channel – and continuing to support the old standby of online banking – they are not 
integrating the technologies used to build e-banking solutions. Also as more people conduct 
their  banking  on  mobile  devices,  these  devices  also  will  become  the  growing  focus  of 
hackers and fraudsters, who are always on the hunt for ripe targets. Banks can work on two 
areas within the mobile channel:7 fraud prevention and marketing to customers. In fact, world 
over mobile banking already is playing a role in reducing fraud in a variety of ways – ranging 
from simple transaction and security alerts to mobile authentication for bank transfers. 
As I conclude, let me flag final set of broad issues: 
• 
Can CIOs of banks come together and identify three major challenges which require 
immediate remediation? IDRBT could take these forward as their core activity. 
A  major  aspect to  be  taken  care  of  in  IT  implementation  pertains to  technological 
obsolescence. CIOs need to be ready with alternatives before this sets in as far as 
their systems are concerned. Could we see CIOs collaborating so that you drive the 
change rather than getting driven? 
All  of  you  are  fully  aware  of  the  KYC  requirements.  Can  we  look  at  technology 
based  KYC  which  is  easy  to  implement  yet  ensures  secure  and  sure  information 
which cannot be repudiated? 
Has  time  come  for  CIOs  to  worry  about  over  dependence  on  some  IT  systems 
(Oracle for database, Windows for Operating system and so on)? 
Finally what would be the best fit options for inter-operability across IT systems and 
more importantly inter-operability across banks? 
    Whether it’s helping to better understand customer profitability, deliver products in innovative 
ways or manage the spiralling data requirements as a result of new regulation, technology is 
emerging as both a key enabler and differentiator. As the role of technology evolves more 
into mainstream banking, banks will need to think about technology expenditure in a different 
way. Instead of being a cost to manage down, it should be seen more as an investment to 
support  growth  and  new  business  development,  only  to  stay  ahead  of  the  curve  in  the 
competitive  world.  Ultimately,  the  proof  of  technology  adoption  is  in  the  improvement  of 
services to customers – across all economic, social and geographical sectors. And the CIO’s 
have a large role to play in fulfilling this objective. 
I would like to conclude with the observation of Gurucharan Das who said ‘‘What leadership 
needs more than thought is action and what’s more important than intelligence is will power’’. 
CIOs, who are leaders in their own right, should work towards translating their thoughts into 
action with the will power to make IT happen. 
                                                
7   Forrester Report commissioned by ClairMail. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I wish you all successful deliberations in this Conference. Since the New Year is less than a 
fortnight away, I would also like to wish you all a happy and prosperous New Year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
