Mario Draghi: Rationale and principles for financial union 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the 22nd Frankfurt 
European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 23 November 2012. 
 Lord Mayor Feldmann, 
Dear Mr. Blessing, 
Dear Mr. Fitschen, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today to address the Frankfurt European Banking Congress. 
A year ago, I gave my first speech as President of the European Central Bank (ECB) at this 
venue. It has been an intense year for the ECB and for Europe – challenging yet promising.  
Introduction  
The  European  financial  crisis  intensified  at  first,  due  to  several  interconnected  factors: 
deteriorating fiscal and banking conditions in some countries, including large ones, increased 
financial  fragmentation,  and  the  first  signs  of  a  renewed  weakening  of  the  European 
economy.  
The ECB reacted in a proactive way, by successively lowering policy interest rates and by 
devising at the end of last year a monetary policy instrument that was particularly effective in 
the specific circumstances at that time. To counter the impending risks for European banks, 
that  were  then  concentrated  mainly  on  the  funding  side,  we  supplied  liquidity  at  very  long 
maturity and at low rates, fully accommodating the demand by the market. We succeeded in 
calming  the  immediate  tensions,  averting  a  credit  crunch  that  would  otherwise  have  had 
grave consequences for the euro area economy, employment and price stability. 
But  that  action  in  itself  could  not  prevent  a  further  fragmentation  of  financial  markets, 
increasingly driven, in the early summer, by “redenomination fears” – the concern that euro 
area membership could prove unsustainable for some countries. The danger was concrete 
that the adverse loop between weak public finances and banks could propagate to a large 
set  of  countries  in  the  euro  area,  leading  to  an  uncontrollable  spiral  of  rising  interest  rate 
spreads and feeding into the real economy. Credit and economic growth were falling, leading 
to rising unemployment and reduced consumption and investment. All of this meant that the 
outlook for the euro area economy as a whole was increasingly fragile.  
The  disruption  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  due  to  financial  fragmentation  is 
something deeply profound. It threatens the single monetary policy and the ECB’s ability to 
ensure price stability. This was  why the ECB decided that action was  essential and that a 
credible backstop against disaster scenarios was required, which led to the announcement of 
Outright Monetary Transactions. In this sense, the ECB has shown resolve and foresight in 
addressing  within  its  mandate  challenges  in the economic  and financial situation,  so  as  to 
contribute to the stability of the euro area economy as a whole.  
But also the cohesion and resolve of the European leaders was crucial in this period. In June 
this year, European leaders decided to accelerate the move towards a “financial union”, by 
creating a single bank supervisor centred around the ECB and by linking to it the possibility 
that European banks, in due time and under certain conditions, could receive direct capital 
support from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). Together with the announcement on 
the  OMT,  this  led  to  the  much  more  benign  market  conditions  that  have  prevailed  in  the 
recent months.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Therefore, I can address you today against the background of a relative return of confidence 
in the prospects for the euro area.  
The return of confidence is justified, but it relies on three things: 
First, given that the return of confidence was related in part to the announcement of Outright 
Market  Transactions,  I  would  like  to  assure  financial  markets  that  we  stand  ready  to 
implement this programme as and when required. 
Second, euro area governments need to continue to pursue structural reforms at the national 
level.  This  is  essential  to  regain  competitiveness  where  it  has  been  lost,  and  to  lay  the 
foundations for sustainable and balanced growth in the future.  
Third,  at  the  European  level,  leaders  need  to  follow  up  with  determination  on  their 
commitment to make the institutional reforms needed to complete economic and monetary 
union. That is what will fully restore stability to our continent.  
The message conveyed in June by Presidents Van Rompuy, Barroso, Juncker and myself is 
that to succeed, institutional reforms must extend to the financial system, to the fiscal and 
economic policy framework and to the area of democratic legitimacy and accountability. 
These building blocks form a consistent and interconnected whole. They can be addressed 
within  different  time  frames  and  following  a  logical  sequential  order,  so  long  as  the 
commitment to address all four of them is unwavering. 
In my remarks today, I would particularly like to elaborate on the rationale and principles for 
establishing a Single Supervisory Mechanism. It is important to understand exactly why we 
need such a mechanism to determine how it would be designed.  
On the ideal schedule for establishing the single supervisor, I agree with those who say that 
we need to do it in a timely fashion but above all, we need to do it well. What is essential is to 
have the legal basis as soon as possible, ideally on 1 January 2013, so that preparations can 
begin. 
The rationale for a financial union  
The crisis has highlighted a fundamental inconsistency between the single monetary policy of 
the euro area and the responsibility of national authorities for financial policies. The single 
currency needs a single financial system that is not fragmented along national lines. 
Moreover,  for  the  effective  functioning  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  and  therefore  for 
delivering  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  banks  are  key  in  transmitting  monetary  policy 
impulses to the real economy. It is important to avoid significant differences in transmission 
arising  from  the  countries  in  which  banks  happen  to  be  located.  Yet  such  fragmentation 
within Europe’s financial system has occurred as a consequence of the sovereign debt crisis.  
The relationship between the credit of sovereigns and that of their financial system is  well 
understood; it runs both ways. Divergence in sovereign credit has resulted in divergence in 
bank funding conditions at the national level. This in turn has brought about differences in 
lending conditions, which hamper the transmission of monetary policy.  
Banks  facing  funding  pressures  react  by  tightening  the  lending  conditions  for  firms  and 
households, which ultimately leads to a breakdown in the relationship between lending rates 
and monetary policy rates that prevails in normal times.  
The  adverse  feedback  loop  between  banks  and  sovereigns  also  has  negative  effects  on 
efforts  to  re-establish  fiscal  sustainability.  Countries  undergoing  fiscal  adjustments  are 
increasingly penalised by financial markets because of their additional burden of supporting 
domestic banks.  
Against this background, the need to break the loop between banks and sovereigns at the 
national level, by taking responsibility for financial stability to the European level, becomes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
evident. This is why a financial union is a necessary step to improve investors’ confidence. 
By  restoring  financial  stability,  it  also  provides  the  most  effective  response  to  the 
fragmentation of Europe’s banking markets. Monetary stability, financial stability and defence 
of the single European market are all closely linked. 
The principles and key elements of a single supervisory mechanism  
Financial  crises  differ  in  many  respects,  but  they  tend  to  have  common  origins.  These 
include  the  rapid  expansion  of  credit,  increasing  leverage,  asset  price bubbles  and  rapidly 
declining credit quality standards.  
National supervisors were often lenient in the face of these developments, partly because of 
regulatory  arbitrage,  partly  because  they  were  subject  to  a  variety  of  constraints  and 
pressures.  
The single supervisor should possess all the qualities necessary to guard against these risks 
on  a  durable  basis.  It  should  be  rigorous  and  even-handed, free from  local  pressures  and 
interests.  It  should  have  the  vision  and  take  on  a  broad-ranging  approach,  independently 
assessing the situation of individual banks in a systemic context.  
As to the specific institutional arrangements, several alternatives have been proposed. The 
solution  chosen  by  European  leaders  –  to  build  the  system  around  the  ECB  –  is  the  only 
pragmatic one in the present circumstances. Fourteen out of seventeen national central bank 
governors in the Eurosystem already have a supervisory role. Therefore, working jointly with 
the  national  supervisory  authorities,  the  ECB  will  have  the  legal  authority  and  technical 
capability to carry out this complex task successfully.  
As part of the European System of Financial Supervision, the single supervisor will closely 
cooperate  with  national  authorities  and  with  the  existing  European  authorities,  notably  the 
European Banking Authority (EBA). Moving supervisory powers to the European level should 
not and will not change their respective roles and tasks. 
But some observers have suggested that the presence in the same institution of monetary 
policy  and  supervisory  decisions  can  lead  to  excessive  burdens,  a  potential  confusion  of 
roles and/or distorted incentives.  
These  concerns  must  be  taken  seriously.  To  guard  against  them  materialising,  certain 
principles must be fulfilled. Let me elaborate, based on reflections that are being conducted 
within the ECB’s Governing Council.  
Rigorous separation of monetary and supervisory policies 
The first principle is the need for rigorous separation of monetary and supervisory policies. 
Let me emphasise that we are taking this issue very seriously and we have envisaged ways 
to  address  it.  The  ECB  has  the  advantage  of  having  a  very  clear  goal  of  price  stability, 
expressed  in  a  transparent  and  measurable  way.  This  objective  has  never  been 
compromised in the 14 years of the euro so far and it will not be compromised in the future. 
The ECB’s attachment to the primary objective of price stability remains unquestioned.  
The  proposal  of  the  European  Commission  provides  for  the  establishment  of  a  separate 
Supervisory  Board  within  the  ECB,  which  will  include  representatives  from  national 
authorities. This proposal allows for a pooling of supervisory expertise and knowledge, and 
will help to ensure that decision-making lines on monetary and supervisory policy are clearly 
separated.  
To  separate  day-to-day  activities,  the  Governing  Council  will  define  internal  procedures, 
making  a  clear  distinction  between  the  monetary  and  supervisory  functions  within  the 
organisation. We can build on a wealth of experience in this field, looking at best practices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
from the many central banks in Europe and around the world that combine supervisory and 
monetary policy functions.  
Independence and higher standards of accountability 
The  second  principle  is  the  need  to  safeguard  the  ECB’s  independence,  implying  higher 
standards  of  accountability.  Independence  is  not  a  new  concept  to  the  ECB.  Neither  is 
accountability. 
We are proud of our independence, and in the context of supervision, the ECB needs to be 
safeguarded from external interests and national bias. With the activation of article 127/6, the 
provisions  of  the  Treaty  are  extended  to  the  new  supervisory  task.  These  include 
independence  in  the  preparation  of  supervisory  assessments.  In  addition,  the  ECB  as 
supervisor  will  enjoy  operational  independence,  as  foreseen  by  the  Core  Principles  of  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision with which it will be compliant. It is essential that 
independence extends to all members of the Supervisory Board. Such independence in the 
assessment is crucial for the credibility of the supervisory system.  
At  the  same  time,  it  is  equally  crucial  that  these  strong  supervisory  powers  should  be 
matched  with  very  strong  arrangements  for  accountability.  Let  me  assure  you  that  we  are 
eager to comply with the highest standards of democratic accountability at all levels, that is 
vis-à-vis both European institutions and national institutions. 
Complete range of supervisory instruments  
The third principle is that the single supervisor should possess a complete set of supervisory 
instruments.  
All banks established in participating Member States would in principle fall within the remit of 
the  single  supervisor.  This  is  important  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field.  It  will  also  prevent 
fragmentation in the financial system, which is precisely what we are aiming to repair. 
One lesson of the financial crisis is that not only large cross-border banking conglomerates 
have the capacity to destabilise the financial system. Due to interlinkages and mechanisms 
of contagion, even smaller institutions may turn out to be systemically important.  
Such  banks  have  a  strong  presence  in  Europe:  in  almost  half  of  the  euro  area  countries, 
more than 60% of the total bank assets are held by smaller banks. Taking the euro area as a 
whole,  approximately  30%  of the  total  bank  assets  are  held  by  smaller banks1. These  are 
significant amounts. To preserve financial stability, the Supervisory Board would be able to 
assert control over all banks in participating countries.  
Let me say something more on how such a system could operate. 
The European supervisor will work as a decentralised system with the Supervisory Board at 
the  centre.  The  Supervisory  Board  will 
top 
representatives  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities;  hence  the  working  method  and 
decision-making will be collective, based on a collegial approach and will directly benefit from 
the  skills  and  experience  of  the  national  supervisors.  They  will  be  prime  actors  in  the 
framework,  not  passive  performers  subject  to  a  central  authority,  and  will  contribute  with 
knowledge of national, regional and local banking markets. 
The  intensity  of  centralised  supervision  will  be  the  highest  for  those  institutions  deemed 
systemically  important.  But  also  for  these  institutions,  close  cooperation  with  national 
authorities on daily activities will remain. The role and responsibilities of national supervisors 
itself  be  predominantly  composed  of 
                                                
1  Banks are considered to be large when their total assets exceed EUR 40 billion or, for smaller countries, when 
they constitute the largest domestic bank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
will increase when going down the dimensional scale, to banks of predominantly national or 
local relevance.  
The  single  supervisory  mechanism  should  also  strengthen  the  single  European  market. 
Therefore, all Member States, also the ones that have not adopted the euro, should have the 
possibility  of  participating  in  the  single  supervisor.  I  am  confident  that  the  proper  legal 
framework that serves this objective can be identified and adopted.  
How European banks can benefit from a single supervisor 
I have touched on the elements needed for the new authority to function successfully. Let me 
now address what I see as the main implications for banks.  
A  strong  area-wide  supervisor,  capable  of  acting  quickly  and  effectively,  can  restore  and 
uphold  business  confidence  in  all  banks,  regardless  of  their  location.  It  can  therefore 
contribute to a revival of interbank and credit markets.  
Second,  the  single  supervisor  should  ensure  homogeneous  supervision,  convergence  of 
practices,  a  level  playing  field  and  therefore  a  reduction  in  banks’  compliance  costs.  An 
important element to achieve convergence is the single rulebook that the EBA is developing. 
But  ensuring  convergence  of  regulation  is  not  enough.  Supervisory  practices  also  need  to 
converge.  The  envisaged  creation  of  a  single  supervisory  handbook  by  the  EBA  is 
complementary  to  this  approach.  Best  practices  should  become  standard  practices.  The 
single supervisory handbook should also ensure that in cases where banks are supervised in 
a decentralised manner within the system, practices are consistent across countries.  
Third, the single supervisor will more easily identify cross-country linkages and exposures, 
and therefore contribute to a reduction of systemic risk.  
The next steps towards a financial union 
The establishment of a Single Supervisory Mechanism would represent a major step towards 
a financial union. But in case we were in need to resolve financial institutions, we want to be 
able to do so without taxpayer money and without disrupting the payments system, even in 
the case of systemically important institutions. For that we need a common resolution regime 
and an independent European resolution authority.  
The  existing  legislative  proposal  on  bank  recovery  and  resolution  is  a  development  in  the 
right  direction,  and  the  ECB  supports  its  rapid  adoption.  It  would  best  be  implemented 
through  an  independent  European  Resolution  Authority,  immune  from  national  bias  and 
national vested interests.  
Conclusions 
The  establishment  of  a  financial  union  in  Europe  is  a  major  component  of  the  institutional 
framework for a genuine economic and monetary union. The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
forms an integral part of this framework.  
With  the  new  system  in  place,  a  critical  cause  of  instability  –  the  link  between  fiscal 
authorities and banks at the national level – will largely be removed and a level playing field 
will be ensured. This is one important step towards a more stable European economy.  
Over  the  course  of  this  last  year,  the  ECB  has  continued  to  follow  its  monetary 
responsibilities in a highly demanding environment and continued to exert its mandated role 
in coping with the crisis with a high degree of responsiveness and farsightedness.  
Three things have been essential here. First, the ECB has not stepped in to any roles that 
belong to governments – they too have to take their responsibilities for coping with the crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in a resolute manner. Second, the ECB has continued to cherish its independence. And third, 
the ECB has continued to deliver what it is tasked to deliver: price stability for the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
