Klaas Knot: The eurozone crisis – causes and solutions 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  to  the  Asia  Society,  Hong 
Kong, 15 October 2012. 
 Thank you for this opportunity to exchange views with you on this topical issue. I’ve accepted 
this  invitation  with  pleasure.  For  you  should  know  that  Hong  Kong  has  always  held  a 
fascination for me, if only because of its breathtaking dynamics. But, much as I would like to 
dwell on that, I’ve been invited here to discuss the crisis in the euro area. And I gladly do so, 
for I feel this crisis needs some explaining.  
I will first briefly touch upon the role of the Eurozone in the global economy, to clarify why it is 
so important for everyone that the European project will be successful.  
After  that,  I’ll  discuss  the  implications  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  for  the  future 
design of EMU.  
I will argue that at the root of the crisis we find some individual euro area countries pursuing 
wrong policies, as well as a failing system of mutual surveillance in the euro area.  
These deficiencies pose a number of challenges for the future of EMU. While the introduction 
of  the  euro  has  increased  macroeconomic  stability  and  furthered  trade  and  financial 
integration, the sovereign debt crisis clearly demonstrates that the job is not done yet.  
The importance of the Eurozone for the global economy does not directly follow from the size 
of its population.  
But the other indicators on the chart show that major economic problems in the Eurozone 
without a doubt have repercussions on the rest of the world.  
The Eurozone accounts for almost 20% of world GDP, and almost 15% of world trade.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The latter figure is corrected for intra-EMU trade, so it only shows the share in world trade of 
the  Eurozone  as  if  it  were  a  single  country.  Including  intra-EMU  trade,  the  share  of  the 
Eurozone in world trade is over 25%.  
Finally,  the  share  of  the  Eurozone  in  global  outstanding  bonds,  equity  and  bank  assets  is 
almost 25%. This indicates that the euro area is an important player for financial markets.  
Given its role in the global economy, it is obvious that a solution of the European sovereign 
debt crisis is of vital importance for everyone.  
If  EMU  were  to  fall  apart,  the  consequences  for  Europe,  but  also  for  the  global  economy 
would be severe.  
Therefore, European policymakers and central bankers do their utmost to solve this crisis.  
In what follows, I will first focus on the causes of the sovereign debt crisis.  
I will conclude by presenting my views on the implications for a stable design of EMU.  
 Since  the  Eurozone  crisis  erupted,  European  policy  makers  have  done  a  lot  to  restore 
confidence.  
Important  developments  include  the  creation  of  the  emergency  facility  EFSF/ESM,  i.e.  the 
European Financial Stability Facility and European Stability Mechanism, to assist vulnerable 
euro countries during their reform efforts.  
Another significant step is the signing of the Fiscal Compact, a treaty in which the political 
leaders  of  the  euro  area  countries  (and  most  other  EU  countries) further  strengthened the 
rules governing budgetary discipline in Europe.  
The  ECB  also  took  unconventional  measures  to  prevent  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  from 
severely dragging down the real economy and from frustrating monetary transmission and its 
efforts to maintain price stability.  
We  first  introduced  the  Securities  Markets  Programme,  or  SMP,  for  interventions  in  the 
secondary government bond markets of vulnerable countries in order to restore their proper 
functioning.  
We  also  introduced  a  refinancing  operation  with  a  maturity  of  three  years,  which  injected 
around EUR 500 billion of “new” liquidity into the European banking system.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This provided the banking system with the liquidity security they needed in light of the market 
tensions and, thus, helped to avoid a sharp reduction in credit supply to the economy.  
While these measures calmed markets for a certain period, as the chart indicates, tensions 
kept returning every time. In my view, this is because the actions of governments and the 
actions of the ECB were not aligned.  
In particular, European politicians tended to slow down their efforts after ECB measures had 
temporarily  reduced  market  pressure.  This  was  especially  visible  for  the  SMP.  Instead  of 
stimulating  politicians  to  solve  the  underlying  causes  of  this  crisis,  the  SMP  discouraged 
them to do so.  
To  remedy  this  situation,  the  ECB  recently  replaced  the  SMP  with  a  new  instrument  for 
secondary market interventions: Outright Monetary Transactions or OMTs.  
The  great  advantage  of  OMTs  is  that  they  come  with  strict  conditionality  for  the  countries 
involved. This is meant to ensure that these countries cannot slow down their efforts after 
ECB interventions have eased market pressure.  
The ECB will only intervene in euro countries committed to and complying with the structural 
economic adjustment programme attached to support from either EFS or ESM, and the IMF.  
This  way,  the  actions  of  the  ECB  and  the  actions  of  governments  do  not  undermine,  but 
reinforce each other.  
In  response  to  the  announcement  of  OMTs,  most  stressed  sovereign  debt  markets  have 
recently  calmed  down  substantially.  I  will  now  switch  to  the  macroeconomic  causes,  but 
would be happy to answer any queries you may have on OMT and other ECB actions after I 
finish.  
As my talk so far indicates, in analysing and solving the sovereign debt crisis, the focus was 
mainly on fiscal and monetary factors rather than on the macroeconomic causes of the crisis. 
However,  these  causes  are  at  least  as  important  as  the  fiscal  slippages  some  countries 
allowed themselves.  
At the start of EMU, per capita income levels between countries differed significantly.  
It was assumed that catching-up countries would experience faster economic growth.  
This is what did happen, but not quite to the extent expected.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
Prior  to  the  crisis,  mainly  Ireland,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  also  Greece  and  Spain,  showed 
signs of real convergence.  
Their cumulative growth differentials compared to Germany reached 20 to 45% in 2007.  
Note that Italy and Portugal hardly experienced any real convergence towards the German 
welfare level, even before the crisis.  
Even the Netherlands “converged” more than these countries.  
 Unfortunately,  the  catching-up  process  largely  took  place  through  debt,  either  public  or 
private.  
As the chart shows, in some countries credit to the private sector grew by more than 10% a 
year for over a decade.  
As a result, their debt with the rest of the world ran up tremendously.  
This was most dramatically the case in Ireland, which moved from a net creditor position of 
52% of GDP in 1999 to a net debtor position of 71% of GDP in 2008.  
Note that the Netherlands is not doing particularly well with regard to this measure either.  
This is mainly the result of the growth in mortgage loans.  
In my view the high stock of mortgage debt is among today’s biggest vulnerabilities of the 
Dutch economy, but fortunately some initial measures have been taken to reverse the trend 
here.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Besides being largely based on credit, real convergence was accompanied by high inflation, 
as you find visualised on this chart.  
Whereas  Germany  experienced  lower  inflation  compared  to  the  euro  area  average,  the 
inflation  rates  in  Greece,  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  were  much  higher  than  the  EMU 
average.  
This  substantial  deterioration  of  competitiveness  mainly  reflects  the  development  of  unit 
labour costs.  
Let me pause for a moment here, and note that economic developments in Germany in the 
last decade have been phenomenal.  
It isn’t that long ago that Germany was called the sick man of Europe.  
Partly due to the ample supply of low-paid workers from East Germany, the labour market 
institutions in Germany were no longer sustainable. This led to the so-called Harz reforms, 
which  made  the  German  labour  market  more  flexible  and  tempered  unit  labour  costs  and 
inflation.  
Turning back to the euro area, before EMU came into being, its current member countries 
followed different economic strategies.  
Between 1970 and 1999, unit labour costs in Germany, the Netherlands and Austria grew by 
a factor of 2.5 to 3.  
During these 28 years prior to EMU, unit labour costs grew by a factor of 12 in Italy, 14 in 
Spain, 35 in Portugal and 55 in Greece.  
By regularly devaluing their currencies, these countries were able to restore competitiveness.  
But after the launch of EMU, this policy option was no longer available, of course.  
The  hope  was  that  these  countries  would  adapt  to  this  new  reality  and  unit  labour  costs 
growth would slow down.  
But is this what happened?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 This chart shows the cumulative growth of unit labour costs relative to the euro area average 
from the start of EMU.  
While countries like Germany, Austria and Finland continued their modest wage policies, unit 
labour costs in Southern European countries went up at a much higher pace, undermining 
their competitiveness.  
This proved unsustainable.  
The countries that found themselves in the top of the chart when the sovereign debt tensions 
started in 2009 – that is Greece, Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Italy – all ran into trouble one 
after the other.  
This is no coincidence.  
Currently, adjustments are hard-handedly being enforced by the markets.  
In  the  said  countries,  probably  with  the  exception  of  Ireland,  product  and  labour  markets 
didn’t function properly and they still don’t.  
Markets are overregulated and labour markets are highly inflexible.  
By addressing these problems, labour productivity can increase, thereby lowering unit labour 
costs.  
I am not saying this will be easy, but I’m convinced that such steps are absolutely necessary 
for EMU to function properly.  
As the chart also shows, in the Netherlands unit labour cost growth was also relatively high 
during the first years of EMU.  
This,  however,  wasn’t  caused  by  the  high  inflation  rates  and  low  flexibility  of  the  labour 
market, but reflected the low unemployment rate in the Netherlands in that period.  
For many years, the unemployment rate in the Netherlands was the lowest in the euro area.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The divergences in unit labour cost developments and price competitiveness within the euro 
area are reflected in the current account balances of the individual countries.  
As you can tell from this chart, before the crisis, most southern European countries and, to a 
lesser extent, Ireland experienced high and steadily increasing current account deficits, while 
the current account surpluses of Germany and the Netherlands improved further.  
For  many  years  it  was  thought  that  in  a  monetary  union,  the  current  account  balances  of 
individual countries were no longer relevant.  
It was only the balance of payment of the euro area as a whole that mattered.  
We know better now.  
Of course, besides competitiveness problems, the crisis also had fiscal causes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
As can be told from the chart, the stability and growth pact didn’t prevent some governments 
from taking up old habits once they had fulfilled the convergence criteria that enabled them to 
join EMU.  
We shouldn’t forget, however, that this was facilitated by some of the core countries of EMU.  
When it became clear that fiscal policies in these core countries wouldn’t be able to meet the 
rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, it was not the policies that were changed but the Pact.  
This was clearly a mistake.  
Besides, the gradual deterioration of the budget balance in countries like Italy and Portugal 
was partly due to their competitiveness problems.  
Since  devaluing  out  of  these  problems  was  no  longer  an  option,  the  decline  in 
competitiveness slowed down economic and employment growth.  
This dampened tax revenues while stimulating social security expenditures.  
Looking at it this way, the lack of fiscal discipline partly reflected the lack of macroeconomic 
discipline.  
More in general, budgetary policy was supposed to absorb temporary cyclical differences, by 
allowing the automatic stabilisers to do their work.  
For  example,  during  a  downturn,  public  spending  automatically  goes  up  as  more  people 
receive unemployment benefits, while tax revenues decrease.  
Such ‘automatic’ response to cyclical developments stabilises the economy.  
But in most member states, the automatic stabilisers have failed to operate properly since 
1999.  
Instead, a number of governments followed pro-cyclical budgetary policies, by loosening the 
budgetary reins during the economic booms, and tightening them during the busts.  
In other words, budgetary policies have hampered the functioning of EMU.  
Budgetary discipline in EMU was supposed to be exacted not only by the stability and growth 
pact, but also by market discipline.  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Markets were expected to restrain profligate governments by charging them higher interest 
rates and, thus, forcing them to change their ways.  
As is evident from the chart, market discipline was largely absent during the first ten years of 
EMU, allowing governments to pursue unsustainable policies.  
And  when  markets finally  started to  differentiate  between  governments, they  did  so  with  a 
vengeance.  
Although market discipline is now imposing necessary corrections, a stable monetary union 
cannot be based on this mechanism.  
So what would a stable monetary union look like in my view?  
 As I argued earlier, some euro area countries have not fully adapted to the fact that they lost 
the option of devaluation in order to restore competitiveness.  
If they had, they would have increased their flexibility and growth potential by reforming their 
labour and product markets.  
Given the spillover effects of postponed structural reforms on the functioning of EMU, these 
reforms  cannot  be  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  governments  concerned,  but  should  also 
have a “European” dimension.  
This may take different forms.  
Political  leaders  already  took  an  important  step  with  the  creation  of  the  Macroeconomic 
Imbalances  Procedure.  They  did  so  as  they  acknowledged  that  diverging  competitiveness 
within a monetary union ultimately creates severe spillovers for all members.  
However, the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure could be strengthened by increasing its 
focus and enforceability.  
This could be done, for instance, by introducing more reversed Qualified Majority Voting in 
these areas.  
Furthermore, minimum standards or best practices could be introduced in policy areas where 
spillovers have turned out to be especially high, such as labour market policies.  
Importantly, what should be avoided is harmonisation of practices towards some kind of EMU 
average, as this would compel strong countries to embark on mediocre policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Secondly, debt ratios should gradually be brought well below the ceiling of 60%.  
This lower debt ratio can only be realised and maintained through independent enforcement 
of the European fiscal rules, and by anchoring these rules in national legislation.  
A  politically  independent  European  authority  that  can  increasingly  intervene  in  the  fiscal 
policy of countries breaking the agreements is essential here.  
Thirdly, the diabolic loop between banks and sovereigns in the Eurozone must be dealt with.  
This  calls  for  European  banking  supervision,  in  combination  with  common  mechanisms  to 
resolve banks and guarantee customer deposits.  
This set-up should apply to all banks in the Eurozone (and preferably the EU) and not only to 
the cross-border banks.  
After all, as the experience in Spain and Ireland has shown, a financial crisis involving small, 
domestically orientated banks can still jeopardize national debt sustainability and European 
financial stability.  
If – and only if – these conditions are met, Eurobonds could be a serious option. Given how 
remote we still are from the 60% debt target, this  will likely be a matter of decades rather 
than years.  
But once we would be there, Eurobonds could enhance the stability of EMU in several ways.  
They  would  prevent  a  liquidity  problem  in  one  euro  area  country  from  needlessly 
transforming into a solvency problem.  
Moreover,  they  could  provide  a  fire  wall  against  the  danger  of  contagion.  Although 
Eurobonds are not suitable as a crisis instrument, they could be the light at the end of the 
tunnel for the people of vulnerable euro area countries.  
For  the  people  in  those  countries  need  to  feel  that  their  sacrifices  will  contribute  to  a 
permanent  solution;  one  that  will  safeguard  them  from  the  short-sightedness  of  both 
politicians and markets.  
Let me finish my address today by saying that finding a structural way out of the crisis will not 
only be beneficial for the Netherlands and the rest of Europe, but also for the world economy.  
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
