Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s banking and licensing framework, its economy 
and outlook 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the soft launch of 
BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited, Suva, 3 November 2012. 
 The Deputy Chairman of BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited, Mr Darryl Constantin  
Board Directors 
Chief Executive Officer, Mr Satish Deb 
Management and Staff of BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Introductory comments  
Good Morning, Bonjour and Bula Vinaka to you all.  
I wish to thank Satish for the kind invitation to officiate at this “soft” launch of BRED Bank 
(Fiji) Limited.  
This is indeed another milestone in the history of our financial system. Today marks the entry 
of a new bank and, perhaps more significantly, not since Bank of Hawaii entered our financial 
system  in  1993  have  we  had  a  bank  start  from  “scratch”  and  be  challenged  to  build  its 
operations from the ground up.  
Before I turn to some background information about BRED Bank I would like to make some 
general comments about banking and our licensing framework.  
Banking & licensing  
Entry into our banking system is quite deregulated. However, I must say that while anyone 
can  apply  to  establish  a  bank  in  Fiji,  they  must  meet  our  fairly  comprehensive  licensing 
requirements, which play an integral role in ensuring we are dealing with reputable, tried and 
proven players.  
Historically,  we  have  had  banks  withdraw  from  the  country  for  various  reasons.  Some 
contend that this indicates that the country is sufficiently banked. The Reserve Bank of Fiji, 
however, does not presently have a policy on limiting the number of players in the industry. 
We  do  like  to  ensure  that  those  institutions  that  do  come  in  are  strong  and  have  the 
appropriate backing to take them forward.  
May I add that the decision to commence full banking operations in a new jurisdiction is not a 
spur of the moment thing and is certainly not taken lightly. Banking is a relatively difficult and 
complex  business  to  establish.  Set  up  and  operating  costs  are  extremely  high.  Just  look 
around you and take a guess at how much has been spent on this fit-out. A new institution 
trying  to  position  itself  in  an  already  competitive  market  must  be  prepared  to  do  more  to 
secure  a  share  of  that  market.  There  are  strenuous  compliance  requirements  set  by  the 
regulators  that  must  first  be  met  before  the  business  can  even  think  of  taking  in  the  first 
deposit,  or  giving  out  the  first  loan.  These  compliance  measures  have  been  further 
strengthened since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The new operators also know that the 
cost of failure and subsequent withdrawal is extremely high.  
In Fiji, as you all know, we have well entrenched players, which will make a new entrant’s 
task of generating adequate returns very challenging. But if a reputable entrant fronts up and 
meets  the  stipulated  requirements,  as  BRED  Bank  has  done,  we  will  grant  entry  into  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banking  system.  This  is  a  deregulated  market  mechanism  that  promotes  competition, 
productivity and efficiency.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to say that BRED Bank has checked all the boxes and 
met  all  our  licensing  requirements  and  worked  tirelessly  to  set  up  their  operations  here  in 
Suva.  
Now let me make some brief background comments on BRED Bank.  
Background of BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited  
BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited is locally incorporated and is a subsidiary of Compagnie Financiere 
de la BRED (in short, COFIBRED).  
COFIBRED,  in  turn,  is  the  wholly  owned  subsidiary  and  international  investment  arm  of 
BRED  Banque  Populaire,  the  largest  regional  co-operative  bank  of  the  Banque  Populaire 
Group  of  France.  BRED  Banque  Populaire  was  formed  91  years  ago  and  currently  has  a 
capital base of 432 million Euros (around FJD 987million).  
COFIBRED’s  banking  subsidiaries  are  located  in  Eastern  Africa,  South  East  Asia,  France, 
Switzerland,  Turkey,  Vanuatu,  New  Caledonia,  Tahiti,  French  Polynesia  and  now  in  Fiji. 
COFIBRED  is  also  expanding further  into  Asia  and  Africa.  You can  see that  this  is  a truly 
international company.  
We  note  that  BRED  Bank’s  entry  into  Fiji  has  been  largely  attributed  to  the  positive 
experiences  from  representations  in  New  Caledonia,  Tahiti  and  Vanuatu,  as  well  as 
investments in Australia. Our country was considered as having the required building blocks, 
ranging from local expertise to infrastructure and communication, which effectively facilitated 
this  bank’s  entry  into  our  market.  BRED  Bank  viewed  Fiji  as  having  a  relatively  good 
developed market size, with appealing future economic prospects. The fact that we are being 
seen more and more as an economic and financial hub in our Pacific region is also extremely 
appealing.  
Considering this vision of BRED Bank, let me make some comments on our economy and 
the near term outlook.  
Fiji economy and outlook  
Our  Macroeconomic  Policy  Committee  is  currently  reviewing  the  earlier  forecast  for  2012 
GDP growth of 2.7 percent. This review takes into account the combined impact of ongoing 
buoyancy  in  domestic  demand  on  the  one  hand  and  the  possible  deterioration  in  external 
demand from a global slowdown, on the other hand. However, I can say that the economic 
growth for this year is expected to be close to the earlier forecast.  
Despite  the  increasing  global  uncertainty,  our  monetary  policy  objectives  remain  at 
comfortable levels. Inflation continues on a general downward trend registering 3.7 percent in 
September and is forecast to fall further to 3.5 percent by year-end, driven by lower prices for 
food and stability in oil prices.  
Foreign reserves are currently around $1.6 billion, sufficient to cover 5.0 months of retained 
imports of goods and non-factor services.  
Turning  to  Fiji’s financial  system,  I  am  pleased  to  confirm that  this  continues  to  be  sound. 
Developments in the various sectors have been reflective of the growth in the total assets of 
our  financial  institutions.  The  key  prudential  indicators  of  our  banking  system  also  remain 
favorable. The satisfactory performance of the banking system is attributed to:  
• 
• 
Strong levels of capital;  
Satisfactory asset quality;  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Adequate liquidity;  
Good management;  
Sound profitability; and  
Revived lending trends after a sustained period of benign growth  
• 
• 
• 
• 
There has also been a rapid development of innovation in the domestic financial sector with 
growth  in  areas  of  mobile  banking,  electronic  banking  initiatives  and  ATM  and  EFTPOS 
interconnectivity, to name a few.  
With  such  favorable  indicators,  the  entrance  of  BRED  Bank  is  considered  timely,  and  it  is 
expected that customers will benefit from healthy competition within the industry. BRED Bank 
is  also  optimistic  that,  with  its  co-operative  style  and  approach,  it  will  deliver  a  banking 
experience for Fiji that compares favorably with any other.  
Overall operations  
With a capital injection of approximately $40.0 million, Bred Bank opens its first branch at this 
MHCC complex, with plans to open other branches around Fiji. From our discussions it has 
been noted that the Bank also has plans to establish satellite branches in close proximity to 
large residential and industrial/commercial areas, as well as kiosks in shopping centers. One 
of the other key strengths of the institution is its 100 percent local Management and Staff.  
Concluding remarks  
Ladies and gentlemen, investments like BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited serve to fuel and drive the 
increasing positive sentiment in our economy.  
I would like to once again thank Satish for his kind invitation. I reiterate my appreciation to 
the Board, Management and Staff of BRED Bank for their support and cooperation.  
Both  prior  to  and  since  the  date  of  the  issuance  of  the  licence,  the  institution  has  made 
tireless efforts in trying to meet all the conditions and here it is today, opening its doors to 
serve  the  people  of  Fiji.  The  Board,  Management  and  Staff  are  commended  for  the  work 
done in setting up a fully fledged commercial bank. A bank that will literally start from scratch.  
Official opening  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the opening of a new commercial bank in Fiji continues the new era 
in  financial  sector  development  in  Fiji.  The  people  of  Fiji  are  the  beneficiaries  of  this 
development and I understand that they are in for a real French banking experience.  
I have much pleasure in welcoming BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited into Fiji’s Financial System and 
wish the institution all the very best in its operations in Fiji.  
Vinaka 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
