Njuguna Ndung’u: National “Chomoa Coins” Campaign – importance of 
coins in Kenya 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the National “Chomoa Coins” Campaign, Nairobi, 26 November 2012. 
 Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. Habil Olaka, Chief Executive, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. Alfred Nganga, Chairman, Retail Traders Association of Kenya;  
CEOs of Commercial Banks; 
Chairmen and CEOs of Represented Supermarkets; 
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  honoured  to  launch  the  2012  National  Coin  Week,  we  dub  it  “Chomoa  Coins 
Campaign” which starts today, November 26th and ends on December 7th, 2012. 
As you are all aware, the Central Bank of Kenya is charged with the responsibility of ensuring 
availability of adequate currency, that is, Banknotes and coins, across the country. Pursuant 
to this mandate, the Central Bank of Kenya has over the years endeavoured to ensure that 
there  is  adequate  supply  of  coins.  However,  in  the  recent  past,  last  year  to  be  precise, 
concerns started to emerge among members of the public regarding challenges in obtaining 
coin-change at retail outlets. 
In response to these concerns, the Central Bank together with key stakeholders such as the 
Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA),  Supermarkets  and  the  Matatu  Owners  Association, 
launched the National Coin Week initiative in July 2011. The campaign was very successful 
as members of the public brought out large amounts of coins into circulation, thus alleviating 
the perceived shortage. However, in the early part of this year, the momentum seemed to 
have waned and reports of perceived coin shortages have resurfaced again. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: it is against this background that the Central Bank of Kenya has 
once  again  partnered  with  key  stakeholders  such  as  the  Media,  the  Kenya  Bankers 
Association (KBA) and the Retail Traders Association of Kenya (RETRAK) among others, to 
promote  the  re-circulation  and  use  of  coins.  As  mentioned  last  year,  it  is  the  view  of  the 
Central  Bank  that  the  current  perceived  shortage  of  coins  could  be  addressed  through 
circulation  of  the  coins  presently  held  by  the  public  in  their  homes,  tills,  piggy  banks,  car 
pouches etc. 
The purpose of the coin week campaign therefore is to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ladies and Gentlemen: as you are aware, coins constitute low-value units of our currency 
structure and adequate availability at all times everywhere cannot be over-emphasized. Most 
of you must have witnessed situations at Points of Sale (POS) and retail outlets where token 
items such as sweets or matchboxes are offered in place of coin-change. This is a practice 
that  we  would  like  to  see  stopped.  Coins  should  be  readily  available  in  all  retail  outlets  to 
Sensitize the Mwananchi on the importance of coins in the economy; 
Encourage the public to exchange coins for notes; 
Promote the habit and culture of using coins in day to day transactions; 
But also encourage a cost-effective circulation of coins. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
ensure proper pricing and avoid undue retail price hikes or issuance of token items in lieu of 
coins. 
The  Central  Bank  through  the  commercial  banks  has  continued  to  ensure  that  adequate 
quantities of coins are in circulation. As of today, the Central Bank of Kenya has issued into 
circulation over 1.31 billion pieces of coins in various denominations with an estimated face 
value  of  Ksh.5.1  billion.  We  believe  these  coins  are  more  than  adequate  to  serve  the 
economy. In the month of October 2012 alone, CBK released 9 million pieces of coins into 
circulation, while in November 2012, a further 12 million pieces have so far been released, 
yet the challenges on coin circulation still persist in some segments of the market. It must be 
that it is the circulation problem in the country. 
We believe that the bulk of coins are held by members of the public either in their homes, 
offices or car pouches or is it becoming expensive to make trips to the bank for coins? 
This trend seems to be continuing and we need to find a mechanism to end or discourage it. 
It  is  therefore  clear  that  the  problem  of  inadequacy  of  coins  in  circulation  cannot  be 
addressed by adding new coins but by ensuring that there is an efficient mechanism for re-
circulating existing coins within the economy. 
The 2012 National Coin Week has therefore been appropriately dubbed “Chomoa Coins” 
and involves a variety of media activities which have been mooted by the Central Bank, KBA, 
Supermarkets  and  the  other  key  stakeholders.  Besides  educating  the  public  on  the 
importance of coins, the key campaign aims at: 
• 
• 
Encouraging the general public to utilize coins in making low value payments;  
Calling upon everyone keeping coins in homes, offices, cars etc. to instead circulate 
them by dropping them at designated change points in supermarkets and banks; 
Informing the general public and traders in particular that they have a responsibility 
towards their currency and should accept all legal tender coins that are in circulation  
Partnering  with  commercial  banks  for  a  most  cost-effective  way  to  ensure 
circulation.  
  The Central Bank in collaboration with all the stakeholders will continue to explore ways of 
addressing  bottlenecks  in  the  coin  circulation  system  and  strive  to  provide  solutions.  The 
Bank  also  encourages  the  development  of  innovative  approaches  and  mechanisms, 
including use of technologies that facilitate the efficient distribution, exchange and circulation 
of coins. 
May I also take this opportunity to thank all stakeholders for supporting this event. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  with  these  brief  remarks,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to 
formally launch the 2012 ‘National “CHOMOA COINS” Campaign’. 
Thank you and God bless you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
