Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Banking on Islamic finance – from legality to economic 
value 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
8th World  Islamic  Economic  Forum  (WIEF)  “Banking  on  Islamic  finance  –  from  legality  to 
economic value”, Johor Bahru, 6 December 2012. 
 Powerful  forces  of  change  are  transforming  the  functioning  of  the  international  financial 
system and the global economy. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the quest has 
been to build financial systems that will best serve the real economy, that provides financial 
intermediation  that  promotes  sustainable  growth  through  productive  and  responsible 
innovation, and that will be resilient to shocks and less prone to crisis. There is tremendous 
potential  to  draw  on  the  economic  value  that  Islamic  finance  has  to  offer.  In  realising  this 
potential, in a now more challenging environment, will depend on our capacity to build new 
capabilities that will unleash the inherent intrinsic value propositions of Islamic finance that 
supports and energises the real economy. 
It  is  my  honour  to  participate  in  this  8th World  Islamic  Economic  Forum  in  my  hometown, 
Johor Bahru to speak on the topic “Banking on Islamic Finance: From Legality to Economic 
Value”. The first part of my remarks will elaborate on the economic value of Islamic finance, 
in terms of its emphasis on the close linkage to the real economy, in terms of its merit as a 
potent tool for enhancing financial inclusion, and in terms of its emergence as a vehicle in 
bridging economies and strengthening economic and financial linkages, in particular between 
emerging economies. 
The second part of my remarks will touch on three key imperatives that will be important to 
the ability of Islamic finance to enhance its value proposition to the global economy. These 
include the legal framework, in particular that which supports its internationalisation, the pool 
of talent that has the international exposure and orientation and finally the convergence and 
harmonisation of Shariah interpretations across jurisdictions. These imperatives will be key to 
reinforcing the gains from the increased economic inter-linkages. 
There are three core propositions of Islamic finance that can be harnessed as the industry 
continues with its rapid growth momentum. The first is to ensure that Islamic finance remains 
a  form  of  financial  intermediation  that  serves  the  real  economy  and  that  it  will  continue  to 
benefit  the  society.  In  staying  true  to  the  inherent  principles  of  Islamic  finance,  financial 
transactions will be underpinned by real economic activities. This ensures its close linkage to 
the  economy  as  it  directs  the  overall  intermediation  function  towards  economic  production 
and  wealth  creation.  This  therefore  requires  the  continuous  development  of  financial 
products and services that manifests the value propositions of Islamic finance. 
In  providing  the  comprehensive  range  of  the  whole  spectrum  of  financial  products  and 
services  that  are  in  accordance  with  these  principles,  Islamic  finance  has  been  able  to 
provide  the  total  financial  solution  to  consumers  and  businesses.  The  recent  growth  of 
Islamic finance has been fuelled by a sustained phase of innovation. The scope of financial 
business  has  also  increased  in  sophistication,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  private  equity, 
project finance, sukuk origination as well as fund and wealth management. To sustain this 
trend,  further  in-depth  applied  research  is  needed  to  develop  more  financial  products  that 
create such links with the real economy in terms of the operating models, risk management 
and supporting infrastructure. 
The second value proposition of Islamic finance lies in its merit as a potent tool for enhancing 
financial inclusion and for being beneficial to all members of society. Its immense potential in 
advancing  social-economic  development  is  mirrored  by  the  continuing  efforts  to  introduce 
Islamic  finance  offerings  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  in  Asia,  the  Middle  East  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
African  nations  in  recent  years.  In  bringing  unserved  communities  into  the  economic 
mainstream  through  the  financial  intermediation  process,  it  can  contribute  towards  poverty 
alleviation, job creation and more equitable economic growth. 
A recent study has however revealed that, despite being a promising financial segment, the 
availability of microfinance in Muslim-majority economies is either non-existent or still at very 
early  stages.  Islamic  financing  instruments  currently  comprise  only  a  small  fraction  of 
microfinance  business  in  the  Organisation  of  Islamic  Cooperation  (OIC)  countries.  While 
there  are  success  stories  on  the  application  of  Islamic  finance  principles  in  microfinance 
programs,  there  is  potential  to  have  better  models  for  Islamic  microfinance.  In  addition,  it 
should  also  integrate  with  other  financial  products  such  as  microtakaful  and  other  social 
welfare tools such as waqf to create a viable and impactful microfinance initiative. There are 
also  immense  opportunities  for  Islamic  finance  to  leverage  on  the  productive  potential  of 
small medium enterprises (SMEs) through greater application of equity-based structures in 
such financing structures. There is seemingly a natural fit between Islamic finance and SMEs 
financing in that both strongly promote entrepreneurship and value-creating activities. 
The  third  value  proposition  of  Islamic  finance  refers  to  its  emergence  as  new  vehicle  in 
bridging  economies  and  contributing  to  increasing  the  financial  linkages,  in  particular,  the 
emerging  markets.  Previously  Islamic  finance  was  domestic  centric.  It  is  now  increasingly 
providing financial solutions for cross border trade and investment. Progressive liberalisation 
has  facilitated  the  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance.  This  has  been  reinforced  by  the 
dynamic  pace  of  innovation  in  Islamic  finance  that  has  widened  the  range  of  financial 
products and services. This internalization process has thus contributed to the more efficient 
allocation of funds across borders from centres with surplus funds to regions with investment 
opportunities and to the diversification of risks. 
The  now  more  developed  Islamic  financial  markets  have  been  particularly  instrumental  in 
intermediating  such funds.  Sukuk  has  been  a major  driving force  behind  this  development 
since  its  emergence as an  important  platform for  international fund raising  and  investment 
activities that are generating increased cross border flows. The international dimension of the 
sukuk market has now evolved on many fronts – It has seen the participation of issuers and 
investors  across  continents  with  sukuk  origination  centres  transcending  the  issuers’  own 
home countries. The total global sukuk outstanding now domiciles in 20 countries and more 
recently, there has also been a growing trend for multi-currency sukuk issuances. The sukuk 
market continues to solidify its position as a leading segment of growth for Islamic finance. Its 
strong performance is driven by its unique value proposition to both issuers and investors. 
For investors, it has now become a new asset class with orientation towards real underlying 
assets  in  which  the  issuer  cannot  leverage  in  excess  of the  asset  value  and  in  which,  the 
financing must be channeled towards productive purposes. For the issuers, sukuk financing 
provides a competitive avenue for fund raising and access to a wider investor base of both 
Islamic  and  conventional,  including  the  growing  investor  base  looking  for  a  socially-
responsible or ethical investment. 
Moving  forward,  there  are  three  key  imperatives  that  will  determine  the  ability  of  Islamic 
finance to further enhance its value proposition for the global economy. First, is the evolution 
of  the  legal  framework  that  is  facilitative  to  the  continuing  market  evolution  and  the 
internationalization of Islamic finance. Whilst the global financial crisis has provided Islamic 
finance with a unique opportunity in the international financial system, the future success of 
the  industry  moving  forward,  will  also  depend  on  its  continuing  ability  to  innovate  more 
indigenous  shariah-based  instruments  and  evolve  business  models  that  strengthen  the 
nexus of Islamic finance with the real economy. An essential part of the overall infrastructure 
therefore is an effective legal framework to provide an enabling environment that will enforce 
the legality of contracts according to the Shariah and the regulatory treatment of the new and 
innovative Islamic financial solutions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While  Islamic  finance  practitioners  and  scholars  continue  to  draw  from  the  source  of  fiqh 
muamalat to create new and innovative instruments, the legal framework needs to be further 
strengthened to  ensure alignment  with  new  market  developments. This is  to  ensure that  it 
continues  to  lend  certainty  and  predictability  to  the  innovative  products  and  financial 
transactions. Furthermore, as Islamic financial activities venture beyond national boundaries, 
the development of legal frameworks that is facilitative of cross-border transactions is pivotal. 
There has to be court recognition and acceptance of the Islamic contracts within the common 
and civil law systems, with a common approach of interpreting the rights of the contracting 
parties based on Shariah principles, in particular for cross-border transactions. 
Malaysia  has  taken  the  approach  to  address  this  imperative  via  the  Law  Harmonisation 
Committee which was established in 2010. As part of its mandate, the Committee undertakes 
an objective review on the legislation and proposes the necessary amendments on existing 
Malaysian  laws  which  are  applicable  to  execute  the  whole  chain  of  Islamic  financial 
practices.  Since  its  inception,  the  Law  Harmonisation  Committee  has  reviewed  seventeen 
(17)  laws  in  Malaysia  and  identified  the  areas  that  require  legislative  amendments  so  that 
Islamic  financial  transactions  can  be  conducted  in  the  most  legally  efficient  manner.  The 
work  of  the  Committee  will  continue  to  remain  relevant  as  the  Islamic  financial  markets 
continue  to  expand  and  develop  new  products  and  business  models. This  mandate  of  the 
Committee will not only ensure that non-Shariah compliant elements in the legal provisions 
are  harmonised,  it  will  also  ensure  that  our  laws  are  facilitative  to  Islamic  financial 
transactions. 
Another  major  milestone  in  Malaysia,  is  the  new  legal  framework  for  Islamic  banking  and 
takaful, which is currently undergoing the legislative process towards its enactment. This new 
legal framework, will not only streamline the legal requirements across sectors, but will also 
ensure that the law is reflective of the nature and features of Shariah contracts and that the 
degree of regulation is commensurate with the level of risks that Islamic financial institutions, 
markets and products pose to the overall financial system. The greater clarity on the legal 
and prudential requirements underpinned by Shariah principles will enable participants of the 
Islamic  financial  system  to  align  to  their  practices  and  expectations  accordingly  when 
undertaking Islamic financial business and transactions. 
The second imperative relates to the continuous effort to develop the key resources of the 
industry,  by  expanding  and  building  new  capabilities  needed  to  support  its  growth  and 
development. There is a critical need to upskill the leadership and technical competency of 
talents  given  the  increasing  complexity  of  the  industry.  With  broader  scope,  scale  and 
internationalization, the demands on the capability of talents in Islamic finance industry can 
only increase. It will require more internationally oriented management teams that have the 
necessary  international  exposure  and  orientation.  In  addition  to  education  and  research  to 
build the expertise in Islamic finance, a more structured framework for capacity-building that 
includes other key resources including the investment in technology for industry development 
is also needed. 
Such a coordinated effort in capacity-building has been initiated by the Islamic Development 
Bank (IDB) in support of its member countries in the development of Islamic finance. This is 
being  undertaken  through  the  IDB’s  Member  Country  Partnership  Strategy  (MCPS) 
programme. Indeed, in a world of increasing interconnectedness, there is a need for such a 
strategic  approach  to  capacity-building  through  cross-border  cooperation  for  the  mutual 
benefit of the members so that growth and development of the industry can be collectively 
strengthened. 
Finally,  the  third  imperative  is  to  accord  importance  to  mutual  recognition  of  Shariah 
interpretations across jurisdictions and thus contribute towards greater international financial 
integration.  A  critical  factor  that  will  support  this  process  pertains  to  the  need  to  enhance 
awareness in respect of the justifications underlying the Shariah resolutions in the industry. 
To achieve this greater awareness will require both openness on the grounds for the rulings 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  in-depth  research  on  the  basis  of  such  grounds.  A  recent  study  conducted  by  the 
International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  (ISRA)  on  fatwas  of  Shariah 
boards  in  the  Asian  region  and  the  GCC  countries  reveals  that,  contrary  to  the  popular 
perception,  there  are more  similarities  than  differences  in  Shariah  resolutions  between  the 
two regions. The study by ISRA however further indicates that there is a lack of awareness 
on  the  Shariah  justifications  to  most  of  the  resolutions  being  reviewed.  This  awareness  is 
essential  to  pave  the  way  towards  greater  understanding  and  nurturing  of  mutual  respect. 
Whilst there are some initiatives to enhance the greater awareness on the juristic reasoning 
in Islamic finance, to facilitate greater mutual recognition, it will require greater transparency 
in the Shariah rulings in addition to constructive dialogue on the grounds of such rulings. 
With the efforts of the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the Islamic Financial Services Board 
(IFSB)  and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
(AAIOFI),  it  has  facilitated  greater  cross-border  engagement  among  practitioners  and 
Shariah  scholars.  In  turn  this  has  contributed  to  a  greater  understanding  on  issues  and 
challenges  faced  by  the  industry  and  the  progressive  convergence  of  Shariah  views  and 
rulings. More such international collaborative  work and engagement would further facilitate 
this harmonization process. 
To  navigate  amidst  turbulent  seas  to  arrive  at  the  new  frontier  of  opportunities  in  Islamic 
finance, there is a need for the industry to build on its strengths and achievements thus far, in 
the pursuit to realize the distinctive value that Islamic finance brings to the global economy. 
Indeed,  Islamic  finance  needs  to  leverage  on  its  inherent  strengths  and  demonstrate 
leadership in the real economic agenda and contribute towards global economic prosperity 
and stability.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
