Luis M Linde: Central bank monetary policy, regulatory and supervisory 
measures 
Closing remarks by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the V International 
Banking Conference/Grupo Santander, Madrid, 14 November 2012. 
 Let  me  first  thank  Banco  Santander,  its  Chairman  Emilio  Botín  and  its  Chief  Executive 
Officer,  Alfredo  Sáez,  for  inviting  me  to  the  closure  of  this  fifth  International  Banking 
Conference. 
The first of these annual conferences was held in 2008. A review of the matters addressed 
that year, which now seems distant, and those on the agenda today, reveals a high degree of 
coincidence.  
We  are  still  in  the  management  of  the  post-crisis  and  the  economic  situation  is,  in  some 
respects, worse than it was five years ago. It is worse in terms of growth or, at least, growth 
prospects, and worse in terms of unemployment or stock market capitalisation.  
The  financial  crisis,  which  began  in  2007  in  the  United  States  and  took  on  a  systemic 
dimension  in  2008,  following  the  Lehman  Brothers  debacle,  has  confronted  the  developed 
countries’ central banks with great challenges. 
I  wish  to  refer  to  the  central  banks’  response  in  two  specific  areas.  Firstly,  in  respect  of 
monetary policy. And secondly, in the area of banking regulation and supervision.  
Central bank measures in the monetary area 
In  the  conventional  monetary  policy  domain,  since  there  was  no  inflationary  risk  over  the 
relevant horizon owing to the deterioration of the economic outlook, the central banks’ priority 
has been preventing the disinflationary process in the Western economies from translating 
into  deflation.  Back  in  October  2008,  in  a  concerted  move  the  central  banks  of  the  main 
economics cut interest rates by 50 basis points, and this was followed by further cuts in late 
2008  and  early  2009.  Currently,  after  an  unprecedented  monetary  impulse,  rates  stand  at 
one of the lowest points in history. 
The narrowing of the room for manoeuvre for conventional monetary policy measures gave a 
leading  role  to  liquidity-provision  policies  and  the  implementation  of  exceptional  or 
non-conventional  measures,  aimed  at  ensuring  the  transmission  of  interest  rate  cuts  to 
agents’ financial costs and to facilitating their access to funding.  
Since the crisis began in August 2007, there have been numerous innovations in monetary 
policy implementation. These have involved increasing the number of institutions with access 
to  central  bank  funding;  extending  the  collateral  eligible  in  monetary  policy  operations; 
lengthening  the  maturities  at  which  liquidity  was  supplied  to  the  market;  and  public  and 
private asset-purchase programmes (or loans to the private sector for such purchases). As a 
result,  there  has  been  an  unprecedented  expansion  in  the  balance  sheets  of  the  central 
banks concerned, and a substantial change in the composition of their assets.  
Central  bank  responses  have  also  tended  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  structure  of  the 
respective financial systems, and to the specific dysfunctions and tensions. For instance, the 
fact that the banking sector plays a predominant role in channelling credit in the euro area 
economy — compared with the Anglo-Saxon model which is underpinned to a greater extent 
by  the  capital  market  —  was  from  the  outset  a  distinguishing  feature  in  the  design  of  the 
ECB’s  response.  Also,  set  against  the  strategies  deployed  by  the  Federal  Reserve  or  the 
Bank of England, based principally on “quantitative easing”, the Eurosystem’s response has 
been  more  complex  over  time,  adapting  itself  to  the  difficulties  that  have  arisen  at  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
different stages of the euro area crisis, though seeking always to act on the segments of the 
transmission monetary policy mechanism that were seen to be most impaired.  
The  perception  that  the  interbank  market  had  ceased  to  operate  as  an  efficient  liquidity 
distribution  mechanism  between  banks  meant  that  the  liquidity-provision  policy  had  to 
become  more  flexible.  And,  when  the  crisis  worsened  in  September  2008,  far-reaching 
changes had to be made to the monetary policy operational framework, to allow the ECB to 
meet  the  system’s  gross  liquidity  needs,  with  a  substantial  expansion  of  the  size  of  its 
balance sheet.  
Later, when the financial crisis became one of sovereign debt, and most especially, when it 
turned  systemic  in the summer  of  2011, the  ECB  had  to  approve further  non-conventional 
measures  that  reinforced  its  position  as  intermediary  in  the  distribution  of  liquidity.  It 
substantially  lengthened  the  horizon  of  its  loans,  up  to  three  years,  when  it  injected  more 
than €1 billion in gross terms in two auctions in December 2011 and February 2012. 
In  sum,  the  financial  crisis  compelled  central  banks  to  adopt,  along  with  robust  monetary 
policy  responses,  exceptional  measures  and  an  unprecedented  expansion  in  their  balance 
sheets. Central banks have been decisive in preventing, even though not always with total 
success, the deflationary risks that characterised other major financial crises in the past.  
Measures in the regulatory and supervisory areas 
The financial crisis has triggered fundamental changes in the international financial system’s 
regulatory architecture.  
Since the first G20 meeting in November 2008 in Washington, work has advanced on many 
fronts.  I  shall  refer  to  two  in  particular.  First,  the  changes  in  the  prudential  regulation  of 
solvency, the move from Basel II to Basel III. And second, the progress in what has become 
known as macroprudential supervision. 
As  we  know,  the  financial  crisis  especially  affected  banks  and,  in  particular,  certain  global 
systemic  banks.  The  response  of  international  banking  regulators  has  had  to  be 
commensurate with the dangers of the crisis and with the cost of the crisis to taxpayers.  
Basel III is a complex set of measures that attempts to respond to the regulatory failings that 
the crisis highlighted. First, many banks found themselves at the start of the crisis with low 
levels  of  capital.  Second,  this  same  capital  had  an  excessive  proportion  of  hybrid 
instruments, with a limited or, at least, uncertain loss-absorption capacity. Third, and finally, 
the procyclicality of Basel II meant there was a trade-off between capital requirements and 
growth, which could push banks to lessen the risk they assume, with the subsequent adverse 
impact on credit and the economy.  
Basel III has increased the minimum level of core capital, the highest-quality capital, to 4.5% 
from 2% under Basel II. On top of this minimum, Basel III has added a capital conservation 
buffer of 2.5% and established a connection between banks’ dividend policy and compliance 
with this minimum capital level. Accordingly, to avoid any interference by the supervisor in 
their dividend policy, banks must at all times hold a minimum level of top-quality capital of 
7%. 
For the first time, too, Basel III has added a macroprudential component to capital levels. The 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  could  entail  an  additional  capital  requirement  of  up  to  2.5%. 
Building up a capital buffer in good times, with the aim of depleting it in not so prosperous 
times, is a macroprudential mechanism that will help reduce the contraction of credit when 
there  is  a  recession,  and  temper  the  growth  of  credit  in  upturns.  However,  calibrating  the 
buffer is no easy task.  
As governor of the Banco de España, allow me to point out how, in its economic significance, 
this countercyclical buffer is close to the so-called “dynamic provisions” the Banco de España 
established more than 10 years ago — with, I should say, less success than, we now know, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
would have been optimal. We believe this countercyclical buffer is a good instrument and we 
advocate its use as a new macroprudential instrument.  
The fact that many ailing banks have been systemic banks has been another consideration 
influencing  supervisors’  stance  as  to  what  the  response  to  the  crisis  should  be. 
Consequently,  another  significant  change  in  banking  regulation  arrangements  is  to  set  in 
place  a  capital  surcharge  for  global  systemic  important  banks  (GSIBs).  A  global  important 
bank  is  not  only  a  large  bank.  It  is  a  major  bank  with  significant  cross-border  activity,  a 
complex bank in terms of its structure, and an interconnected bank that is not liable to be 
replaced in certain markets.  
Regarding  global  systemic  important  banks,  I  should  also  mention  the  so-called  “recovery 
and  resolution  plans”.  It  is  important  to  highlight  the  value  of  this  instrument  in  reducing 
systemic  risk  and  also  a  formula  for  taking  into  account  differences  between  business 
models in regulation and supervision. 
One  of  the final  components  of  Basel  III  is  the  leverage  ratio,  which  should  be  seen  as  a 
complement  to  the  risk-based  regulatory  framework.  Its  primary  aim  is  to  respond  to  the 
underpricing  which  may  exists  in  the  model-based  calculation  of  risk,  in  particular  trading 
book risk. 
Basel III has entailed a considerable effort of convergence, at least regarding the calculation 
of  the  capital  ratio  numerator.  However,  we  should  strive  to  achieve  greater  convergence 
also in the calculation of the denominator. Some analysts and regulators, and some banks 
too, have pointed out that there are differences in the calculation of risk-weighted assets that 
are not the result solely and exclusively of differences in levels of risk. It would be frustrating 
if  all  efforts  to  strengthen  capital  levels  were  weakened  by  excessive  disparities  in  the 
calculation of risk-weighted assets across different banks and countries.  
Lying outside the Basel III framework are, finally, the possible structural reform of banking 
models, where we already have rules, such as the so-called Volcker Rule; proposals whose 
implementation  is  under  way,  such  as  those  of  the  Vickers  Commission  in  the  United 
Kingdom; and the more recent proposals by the European Union’s Experts Group, chaired by 
my  colleague  Erkki  Liikanen.  All  these  measures  or  proposals  come  down  to  different 
formulas to separate the riskiest banking activities, from the more traditional and less risky 
ones. The differences between Volcker, Vickers and Liikanen are in the formula for achieving 
this segregation and in its degree of complexity. This will never be a simple matter, given the 
need  for  banks,  even  those  with  simple  business  models,  to  pursue  some  trading  activity 
linked to the services offered to their customers. However, the group chaired by Governor 
Liikanen has come out with the simplest proposal. 
The  second  element  of  the  reform  of  the  regulatory  framework  is  that  of  macroprudential 
supervision. 
While  microprudential  supervision  concerns  itself  with  individually  considered  financial 
institutions,  macroprudential  supervision  contributes  to  financial  stability  by  identifying, 
monitoring and mitigating the risks that may affect the financial system as a whole.  
While  such  a  concept may  not  be  entirely  novel,  this  crisis  has  underlined  the  absence of 
macroprudential  authorities  with  well-defined  mandates  in  this  field  and  clearly  defined 
intervention  instruments.  The  main  advanced  economies  have  set  up  macroprudential 
authorities such as the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) in the United States and, 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Bank  of  England’s  Financial  Policy  Committee.  I  would  just 
mention  that  at  the  Banco  de  España,  too,  we  have  begun  work  to  accommodate  our 
organisational structures to the needs of the macroprudential approach.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
