Andreas Dombret: Restoring confidence in the financial system 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Generation Forum “Communication across generations – regaining trust 
in banking”, Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  financial  system  is  more  resistant  today  than  it  was  a  few  years  ago.  The  G20  have 
launched a wide range of reforms – from financial institutions to financial markets to financial 
instruments.  Banks  have  substantially  improved  their  resilience  by  increasing  both  their 
capital and liquidity. Work is under way to strengthen oversight and regulation of the shadow 
banking system. Derivative markets are being transformed to reduce systemic risks. 
Yet the financial system is still not as safe as it should be. More steps are necessary. In my 
short remarks, I will point out three of these steps: first, ending too big to fail; second, paying 
greater attention to the consistency of regulation; and finally, reviving individual responsibility. 
Ending too big to fail 
2. 
Let me turn to the first of my theses. 
Financial  sector  reform  has  focused  on  protecting  the  public  from  having  to  pay  for  the 
mistakes  of  financial  institutions  –  and  quite  rightly  so.  Too  often,  we  have  answered  the 
failure of financial institutions by bailing them out, using taxpayers’ money. 
Unfortunately, despite some progress, too big to fail is still with us. There is still the risk that 
financial institutions that are particular large, complex, interconnected or globally active are in 
a position to jeopardise the entire financial system. 
Separating banking functions? 
2.1 
So what can be done to overcome too big to fail? Some believe that introducing a system of 
separated  banking  functions  –  in  other  words,  divorcing  deposit-taking  and  lending  from 
proprietary trading and investment banking – is the way forward. YetI am questioning if such 
a system can truly fulfil all the hopes invested in it. Let me explain. 
The  main  argument  in  favour  of  separating  banking  functions  is  to  avoid  contagion. 
Separating deposit-taking and lending from capital market transactions is said to prevent a 
crisis from spilling from one of the areas of business into the other. This would allow “good” 
banks  to  fulfil  the  important  task  of  supplying  the  real  economy  with  credit  while  being 
shielded from risks inherent in investment banking. 
Banks, however, that engage in risky transactions unrelated to the real economy, would be 
excluded from deposit insurance schemes. If things went wrong, they would not be rescued 
at taxpayers’ expense. Thus, the separation could protect depositors and, at the same time, 
would  reduce  moral  hazard  as  it  would  become  more  difficult  to  finance  risky  areas  of 
business through insured deposits. 
In  addition,  the  separation  of  business  areas  could  simplify  group  structures,  thereby 
counteracting incentive and information problems which increase disproportionately with the 
size of banks. This would make banks more transparent and easier to manage, benefiting 
supervisory boards and management as well as supervisory authorities. 
However,  separating  banking  functions  will  not  prevent  future  banking  crises.  Remember 
that, during the financial crisis, governments had to save many specialised banks in order to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
prevent systemic disruptions. The Lehman bankruptcy caused precisely such contagion, but 
not  because  customer  deposits  were  at  risk.  Rather,  it  had  many  connections  to  other 
financial  institutions  including,  above  all,  many  counterparties  in  derivative  transactions. 
Essentially the same applied to AIG which was not even a bank at all, but an insurer. 
Even if there were a clean organisational separation, the interconnectedness of the financial 
sector and the resulting systemic importance of individual institutions would not be entirely 
eliminated.  Economic  linkages  would  remain.  Financial  institutions  are  linked  not  only 
through  direct  business  relationships,  but  also  indirectly  through  payment  and  securities 
settlement systems. 
It is also difficult to decide how and where to draw the line between “good” and “not so good”. 
The  boundaries  between  customer  business,  hedging  transactions,  market  making  and 
proprietary trading are very much fluid. And problems in drawing clear boundaries generally 
result in loopholes and incentives for regulatory arbitrage. We should not neglect the danger 
of  transactions  and  risks  being  shifted  from  the  banking  sector  to  areas  which  are  less 
closely monitored and regulated, such as, for example, the transfer of proprietary trading to 
hedge funds. 
All in all, I do not see a clear case for separating banking functions. In other words, I do not 
believe this to be the first-best solution. 
Introducing credible resolution regimes 
2.2 
Given  these  difficulties, what  else  can  be  done to  end too  big to fail?  For  me, rather than 
intervening in financial institutions’ business structures, the preferable regulatory solution is 
the credible threat of an orderly market exit. And the decisive factor here, as always when it 
comes to money and finances, is credibility. Only the credible threat that even systemically 
important  financial  institutions  may  exit  the  market,  and  that  this  can  be  executed  in  an 
orderly fashion, will restore trust in the rules of the game.  
Unfortunately, the crisis has revealed a significant lack of suitable instruments for effectively 
dealing with failing financial institutions. Existing insolvency laws have proven inadequate in 
many countries, especially when it comes to firms that operate on a global level. Thus, new 
resolution tools, and credible tools at that, are needed. 
Some  progress  has  already  been  achieved  in  this  regard.  A  year  ago,  the  G20  Leaders 
endorsed a new international standard: the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes 
for Financial Institutions. These Key Attributes set out for the first time essential features of 
national resolution regimes on a global level. For instance, in future every G20 country is to 
entrust  restructuring  and  resolution  functions  to  appointed  authorities.  So-called  Crisis 
Management  Groups  are  already  in  place  for  nearly  every  global  systemically  important 
financial  institution.  Recovery  and  resolution  planning  will  become  mandatory  for  both 
financial  institutions  and  authorities.  In  addition,  firm-specific,  cross-border  cooperation 
agreements are to be put in place, setting out roles and responsibilities of home and host 
authorities. 
The  Key  Attributes  represent  quite  a  step  forward.  Implementing  them  will  gradually  align 
national  resolution  regimes,  thus  ensuring  smooth  interaction  between  the  different 
frameworks.  I  am  hopeful  that  this  will  significantly  curtail  financial  institutions’  ability  to 
blackmail  the  taxpayer.  It  is  now  up  to  governments  to  transpose  the  Key  Attributes  into 
national law and legislation. In Europe, the draft directive for the restructuring and resolution 
of  credit  institutions  and  securities  firms,  which  was  published  in  June  by  the  EU 
Commission,  is  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction. It  is  necessary  to  continue  on  this 
path. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Paying greater attention to consistency 
3. 
When  setting  the  rules  for  the  financial  system,  one  main  challenge  is  that  regulation  has 
been geared towards a sector-specific approach. This is reflected, for example, in the way 
regulatory standards and principles applying to the banking, insurance and securities sectors 
have  developed  largely  independently  of  one  another.  However,  this  entails  the  danger  of 
losing sight of the financial system as a whole. 
We need to be aware of this risk and focus our attention more on the systemic aspects of 
regulation.  One  of  the  most  important  reasons  for  this  is  the  prevention  of  regulatory 
arbitrage. This applies not just to the relocation of business activities from one jurisdiction to 
another, but also to shifts between different sectors of the financial system. For instance, as 
already  mentioned,  tightening  banking  regulations  may  well  push  activities  towards  the 
shadow banking system. 
Besides regulatory arbitrage, we must also pay attention to the cumulative effects of, and the 
interplay between, individual regulatory initiatives. Where there is a lack of consistency there 
is  a  danger  that  different  measures  may  create  conflicting  incentives  or  may  even  cause 
countervailing  effects.  This  then  may  diminish,  or  even  completely  prevent,  the  desired 
effects  of  new  rules.  Take,  for  example,  the  interplay  between  the  Capital  Requirements 
Directive/Capital  Requirements  Regulation,  which  serve  to  implement  the  Basel  III rules  in 
Europe, and Solvency II: the former seeks, among other things, to place bank funding on a 
more  stable,  long-term  basis.  However,  Solvency  II  may,  under  certain  circumstances, 
benefit short-dated bonds, impacting insurers’ asset allocation and thus banks’ funding costs. 
Implementing Basel III 
4. 
Ensuring  consistency  clearly  calls  for  intensive  cross-border  cooperation.  This  holds 
especially true as the reform process is shifting from policy development to implementation. 
Countries must live up to their commitments and ensure the timely and globally consistent 
implementation of agreed policies. This applies, above all, to Basel III, which is without doubt 
the central achievement of our reform efforts. Although it has become apparent that some 
countries  are  having  difficulties  sticking  to  the  timetable,  I  urge  all  authorities  involved  to 
implement the framework as internationally agreed. 
Recently,  there  has  been  a  somewhat  disconcerting  discussion  about  the  perceived 
shortcomings  of  Basel  III.  Some  argue  that  it  is  not  enough.  Others  argue  that  it  is  too 
complex. Yet, neither of these criticisms is convincing. First, one clear lesson from the crisis 
is  that  banks’  risk  absorbing  capacity  was  way  too  low.  Therefore,  Basel  III  substantially 
raises capital requirements, reducing the probability of bank failures and the associated risks 
to financial stability and to taxpayers. 
Second, while risk measurement will never be perfect, simplicity can sometimes come at a 
cost, too. Operating exclusively on a simple non-risk-based ratio may counteract one of the 
Basel 
risk-taking  means  higher  capital 
requirements. Having said this, I fully agree to the leverage ratio’s overall intention which is 
to  deliver  a  simple,  transparent  and  credible  ratio,  complementing  the  risk-based  capital 
requirements – and not replacing them. It should just serve as a backstop. 
There is no alternative to implementing Basel III on a global scale. In particular, I call on my 
colleagues in the US not to unexpectedly question the whole framework in the 11th hour – 
after taking part in its negotiation during the entire process. Nobody would understand why 
the largest financial market in the world suddenly  were to go its own way on capital rules. 
Every country must absolutely avoid seeking advantages by watering down, or by reluctantly 
implementing agreed reforms. Such a policy would only lead to new tensions in the financial 
markets during a time of anyhow increased stress. We simply cannot afford going down this 
route. 
framework’s  overarching  principles:  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Reviving individual responsibility 
5. 
The  crisis  has  opened  our  eyes  to  an  undue  reliance  on  the  market  that  has  sometimes 
prevailed. Confidence in the financial system will only return if we improve the rules of the 
game.  Yet,  regulation  can  and  will  never  catch  everything.  It  can  only  put  in  place  a 
consistent  and  reliable  framework  in  which  financial  transactions  take  place,  and  try  to 
prevent  market  forces  from  getting  out  of  control.  This  does  not  mean  simply  banning 
undesired activities and stopping market processes. Statism and dirigism are, by no means, 
the right path to take. 
Market  participants  themselves  must  do  their  part  to  strengthen  financial  stability.  This 
implies,  above  all,  returning  to  a  founding  principle  of  social  market  economy:  individual 
responsibility.  Those  who  take  risks  must  not  only  reap  the  benefits  but  also  face  the 
consequences. The possibility of loss and default is a constitutive element of any functioning 
market economy – and financial markets cannot, and must not, be an exception to this. That 
is  why it is so important that all financial institutions are able to exit the market in case of 
insolvency without impairing financial stability. And without using taxpayers’ money. 
Reviving  individual  responsibility  requires  a  change  in  behaviour  and  a  change  in  culture 
within the financial sector. The manipulation of LIBOR is just one shocking example for this. 
Bad attitude cannot be fixed by a few new rules. Nevertheless, a lot has already been set in 
motion.  Banks  are  now  seeing  themselves  more  as  servants  to  the  real  economy.  Many 
move away from unrestrained pre-crisis profit targets. They are reconsidering their business 
models as well, focusing on retail and corporate banking. 
Remuneration  practices in  the  financial  sector  are  also  slowly,  but  surely  changing for  the 
better. There is no disputing that mismanaged remuneration systems helped cause the crisis. 
Asymmetries  in  terms  of  risk  and  reward  led  to  short-termism  and  excessive  risk-taking. 
Remuneration  needs  to  be  aligned  to  prudent  risk-taking  and  be  based  on  sustainable 
creation of value, rather than on short-term earnings. Don’t get me wrong: good work needs 
to  be  rewarded  with  good  money.  Yet  to  be  good,  work  has  to  be  sustainable  and 
responsible. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Let me sum up: 
First, ending too big to fail is not everything. But without ending too big to fail, all comes to 
nothing. Rather than intervening in financial institutions’ business structures, I prefer credible 
resolution systems. 
Second, while setting the rules of the game, we must take on a more systemic perspective, 
paying  attention  to  regulatory  arbitrage  and  the  interplay  between  individual  reforms. 
Countries  need  to  implement  agreed  policies  consistently  and  on  schedule,  including  in 
particular Basel III. 
Finally, we have to return to individual responsibility: those who take risks may well reap the 
benefits but must also face the consequences. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
