Choongsoo Kim: Strengthening the resilience of the financial system in 
Asia and the Pacific 
Welcome remarks by Dr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the BOK-BIS 
Roundtable on “Strengthening the resilience of the financial system in Asia and the Pacific”, 
Hong Kong SAR, 10–11 December 2012. 
 Greetings 
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  I  bid  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participating  in  the  BOK-BIS 
Roundtable  on  Financial  Markets.  Our  gratitude  goes  in  particular  to  those  giving 
presentations and the BIS as the co-host. 
Currently, the world economy has not yet gained traction amid the prevailing high degree of 
uncertainty, not having completely broken free from the aftershocks of the Global Financial 
Crisis and it is now facing the euro area sovereign debt crisis and the risks of the U.S. fiscal 
cliff. When  we  turn  our  eyes  to  the  Asia-Pacific,  economies  closely  linked  with  China  in  a 
supply  chain  are  on  the  alert  for  the  spillovers  to  them  depending  upon  the  direction  the 
Chinese  economy  takes,1  and  some  economies  are  keen  to  see  a  soft-landing  of  their 
household debt and real estate prices. In addition, emerging market economies in Asia and 
the  Pacific  are  making  various  efforts  to  prevent  advanced  countries’  crisis  response 
measures  including  QE  and  international  financial  market  unrest  from  causing  excessive 
capital flows and consequential commodity price increases and the exchange rate volatility. 
At this critical juncture, I think it is most timely that this meeting is being held as it sets out to 
examine  financial  system  resilience  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  and  to  find  measures  to 
strengthen it. 
Seizing  this  opportunity,  I  would  like  to  give  you  my  thoughts  on  the  need  to  strengthen 
regional financial integration and other policy tasks such as maintaining financial stability in 
order to boost the resilience of the financial system in Asia and the Pacific. 
Regional financial integration in Asia and the Pacific and financial system resilience 
Countries in Asia and the Pacific and, above all, financial markets in emerging economies 
show  very  high  beta,  namely  sensitivity,  to  global  shocks  taking  place  in  systemically 
important  economies  such  as  the  U.S.  and  Germany.2  The  real  economy’s  resilience  in 
emerging  market  economies  including  those  in  Asia,  in  contrast,  is  analyzed  as  having 
increased  greatly  over  the  past  ten  years3  and,  unlike  advanced  economies,  emerging 
market economies have kept up relatively high growth rates since the Global Financial Crisis. 
The fact that the resilience of the financial markets in Asia and the Pacific does not match 
that of the real economy seems to be because the degree of regional financial integration is 
relatively low compared to that of trade integration, in other words, real integration. While the 
share of regional trade in total trades in Asia and the Pacific, by the way, in my speech this 
morning,  Asia  and  the  Pacific  refer  to  12  ACC  members  of  the  region,  has  generally 
maintained  a  high  level  of  around  49%  for  the  past  ten  years,  the  degree  of  capital 
integration is low, with the share of regional portfolio investment running at only around 10%. 
                                                
1  Ahuja and Nabar (2012). 
2  Elekdag et al. (2012). 
3 
IMF (2012b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Consequently, at a time of shocks external to the region like the Global Financial Crisis, the 
real sector showed relatively high resilience thanks to its high regional dependence, but the 
financial  sector  even  became  an  innocent  bystander  due  to  its  heavy  extra-regional 
dependence.  More  specifically,  when  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  broke  out,  financial 
institutions in the US and the euro area embarked on massive deleveraging. Hence Asia and 
the Pacific experienced large scale capital outflows, which were unrelated to pull factors, and 
consequent financial market unrest. 
In this regard, one step toward enhancing the resilience of the Asia-Pacific financial system 
is  to  further  strengthen  regional  financial  integration  in  such  a  way  as  to  relieve  the 
asymmetry between the degrees of financial and real integration. The initial target level for 
strengthening financial  integration  can  be  taken  as  that  of  regional  trade  integration.  If  so, 
risk sharing with offshore regions including the U.S. and the euro area will decrease, while 
risk  sharing  through  the  Asia-Pacific  financial  system  will  increase.4  Besides  the  risk 
diversification effect in moderating offshore shocks, closer regional financial integration will 
lead to consumption smoothing in regional economies, a typical effect of financial integration, 
and will also contribute to the easing of global imbalances and the development of regional 
financial markets. 
In  the  course  of  the  euro  area  crisis,  the  Asia-Pacific  is  actually  enjoying  certain  positive 
effects ― its financial system has become more stable along with a rise in regional financial 
transaction.  This  appears  attributable  to  the  fact  that,  while  European  banks  have 
deleveraged  out  of  Asian  emerging  market  economies,  regional  banks,  such  as  those  of 
Japan and Australia, have stepped up their lending to regional emerging market economies, 
which has helped ease the shocks.5 
Meanwhile,  the  Asia-Pacific  seems  to  be  well  placed  to  a  double  harvest  in  terms  of  the 
positive  effects  from  the  progress  of  regional  financial  integration.  First,  since  regional 
economies  show  large  differences,  for  example  in  terms  of  economic  development  status, 
population aging and the degree of financial market development, the wide diversity within 
the  region  makes  for  possible  complementary  financial  transactions  within  the  region.  For 
instance, if an aged country with a high degree of capital accumulation and a low growth rate 
invests  in  a  country  with  a  younger  demographic  structure  and  showing  relatively  strong 
growth,  benefits  accrue  to  both  parties,6  such  as  improving  profitability  and  the  raising  of 
required funds. 
We  need  to  set  the  methods  and  appropriate  degree  of  financial  integration  in  the 
Asia-Pacific, bearing in mind the lessons from the Global Financial Crisis and the latest ones 
from  the  euro  area.  The  Global  Financial  Crisis  highlighted  the  danger  of  the  excessive 
financial  integration  of  advanced  economies,  including  the  U.S.  and  European  countries,7 
and the euro area crisis was attributable to the serious internal imbalances accumulated by 
financial integration8 that was blind to the differences in industrial competitiveness within the 
region. The degree of regional financial integration should therefore be set within a level at 
which  the  positive  effects,  such  as  risk  diversification  and  sharing,  are  not  offset  by  the 
negative effects from spillovers. Furthermore, just as a variety of species helps reduce the 
possibility  of  the  collapse  of  an  ecosystem,9  financial  integration  in  the  Asia-Pacific  that 
                                                
4  Rungcharoenkitkul (2011). 
5  McGuire and Rixtel (2012). 
6  Jin and Jokish (2011). 
7  Aizenman et al. (2011). 
8  Carton and Herve (2012). 
9  Haldane (2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recognizes and makes the most of the diversity of regional economies will further strengthen 
financial system stability. 
Moreover, since the Asia-Pacific accounts for 30 percent of total global GDP and 46 percent 
of  total  global  population  in  2012,  respectively,  and  includes  economies  with  developed 
financial  markets  such  as  Japan,  Australia,  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong  SAR,  the  region  is 
fully capable of developing its own regional financial markets. 
Policy tasks for financial stability in the Asian and Pacific region 
After undergoing the Asian Financial Crisis from 1997 to 1998, Asian emerging economies, 
while  proceeding  with  capital  account  liberalization,  improved  the  resilience  of  their 
economies by individually achieving moderate inflation, a sound fiscal policy, and a current 
account surplus and building up foreign currency reserves as a first line of defense against 
crisis.10 Despite such efforts, the Global Financial Crisis brought home to us all the danger of 
surges and sudden stops. It also taught us a lesson that the interconnectedness of the global 
economy has made the Asian-Pacific financial system subject to external shocks and that the 
capacity of an isolated response by a single country has hit its limit. As I noted earlier, even 
in  advancing  regional  financial  integration  to  strengthen  its  buffer  against  external  shocks, 
the  Asian-Pacific  may  also  have  to  shoulder  a  cost  burden  as  there  would  be  heightened 
contagion effects from internal shocks. 
Therefore,  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  it  is  vital  to  build  up  organically 
functioning  multi-layered  financial  safety  nets  including  bilateral  currency  swaps,  regional 
liquidity arrangements, and IMF loans as global liquidity arrangements, and not just foreign 
currency  reserves  if  situational  needs  are  to  be  met.11  These  are  all  necessary,  since  we 
cannot  foretell  where  and  in  what  form  the  next  crisis  will  emerge  regionally  and  globally. 
Although advanced economies take a rather more reserved position on building multi-layered 
financial  safety  nets,  citing moral  hazard  and  such  like, I  believe  we  need  to focus  on the 
benefits  that  this  safety  net  would  bring  about  not  only  for  emerging  economies  but  also 
advanced economies. Having financial safety nets would indeed lower the need for emerging 
economies to accumulate foreign currency reserves due to the original sin hung around their 
necks that their local currencies are not used for international settlement. Thus in due course 
it would lead to global re-balancing. 
Meanwhile, the Asia-Pacific accounts for 55% of world foreign currency reserves, providing 
an  environment  conducive  to  strengthening  crisis  response  capacity  within  the  region 
through  bilateral  currency  swaps  or  regional  liquidity  arrangements.  One  such  regional 
financial  safety  net,  the  CMIM(Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization)  has  made  much 
progress but it is still judged in need of further improvements to serve as an effective crisis 
response.12 The scale and membership of regional financial safety nets should be enlarged in 
keeping  with  regional  trade  volumes  and  the  degree  of  regional  financial  integration. 
However,  the  euro  area  has  had  to  wrestle  with  difficulties  in  seeking  to  expand  such  of 
safety  nets  since  the  outbreak  of  its  crisis,  serving  as  a  saltatory  warning  over  which  we 
should ponder. Also, too much focus on a timely crisis response can increase moral hazard 
on  the  part  of  recipient  economies  and  investors,  on  the  other  hand,  too  strict  bailout 
conditions  can  bring  about  a  stigma  effect,  undermining  the  bailout’s  usefulness.  Thus,  a 
balanced design and effective surveillance mechanisms are crucial. 
Having  said  that,  what  is  most  important  is  that  every  individual  economy  should  be 
committed  to  making  every  effort  for  the  stability  of  its  own  financial  system.  First  of  all, 
                                                
10  IMF (2012b). 
11  Kim (2012a). 
12  Hill and Menon (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
whether financial stability is explicitly included in a central bank’s mandate or not, in view of 
the macro-finance linkage, as the central bank, it needs to prevent the build-up of excessive 
imbalances in the financial system while not detracting from price stability. Additionally, policy 
makers  should  measure  misalignments  in  asset  prices  with  alternative  indicators,  notably 
economic  agent’s  financial  leverage,  taking  the  view  that  they  are  one  source  of  systemic 
risks rather than they should simply be stabilized. Based on the results, they need to seek 
steps such as the use of macroprudential policy to curb the misalignments. Furthermore, in 
coping  with  highly  volatile  capital  flows,  an  economy  needs  to  consider  capital  flow 
managements13  which  can  help  lower  the  proportion  of  unstable  capital  flows  such  as 
short-term debt and mitigate the boom-bust cycles of capital flows. 
In today’s open global economy, however, the policy effects taken by an individual economy 
alone can be limited because the effects always spill over to other economies. Thus, policy 
coordination among economies concerned is necessary to ensure the intended policy effect. 
In  this  regard,  regional  cooperative  organizations  such  as  the  ADB,  ASEAN+3,  SEACEN, 
EMEAP and indeed this meeting are very important for policy coordination in the Asia-Pacific 
region. While we live in a global economy, we know that there is no global jurisdiction. Under 
such  circumstances,  it  is  likely  that  a  state  of  multiple  equilibria  prevails.  Good  and  bad 
equilibrium  can  coexist  for  some  time.  We  may  need  to  remember  that  an  intra-local 
equilibrium is no more than a “knife-edge equilibrium”, which is vulnerable to external shocks 
and  falls  short  of  stability  and  resilience.14  In  the  ongoing  Eurozone  crisis,  there  has  been 
injection  of  massive  capital  in  pursuit  of  intra-regional  equilibrium.  From  the  perspective of 
global equilibrium, however, for the faster recovery of world economy, capital should, by all 
the principles of economic structural adjustment, flow into economies with faster growth and 
higher productivity. As pointed out earlier, multiple local equilibria may be suboptimal rather 
than optimal given the external effects. Thus, policy coordination striving for having a global-
dimension equilibrium through the IMF, BIS, and the G20 is called for. 
Conclusions 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  revealed  that  under  excessive  financial  integration  without 
appropriate regulations and financial safety nets, crises could spread around the world with 
amazing rapidity. Currently, the Asia-Pacific is in the somewhat paradoxical situation, where 
it  needs  to  deepen  regional  financial  integration  in  order  to  heighten  financial  system 
resilience against shocks occurring outside the region. Nevertheless, the costs of that greater 
financial integration in terms of crisis contagion can be reduced by the appropriate execution 
of  macroprudential  policies  by  individual  countries  and  the  strengthening  of  multi-layered 
financial  safety  nets.  I  am  therefore  sanguine  that  our  objective  of  bolstering  Asia-Pacific 
financial resilience can be achieved. 
Past  experience  shows  that  one  region’s  economic  crisis  can  be  overcome  easily  when 
another region can lead the world economy. In the Asian Financial Crisis, the United States 
and  Europe  took  that  role,  which  helped  Asian  economies  overcome  the  crisis.  In  the 
resolution  of  the  current  crises  in  advanced  economies,  emerging  economies  whose 
potential economic growth is much higher than advanced economies similarly need to take 
the role of leading the world economy on the basis of domestic demand rather than exports. 
To put it more specifically, the size of the domestic markets of the emerging economies as 
compared to the magnitude of GDP is, however, relatively small so they cannot take up the 
slack sufficiently to lead the world economy. To overcome this limit, free trade agreements 
could be a good solution in that they can expand market size through boosting both trade 
                                                
13  IMF (2012a). 
14  Kim (2012c). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and domestic demand. In this regard, the Korea-China-Japan FTA, the negotiation of which 
just started, could be a benchmark example if it is signed in the near future.15 
In  addition,  in  the  current  global  financial  system  which  is  decentralized  without  a  global 
jurisdiction, policy coordination and information sharing through international institutions and 
cooperative organizations are of the utmost importance. For example, we should be looking 
closely at plans for the pursuit of joint research on indicators for measuring financial system 
resilience in Asia-Pacific and on ways in which it can be strengthened. In this regard I look 
forward  to  this  meeting  serving  as  productive  forum  for  wide-ranging  discussions  on  all 
aspects  of  the  resilience  of  the  Asia-Pacific  financial  system,  the  presentation  of  possible 
options and the pooling of members’ experiences. 
Thank you. 
References 
Ahuja,  Ashvin,  and  Malhar  Nabar  (2012),  “Investment-Led  Growth  in  China:  Global 
Spillovers”, IMF WP/12/267. 
Aizenman, Joshua, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donhyun Park (2011), “Capital Flows and Economic 
Growth in the Era of Financial Integration and Crisis, 1990–2010”, NBER WP No. w17502. 
Carton,  Benjamin  and  Karine  Herve  (2012),  “Euro  Area  Real  Effective  Exchange  Rate 
Misalignments”, La Lettere Du CEPII No. 319. 
Elekdag, Selim, Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul, and Yiqun Wu (2012), “The Evolution of Asian 
Financial Linkages: Key Determinants and the Role of Policy”, IMF WP/12/262. 
Haldane,  Andrew  G  (2009),  “Rethinking  the  Financial  Network”,  Speech  at  the  Financial 
Student Association, Amsterdam. 
Hill,  Hal  and  Jayant  Menon  (2012),  “Financial  Safety  Nets  in  Asia:  Genesis,  Evolution, 
Adequacy, and Way Forward”, ADBI WP No. 395. 
Jin, Keyu and Sabine Jokisch (2011), “The Impact of Demographics on Global Asset Prices: 
The Role of Trade”, Unpublished manuscript. 
Kim,  Choongsoo  (2012a), “Can  Economies from  Asia  and  Latin  America  be  the  Drivers of 
World Recovery?”, Speech at Asia-LAC High Level Economic Policy Forum. 
Kim, Choongsoo (2012b), “Evolving Regional Frameworks and Global Challenges: Korea’s 
Perspective”, Speech at The Bretton Woods Committee International Council Meeting. 
Kim, Choongsoo (2012c), New Year Speech at the Bank of Korea. 
IMF (2012a), “Liberalizing Capital Flows and Managing Outflows – Background Paper”. 
IMF  (2012b),  “Resilience  in  Emerging  Market  and  Developing  Economies:  Will  It  Last?”, 
World Economic Outlook October 2012, pp. 129–171. 
McGuire,  Patrick  and  Adrian  van  Rixtel  (2012),  “Shifting  Credit  Patterns  in  the  Emerging 
Asia-Pacific Region”, BIS Quarterly Review December 2012, Forthcoming. 
Rungcharoenkitkul,  Phurichai  (2011),  “Risk  Sharing  and  Financial  Contagion  in  Asia:  An 
Asset Price Perspective”, IMF WP/11/242.  
                                                
15  Kim (2012a). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
