Mark Carney: Release of the $20 bank note 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at the Canadian War Museum, Ottawa, Ontario, 7 November 2012. 
 On behalf of the Bank of Canada, I want to thank the Canadian War Museum for hosting this 
event. Visitors of all ages leave this building better informed about Canada’s history and our 
contributions to struggles the world over. Visitors also leave humbled, as they learn of the 
enormous sacrifices of men and women who have given so much for their country. 
The new $20 polymer bank note – which begins today to make its way into banks, stores, 
and  wallets  across  the  country  –  features  the  Canadian  National  Vimy  Memorial.  It  is 
altogether fitting  that  this  bank  note  –  the  most  widely  used  denomination  –  would  remind 
Canadians of the Battle of Vimy Ridge, which was so pivotal in our history. 
While the imagery of the new $20 bill reminds us of the past, in all other respects, the bank 
note itself represents the future. 
Safer,  cheaper,  greener  –  these  notes  are  the  product  of  innovative  technology  and 
Canadian  ingenuity.  There  is  no  other  currency  like  them.  The  unique  combination  of 
transparency,  holography  and  other  sophisticated  security  elements  makes  them  a  world 
first. 
State-of-the-art security features ensure we are staying ahead of counterfeiters and providing 
Canadians  with  bank  notes  they  can  use  with  complete  confidence.  The  bank  notes  last 
longer, at least 2.5 times longer than those made with cotton-based paper. This makes them 
more  economical  and  their  environmental  footprint  smaller.  After  they  are  removed  from 
circulation, they will be recycled here in Canada. 
As with the $50 and $100 bank notes, which were introduced into circulation over the past 
year,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  worked  with  financial  institutions  and  retailers  to  ease  the 
transition from the old to the new so that the businesses that handle cash can readily adapt. 
When people hold their first polymer $20, I hope they will take a moment to consider more 
than its face value; that they will consider the image of the Canadian National Vimy Memorial 
and reflect upon and remember the sacrifices of those who have come before us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
