Manuel Sánchez: Forces and threats to Mexico’s economic recovery 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  United 
States – Mexico Chamber of Commerce, New York, NY, 28 September 2012. 
 It  is  a  great  honor  to  be  back  at  the  Northeast  Regional  Chapter  of  the  United  States 
– Mexico Chamber of Commerce. Thank you for inviting me to share some thoughts with you 
on the recent evolution and outlook of the Mexican economy.  
Since  I  was  here  over  a  year  ago,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  Mexico  has 
strengthened,  even  surprising  on  the  upside,  slightly  exceeding  mainstream  forecasts. 
However, some risks that I exposed then still remain today, notably those related to the world 
economy,  while  others  associated  with  domestic  concerns  have  surfaced.  In  this  brief 
overview of Mexican economic conditions, I will focus on both old and new issues, including 
those regarding inflation and monetary policy in Mexico. As always, my remarks are entirely 
my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico or its 
Governing Board. 
Current economic rebound 
Since the middle of 2009, Mexico has been experiencing a process of continuous economic 
recovery. Three characteristics of the upswing are worth mentioning. First, the rebound has 
proceeded at rates that have been roughly twice as high as those observed during the first 
decade of the century, before the global crisis.1 Obviously, high growth is partly explained by 
adjustment  from  the  deep  recession  that  the  country  suffered  three  years  ago  in  the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis.  
However,  even  after  taking  the  correction  into  account,  recent  expansion  is  noteworthy. 
Specifically, on average during the first half of this year, GDP increased 4.3 percent in annual 
terms, which has contributed to bringing the economy back to the level of its long-term trend, 
as  reflected  by  conventional  estimations  that  the  output  gap  has  closed.  This  progress 
contrasts  with  economic  underperformance  relative  to  historical  standards  in  many 
developed  nations  and,  in  particular,  the  United  States,  Mexico’s  main  trading  and 
investment partner.  
Second,  the  current  upturn  has  been  balanced,  in  the  sense  that  it  has  included  all  key 
components  of  aggregate  demand,  notably,  domestic  fixed  investment  and  consumption. 
Capital formation has shown substantial rates of growth, surpassing those of consumption, 
as  typically  occurs  over  business  cycles.  Nevertheless,  and  despite  recent  signs  of 
deceleration,  during  the last  two  years  consumer  spending  has  been  increasing  at  a fairly 
stable annual rate, close to 4 percent.  
In  a  structural  sense,  the  reactivation  of  economic  activity  and  domestic  absorption  in 
particular  has  been  possible  thanks  to  Mexico’s  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  including 
contained public debt with rising maturities, moderate inflation rates, and a well-capitalized, 
provisioned and liquid banking system. Indeed, the stable macroeconomic environment has 
enabled bank lending to firms and households to support dynamic domestic investment and 
consumption.  
In the upswing, a positive feedback loop has emerged between labor market developments 
and consumer spending. Formal employment has continuously expanded, as measured by 
                                                
1  Average annual GDP growth was 2.3 percent from 2001 to 2007, and 4.6 percent from 2010 to the first half of 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  number  of  affiliates  at  the  Mexican  Social  Security  Institute  (IMSS).  Although  still 
moderately  higher  than  pre-crisis  levels,  the  total  unemployment  rate  has  been  gradually 
declining.  This  advancement  has  occurred  while  labor  force  participation  has  recently 
expanded,  the  duration  of  unemployment  has  fallen,  and  transitional  indicators  of 
employment and unemployment have improved. As a result, the total wage bill has posted 
real annual growth during the last three quarters. 
A  third  characteristic  of the  current  upturn,  which  may  explain  cyclical  developments  more 
than  any  other  factor,  is  the  extraordinary  support  provided  by  external  conditions, 
particularly  that  from  advanced  countries.  On  the  surface  this  may  sound  contradictory, 
considering  the  significant  difficulties  these  nations  have  faced  in  resolving  the  fiscal  and 
financial  problems  that  gave  rise  to  or  resulted  from  the  global  crisis.  After  all,  prolonged 
uncertainty  regarding the  effectiveness  of  corrective  measures  in  those  countries  has  long 
put a downward bias on output forecasts for many emerging economies, including Mexico, 
given its close production ties with the United States. 
Yet,  in  spite  of  this  uncertainty  and  the  relatively  weak  rebound  of  the  U.  S.  economy, 
Mexico’s actual economic growth has been higher than expected, to a large extent, due to 
two  external  factors:  solid  demand  for  Mexican  exports,  and  unusually  favorable  financing 
conditions.2  Obviously,  these  factors  are  not  independent  from  the  economic  policies 
implemented by developed countries. Let me now examine them in more detail. 
External supporting factors  
Along with the world economy, Mexico is currently in its 13th quarter of economic expansion. 
Because of Mexico’s large degree of openness, the revival of world trade has translated into 
a  significant  impetus  for  Mexican  economic  activity.  Specifically,  non-oil  exports,  which 
represent  approximately  85  percent  of  the  country’s  total  merchandise  shipments  abroad, 
have  been  increasing  at  double-digit  annual  rates  in  dollar  terms.  Especially  vigorous  has 
been the advance of automotive exports, the largest non-oil export item. But sales of other 
goods have also shown substantial growth.  
Non-oil exports have been expanding both to the United States and, even more strongly, to 
the rest of the world.3 This development is consistent with the diversification trend registered 
by  Mexican  shipments  during  recent  years.  Particularly,  while  in  2000  sales  to  the  U.S. 
represented  approximately  90  percent  of  total  non-oil  exports,  twelve  years  later  this 
proportion has fallen to 78 percent.  
Several factors seem to be at play in the robustness of exports. External demand has been 
backed by the resilience of consumer spending abroad, which has been a significant engine 
of the recovery in the United Sates and other parts of the world. But Mexico’s non-oil exports 
may  also  have  been  favored  by  price  competitiveness,  as  suggested  by  high  productivity 
gains and declining unit labor costs in the country’s manufacturing industry in recent years. 
Also, the relatively weak Mexican peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar could have contributed. All in 
all, price competitiveness together with the advantage of geographical closeness may help 
                                                
2  For  example,  analysts’  average  forecast  for  GDP  growth  in  2011  was  3.6  percent  at  the  end  of  2010  and 
actual growth was 3.9 percent. Similarly, the average forecast for GDP growth in 2012 was at 3.2 percent at 
the end of 2011 and is currently at 3.8 percent. See Banco de Mexico Survey of Private-Sector Analysts. 
3  From  January  2010  to  August  2012,  the  average  annual  growth  of  the  dollar  value  of  automotive  and 
non-automotive exports was, respectively, 34.4 percent and 14.2 percent, while that of non-oil shipments to 
the United States and the rest of the world was, respectively, 17.5 percent and 23.9 percent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fixed 
flows  directed 
income  assets.  Especially  significant  have  been 
explain the fact that Mexican exports have regained market share in U.S. total manufacturing 
imports.4 
A  second  external  driving  force  stems  from  extraordinarily  favorable  financial  conditions. 
Unusually lax monetary policies implemented by many developed countries and in particular 
by the United States, have resulted in policy and market interest rates currently at or close to 
all-time  lows  in  those  nations.  Since  Mexico’s  yield  curve  has  been  shifting  downward  in 
tandem with that of the United States, domestic yields have also fallen to record-low levels.  
As in other emerging markets, a major transmission mechanism of imported monetary easing 
has been substantial capital flows into the country, driven by the search for yield in equity 
and 
to 
peso-denominated government bonds. Mexico has been attracting an increasing proportion 
of total capital inflows devoted to emerging-market local bonds. Currently, in Mexico, close to 
half  of  all  peso-denominated  public  debt  securities  with  fixed  coupons  are  held  by  foreign 
investors.  
Factors  behind  the  portfolio  inflows  may  include  Mexico’s  macroeconomic  stability,  capital 
account openness, a freely floating exchange-rate regime, and high liquidity enjoyed by the 
Mexican peso in FX markets. Resulting favorable financial conditions have supported credit 
to firms and, in general, the recovery of bank lending to the private sector. As financing costs 
have fallen, so has the required return on capital projects, promoting investment. 
It is often said that the main risk associated with buoyant capital inflows is the possibility of a 
“sudden stop.” Indeed, this scenario is likely and it has occurred, on innumerable occasions, 
for reasons not exclusively related to the recipient country, including several times in Mexico. 
A sudden stop of capital inflows has frequently implied the need for traumatic adjustments in 
domestic spending, employment and growth, as has been illustrated by the current collapse 
of foreign investment in the peripheral countries of the Eurozone.  
The most serious risk associated with capital inflows is not the ever-present possibility of a 
reversal, but rather ignoring the likelihood of the event. To be sure, financial crises typically 
occur because people assume that easy credit will last forever. As a result, over-borrowing 
and  asset  price  bubbles  emerge,  which  eventually  end  in  implosions  that  impair  the 
functioning of the economy, as witnessed in the last global financial meltdown.  
Hence, possible capital reversal calls for prudence on the part of economic agents in Mexico. 
As in any economy, the need to detect financial bubbles poses a challenge for policymakers. 
Although  in  accomplishing  this  task,  authorities  do  not  generally  have  knowledge  that  is 
superior  to  that  of  market  participants,  they  should  have  stronger  incentives  for  warning 
against  possible  excessive  risk-taking.  Given  the  inherent  difficulty  of  measuring  systemic 
risk  and  the  probability  of  unintended  consequences  from  direct  interventions  in  credit 
markets, moral suasion could, in principle, be an advisable policy tool.5 
The  base-case  scenario  for  Mexico’s  economic  outlook,  as  posited  by  most  analysts, 
assumes the continuation of favorable external conditions. This assumption does not seem 
unreasonable  at  this  point  in  light  of  new  rounds  of  monetary  accommodation  recently 
announced  by  the  U.S. Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks.  In  this  environment, the 
Mexican economy is forecast to continue growing at rates between 3 and 4 percent this year 
and the next.  
                                                
4  For an interesting study of the productivity gains of Mexican manufacturing exports, see Oviedo, M. (2012), 
“The productivity revolution and the China (manufacturing) syndrome,” Barclays, Emerging Markets Research, 
6 September. 
5  For an evaluation of the current state of Mexico’s financial system, see Council for Financial Sector Stability 
(2012), “Informe anual sobre el estado que guarda la estabilidad del sistema financiero en México y sobre las 
actividades realizadas por el Consejo de Estabilidad del Sistema Financiero,” March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Obviously,  the  substantive  role  that  external  conditions  have  played  in  Mexico’s  economic 
recovery makes their eventual weakening a fundamental risk. In particular, if U.S. industrial 
production  slows,  Mexican  manufacturing  exports  may  decelerate  notably.  Additionally, 
further difficulties encountered by the euro area countries in implementing measures aimed 
at  an  integral  solution  to  their  common  problems  could  generate  new  bouts  of  financial 
volatility and engender adverse effects on world economic prospects, affecting Mexico. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
In recent months, annual inflation has been rising, and since last June, it has surpassed the 
upper limit of the variability interval of plus or minus one percentage point around the Bank of 
Mexico’s permanent 3 percent target. A central element behind this deterioration has been 
significant  price  increases  registered  by  agricultural  products,  resulting  mainly  from 
international drought and the outbreak of bird flu in Mexico. These effects have manifested 
themselves  primarily  in  the  non-core  component  of  the  National  Consumer  Price  Index 
(INPC), which includes those items that tend to exhibit the highest price volatility.  
A  second,  more  prolonged  trend  driving  the  evolution  of  inflation  are  increasing  annual 
changes  in  the  INPC  core  component  since  the  second  half  of  last  year.  Among  other 
factors, this tendency has reflected some pass-through from the depreciated Mexican peso 
vs. the U.S. dollar, as well as significant processed food price increases. 
According to private-sector forecasts, annual inflation could remain above 4 percent for the 
rest of the year. The worsened scenario is worrisome, as inflation imposes a significant cost 
on society. Given the large weight of food components in the price index, this burden has 
tended to fall more heavily on the lower-income population. Also, inflation uncertainty may 
hinder consumption and investment and, hence, the pace of the ongoing economic recovery. 
Given these prospects, it is crucial to evaluate whether current price pressures are transitory 
and  will  not  generate  future  problems  for  controlling  inflation.  Most  importantly,  monetary 
policy  will  have  to  be  adjusted  in  a timely  way  if  convergence  of  inflation  to  the  3  percent 
permanent target is endangered.  
Two sources of risk that will have to be monitored are first, the amplification of second-round 
effects from international price shocks and foreign exchange volatility, and second, evidence 
of aggregate demand pressures. It is worth mentioning that, as of last August, close to half of 
the  goods  that  comprise  the  INPC  basket  exhibited  annual  price  changes  higher  than 
4 percent, and some indicators of slack in the economy have already disappeared. 
The most essential challenge to Mexican monetary policy remains the anchoring of inflation 
expectations on the 3 percent permanent target. As reflected in analysts’ surveys, inflation 
expectations for the short term have been increasing, while those for longer terms continue 
to be relatively stable but stubbornly above the objective.  
Concluding remarks 
Finally,  the  encouraging  pace  of  the  ongoing  economic  recovery  does  not  imply  that  the 
economy  is  growing  at  rates  that  are  sufficient  to  meet  social  needs  or  exploit  potential 
opportunities.  In  order  to  enhance  living  standards  more  significantly,  Mexico  has  to 
consolidate  macroeconomic  stability,  by  promoting  strengthened  public 
in 
preparation  for  future  obligations  and  difficulties,  the  convergence  of  inflation  to  the 
permanent target, and further improvement of the regulatory and supervisory framework for 
financial institutions.  
Additionally,  total  factor  productivity  growth  should  be  facilitated.  Considerable  efficiency 
gains seem possible in the services sector and in non-manufacturing industries, given their 
size in the economy and the relatively low levels of productivity. This could be accomplished 
by removing obstacles to the reduction of informality and by facilitating competition. 
finances 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
