Mario Draghi: A central banker’s perspective on European economic 
convergence 
Speech by  Mr  Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Anchor 2013 
Conference,  organised  by  the  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of  Hungary), 
Budapest, 7 December 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Budapest  and  to  participate  in  the  annual  Anchor 
conference. I understand that this will be the last Anchor conference for András Simor in his 
position as Governor of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank. So this is an excellent opportunity for me 
to pay him a sincere tribute for his work here and as a valued member of the General Council 
of the European Central Bank (ECB). 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  process  of  economic  convergence  in 
Europe. As the experiences of recent years have made clear, this process does not end with 
a country’s adoption of the euro. Nor does participation in the single monetary policy provide 
automatic delivery of convergence. 
I will first talk about the challenges facing the euro area as a result of shortcomings in the 
process of convergence and integration. I will then discuss the challenges of convergence for 
those members of the European Union (EU) that have not yet adopted the euro.  
1.  
Two challenges in the process of European integration 
The institutional challenge 
Over  a  period  of  many  years,  the  EU  has  provided  an  unprecedented  framework  for 
successful regional integration. The process of integration has involved not only the creation 
of a common market and the harmonisation or coordination of several economic policies, but 
also the conduct of some of these policies at a supranational level. 
A  central  pillar  of  the  EU’s  institutional  architecture  has  always  been  the  principle  of 
subsidiarity. This is the rule that action shall only be taken at the supranational level if the 
objectives to be pursued cannot be sufficiently achieved by EU members, either at the level 
of central government or at the regional and local level. 
While we should continue to preserve the principle of subsidiarity, the recent challenges for 
the euro area have provided us with a major institutional lesson: maximising the benefits of 
the single currency requires not only a strong ECB; it also requires additional strong common 
institutions.  
We  need  strong  institutions  to  guarantee  competitiveness  and  to  encourage  sustainable 
growth; to guide fiscal policies and ensure fiscal sustainability; and to supervise and stabilise 
the single financial market. We also need strong institutions to engage citizens more closely 
in the European project. 
In other words, the future prosperity of Europe hinges on our ability to complement monetary 
union with economic union, fiscal union and financial union. This more advanced institutional 
architecture will in turn need to be embedded in some form of political union that engages 
citizens more deeply in European decision-making. As a result, joining the euro area in the 
future  should  imply  greater  sharing  of  sovereignty  and  a  deeper  European  accountability 
than it did ten years ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The institutional challenge is the first major challenge with which we are currently confronted. 
We have already made much progress in addressing the challenge. But a great deal of work 
remains to be done. 
The economic challenge 
The  second  and complementary  challenge  is  economic. The  benefits  of  adopting  the  euro 
are  greater  the  more  consistent  the  economic  structures  of  existing  and  prospective 
members  are.  Convergence  can  be  broadly  defined  as  a  process  in  which  cross-country 
differences in economic structures are reduced over time. The success of the convergence 
process ultimately depends on the sustainability of the underlying policies. 
Shortcomings in the process of convergence across euro area members have been at the 
root of the challenges we have faced since 2010. But I am pleased to report that progress in 
addressing those shortcomings is being made. 
External imbalances and fiscal imbalances are starting to be unwound. Efforts to regain price 
and non-price competitiveness are bearing early fruit. Deleveraging is generally proceeding 
in  an  orderly  way,  even  though  credit  flows  to  the  real  economy  seem  to  be  negatively 
affected in parts of the euro area. Debt is being reduced in some countries, while others are 
devising  strategies  to  make  debt  reduction  sustainable  over  time.  And  financial  sector 
weaknesses are being addressed along with their links to sovereign risk. 
As  I  have  said,  progress  is  being  made  but  much  still  needs  to  be  done.  The  recent 
experiences  of  some  current  euro  area  members  also  serve  as  a  cautionary  tale  to 
EU members  bound  by  the  Treaty  to  adopt  the  euro  in  the  future.  I  will  now  turn  to  the 
challenges facing these countries in the process of convergence.  
2.  
The perspective of EU countries which have still to adopt the euro 
The framework for convergence 
With two exceptions, all EU members that are not yet in the euro area are expected to adopt 
the single currency on meeting certain convergence criteria. As you know, the Treaty defines 
these criteria along three dimensions.  
The first dimension is the degree of nominal convergence with the euro area. This implies 
achieving  price  stability;  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  the  government’s  financial  position; 
realising  sustainable  convergence  of  long-term  nominal  interest  rates;  and  maintaining  a 
stable exchange rate between the national currency and the euro.  
The  Treaty  also  requires  that  nominal  convergence  is  sustainable.  This  is  not  possible 
without it being underpinned by a high degree of real convergence. According to this second 
dimension, adopting the euro makes sense only if the economic structure of a prospective 
member has converged sufficiently towards the prevailing structures in the euro area. 
The  success  of  the  real  convergence  process  in  turn  depends  on  the  sustainability  of  the 
relevant policies. The challenges that we have faced since 2010 highlight the dangers that 
large and persistent macroeconomic imbalances pose, not only for the stability of domestic 
economies, but also for the smooth functioning of the euro area as a whole. We all know the 
dire  implications  of  prolonged  losses  of  competitiveness,  excessive  indebtedness  and 
housing market bubbles.  
Recognising this fact, EU members have moved towards stronger surveillance of domestic 
policies.  Let  me  remind  you  of  two  examples.  One  is  the  new  Macroeconomic  Imbalance 
Procedure,  which  aims  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  new  macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
enforce the correction of existing imbalances. The other is the “fiscal compact”, which was 
signed by all EU members except the UK and the Czech Republic  in  March this year and 
which strengthens the sustainability and credibility of fiscal policies.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  third  dimension  of  convergence  is  institutional.  The  relevant  national  legislation, 
including  the  statute  of  the  national  central  bank,  needs  to  be  compatible  with  the 
EU Treaties and the Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). 
More generally, a lesson we have learned the hard way is that the strength of the institutional 
environment  is  crucial  for  the  sustainability  of  economic  integration  and  convergence. 
Improvements in the institutional environment entail, among other things, better regulations, 
better  governance,  better  quality  of  statistics  and  a  more  business-friendly  environment. 
Removing  impediments  to  the  efficient  use  of  factors  of  production  helps  to  enhance  the 
growth potential of each country. 
How to achieve a high degree of sustainable convergence?  
So how can countries best prepare their economies to reap the benefits of closer European 
integration?  There  are  four  building  blocks:  monetary  policy,  structural  policy,  fiscal  policy 
and financial policy. Let me reflect briefly on each of these. 
Monetary policy 
First, monetary policy, which, before the euro is adopted, remains a national responsibility. 
But  a  number  of  Treaty  obligations  already  apply  at  this  stage.  In  particular,  the  main 
objective  of  monetary  policy  should  be  price  stability,  and  exchange  rate  policy  should  be 
treated as a matter of common interest. 
Monetary policy best contributes to growth through the delivery of price stability. Overall price 
stability  creates  a  predictable  environment  that  fosters  the  efficient  adjustment  of  relative 
prices and bolsters investor and consumer confidence. It also protects the purchasing power 
of the most vulnerable members of the population. 
Different  monetary  policy  frameworks  have  been  devised  to  deliver  price  stability.  Some 
EU members outside the euro area have fixed the exchange rate of their domestic currencies 
to the euro, which has a very good track record of low inflation. A different approach – which 
has  been  adopted  by  Hungary  –  has  combined  exchange  rate  flexibility  with  a  regime  of 
inflation targeting. 
I understand that Governor Simor will focus his remarks on the past and future of inflation 
targeting in Hungary. So I will limit my comments to the importance of central bank credibility 
for the success of inflation targeting.  
The ultimate success of a central bank in maintaining price stability depends on its credibility. 
Credibility anchors inflation expectations in line with the definition of price stability adopted by 
the central bank. Well-anchored inflation expectations in turn align the choices relevant for 
wage and price setting.  
A  key  prerequisite for  a  credible  monetary  policy  is  the  independence  of  the  central  bank. 
This principle is enshrined in the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB. Each central bank in 
the  EU  should  have  institutional,  personal,  functional,  and  financial  independence. 
Institutional  and  personal  independence  protect  the  central  bank  and  members  of  its 
decision-making bodies from direct or indirect influences of third parties in the performance 
of  their  tasks.  Functional  independence  requires  that  the  central  bank  has  the  necessary 
means and instruments for achieving its objective independently of any other authority. And 
financial  independence  guarantees  that  the  central  bank  has  access  to  and  control  over 
sufficient financial and human resources to fulfil its mandate.  
Credible  inflation  targeting  in  small  open  economies  also  depends  on  central  banks’ 
recognition of the impact of their monetary policy decisions on the exchange rate.  
For example, in the presence of heavily indebted private and public sectors with large open 
foreign exchange positions, central banks have little space for manoeuvre when faced with a 
flagging economy. This is especially true when inflation is already high and there is not yet a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
critical  mass  of  structural  and  institutional  reforms  capable  of  reducing  the  country  risk 
premium to sustainable levels. 
In these circumstances, lowering the policy rate to stimulate the economy may risk sparking 
depreciation pressures on the domestic currency at some point in time. Depreciation of the 
currency may in turn further fuel inflation and offset the impact of economic stimuli through 
negative balance sheet effects on consumption and investment.  
Structural policies 
The second building block is structural policy. The sustainability of nominal convergence is to 
a large extent conditional on a sufficient degree of structural, or real, convergence. A broad 
indicator of the degree of real convergence with the euro area is the catching-up of per capita 
incomes and price levels of new members with those of the euro area. 
Convergence in real per capita GDP levels has to be fostered by far-reaching structural and 
institutional changes aimed at enhancing the growth potential of the economy. Such reforms 
typically aim at strengthening the flexibility of adjustment mechanisms in the economy and 
improving the business environment. 
When  goods  and  labour  markets  are  rigid,  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  may  remain 
high  even  in  the  presence  of  monetary  regimes  committed  to  the  achievement  of  price 
stability.  Both  governments  and  social  partners share  responsibility  for ensuring that  wage 
determination takes sufficient account of labour market conditions and does not jeopardise 
competitiveness  and  employment.  Active  labour  market  policies  should  tackle  persistent 
bottlenecks, such as skill mismatches.  
Finally,  protection  of  vested  interests  in  the  product  markets  and  lack  of  mobility  and 
adaptability  in  the  labour  markets  undermine  job  creation,  in  particular  for  young  and  less 
qualified  workers,  as  well  as  for  all  those  who  face  problems  entering  the  labour  market. 
Lowering  barriers  to  entry  will  increase  competition,  particularly  in  those  domestic  service 
sectors that are sheltered from international competition, and thus support price stability. 
Economic  growth  led  by  the  private  sector  needs  to  be  fostered  by  a  stable  and 
business-friendly  policy  environment.  In  this  respect,  governments  should  strive  for 
transparency and predictability of the policy regime, a low compliance burden, and effective 
governance in applying the rule of law.  
Fiscal policy  
It is also crucial that the achievement of price stability is supported by sound fiscal positions, 
the third building block of convergence. Irresponsible fiscal policies can jeopardise credibility, 
as higher inflation becomes desirable to reduce the real value of government debt.  
Fiscal policies should be sustainable and oriented to the medium term. They should further 
aim at mitigating undesirable trend growth differentials through “high quality” expenditure and 
tax policies. In particular, high and inefficient public expenditure can put a brake on economic 
activity  by  imposing  a  high  tax  burden  on  the  economy  and  channelling  resources  into 
unproductive uses.  
is  financial  policy.  A  sound  banking  sector, 
Financial policies  
liquid  and 
The  fourth  building  block 
well-functioning capital markets are important for the sustainability of nominal convergence.  
On  the  one  hand,  well-functioning  banking  sectors  and  capital  markets  ensure  efficient 
financing of capital accumulation in the economy, thus supporting potential output growth. On 
the  other  hand,  they  sustain  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
channels, such as the interest rate and bank lending channels. In this regard, financial sector 
vulnerabilities pose great challenges for the conduct of monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusions 
Let me draw to a close. The experiences of the past few years have shown that participation 
in a monetary union places important demands on national economic policies. 
Euro area governments are hard at work responding to those demands. They are correcting 
macroeconomic  imbalances. They  are  establishing  a  stronger framework  of governance  to 
keep  countries  on  the  path  of  sustainable  convergence.  And  they  are  improving  the 
institutional set-up underpinning monetary union. 
For those EU members that have not yet adopted the euro, the challenge is to achieve a high 
degree of sustainable convergence with the euro area. This requires credible commitment on 
the  part  of  their  central  banks  to  achieve  price  stability  and  treatment  of  exchange  rate 
policies as a matter of common interest. 
For  the  members  of  the  euro  area,  the  challenge  is  to  achieve  full  compatibility  of  their 
economies with participation in monetary union. Product and labour markets must possess 
sufficient  adjustment  capacity 
to  buffer  shocks  while  maintaining  high  output  and 
employment. It is in this area that progress is most needed. 
As I have indicated, much work remains to be done – in both the current and prospective 
members  of  the  euro  area,  and  both  individually  in  each  EU  member,  and  jointly  across 
Europe. But I have no doubt that this opportunity to continue progress will be seized and that 
together we will reap the benefits of sustainable economic convergence and lasting regional 
integration.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
