Fritz Zurbrügg: Challenges posed by the growth in the SNB’s foreign 
exchange reserves 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Geneva, 8 November 2012. 
 I would like to thank Pierre Monnin for his support in the preparation of this presentation. I am also indebted to 
Erich Gmür, Marco Huwiler, Peter Kuster and Sandro Streit for their insightful comments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you here today at our traditional Money Market Event, which 
takes place every year here in Geneva. This occasion is particularly important for me, as it is 
the first time that I have the opportunity to meet you in such a setting. 
Since  our  previous  Money  Market  Event  last  November,  the  situation  on  financial  markets 
has continued to be a cause for concern to the Swiss National Bank (SNB). To mention but a 
few of the main factors: financial market uncertainty is still high, the global economic outlook 
has worsened considerably, and the situation on bond markets in peripheral Europe is still 
highly uncertain. 
Against this background, central banks have adopted a number of measures to address the 
challenges  they  face.  These  measures  have  increased  the  size  of  their  balance  sheets 
significantly.  In  Switzerland,  the  SNB  has  seen  its  foreign  exchange  reserves  grow 
substantially. Managing these reserves is currently a major challenge, and has become the 
subject of much scrutiny by both the media and SNB watchers. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  this  challenge  by  analysing  the  context  in  which  the  SNB 
manages its foreign exchange reserves. While a number of problems are shared by both the 
SNB and other large investors, there are certain features that are specific to a central bank; I 
will return to these in a moment. 
My  presentation  is  structured  as follows:  First, I  will  outline  the  latest  developments  in  the 
SNB’s  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Second,  I  will  describe  the  principles  underlying  the 
management of these reserves. Third, I will comment on the current allocation of reserves, 
based  on  the  results  for  the  third  quarter  of  2012,  which  have  just  been  published.  I  will 
conclude by setting out the main challenges facing the SNB in the management of its foreign 
exchange reserves. 
Substantial growth of foreign exchange reserves since the start of the crisis 
A  first  key  observation  is  that  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  has  grown  significantly  since  the 
onset of the crisis (cf. slide 1). It is currently around four times its pre-crisis level, at nearly 
CHF 500 billion, with foreign exchange reserves amounting to nearly 70% of GDP. Such a 
sizeable expansion is by no means unique; other central banks have also seen their balance 
sheets grow considerably. 
However, the SNB stands out because of the very rapid expansion in its foreign exchange 
reserves (cf. slide 2). It is important to note that this growth results directly from the SNB’s 
monetary  policy,  and  not  from  any  investment  choices.  This  expansion  reflects  the  policy 
adopted by the SNB to combat the rapid and excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc. A 
number of measures were taken in 2009 and 2010 to counter this appreciation, and these 
have left their mark on the SNB’s balance sheet. The most important of the recent measures 
was  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF 1.20  against  the  euro  on 
6 September 2011. This exceptional measure was designed to mitigate the risk of deflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  threatens  the  Swiss  economy.  We  are  convinced  that  this  policy  is  effective,  and  we 
shall continue to pursue it with the utmost determination. 
Note also that even the role of foreign exchange reserves has changed since the onset of the 
financial crisis. Until 2008, the aim of foreign exchange reserves was to ensure that the SNB 
was able to implement its monetary policy unhindered and at all times. At that time, foreign 
exchange  market  intervention  was  virtually  non-existent,  and  discussion  focused  more  on 
whether to hold foreign exchange reserves or not. Today, given the level of foreign exchange 
reserves,  this  question  is  less  pertinent.  Instead,  the  SNB  has  had  to  adjust  its  policy  on 
foreign  exchange  reserve  management,  in  order  to  take  account  of  the  large  amounts 
involved  since  2008.  For  this  purpose,  it  has  amended  its  investment  instructions,  and  I 
would like to briefly describe these to you now. 
The main principles of foreign exchange reserve management at the SNB 
Currently, the management of foreign exchange reserves is enshrined in the National Bank 
Act (arts. 5, 30, 42 and 46), and defined in detail in the internal instructions drawn up in 2004 
and revised in 2008. 
These instructions are available on our website. Contrary to received wisdom, the SNB is as 
transparent  as  possible  about  the  principles  surrounding  the  management  of  its  foreign 
exchange reserves. Thus, in contrast to other central banks, it publishes quarterly data on its 
foreign exchange reserves, broken down according to currency and asset class. 
The  basic  principles  of  foreign  exchange  reserve  management  are  very  clear;  let  me  just 
quickly run through them. 
First principle: Primacy of monetary policy over foreign exchange reserve management. 
Concretely,  changes  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  result  from  monetary  policy  decisions. 
The  level  of  these  reserves  is  a  variable  upon  which  reserve  management  policy  has  no 
influence. Once this framework has been established, the management of foreign exchange 
reserves takes place independently from monetary policy. However, the SNB does need to 
make sure that its investments do not give rise to any conflict of interest with the objectives of 
monetary policy, or indeed of the SNB as regards financial stability. So, for example, we do 
not invest in Swiss financials, so as to avoid a conflict between the management of foreign 
exchange reserves and the SNB’s mandate to contribute to financial stability in Switzerland. 
As a general rule, the SNB does not invest in Swiss corporate equities. 
Second principle: The criteria governing the management of foreign exchange reserves 
are  primarily  the  security  of  investments  and  their  liquidity.  Return  is  also  a  factor. 
Secure and liquid assets are key, because the SNB must always be able to implement its 
monetary policy, and hence must have rapid access to its foreign exchange reserves, should 
the need arise. The need for secure assets means that a large proportion of our investments 
are  in  government  bonds;  the  need  for  liquidity  means  that  we  invest  in  the  world’s  most 
liquid assets and currencies. 
Finally, the third principle is this: The SNB takes care to ensure that its investments do 
not disrupt the markets. We are aware that the huge amounts we have under management 
could impact significantly on market prices. To prevent this kind of problem, we control the 
volumes  we  place  on  the  markets,  so  as  to  avoid  having  any  perceptible  market  impact. 
Thus, with such a large volume to invest, there is a fairly long period of transition before the 
desired allocation is achieved. We are sometimes obliged to hold liquidity on our accounts at 
other central banks for a while, until it can be invested in line with our investment strategy. 
A number of players are involved in implementing the investment strategy. I am not planning 
to go into too much detail about the investment process today. Briefly, the Governing Board 
decides on the main investment principles, as well as the strategy. The Asset Management 
unit  then  implements  this  strategy,  monitored  by  the  Risk  Management  unit.  Risk 
Management  is  also  tasked  with  reporting  regularly  to  the  Governing  Board  and  the  Bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Council,  which  oversees  the  entire  process.  This  multiplicity  of  players  involved  in  foreign 
exchange reserve management, as well as the division of responsibilities, enable conflicts of 
interest  to  be  reduced  as  far  as  possible,  and  allow  effective  control  of  the  actual 
management of reserves. 
How do these guidelines translate into foreign exchange reserve allocation in 
practice? 
Last week, we published the data on the allocation of our foreign exchange reserves for the 
third  quarter  of  2012.  I  would  like  to  take  you  through  those  data,  and  highlight  the  main 
areas which may have given rise to discussion. 
This is the breakdown of foreign exchange reserves by currency (cf. slide 3). As you can see, 
the euro is our principal investment currency, and its share in our investments has remained 
largely unchanged for the past number of years. If we take quarterly data as a basis, we can 
see  that  this  share  has fluctuated  between  45%  and  65%.  These fluctuations  come  about 
because  of  the  time  it  takes  us  to  reallocate  our  portfolio  following  large  inflows  of  new 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  These  amounts  are  then  gradually  diversified  across  other 
currencies in order to restore the original allocation. 
Currently, 48% of foreign exchange reserves are held in euro-denominated assets; however, 
the Asset Management unit also invests in other currencies, above all the US dollar, which 
accounts for 28% of assets under management, as well as the yen, the pound sterling and 
the Canadian dollar, which together account for 20%. The SNB also invests in other, minor 
currencies.  It  generally  chooses  major  international  currencies  with  a  liquid  market. 
Exchange rate risk is inherent in the SNB’s investment policy. It is important to note that the 
SNB  cannot  hedge  against  exchange  rate  risk without  neutralising the  impact  of monetary 
policy,  given  that  each  hedging  operation  is,  in  effect,  a  purchase  of  Swiss  francs  against 
other  currencies.  Thus,  the  main  tool  in  managing  exchange  rate  risk  is  the  most 
optimal  diversification  possible.  Faced  with  the  strong  growth  in  foreign  exchange 
reserves, the need for diversification has therefore taken on even greater significance. Since 
2010,  we  have  extended  the  list  of  investment  currencies  to  include  five  new  currencies. 
These are: the Australian and Singapore dollars, the Swedish krona, the Danish krone and 
the Korean won. 
As a general rule, the SNB is constantly assessing ways to improve the diversification 
of its investments. I  would  like  to  stress that we  actively  analyse  and  monitor  new  asset 
classes  and  different  currencies  in  both  advanced  and  developing  economies,  in  order  to 
reduce our risk concentration over time. 
Here are the foreign exchange reserves broken down by asset class (cf. slide 4). As you can 
see,  the  vast  majority  of  reserves  are  invested  in  bonds  (issued  by  governments,  public 
sector  entities,  foreign  companies  and  supranational  organisations)  or  placed  with  other 
central banks. This represents around 88% of investments, which further underlines the 
prime importance of security and liquidity in the management of our assets. The proportion of 
equities has varied over the years. Currently, they amount to 12%, the highest level since 
2004,  when  investment  in  equities  was  first  allowed  following  a  change  in  the  legal 
framework governing SNB investments. 
For bonds, the SNB uses a combination of major bond indices as benchmarks. The 
SNB’s portfolio can deviate from these indices for tactical reasons, but always within a clearly 
defined  range.  Using  such  deviations,  the  SNB’s  portfolio  managers  can  exploit  market 
inefficiencies in order to improve returns. Moreover, this bond management method allows 
the  SNB’s  portfolio  managers  to  retain  a  direct  link  with  the  main  market  players  –  a  link 
which  is  essential  for  gathering  first-hand  market  intelligence  that  might  be  of  use  for  the 
SNB’s activities. At present, 96% of our bond investments are in assets rated AAA or AA, or 
are placed with other central banks and international organisations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Since  2004,  the  SNB  has  also  invested  in  foreign  equities.  This  asset  class  allows  us  to 
increase  the  return  on  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Equities  are  managed  entirely 
passively. Our asset managers ensure that our equities portfolio corresponds to that of the 
main international benchmarks. These benchmarks are based on a combination of different 
equity  indices,  and  are  implemented  passively  by  the  SNB.  It  is  important  to  note  that the 
management  of  the  SNB’s  assets  is  largely  performed  in-house.  Contracts  with  external 
asset managers cover only a small proportion of these activities, and are essentially used for 
benchmarking the performance of our Asset Management unit. 
In addition to bonds and equities, the SNB occasionally invests in derivatives such as futures 
or  interest  rate  swaps.  Derivatives  are  used  if  the  underlying  instrument  meets  the  SNB 
selection criteria, and if the market for that derivative is more liquid or less costly than the 
market for the underlying asset, or if derivatives enable us to better manage risk. 
Finally, here we can see the returns achieved on our portfolio since 1999; these figures are 
also published on our website (cf. slide 5). As you can see from the last column, the annual 
return  on  investment  in  local  currency  terms  has  always  been  positive.  If  returns  in  Swiss 
francs are sometimes negative, this is solely due to changes in the exchange rate of the local 
currencies against the Swiss franc, as shown in the two preceding columns. Exchange rate 
risk is thus the main determinant of total return on investment. 
The chart we are looking at now provides a further illustration of the dominant role played by 
exchange rates in our portfolio (cf. slide 6). It shows the factors driving changes in our foreign 
exchange  reserves.  As  you  can  see,  exchange  rate  movements  are  the  main  cause  of 
changes in our foreign exchange reserves. Returns in local currency play only a secondary 
role. As I pointed out earlier, diversification is the only way for the SNB to mitigate the impact 
of foreign exchange fluctuations. Hedging would mean diluting the effectiveness of monetary 
policy,  because  purchasing  protection  against  exchange  rate  movements  would  effectively 
cancel out the impact of monetary policy on the Swiss franc exchange rate. 
The challenges ahead 
To finish, I would now like talk about some of the challenges the SNB is always faced with in 
the management of foreign exchange reserves. 
First  challenge:  Ensuring  that  our  resources,  methods  and  structures  guarantee  the 
effective management of our portfolio. I have already emphasised that the complexity and 
risk  associated  with  the  management  of  our  investments  have  recently  increased 
significantly.  This  has  required  a  corresponding  increase  in  our  management  team 
headcount. I am confident that we now have enough staff for both the Asset Management 
and  the  Risk  Management  units  to  meet  the  challenge. We  are  also  prepared  to  continue 
developing our structures should the need arise. As regards governance, we have ensured a 
strict separation between asset management and risk management, by transferring the Risk 
Management unit to another department of the SNB. Our asset managers’ performance is 
constantly benchmarked against the relevant markets. For some portfolios, performance is 
also benchmarked against that of our external asset managers. 
Second challenge: Achieving optimal portfolio diversification. The SNB has to manage a 
large volume of foreign exchange reserves. So it needs to find fairly large markets to absorb 
these volumes, while retaining a high level of liquidity, which narrows the range of available 
assets considerably. It therefore places particular emphasis on researching new investment 
opportunities,  whether  these  be  equities,  currencies  or  markets.  Hence,  for  example,  the 
recent  introduction  of  new  currencies  or  the  inclusion  of  additional  countries,  in  order  to 
better achieve a satisfactory degree of diversification. 
Third  challenge:  Investing  our  portfolio  without  influencing  the  markets.  The  rapid 
growth  of  our  reserves  required  us  to  invest  and  reinvest  large  amounts.  Amounts  of  this 
magnitude can have an impact on the stock, bond or money markets. This is why the SNB 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
operates on the major markets and does not invest in niche markets. Moreover, to ensure 
that our investments do not destabilise the markets, we place amounts which they can easily 
absorb. This implies that any diversification after a large inflow of foreign exchange reserves 
must  be  gradual. We  are  also  engaged  in  active  discussion  with  our  partners,  the  central 
banks  of  the  countries where  we  invest,  and  we  are  pursuing  an  information  policy  in  this 
area that is as transparent as possible. 
Fourth challenge: Maintaining an optimal proportion of equities in our portfolio. Despite 
the recent significant inflow of foreign exchange reserves, we have increased the proportion 
of equities, and it now stands at nearly 12%. Many observers of the SNB’s activities have 
expressed a desire that this proportion be larger. Yet such an increase is not without risk. 
While  the  inclusion  of  equities  in  a  portfolio  can  reduce  the  risk  profile  as  a  result  of  the 
diversification effect, this is only true up to a certain level. We estimate this level of equities to 
be between zero and 5% of the portfolio. While a higher share would naturally translate into a 
higher return on the portfolio, it would also mean incurring greater risk. Any increase in the 
proportion of equities must therefore be analysed from two vantage points: return and risk. 
Additional  risk  can  run  contrary  to  the  criterion  of  security  that  the  SNB  applies  to  its 
investments. 
Let me now turn to the fifth and last challenge: Managing exchange rate risk. The return on 
foreign exchange reserves essentially fluctuates in line with changes in local currency returns 
versus Swiss franc returns. This exposure to exchange rate risk is the result of the SNB’s 
monetary policy. It thus forms, so to speak, part the DNA of a central bank’s activities in a 
small open economy such as ours. Eliminating this risk would go against monetary policy, 
which remains the SNB’s priority. We therefore have to live with this risk and try to reduce it 
without getting rid of it completely. To this end, the Governing Board pursues a strategy of 
maximum  diversification  across  the  currencies  at  its  disposal.  It  is  important  to  remember 
that  the  SNB’s  activities  must  primarily  be  measured  against  the  effectiveness  of  its 
monetary policy as well as the financial return on its investments.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me reiterate two points that have come up several times during my remarks. 
First: While the SNB is a global investor, it is also a special investor and rather far removed 
from the classical definition that applies in the private sector. Its investments are the direct 
result  of  its  monetary  policy.  That  policy  continues  to  have  priority  over  purely  profit 
considerations  in  financial  terms.  The  SNB  must  also  meet  specific  requirements  when 
selecting investments; return is obviously a factor, but it also needs to take risk and market 
liquidity  into  consideration.  Finally,  it  must  invest  a  significant  volume  of  funds  without 
disturbing the markets. This can prove difficult, and requires transitional periods in order to 
achieve the desired allocation. 
Second: The  SNB tries to  pursue the most  efficient  investment  strategy  possible. The fact 
that several central banks inform themselves about and are inspired by our experiences goes 
to show that we are sometimes an example for them. In so doing, the SNB also tries to be as 
transparent  as  possible,  thereby  meeting  its  duty  to  inform  the  public.  The  investment 
strategy is largely made public, and we are one of the few central banks to publish its results 
on a quarterly basis. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have now come to the end of my remarks. I would like to thank you 
for your kind attention, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Slide 1 
Slide 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
 Slide 3 
Slide 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
Slide 5 
Slide 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  8 
 