Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Policy Forum marking the Bank of Thailand’s 
70th anniversary 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  to  the 
Bank of Thailand’s 70th Anniversary and 3rd Policy Forum, Bangkok, 12 December 2012. 
 Governor Glenn Stevens, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you,  our  distinguished 
guests, to the Bank of Thailand’s Policy Forum. Today’s gathering marks the third such event 
organized  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  The  policy  forum  serves  as  a  platform  for  prominent 
academics, policy-makers and market participants to learn from the visions and insights of 
outstanding  international  leaders.  More  importantly,  the  discussion  and  knowledge-sharing 
arisen from this forum will further equip the Bank of Thailand with a broader and deeper pool 
of  knowledge  to  pursue  its  mandate.  On  that  note,  let  me  add  that  this  year  marks  the 
70th anniversary of the Bank of Thailand, an institution that has always been committed to 
preserving economic and financial stability. This commitment would not be possible without 
continual upgrading of our knowledge base through forums such as the one today. 
2.  Today,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  truly  honored  to  have  Governor  Glenn  Stevens  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia with us to share his thoughts on “Challenges for Central Banking”. 
This  talk  is  especially  timely  because  the  effects  of  the  global  crisis  are  spreading  to  our 
region. Asia is clearly slowing amid the weak US economic recovery and the euro crisis. At 
the last policy forum, Dr. Wolfgang Schäuble, Federal Minister of Finance of Germany, spoke 
at  this  forum  and  shared  with  us  his  views  from  the  eye  of  the  storm.  Now,  as  the  storm 
moves east to Asia, Governor Glenn Stevens will be able to share with us his views from the 
perspective of our region with respect to the external challenges we are facing.2 
3. Apart from common external challenges, Australia and Thailand also share many internal 
characteristics as well as a similar monetary policy framework. For example, both are open 
economies. Both export commodities and import oil. The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) 
practices inflation-targeting with a flexible exchange rate. In fact, it is considered a pioneer 
among central banks as it adopted inflation-targeting in 1994. As you all know, the Bank of 
Thailand also practices inflation-targeting with a  flexible exchange rate. Both Australia and 
Thailand  recently  experienced  substantial  exchange  rate  swings  amid  the  euro  crisis.  A 
flexible exchange rate regime allows flexibility in responding to exchange rate movements. 
However, in a world where global liquidity is especially fluid due to loose monetary policies in 
the  US  and  the  euro  zone,  can  exchange  rates  move  out  of  line  with  fundamentals  for 
prolonged period of time? This is an issue that faces not only Australia and Thailand but also 
the region as a whole. As a life-long central banker, I’m sure Governor Glenn Stevens can 
give us the broader perspective on this issue. 
4. I sincerely hope that the common lessons learned from our experiences within the region 
will  help  us,  and  indeed  other  central  banks,  better  manage  the complexities  of the global 
economy. 
5. Before we hear from Governor Stevens, I wish to take this opportunity to thank all guests 
for  joining  us  at  this  Policy  Forum  to  mark  the  70th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand. 
Many  of  you  here  have  been  an  integral  part  of  our  policy  progress  over  the  past  many 
years. On this note, may I propose a toast of appreciation to all of you and of hope that many 
of you will continue to support a common vision toward building further policy progress for 
the well-being of all Thais in years to come. 
6. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
