William C Dudley: The spread between primary and secondary mortgage 
rates – recent trends and prospects 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial 
System (CGFS), at The Spread between Primary and Secondary  Mortgage Rates: Recent 
Trends and Prospects Workshop, jointly sponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston 
and New York, New York City, 3 December 2012. 
 took  action  at 
its  September  meeting 
Good morning. I’m William  Dudley,  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York. I 
would  like  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  Bank  and  thank  you  for  participating  in  today’s 
workshop. My colleague Eric Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
and I asked our staffs to organize this workshop because the topic of the primary-secondary 
mortgage rate spread is important for current efforts by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) to foster faster economic growth. 
As I have said on a number of occasions, while the U.S. economy has expanded since mid-
2009, the pace of the economic recovery has been too slow to make rapid inroads into the 
spare  capacity  left  over  from  the  recession.  As  a  result  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
unacceptably high. To support a stronger economic recovery in the context of price stability, 
the  FOMC 
to  provide  additional  monetary 
accommodation. This included a new program to purchase an additional $40 billion a month 
of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS).  The  FOMC  reiterated  in  October  that  it  will 
continue its purchases of agency MBS, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its 
other tools as appropriate until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor 
market in a context of price stability. 
Monetary  policy  works  in  large  part  through  its  effect  on  financial  markets  and  financial 
conditions. The impact on economic activity depends on the extent to which policy actions 
are  effectively  transmitted  to  key  sectors  of  the  economy.  While  actions  such  as  MBS 
purchases  help  ease  financial  conditions  more  broadly,  a  key  channel  through  which 
monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  is  through  the  housing  and  mortgage  markets.  An 
easing  of  policy  lowers  the  secondary  market  rate  at  which  mortgage-backed  securities 
trade, which puts downward pressure on the primary mortgage interest rate. A lower primary 
mortgage  rate  enables  borrowers  to  refinance  their  existing  loans  at  lower  rates,  and 
increases  demand  for  home  purchases,  supporting  house  prices  and  household  wealth, 
which in turn may increase household access to credit.  
We  have  seen  this  channel  in  operation  since  the  September  FOMC  meeting.  Yields  on 
newly issued agency MBS have declined about 45 basis points and the Freddie Mac survey 
30-year primary rate has declined 23 basis points to 3.32 percent. These declines have been 
even larger if measured from the release of the minutes of the previous FOMC meeting in 
August,  after  which  market  expectations  of  easing  in  September  increased.  This  is  solid 
evidence that our policy has been and continues to be effective – though it is certainly not all-
powerful in current circumstances. 
However,  the  impact  of  monetary  easing  on  the  economy  through  housing  and  mortgage 
finance has been impeded to some degree by two factors. First, not enough people can take 
advantage  of  today’s  low  primary  mortgage  rates.  Mortgage  underwriting  standards  have 
tightened quite dramatically and the share of new mortgages going to households with better 
credit metrics has risen. While it is difficult to disentangle how much of this is due to supply 
versus demand factors, it appears likely that credit standards for home purchase loans have 
not just tightened since the housing bust but overcorrected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  addition,  many  homeowners  find  it  difficult  to  refinance their  existing mortgage  because 
they  have  little  equity  in  their  homes,  or  are  outright  “underwater”  with  mortgage  balances 
that  exceed  the  current  appraised  value  of  their  property.  In  a  speech  earlier  this  year,  I 
called  for  measures  to  ease  refinancing  and  tackle  other  frictions  and  market  failures  that 
lead to economically inefficient outcomes in housing. Some useful steps have been taken. 
But, more could be done, and these issues warrant ongoing focus by policymakers. 
Today, though, we are focusing on a second impediment to the impact of monetary policy on 
the economy through housing and mortgage finance: the significant widening of the spread 
between  yields  on  mortgage-backed  securities  in  the  secondary  market  and  primary 
mortgage  rates.  Actions  taken  by  the  FOMC  such  as  its  MBS  purchase  program  operate 
principally on the secondary rate. For these actions to achieve their full impact, reductions in 
the  secondary  rate  need  to  also  pass  through  to  the  primary  rate.  To  the  extent  that  the 
primary-secondary rate spread widens the reduction in pass-through limits the full impact of 
the policy actions. 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s the primary-secondary spread was in the range of 30 to 
50 basis points. In recent years and over the past 18 months in particular, the spread has 
increased  substantially.  Following  the  September  FOMC  meeting  it  rose  above  150 basis 
points. A spike in the spread following a decision to ease monetary policy is not surprising 
because  the  primary  market may  be  slower  to  react. The  spread  has  since  retraced  to  its 
pre-September FOMC meeting level of about 120 basis points. However, the spread remains 
elevated by historic standards. 
An important objective of this workshop is to gain a deeper and clearer understanding of the 
determinants  of  the  primary-secondary  spread  and  its  dynamics  over  time.  This  spread  is 
influenced by a number of elements, such as the valuation attached to the right to service the 
mortgages  underlying  the  security,  and  the  annual  guarantee fee  that  is  paid  to  cover  the 
credit guarantee provided by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). 
The observed widening of the primary-secondary spread likely reflects many factors. Part of 
this  widening  is  due  to  higher  annual  agency  guarantee  fees  which  are  a  necessary  and 
overdue re-pricing of the credit guarantee provided to investors. While these guarantee fees 
differ  by  mortgage  and  by  seller,  the  average  effective  guarantee  fee  has  increased  from 
20 to 25 basis points to around 50 basis points today. But this still leaves a significant part of 
the  spread  left to  be  explained  by  other  factors  such  as  changes  in  originators’  costs  and 
profits. 
As  you  all  know,  the  primary-secondary  spread  is  a  technically  imperfect  measure  of  the 
pass-through from primary rates to secondary rates. A new study1, by authors including New 
York Fed staff, adjusts for these factors to come up with a measure of originator2 profits and 
unmeasured  costs,  or  OPUCs.  The  basic  picture  remains  the  same,  with  OPUCs  at 
historically elevated levels. 
The  paper  evaluates  a  number  of  potential  factors  that  could  help  explain  this  increase. 
These include the decline in the value of mortgage servicing rights, credit losses and other 
costs  associated  with  put-back  risk,  possible  changes  in  pipeline  hedging  costs  and  other 
loan production expenses. It finds a potentially material role for the decline in the value of 
mortgage  servicing  rights  in  particular,  but  concludes  that  the  increase  in  the  aggregate 
measure  of  profits  and  unmeasured  costs  is  “not  likely  to  be  driven  exclusively  or  even 
mostly by increase in costs”. 
This suggests that originator profits may have increased. The study examines a number of 
potential  explanations.  These  include  capacity  constraints,  market  concentration,  pricing 
                                                
1   The Rising Gap Between Primary and Secondary Mortgage Rates. 
2   We interpret originator to include all actors involved in originating and servicing mortgages. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
power over Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) refinance loans and pricing power 
on  other  loans.  It  finds  that  capacity  constraints  play  a  role  and  that  there  is  evidence  to 
suggest  that  originators  enjoy  pricing  power  and  elevated  profits  on  HARP  and  other 
refinancings. 
I  encourage  everyone  to  take  a  look  at  this  paper.  It  represents  a  good  starting  point  for 
today’s discussion. However, as the authors are the first to acknowledge, the increase in the 
primary-secondary spread and the underlying changes in originator costs and profits remain 
something  of  a  puzzle.  I  hope  today’s  discussion  will  further  deepen  our  collective 
understanding of this important issue. 
To  sum  up,  for  monetary  policy  to  be  as  effective  as  possible  in  supporting  economic 
recovery in a context of price stability it is imperative that the key channels of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism are operating as effectively as possible. The financial crisis 
and the housing bust created headwinds to the recovery in part through adverse impacts on 
the mechanisms of monetary policy transmission. The topic of today’s workshop is important 
for understanding how to gauge and potentially improve the transmission of monetary policy 
to the household sector. It is important that we correctly identify and to the greatest extent 
possible  quantify  the  forces  that  have  been  acting  on  the  primary-secondary  spread.  This 
requires bringing a broad range of informed perspectives to the table, perspectives that many 
of you have. For this workshop to succeed, we need for you to be as open, frank and precise 
in  your  discussions  today  as  possible.  President  Rosengren  and  I  thank  you  for  your 
participation in this effort and we look forward to the key findings from the workshop. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
