Daniel Mminele: South African monetary policy in the context of central 
banking developments abroad 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Tradition dinner, Johannesburg, 28 November 2012. 
 Introduction  
1.  
Good evening and thank you to Tradition South Africa for the kind invitation to speak to you 
this evening. I have been asked to talk about South African monetary policy in the context of 
the influences from monetary policy globally.  
Monetary  policy  has  evolved  in  leaps  and  bounds  over  the  past  few  years  and 
unconventional measures, in particular, quantitative easing (QE), has become a fundamental 
part of monetary policy around the world. Japan, known as the pioneer of QE, unfortunately 
has not had much success with this policy, failing to boost either growth or inflation despite 
very  accommodative  monetary  policy.  There  are  many  views  about  Japan’s  so-called  lost 
decades and why it is different for the US and others, and how the speed, vigour and manner 
in  which  QE  applied  can  make  a  difference.  Japan’s  experience  is  translated  into  what  is 
happening in the US and elsewhere, and doubts are raised about the appropriateness and 
success of such unconventional measures. It is too early to draw any definitive conclusions, 
but no doubt in time economic textbooks will be full of evidence of the success or otherwise 
of QE.  
I will start my remarks off by firstly looking at countercyclical monetary policy, in particular as 
it  pertains  to  emerging  market  economies,  and  the  spill-over  effects  of  monetary  policies 
abroad. I will end my remarks by talking about the more recent developments pertaining to 
South Africa, with reference to the Monetary Policy Committee meeting held last week.  
Counter-cyclical monetary policy and spillovers  
2.  
Monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  has  undergone  a  drastic  makeover  since  the 
2008–2009  crisis, from  the  implementation  of  unconventional  policies,  to forward guidance 
being  provided,  and  increasingly  talk  of  moving  towards  specific  numerical  measures  to 
which monetary policy tightening should be tied. The so called “7/3 threshold rule”1 has often 
been bandied about as an alternative to the explicit forward guidance provided thus far by 
the Federal Reserve Bank. Under such a rule, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
may  indicate  that  it  will  maintain  the  fed  funds  rate  at  current  levels  until  such  time  as 
unemployment  moves  below  7  per  cent  or  inflation  above  3  per  cent,  at  which  point,  the 
federal funds rate may be raised.  
Alongside  such  unconventional  policies 
in  advanced  economies,  emerging  market 
economies  have  witnessed  a  break  from  past  behaviour,  where  central  banks  have 
graduated from conducting pro-cyclical monetary policy to counter-cyclical monetary policy. 
This  is  significant  because  counter-cyclical  policy  was  seen  to  be  largely  the  domain  of 
advanced  economies,  and  in  crisis  situations,  emerging  markets  instead  opted  to  tighten 
monetary policy as they sought to defend the value of their currencies, contain capital flight 
and reinforce policy credibility.  
In  February  2012,  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  published  a 
discussion  paper  entitled  “Monetary  policy  in  Emerging  Market  Economies: What  Lessons 
                                                
1   Proposed by Charles Evans of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
from the Global Financial Crisis?”2 The paper looked specifically at the counter-cyclicality of 
emerging  market  central  banks’  monetary  policies  during  the  2008–2009  crisis,  and  found 
that  at  the  height  of  the  crisis,  over  80  per  cent  of  emerging  market  economies  loosened 
monetary  policy.  Similarly,  a  study3  conducted  in  2012  found  that  between  1960–1999, 
51 per  cent  of  developing  countries  were  pro-cyclical  with  an  average  correlation  between 
GDP  and  interest  rates  of  –0.02  per  cent.  This  compared  to  0.38  per  cent  for  industrial 
countries. In contrast, for the period 2000–2009, around 77 per cent of developing countries 
showed counter-cyclical monetary policy. In both periods, South Africa was found to be 
counter-cyclical, with the correlation increasing from around 0.25 to 0.75 per cent.  
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  in  its  June  2012  Quarterly  Review  made 
reference to this shift among emerging market central banks, and pointed out the benefits of 
counter-cyclical policy, in particular, the associated reduction in output volatility, which also 
helped  to  stabilise  the  global  economy.  It  is  important  to  realise,  however,  that  not  all 
countries can benefit from counter-cyclical monetary policy. In particular, a country with large 
short-term foreign currency borrowings could suffer massive exchange rate depreciation, the 
costs of which could offset any potential costs of a pro-cyclical policy.  
The discussion paper I referred to earlier investigates the factors that allowed for this shift to 
happen,  and  poses  the  question  whether  this  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  in  which 
emerging  markets  can  now  conduct  counter-cyclical  policy  in  a  sustainable  manner.  The 
study  finds  that  robust  institutions,  stronger  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  reduced 
vulnerabilities,  greater  openness  to  trade  and  international  capital  flows  and  more 
importantly, financial reforms and adoption of inflation targeting, helped to facilitate this shift. 
By adopting inflation targeting and implementing financial reforms, greater policy credibility 
was  achieved.  Not  only  does  the  development  of  local  financial  markets  enable  a  more 
efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  but  the  promotion  of  local  financial  markets  has 
also  encouraged  greater  borrowing  in  local  currencies  in  domestic  markets,  which  has 
helped to reduce the risk of capital flight, as well as currency and maturity mismatches. As 
such, the development of domestic financial markets has helped to facilitate the conduct of 
counter-cyclical  monetary  policy.  Central  banks  that  have  adopted  inflation  targeting  and 
moved to a low inflation environment were also seen to be more independent and credible, 
which also helped to facilitate the loosening of monetary policy.  
The BIS notes a few caveats:  
• 
Firstly, that low interest rates in advanced economies may have allowed emerging 
market  central  banks  to  cut  policy  rates  more  sharply  than  they  could  have  done 
otherwise, which would then overstate the degree of counter-cyclicality.  
Secondly, that the prolongation of low interest rates in advanced economies could 
complicate counter-cyclical monetary tightening in the future.  
Finally,  the  BIS  also  provides  the  example  of  some  euro  area  countries  which 
despite following counter-cyclical policies are facing a crisis today – underlining the 
importance  of  continuously  monitoring  financial  imbalances  and  sustainability  of 
policies.  
  These caveats brings me to the subject of spill-overs, an issue the G20 spends much of its 
time  discussing,  and  requested  of  the  IMF  to  produce  spill-over  reports  for  the  five  most 
systemically  important  economies.4  These  reports  quantify,  inform  and  educate  about  the 
spill-over effects of the policies of these five economies.  
                                                
2   Brahima Coulibaly, International Finance Discussion Papers, Number 1042. 
3   “Graduation from monetary policy procyclicality”, Vegh,c and Vuletin,G, 22 August 2012. 
4   US, euro area, Japan, China, UK. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The arrival of QE brought much scepticism and unease, with talk of currency wars gaining 
momentum  owing  to  the  spill-over  effects  of  such  easy  monetary  policy  on  emerging 
markets.  In  particular,  QE  led  to  increased  liquidity  globally;  amplified  carry  trade  activity 
owing  to  favourable  spreads;  the  financialisation  and  resultant  boom  in  commodity  prices; 
volatility  in  financial  markets,  in  particular  exchange  rates;  and  robust  capital  inflows  into 
bond and equity markets.  
The IMF 2011 Spill-over report for the US5 provides an analysis of QE spill-overs and finds 
that  from  both  conventional  and  unconventional  US  monetary  stimulus,  there  were  in  fact 
substantial output gains, occurring predominantly via significant reductions in nominal bond 
yields and increases in equity prices, with exchange rates also appreciating both in advanced 
and emerging market economies. Under conventional policy, for example, the IMF estimates 
peak  output  gains  of  0.3  per  cent  in  the  US;  0.1  –  0.3  per  cent  for  other  advanced 
economies;  and  0.0  –  0.2  per  cent  for  emerging  markets.  Under  QE1,  the  IMF  estimates 
peak  output  gains  of  0.4  per  cent  in  the  US;  0.1  –  0.3  per  cent  for  other  advanced 
economies; and 0.0 – 0.4 per cent for emerging markets. The study also finds, however, that 
the effect of QE2 was somewhat smaller than QE1. In September 2012, the Fed announced 
a third round of QE, the impact of which is yet to be seen. Nonetheless, the results of 
these studies are not surprising, given that the US is the benchmark for pricing of other 
global assets, and was long hailed as the engine of global growth.  
Unconventional  monetary  policies  may  very  well  complicate  policymaking  for  emerging 
market  central  banks  and  create  significant  challenges  going  forward,  not  least  of  which 
relate  to  the  unwinding  of  loose  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies  and  the 
implications for capital flows. This could have significant repercussions for emerging markets, 
and the rest of the world, given the increased weight of emerging market economies in global 
output. Strong capital inflows to emerging markets over the past few years also means that 
emerging market assets have taken up an increasing share of investor portfolios. In its 82nd 
Annual  Report  published  in  June  2012,  the  BIS  notes  a  number  of  longer-term  risks  for 
central  banks  related  to  prolonged  monetary  accommodation.  These  include  a  threat  to 
advanced  economies  central  bank  credibility  should  they  feel  pressured  to  do  more  and 
therefore complicate even further the eventual exit from monetary accommodation; a gradual 
dislodging  of  inflation  expectations  in  emerging  markets  should  there  be  doubts  about  the 
determination  to  pursue  price  stability  and  exit  large  scale  foreign  exchange  interventions; 
and undermining of operational autonomy and financial independence.  
Having said this, and understanding the significant risks introduced to emerging markets as a 
result of QE, there is no denying that in the earlier phases of the crisis, QE policies did help 
to  stabilise  markets,  support  trade  and  help  to  prevent  a  breakdown  in  demand  and 
economic activity.  
Recent monetary policy developments in South Africa  
3.  
We are often asked how much influence global monetary policy has on domestic rate setting. 
Of course, the Monetary Policy Committee does take into consideration in its deliberations, 
the  decisions  of  policymakers  elsewhere.  These  are 
the 
decision-making process, given the large spill-overs associated with global policymaking on 
economic and financial market variables.  
Like  other  emerging  market  countries,  South  Africa  has  witnessed  significant  portfolio 
inflows.  In  2008,  net  outflows  of  R78  billion  were  recorded,  and  since  2009  until 
26 November 2012, non-residents have bought a cumulative R280 billion worth of bonds and 
equities. The nature of these flows has changed, from being primarily equity inflows (turning 
important 
inputs 
into 
                                                
5  
IMF, The United States: Spillover Report, 2011 Article IV consultation, IMF Country Report no 11/203. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
from net inflows of R75 billion in 2009 to net outflows of R17 billion in 2011 and outflows of 
R8.3  billion  year-to-date)  to  being  predominantly  bond  inflows  (from  net  inflows  of 
R15.5 billion  in  2009,  to  R85  billion  year-to-date).  Factors  such  as  South  Africa’s  inclusion 
into the World Government Bond Index have supported this trend, as well as the appreciation 
of the rand for much of the past three years, and are a clear reflection of the interest rate 
sensitivity  of  capital  flows.  Having  twin  deficits  (fiscal  and  current  account)  and  a  low 
domestic savings rate, these inflows were not unwelcome, also to the extent that they helped 
to  lower  long-term  borrowing  costs.  One  can  also  argue  that  rather  than  inflows  being 
diverted to South Africa because of expectations of rand appreciation, it was the inflows that 
in fact caused to the rand to appreciate. Whichever view is taken, the exchange rate of the 
rand did nonetheless appreciate from almost R12 against the USD in 2008 to under R6.60 in 
2011.  
Other emerging markets lowered policy rates to support growth; they also intervened in the 
exchange rate markets to try and stem appreciation pressure, or imposed capital controls. 
South  Africa’s  policy  rate  was  also  lowered,  although  we  were  less  aggressive  than  other 
emerging markets in dealing with these inflows as we did not at any time feel it necessary to 
intervene  in  the  exchange  rate  market  nor  were  any  capital  controls  imposed.  We  did, 
however,  with  a  surplus  position  on  our  Balance  of  Payments, mop  up  extra  liquidity  from 
both  portfolio  and  direct  investment  flows,  and  consequently  managed  to  grow  the  official 
foreign exchange reserves. We have been consistent in our approach, and have maintained 
an easy stance throughout the crisis, given that inflation largely remained under control and 
growth was moderate.  
Exchange  rate  appreciation  has  been  both  a  positive  and  a  negative,  on  the  one  hand 
lowering  South  Africa’s  trade  competitiveness,  but  also  helping  to  dampen  inflationary 
pressures given the influence of the exchange rate on consumer prices. CPI receded from 
13.7 per cent in August 2008 to 3.2 per cent in September 2010, at the same time growth 
slowed somewhat, never quite recovering from the recession, while unemployment increased 
to over 25 per cent. It is the combination of these factors, a large output gap, the absence of 
any significant underlying price pressures and a still dismal outlook for the global economy, 
that has given the Bank room to manoeuvre and reduce the repo rate from 12.0 per cent in 
2008 to 5.0 per cent in July 2012.  
However,  since  July  domestic  developments  in  the  form  of  labour  unrest,  credit  rating 
downgrades, and a widening in the current account deficit, have taken centre stage and been 
the  prime  determinant  of  exchange  rate  movements,  which  previously  was  primarily 
determined by movements in the USD/EUR exchange rate and other global developments. 
The exchange rate of the rand has weakened considerably from just above R8.00 against 
the USD at the beginning of August to levels close to R9.00 against the USD in November. 
Such developments, together with the lagged effect of higher food prices and higher wage 
settlements as seen in certain sectors of the economy, do not bode well for inflation going 
forward.  A  wide  range  of  estimates  have  been  released  from  various  analysts  trying  to 
ascertain the potential impact of the rebasing and reweighting of the CPI basket in 2013. Our 
own estimates indicate some upward pressure on both headline and core prices, as noted in 
the MPC statement, to the magnitude of around 0.2 per cent on headline CPI. However, I 
should  caution  that  these  estimates  are  subject  to  the  final  set  of  price-updated  weights 
which will only be published in January 2013, and as such, are subject to change.  
Alongside  a  less  favourable  outlook  for  inflation,  the  domestic  growth  outlook  has 
deteriorated, not only due to developments in the euro zone and US, but intensified further 
by  labour  market  instability.  Such  actions  as  we  have  seen  in  the  mining  and  agricultural 
sectors  in  particular,  not  only  amplify  wage  pressures,  but  hurt  output  growth  and  export 
volumes, raise the prospects for even higher unemployment and aggravate the widening in 
the  current  account  deficit. The  third quarter  GDP  figures  provided  the  first glimpse  of the 
negative  impact  from  the  strike  action,  as  growth  slowed  from  3.4  per  cent  in  the  second 
quarter  to  1.2  per  cent  quarter-on-quarter.  Mining  reflected  a  contraction  of  12.7  per  cent, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
while manufacturing grew a paltry 1.2 per cent. The negative impacts of the strike action on 
growth have not fully fed through and we are likely to see further weakness in the quarter 
ahead. Both business and consumer confidence are far from robust and it is unlikely that the 
demand side of the economy will provide much support. The Bank has lowered its growth 
forecast to 2.5 per cent for 2012, improving to 3.6 per cent in 2014 – with risks tilted to the 
downside. Inflation forecasts on the other hand, have been adjusted higher and the risks are 
tilted to the upside. The forecast do not take into consideration the new CPI weights or the 
rebasing  that  will  take  place  in  January  2013,  nonetheless,  the  CPI  forecast  was  revised 
higher  to  5.5  per  cent  for  2013  (previously  5.2  per  cent),  and  the  forecast  for  2014  kept 
unchanged  at  5.0  per  cent. The  outlook for  core  inflation  remains  relatively  benign,  with  a 
peak of 5.0 per cent in the first quarter of next year and an average of 4.8 per cent in 2013, 
dropping to an average of 4.5 per cent in 2014.  
The  combination  of  low  global  growth,  domestic  challenges  further  hampering  the  growth 
outlook, rising wage settlements, a weaker rand and higher current account deficit – makes 
for a very difficult combination of factors to consider when making policy decisions.  
Olivier Blanchard in 2006 presented a paper entitled “Monetary Policy; Science or Art”. He 
said  that  monetary  policy  can  pretend  to  be  close  to  science  if  it  can  be  conducted  using 
simple  and  robust  rules,  however,  monetary  policy  must  be  closer  to  art  if  it  is  frequently 
confronted  to  new,  poorly  anticipated  and  poorly  understood,  contingencies.  In  that  case, 
each  of  these  contingencies  requires  fast  thinking  and  having  to  make  decisions,  not  fully 
based  on  existing  research  but  rather  on  well  trained  intuition.  There  is  little  doubt  that 
monetary policy has gravitated towards being more of an art than a science.  
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
