Jan F Qvigstad: On learning from history – truths and eternal truths 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 13 November 2012. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 I have received valuable assistance in preparing this speech. Outside the Bank, I would like to thank Mike Bordo, 
Marc Flandreau, Henrik Mestad, Henrik Syse and Knut Sydsæter. At the Bank, I would like to thank the following 
persons  in  particular  for  their  contributions:  Øyvind  Eitrheim,  Amund  Holmsen,  Jon  Nicolaisen,  Øystein  Olsen, 
Øystein  Sjølie,  Birger  Vikøren  NS  Mari  Aasgaard  Walle.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Helle  Snellingen  for  her 
contribution to the translation of the text into English. 
Introduction 
All  scientific  and  scholarly  disciplines  have  a  particular,  and  not  immutable,  set  of  truths. 
Mathematics and theology are possible exceptions, though for different reasons. As the late 
Professor Knut Sydsæter underscored when assisting me with this speech; in mathematics 
new  results  are  proved  on  the  basis  of  fundamental  axioms  and  become  new  truths. 
Theology also relies on truths, even eternal truths. Even if logical proofs of God’s existence 
have long been an important pursuit, it is safe to say that the truths in theology today stem 
from faith. 
The discipline of economics can readily be formulated in the language of mathematics, and 
economic  models  are  usually  tested  empirically  before  gaining  acceptance.  Conflicts  arise 
when  theories  that  appear  to  be  patently  true  are  unsupported  by  empirical  evidence,  or 
when contradictory theories find support at the same time. In other words, we economists are 
in a borderland between faith and the strict proofs of mathematics. 
The notion of learning from history cannot easily be explored without invoking the American 
physicist  Thomas  Kuhn.  This  year  is  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  publication  of  his 
groundbreaking work, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.1 According to Kuhn, disciplines 
progress within an established set of truths – a paradigm. Observations irreconcilable with 
the paradigm are tolerated as inexplicable. Eventually, however, the number of inexplicable 
observations can become so overwhelming that the paradigm breaks down. New truths have 
to be established – a paradigm shift occurs. 
Such  shifts  can  be  painful.  The  old  paradigm  will  usually  be  defended  by  those  whose 
training lies in a more distant past, often persons in positions of leadership in academia and 
government bureaucracy. 
Long before Kuhn, Henrik Ibsen touched upon the same idea in An Enemy of the People. 
Dr. Stockman talks about the few who attain the new truths, unlike the compact majority that 
have yet to embrace them. 
Social  scientists,  like  economists,  face  some  peculiar  problems  when  attempting  to  learn 
from  history.  First,  we  do  not  have  a  laboratory  in  which  we  can  perform  experiments. 
Second,  economic  policy  is  part  of  the  reality  we  observe.  The  outcome  of  a  particular 
measure  will  depend  both  on  shifting  economic  conditions  and  on  economic  agents’ 
expectations of the effect of that measure. It goes without saying that in a situation like that, 
drawing useful lessons from history can be a challenge.2  
                                                
1  Thomas Kuhn (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press. 
2  Here the natural sciences may be more stringent, and in some cases it may be easier to set up experiments 
that  can  refute  the  theory.  For  example,  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  was  considerably  strengthened,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Scientific truths provide a common basis for further research and development, but they can 
be a scourge if they are not challenged. The recognition of economic correlations lays the 
groundwork for good economic policy, resulting in a better life for more people. The outcome 
can  be  disastrous  if  the  established  truths  lay  the  foundation  for  bad  economic  policies. 
Economics  as  a  discipline  has  in  the  past  hundred  years  undergone  several  prominent 
paradigm shifts, with widespread impacts and implications. 
What have we learned from 1930 to the present day? 
More than five years have passed since the turbulence in financial markets began. Today’s 
situation resembles the one Governor Nicolai Rygg described in his annual address in 1933: 
“The  figures  for  world  output  are  truly  disheartening.  A  recent  estimate  of  the  number  of 
unemployed is an appalling 30 million.” Except for the phrasing and style, that speech could 
be cut and pasted from that address in 1933 to describe the situation today. The queues of 
the unemployed that we used to see in 1930s-vintage black-and-white photographs we are 
now  seeing  on  television  in  living  colour.  Youth  unemployment  in  southern  Europe  is 
especially high. The Red Cross is setting up food banks in Spain. The middle class is being 
hit by higher taxes, lower pensions and unemployment. Political scientists tell us that this is a 
recipe for social and political unrest.3 
In May 1945, the work began to rebuild our country after the Second World War. At that time, 
Friedrich  Georg  Nissen  was  the  highest-ranking  official  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Nissen 
trained in the law, and the photograph of him in Einar Lie’s book on the history of the Ministry 
of Finance shows a man formally dressed in a three-piece suit. He believed that the central 
government  budget  should  be  balanced  each  year.  Fiscal  policy  was  conducted  based  on 
this principle, which leading politicians also agreed with.4 Tax revenue was to be spent, but 
not a penny more. 
Broadly speaking, the prevailing paradigm up until the Great Depression of the 1930s – both 
in economic policy and in economic theory – was that the authorities’ role should be limited 
to keeping  domestic  order  and  ensuring  a  stable  and  predictable  regulatory  and  operating 
framework. Prices adjust automatically to supply and demand, and the general view was that 
                                                                                                                                                   
Newton’s  theory  shown  to  be  insufficient,  during  the  solar  eclipse  of  1919.  Scientists  were  then  able  to 
observe that the light from distant stars was bent by the Sun’s gravity, just as Einstein had predicted. Many 
scientists once believed that the Earth looks the way it does, with mountains and valleys, because the Earth 
was originally a red-hot mass that gradually shrivelled as it cooled. We know what an orange looks like after a 
long  drying  process  or  what  clay  looks  like  after  being  exposed  to  the  air  for  a  time.  What  was  a  smooth 
surface  becomes  wrinkled.  It  was  100  years  ago  this  year  that  the  German  meteorologist  Alfred  Wegener 
proposed  an  alternative  theory  of  continental  drift.  He  used  heuristic  arguments  based  on  studies  of 
coastlines. Brazil has a coastline that is an apparent perfect fit with the Gulf of Guinea on the west coast of 
Africa. Even so, the theory was not accepted until it was given a proper theoretical foundation and empirical 
grounding.  The  breakthrough  came  50  years  ago,  when  the  American  geologist  Harry  Hess  proposed  his 
theory of sea-floor spreading, and by the end of the 1960s the theory of plate tectonics became established 
science. The Centre for Advanced Study, which is located here in the Academy, recently hosted a research 
group that  is  at the  very  international  forefront of  this  field.  Headed  by  Professor  Trond Helge  Torsvik,  this 
group  worked  to  incorporate  the  theory  of  plate  tectonics  into  a  broader  theory  of  mantle  dynamics  as  an 
explanatory model for movements in the Earth’s crust. The aim is to understand the development of the Earth 
over several hundred million years. This is truly an ambitious example of learning from history. The Centre for 
Earth Evolution and Dynamics at the University of Oslo was just awarded the status of Centre of Excellence in 
research. 
3  Descriptions  of  the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  that  began  in1929  bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  today’s 
headlines:  a  massive  and  unregulated  shadow  banking  system,  global  imbalances  and  substantial  income 
inequality (see John Kenneth Galbraith (1997): The Great Crash, 1929, Houghton Mifflin). 
“More than anyone else”, Einar Lie writes, “he adhered to the fiscal policy convictions that he brought along to 
the  postwar  Ministry  of  Finance,  which  bore  the  stamp  of  his  experience  from  a  time  without  sufficiently 
(2010)  Over  evne. 
stringent 
Finansdepartementet 1965–1992 [Beyond our power], Pax forlag 
finances”.  Lie,  E.  and  C.  Venneslan 
regulation  of  government 
4 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
markets  were  self-correcting.  Following  the  Depression,  a  new  truth  emerged,  with  John 
Maynard Keynes and Norway’s own Ragnar Frisch at the forefront: prices and wages do not 
adjust  that  quickly  –  nor  can  we  expect  that  markets  will  automatically  ensure  full 
employment. Hence, government should play a more active role in economic policy. 
At the Ministry of Finance, Nissen kept to the traditional view. But the political leadership, and 
eventually  the  younger  economists  who  started  at  the  Ministry,  had  other  plans.5  The 
economy  was  to  be  managed.  Keynes’  idea  that  the  budget  should  be  used  actively  to 
manage  demand  and  output  over  an  economic  cycle  was  to  them  an  obvious  truth.  In  a 
Kuhnian sense, the older civil servants had to go for the new thinking to gain ground. The 
legal experts at the Ministry had to give way to the young economists. 
The new regulatory regime was enthusiastically implemented after the war, and crowned with 
success. The contrast between the blight of the interwar years and the postwar boom was 
stunning. 
The  ambition  was  not  only  to  keep  unemployment  low.  Which  industry  sectors  should  be 
allowed to invest? What type of dwellings should we build? Who should be able to buy a car 
and have a telephone installed? In the 1950s and 1960s, these were questions in respect of 
which the central government had firm views. 
Keynes, regulation and planning were predominant truths in the former government building 
for  several  decades.  Yet  neither  did  these  truths  remain  eternal.  In  the  1970s,  deficits 
ballooned  when  the  government  used  countercyclical  policies  to  “build  a  bridge”  over  the 
global downturn. But it was a bridge to nowhere. Inflation took off and government finances 
were strained to breaking point. The policy of micro-managing the economy had gone too far. 
Wage and price controls at the end of the 1970s, the last gasp of the postwar paradigm, did 
little to help. Norway was close to being placed under IMF administration. 
In  fact,  it  was  not  possible  to  steer  the  economy  towards  permanent  prosperity.  The  old 
doctrines  collapsed.6  New  ideas  for  managing  the  economy  took  shape  because  the  old 
system no longer functioned. Underlying the new truths was the notion that economic policy 
needed to operate through the proper market incentives and that economic policy must be 
sustainable  and  predictable.  At  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  new  ideas  took  hold  primarily 
because  a  younger  generation  was  taking  over,  just  as  when  Nissen  was  pushed  aside. 
Political micro-management lost considerable traction. 
Through the 1990s and up to the mid-2000s, economic growth was high and both inflation 
and unemployment low in much of the world. Cyclical fluctuations were moderate. The new 
truths  appeared  to  be  working  well.  This  period  is  known  as  the  Great  Moderation.  But 
underneath the positive developments, imbalances were building up both within and across 
countries. 
As we have all experienced, it is easy to ignore the bill as long as the food keeps coming and 
the conversation keeps flowing. Countries and governments can live with deficits for a while, 
but sooner or later the bill has to be paid. 
                                                
5  Einar Lie provides a detailed account of the break between classical and the new, more Keynesian thinking at 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  the  book  Norsk  økonomisk  politikk  etter  1905  [Norwegian  economic  policy  after 
1905], Pax forlag, 2012. 
6  Hermod  Skånland  (2004):  Doktriner  og  økonomisk  styring:  et  tilbakeblikk  [Doctrines  and  economic 
management in retrospect], Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers No. 36, Oslo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Budget deficits and high sovereign debt levels meant that the authorities had little slack when 
the financial crisis hit in autumn 2008.7 Countries rapidly embarked on an unavoidable path 
of fiscal austerity at the very time that demand was falling and unemployment rising. 
Unsound  fiscal  policies  have  particularly  severe  consequences  when  they  coincide  with  a 
financial  crisis.  Capital  markets  were  unable  to  manage  the  large  pool  of  savings  from 
emerging  market  economies  in  Asia.  Safe  yields  had  fallen  and  the  search  for  returns 
provided fertile ground for creativity in financial markets. Governments worldwide allowed the 
banking system to grow in the belief that regulations were sufficiently stringent, that a large 
banking  sector  is  a  benefit  and  that  banks’  self-interest  would  prevent  them  from  taking 
excessive risk. 
The  regulations,  which  in  the  1980s  were  regarded  as  overly  rigid,  had  been  introduced 
during the crisis of the early 1930s as a still-vivid memory. The well-known Glass-Steagall 
Act had been passed in 1933 precisely to prevent financial sector excesses. Banks that took 
deposits  from  the  public  were  subjected  to  strict  rules  concerning  the  amount  of  risk  they 
could take. Deposits were guaranteed by deposit insurance, and banks could draw on central 
bank liquidity if necessary. Investment banks whose customers were professional investors 
had a freer hand, but no safety net.8  
Banking  gradually  became  a  growth  industry  in  many  countries.  Strict  regulations  in  one 
country prompt banks to flee to another. The result was the dilution or elimination of many 
regulations  that  attempted  to  rein  in  the  imagination  of  the  financial  sector.  The  rationale 
behind the Glass-Steagall Act was discarded. This trend was universal. Unfettered financial 
markets were apparently a success. Mortgage-backed securities enabled more Americans to 
become homeowners, and a bullish stock market was good for pension funds – as long as it 
lasted.9  
8 
                                                
7  Debt levels among European countries were, on the whole, excessive in 2008, though this varied substantially 
from  country  to  country.  For  example,  Ireland  and  Spain  had  moderate  sovereign  debt,  but  both  countries 
have  later  incurred  additional  obligations  owing  to  the  problems  in  their  banking  sectors.  By  2008,  the 
government debt of Italy and Greece had already exceeded 100 percent of GDP. 
In the US, under the Glass-Steagall Act, which was passed in 1933, banks were no longer allowed to engage 
in  retail  banking  (deposits,  lending  and  payment  services)  while  also  engaging  in  more  risky  investment 
banking  activities.  When  the  act  was  formally  repealed  in  1999,  it  had  long  been  the  subject  of  intense 
discussion  in  the  academic  literature.  See,  for  example,  George  Benston  (1989),  The  Separation  of 
Commercial from Investment banking: The Glass-Steagall Act Revisited and Reconsidered, Kluwer Academic 
Press, Randall S. Kroszner and Raghuram G. Rajan (1994), “Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of 
the U.S. Experience with Universal Banking before 1933”, American Economic Review, Vol. 84, pp. 810–32, 
Eugene N. White (1986), “Before the Glass-Steagall Act: An Analysis of the Investment Banking Activities of 
National Banks”, Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 23, pp. 33–55, and Charles W. Calomiris (2003), U.S. 
Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective, Cambridge University Press. Marc Flandreau (2011), “New Deal 
Financial Acts and the Business of Foreign Debt Underwriting: Autopsy of a Regime Change” shows how the 
Glass-Steagall Act and other New Deal legislation conferred greater power on policymakers at the expense of 
international  bankers  and  discusses  some  consequences  for  financial  markets.  Flandreau’s  article  can  be 
downloaded  from  Norges  Bank’s  website:  http://www.norges-bank.no/Upload/82434/EN/FLANDREU%20 
Paper.pdf. 
In this area, there are few, if any, ultimate truths, and the pendulum appears to be swinging back again. In the 
US, the UK and the euro area, reintroducing some sort of separation between retail and investment banking is 
now  being  discussed  (cf.  the  Volker  Rule  (US),  the  Vickers  Commission  (UK)  and  the  Liikanen  Plan  (EU). 
Andrew Haldane at the Bank of England has recently discussed this issue in his speech, “On being the right 
size”,  where  he  also  outlines proposals  for  future banking sector  regulation  (see http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/615.aspx).  CEO  Sandy  Weill  of  Citigroup,  the  largest  US  bank 
before the crisis, said in July 2012 that repealing this act had contributed more than any other factor to the 
financial crisis. See also the article, “Roosevelt’s lessons for President Obama” by Marc Flandreau (2012), in 
The  Global  Journal  (http://theglobaljournal.net/article/view/770/),  where  the  author  discusses  historical 
perspectives on New Deal policies in the 1930s. 
 9  For decades, a number of policies have been implemented in a large number of countries, including Norway, 
to support home ownership. In Fault Lines (2010), Raghuram Rajan describes US housing market policies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Big  banks  can  easily  give  rise  to  big  ideas  about  the  importance  of  a  country.  But  the 
financial  crisis  showed  that  big  banks  above  all  give  rise  to  a  political  headache  and  a 
massive  bill  for  taxpayers.  Banks  that  are  so  large  that  they  can  undermine  the  entire 
financial system cannot easily be allowed to fail.10 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  seeks  to  ensure  that  different  countries 
operate on a level playing field. While this is a good thing, the result was often compromise 
whereby the country with the weakest regulations set the standard. One must also recognise 
that  the  new  rules  introduced  in  the  1980s  did  not  take  into  account  banks’  ability  and 
creativity in terms of circumventing these rules. Rules intended to mitigate the risk of financial 
instability actually encouraged banks to take on ever more risk. 
What do economists do when regulations do not work? Well, paradoxically, what we do is 
argue that we need to regulate more and better. There is now a version III of the Basel rules, 
which  have  grown  from  37  to  616  pages.11  Andy  Haldane,  Executive  Director  of  Financial 
Stability at the Bank of England estimates that, all together, the rules – once they are fully 
incorporated in national legislation in Europe – will number 30,000 pages.12 Is this really the 
way to go? Has the pendulum swung too far?13 Are we facing a new paradigm shift? 
In spite of lessons learned: back to square one 
The philosopher Henrik Syse has reminded me of this very phenomenon. Truths we took to 
be eternal often prove to bear the stamp of their time. We then find new truths and throw out 
the  old  ones.  Following  the  policy  failures  in  the  1970s,  many  economists  believed  that 
Keynes  and  his  disciples  were  wrong,  and  “Keynesian”  almost  became  a  term  of  abuse, 
referring  to  irresponsible  government  spending.  But  to  draw  such  a  conclusion  is  to  go  to 
                                                
10  Experience  shows  that  governments  routinely  bail  out  banks  on  the  verge  of  failing.  Of  course,  this sort of 
implicit  government  guarantee  makes  lending  to  these  banks  safer,  and  their  borrowing  costs  fall.  The 
difference  between  the  rate  they  actually  pay  and  what  they  would  have  had  to  pay  without  the  implicit 
government guarantee amounts to a subsidy. Andrew Haldane at the Bank of England notes in his speech, 
“On being the right size” that if we look at some of the world’s largest banks, this subsidy amounted in the 
period between 2002 and 2007 to around half of post-tax profits. When the financial crisis erupted, this implicit 
subsidy became explicit and was equal to more than post-tax profits. By comparison, the value of the subsidy 
exceeds  the  amount  spent  globally  each  year  on  development  assistance  (see  http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/615.aspx. However, this subsidy does not go to the needy. Figures 
for  the  US  show  that  CEOs  of  the  largest  investment  banks  earned  500  times  the  median  US  household 
income in 2007, a ratio that has increased fivefold since 1989. Andrew Haldane discussed this recently in a 
speech 
(see  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/ 
2012/616.aspx). 
leaf  being 
turned” 
“A 
11  Nevertheless, Basel II gives banks ample leeway to determine their own capital requirements. In 2007, the 
Swiss bank UBS held USD 50 billion in US CDOs, but the bank believed that these were risk-free, since the 
paper  had  the  highest  rating  from  the  rating  agencies  and  the  bank  had  also  purchased  credit  default 
insurance. Thus, the bank did not have sufficient capital reserves to cover any losses on this portfolio (Gillian 
Tett (2009): Fool’s Gold). 
12  Andrew Haldane (2012): “The dog and the Frisbee”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 
36th symposium ‘The Changing Policy Landscape’, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (see Bank of England website). 
13  Swings  of  the  pendulum  are  a  frequently  used  metaphor  in  studies  of  financial  crises.  See,  for  example, 
Michael D. Bordo (2003), “Market Discipline and Financial Crisis Policy: a Historical Perspective”, in Market 
Discipline  in  Banking:  Theory  and  Evidence.  Research  in  Financial  Services:  Private  and  Public  Policy, 
Volume 15, 157–182, Edited by George G. Kaufman, Elsevier Publishers. According to Bordo, the pendulum 
swings between measures to prevent crises, manage crises and resolve crises. Erik F. Gerding (2006), “The 
Next  Epidemic:  Bubbles  and  the  Growth  and  Decay  of  Securities  Regulation”,  Connecticut  Law  Review, 
shows  how  economic  upswings  are  often  periods  of  deregulation  and  overoptimism  in  securities  markets, 
while the downturns that follow are marked by austerity and calls for stricter regulation. Moreover, regulations 
become  less  effective  as  time  passes,  and  market  participants  forget  the  previous  crisis.  Gerding  provides 
examples of such cyclical pendulum movements going as far back as the 1600s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
extremes.  Keynesian  policy  is  often  appropriate  in  a  contractionary  period,  but  it  also 
involves saving in times of growth – a component that had been widely forgotten.14  
The economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff have summarised the experience of 
financial crises all over the world over the past 800 years. They show that history repeats 
itself. The “truth” most often proclaimed in boom periods just before the bubble bursts is the 
belief that “this time is different”, which is also the ironic title of the book. 
Although history never repeats itself exactly, some key features recur: one recurring feature 
is that boom periods are confused with an increase in the economy’s growth capacity. Good 
times are mistakenly interpreted as perfectly normal.15  
When  times  are  good,  it  is  difficult  to  gain  acceptance  for  setting  aside  funds.  There  are 
always unsolved tasks in a society, and these tasks attract attention. In the 1930s, Ragnar 
Frisch  understood  that  it  is  difficult  for  politicians  to  recognise  good  times  at  the  time.  He 
believed that it was the task of economists to ascertain the cyclical situation.16 
When the crisis arrived in 2007, government finances were in disorder. Deficits and debt rose 
to such high levels that it was difficult for many countries to borrow money. When credibility 
is lost and lenders draw the line, Keynesian policy has reached its limit. These countries now 
have no other choice than to cut welfare schemes and public spending. The political fury we 
are now witnessing in Athens, Madrid and Rome is being directed at today’s political leaders. 
Perhaps their rage should be directed at those who were in positions of responsibility in the 
good times, instead of at those who are now left with the washing-up. 
We have furthered our understanding of economics over the many decades since Keynes, 
Frisch and others laid the basis of modern economics after the 1930s crisis. Theories have 
become more advanced, and methods and calculations far more complex. We have reams of 
regulations. 
Perhaps one lesson to be learnt from history is that the simplest method can sometimes be 
the  best,  as  Andy  Haldane  has  argued.  Friedrich  Georg  Nissen’s rule  that  budgets  should 
always balance was not particularly sophisticated, but if his ideas had been followed before 
the crisis, many countries would now be better off. 
However,  the  principles  behind  Nissen’s  ideas  were  not  completely  unfamiliar  when 
European politicians drew up the Maastricht Treaty at the beginning of the 1990s. The Treaty 
contained  simple  rules  for  economic  policy:  budget  deficits  should  be  below  three  percent 
and government debt below 60 percent of GDP. 
The rules sparked debate, and academics the world over – including in Norway – ridiculed 
them as far-fetched and hopelessly rigid. And as so often before, the rules soon sank into 
oblivion,  particularly  after  the  major  EU  countries  Germany  and  France  had  pushed  them 
aside. 
                                                
14  Georg F. Nissen was not alone in focusing on the fiscal balance. Nicolai Rygg wrote the following in 1948: 
“There is a tenet that is not difficult to endorse: in times of slow economic growth, when the private sector 
relaxes, central and local government should support the economy, initiate projects to sustain activity and to 
prevent  a  rise  in  unemployment.  But  the  other  side  of  this  coin  is  also  important:  in  years  when  economic 
conditions are favourable, when the private sector is at full speed, the government should hold back and put 
aside  reserves  to  boost  its  financial  strength  so  that  it  can  provide  support  when  the  economy  needs  it.” 
Nicolai Rygg (1948), “I økonomisk stormvær” [In stormy economic weather], festschrift for Joh. H. Andresen, 
also published as an annex to the periodical Statsøkonomisk tidsskrift nr. 3/4 1948, p. 23. In this article, Rygg 
highlights his assertion that government budgets must balance over the business cycle. 
15  Governments consistently overestimate growth in their forecasts (Frankel 2011). But this is difficult; in summer 
2008, the average OECD country overestimated the budget situation in 2007 – the year prior to the forecast – 
in an amount equivalent to 2 percent of GDP (National Budget 2013). 
16  In his 1933 pamphlet “Saving and Circulation Regulation”, Frisch proposed the establishment of an advisory 
committee on the business cycle, composed of economics experts. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In retrospect, we can acknowledge that simple rules of thumb can often be useful. For my 
own part, many years’ experience of economic policy have led me to notice the prevalence of 
the figure 4.17 A current account deficit exceeding 4 percent of GDP is often a harbinger of 
future  problems.  Spain  is  a  case  in  point:  government  finances  were  fairly  healthy,  but 
deficits were building up in the private sector. Inflation of more than 4 percent is usually a 
sign  of  economic  instability.  If  unemployment  in  a  country  is  persistently  above  4  percent, 
there is probably something wrong both with the functioning of the labour market and with the 
level of political ambition. And the financial crisis has shown that total banking sector lending 
in  the  most  heavily  indebted  countries  has  often  been  more  than  4  times  GDP.18  In  this 
situation, any rescue packages would be too expensive for taxpayers – Ireland and Iceland 
are two examples. 
This is a familiar element in our everyday lives. Speed limits are an example of such a rule. 
Calculating the optimal speed for a specific car on a specific road is extremely complicated. It 
would require considerable knowledge of both mechanics and physics. Speed limits help us. 
Of course, it might be optimal to drive faster or slower than the speed limit, but the rule is 
simple to understand and easy to enforce. This simple rule helps to shape our behavioural 
patterns to ensure efficiency and safety in the traffic system. 
Simple  rules  can  also  make  it  easier  to  resist  the  temptation  to  postpone  problems. 
Economists call this the time inconsistency problem. Odysseus solved his time inconsistency 
problem by having himself tied to the mast and instructing his crew to plug their ears with 
wax and ignore him when he would later ask them to steer the ship towards the song of the 
Sirens. That was an easy rule for the crew to follow. 
But rules can be too simple.19 They must be used only as points of reference, not as excuses 
for  doing  nothing.  Economic  policy  rules  should  be  common  knowledge.  An  independent 
body should be established to tell us when we are “speeding”, and procedures must be in 
place to implement measures to solve the problem.20 The new "Fiscal Compact" in the euro 
                                                
17  See  Berg,  Qvigstad  and  Vonen  (2011)  Two  essays  on  the  magic  number  4  ,  Staff  Memo  2/2011,  Norges 
Bank, and Llewellyn and Qvigstad (2012) The “Rule of Four”, The Business Economist, Vol 43, No. 1. 
18  The  financial  sector  faces  risk  involving  probabilities  of  various  outcomes  that  we  can  forecast  fairly 
accurately. But it also faces genuine uncertainty, where probabilities are also unknown. We do not know all 
the possible outcomes of bank behavior or the real probabilities. Such uncertainty is more effectively managed 
using  simple  and  robust  rules,  rather  than  rules  that  are  as  complex  as  the  systems  they  are  meant  to 
regulate. 
19  The  psychologist  and  Economics  Nobel  laureate  Daniel  Kahneman  touches  on  this  theme  in  his  book, 
Thinking, Fast and Slow (Allen Lane, 2011) (see e.g. page 98). Kahneman points out that the application of 
heuristics  –  simple  decision-making  rules  often  used  to  find  answers  to  difficult  questions  –  may  produce 
answers that are imprecise or wrong. The use of heuristics may be regarded as a way of substituting complex 
questions with simple ones. While simple rules produce answers quickly, these answers may not be a proper 
response to the question we want to know the answer to. An analogy to this is substituting the fundamental 
question, “Am I driving safely?” with “Am I obeying the speed limit?” 
20  Most  countries  have  balanced  budgets  as  a  long-term  strategy.  However,  the  long-term  intention  of  a 
balanced budget is often abandoned in practice. This is another example of the time inconsistency problem. 
Today, many European countries are forced to pursue fiscal austerity, even if their current economic situation 
makes  such  a  policy  undesirable.  The  most  rational  option  would  be  if  governments  were  able  to  approve 
credible tightening measures that cut spending and raised taxes in the medium term, but that had negligible 
short-term austerity effects. Pension reform would be such a measure. The problem is that investors, who will 
be lending money to governments in the meantime, have little confidence that governments will actually follow 
through on their plans. History shows that they have good reason for this lack of confidence. Thus, the OECD 
and the IMF are recommending measures intended to deal with the time inconsistency problem and bolster 
confidence  that long-term  plans  will  actually  be implemented.  Independent  fiscal  policy  boards  that  monitor 
government budgetary policy and that speak up if plans are not followed is one such measure. These boards 
will also make recommendations for realistic economic forecasting, so that projections of future tax revenues 
are credible. The idea is that greater credibility reduces borrowing costs and thus the need for cuts. The UK 
has  basically  followed  up  these  recommendations  by  establishing  the  Office  for  Budget  Responsibility  (see 
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/data_obr_index.htm). In the Eurosystem, there is now a tendency to give the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
area is a tightening of the Maastricht Treaty, precisely to prevent the simple rules from being 
broken. 
We  should  be  less  concerned  about  what  is  completely  right  and  correct  according  to  the 
prevailing  truths,  and more  concerned  about  avoiding  major mistakes,  irrespective  of  what 
the truth might be.21 And this is the line of thinking behind our inflation target for monetary 
policy and the fiscal rule for oil revenue spending. 
We must be humble and constantly search for new knowledge. But as I have shown, there is 
a tendency for this humility to vary with the business cycle. Marc Flandreau and Mike Bordo 
tell  me  that  during  upturns,  the colossal  blunders  of  yesterday  are forgotten  by  politicians, 
journalists and central bank governors, but not by economic historians. And right now, their 
profession is enjoying its golden age.22  
Simple economic rules can perhaps prevent countries from getting into difficulties, but once 
the rules have been broken and the crisis is a fact, the solution is anything other than simple. 
Real problems must be solved by real measures. That takes time and is painful, as we are 
witnessing in Europe today. Much of the adjustment in real terms is still to come, and there is 
still some way to go before we will be able to say that the global economy is on safe ground. 
The full consequences of inadequate regulation of financial institutions became visible only 
after  the  crisis  was  a  fact.  However,  macroeconomic  imbalances  were  widely  recognised 
beforehand.  In  the  mid-2000s,  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  raised  the  key 
rate to reduce the US savings deficit. But long-term interest rates were kept low by the Asian 
savings surplus that found its haven in the US. International organisations such as the IMF 
and the OECD pointed out what needed to be done, but the solution required measures to be 
implemented by a number of countries with differing interests and finding a good solution for 
the global community proved to be too difficult.23 
The  global  community  is  nonetheless  sometimes  able  to  make  decisions  that  benefit  all 
countries.  I  witnessed  this  myself  in  Washington  at  the  IMF’s  meeting  in  October  2008 
following the Lehman Brothers collapse. The alternative then was a black hole. In that kind of 
situation, it is easier to reach agreement. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Commission the role of monitoring member states’ implementation of their own plans. Other countries, such 
as  Denmark  and  Sweden,  have  fiscal  policy  boards,  but  in  many  cases  they  have  taken  on  duties  beyond 
those strictly related to remedying the time inconsistency problem. They also comment on how fiscal policy 
ought to be formulated. This quickly encroaches on what is properly the domain of politics, rather than helping 
the political system to be consistent in implementing its own plans. A more detailed discussion of fiscal policy 
boards,  with  a  focus  on  the  board  in  Sweden,  is  found  in  Matsen,  Natvik  and  Torvik  (Samfunnsøkonomen 
no. 2, 2010). 
21  The financial crisis has also reminded us of weaknesses in models and methods used in analyses behind the 
economic policies pursued. We must with humility acknowledge that we understand less about the functioning 
of the economy than we would have liked. Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, recently voiced 
this view in a speech, “Twenty years of inflation targeting”, which he gave on 9 October 2012 at the London 
School  of  Economics  (see  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/606.aspx). 
Similar  reflections  have  also  recently  been  expressed  in  an  interview  with  Andrew  Haldane,  the  
Executive  Director  for  Financial  Stability  at  the  Bank  of  England,  under  the  title  “Our models  are  no  longer 
working  properly”  (see  http://economicsintelligence.com/2012/10/24/bank-of-englands-haldane-on-the-crisis-
of-economics-our-models-are-no-longer-working-properly/). 
22  In  his  article,  “Time  on  the  Cross:  How  and  Why  Not  to  Choose  Between  Economics  and  History”  in  Pat 
Hudson  (2001),  Living  Economic  and  Social  History,  Glasgow:  Economic  History  Society,  pp.  81–85,  Marc 
Flandreau gives a personal and colourful account of how he inadvertently and unwittingly and in the spirit of 
“having it both ways” became an economic historian, because he refused to choose between economics and 
history. 
23  Various observers have pointed out a number of factors that help to explain the financial crisis: Low key rates 
in  all  major  countries  over  several  years  in  the  early  2000s,  conflicts  of  interest  in  important  financial 
institutions such as credit rating agencies and considerable economic differences are just a few of them. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In many ways, central banks are the response the authorities could apply when crises arose. 
Central  banks  were  established  to  exercise  control  over  the  monetary  system,  enabling 
states to issue banknotes people could trust and providing banks with a bank for their own 
deposits and from which they could, in the last resort, borrow from in times of crisis. 
Confidence in the monetary unit is the mainstay of our financial system. The following may 
serve as an illustration: It costs 50 øre to produce a banknote. For every 100-krone banknote 
Norges Bank issues, we apparently create wealth of NOK 99.50 – out of thin air. But people 
still  sleep  soundly  in  their  beds  –  including  those  with  money  under  their  mattresses  – 
because we are confident that the money can be exchanged for real goods. 
It  is,  of  course,  tempting  to  take  advantage  of  this  confidence.  History  is  full  of  kings  and 
governments who have attempted to do just that. In 1716, the Scottish economist John Law 
established a bank that soon assumed the role as the first central bank of France. John Law 
saw  the  possibility  of  printing  banknotes  to  finance  promising  development  projects  in  the 
New World. Excessive confidence in the potential for profits fuelled both the printing presses 
and  equity  prices  in  Paris.  The  bubble  burst  and  John  Law  fled  to  Italy.24  Today,  the 
                                                
24  Government  debt  in  France  had  reached  enormous  proportions  after  the  Spanish  War  of  Succession  
(1702–1713).  After  the  death  of  Louis  XIV  in  1715,  John  Law  persuaded  the  French  authorities  to  convert 
government debt into equity capital in the Compagnie d’Occident, also known as the Mississippi Company. 
The company was awarded exclusive rights to develop the French territories in North America and a number 
of trade privileges. Banque Générale was taken over by the state, given the name Banque Royale, and later 
merged  with  Mississippi  Company.  John  Law  was  appointed  Contrôleur  Général  des  Finances  and  now 
controlled in practice France’s finances and all trade between France and countries outside Europe. Banque 
Royale was given unlimited rights to issue banknotes (livres tournois). This was the first time paper money 
had been issued in France. The banknotes were made legal tender and the bank was given the right to collect 
taxes. An increasing number of stocks in the Mississippi Company were issued against government debt or 
paper notes issued by the Banque Royale. This led to a speculative bubble and new rounds of share issues. 
The value of the shares rose twentyfold in the course of 1719 and the number of millionaires rose sharply. 
When some investors sought to sell their shares in exchange for gold early in 1720s to secure their gains, the 
party came to an end. The bank attempted to persuade investors to accept banknotes instead, but this led to a 
sharp increase  in  the money  supply.  Inflation  surged and in  January  1720  it had  exceeded  20  percent per 
month.  In  late  spring  1720,  the  bubble  burst.  People  lost  all  confidence in  banknotes.  Coins  resumed  their 
status as means of payment, and to the extent that bank-like institutions were established in France in the 
next 150 years banks were designated using other names such as “caisse”, “credit”, “sociétè” or “comptoir”. 
John Law was sacked and allegedly fled the country disguised as a woman. At about the same time a similar 
project in England led to the South Sea Bubble. Under an agreement between England and Spain in 1713, the 
South Sea Company was awarded a contract for delivering slaves to the Spanish territories in America. The 
South Sea Bubble also burst in 1720. In contrast to the Mississippi bubble, however, the South Sea Bubble 
involved  extensive  insider  trading  and  fraud,  and  a  reaction  new  and  stricter  financial  regulation  was 
introduced in England through the Bubble Act and Sir John Barnard's Act. There is a large body of literature 
dealing  with  these  speculative  bubbles  in  France  and  England  in  the  early  years  of  paper  money,  see  for 
example Larry Neal (1990, 2011), “The rise of Financial Capitalism. International Capital Markets in the Age of 
Reason”, Cambridge University Press and “I Am Not The Master of Events. The Speculations of John Law 
and  Lord  Londonderry  in  the  Mississippi  and  South  Sea  Bubbles”,  Yale  University  Press,  Charles 
P. Kindleberger (1984), “A Financial History of Western Europe”, Erik F. Gerding (2006), “The next epidemic: 
Bubbles  and  the  Growth  and  Decay  of  Securities  Regulation”,  Connecticut  Law  Review,  and  John 
E. Sandrock  (2007),  “John  Law’s  Banque  Royale  and  the  Mississippi  bubble”.  For  further  details  regarding 
South  Sea  Bubble,  see  Norges  Bank’s  website,  article  by  Helen  Paul  (2011),  “Limiting  the  witch  hunt: 
Recovering from the South Sea Bubble”, http://www.norges-bank.no/Upload/82434/EN/PAUL%20Paper.pdf 
  Many decades were to pass before France reintroduced paper money. This was in connection with the French 
Revolution,  which,  paradoxically,  also  ended  in  disaster.  The  Revolution  in  1789  led  to  substantial 
expenditures that needed to be financed. The Assemblée Nationale had reduced taxes, and instead issued 
large quantities of banknotes backed by confiscated church lands. These notes were called assignats, since 
each note was assigned to a specific property holding, which the bearer could subsequently take possession 
of. John Law originally had the same plan when in 1705 he proposed introducing land-backed paper money, 
but when Law  was given the opportunity in 1715 to introduce paper money in France, the banknotes were 
collateralised by government debt and stock in the Mississippi Company. Meanwhile, French assignats were 
issued in such great quantities that the result in a few short years was hyperinflation that culminated in 1795. It 
would  take  years  to  restore  confidence  in  paper  money  and  banks  in  France.  Sweden  had  a  similar 
experience  with  paper  money  following  an  economic  collapse  in  the  1750s.  For  that  reason,  Sveriges 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
European Central Bank and the central banks in the UK and the US are using money they 
have  produced  themselves  to  purchase  government  bonds  and  other  securities.  They  are 
taking advantage of the confidence the central bank enjoys to buy time to enable European 
countries to tackle the underlying problems. 
Some lessons 
Tonight’s theme is “Learning from history”. And in this title lies a question, in both the positive 
and normative senses. The answer to the question of whether we actually learn from history 
would  probably  have  to  be  “yes  and  no”.  Sometimes  we  learn,  sometimes  we  do  not. 
Economic crises seem to be a necessary precondition for learning. And this may still be the 
case.  We  have  some  capacity  to  learn  from  our  own  mistakes  –  particularly  if  they  are 
traumatic  enough  –  but  limited  capacity  to  learn  from  other  people’s  mistakes.  This  is 
something  we  recognise  from  raising  children.  To  the  frustration  of  their  parents,  children 
seem to be more interested in having their own experiences than listening to parents’ advice, 
however good it might be. 
The answer to the normative question “should we learn from history?” is obviously “yes”. 
And which lessons should we learn? 
Allow me to venture to select three lessons on the basis of what I have said so far. 
First: the simplest solution is often the best. Simple rules, whether for fiscal policy or banking 
regulation,  will  often  prevent  the  worst  errors.  And  when  the  yellow  warning  light  starts 
flashing, action must be taken. 
Second: confidence is essential, also for economic policy. Confidence is easily eroded and 
difficult – and costly – to restore. Confidence must be earned. The resolution of today’s crisis 
will also follow a smoother path if there is confidence in institutions – banks, central banks 
and governments. Borrowing costs will then decrease more quickly, the need for government 
cuts will diminish accordingly, and the good times will return sooner. 
Third: we have no magic wand. If a country has real economic problems, real adjustments 
must be made to solve them.25 Central banks cannot solve the problems, but what they can 
do  is  lend  money  when  there  is  none  available  elsewhere,  giving  countries  more  time  to 
implement necessary reforms. Deficits must be reduced. 
Unrestrained  printing  of money  has  led to  problems  on  many  occasions  through  history. If 
printing money is not followed up by action – in euro area countries, in the UK and in the US 
– Mario Draghi, Mervyn King and Ben Bernanke run the risk of being recorded in history in 
the same chapter as the Scotsman John Law. 
The full title of my speech today is “Learning from history: truths and eternal truths”. I have 
ventured to outline three lessons that are hopefully are universally valid. But we can never be 
sure.  I  mentioned  Ibsen’s  “Enemy  of  the  People”.  Allow  me  to  conclude  with  Doctor 
Stockmann’s comments: 
                                                                                                                                                   
Riksbank’s was not permitted to print banknotes when it was founded. In Norway, Jørgen Thormølen issued 
banknotes  in  September  1695.  His  venture  lasted  a  year!  See  Anders  Bjarne  Fossen  (1978),  Jørgen 
Thormølen.  Forretningsmann,  storreder,  finansgeni  [Jørgen  Thormølen.  Businessman,  shipping  magnate, 
financial genius]. Eirnar Blaauw A.S, Bergen. 
25  In Act I of Part II of Goethe’s Faust, published in 1832, the Emperor is in financial difficulties. Mephistopheles 
convinces him to print paper money backed by gold that has yet to be mined to boost economic activity. This 
works  for  a  while,  until  soaring  inflation  destroys  the  economy.  Jens  Weidmann,  the  President  of  the 
Bundesbank, spoke of the dangers posed by overly unrestricted monetary policy, based on Faust, during the 
festival  “Goethe  und  das  Geld”  in  Frankfurt  in  September  2012:  http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/ 
EN/Reden/2012/2012_09_20_weidmann_money_creaktion_and_responsibility.html 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Yes, believe me or not, as you like; but truths are by no means as long-lived as Methuselah – 
as some folk imagine. A normally constituted truth lives, let us say, as a rule seventeen or 
eighteen, or at most twenty years –seldom longer.26  
Ibsen’s play has been long-lived. It is still performed all over the world, 130 years after it was 
written. Not because the Norway of the 1880s never loses its appeal, nor because Doctor 
Stockmann found eternal truths. It is because the play raises questions of a more enduring 
nature.  Perhaps  we  have  to  recognise  that  the  closest  we  can  get  to  eternal  truths  is, 
precisely, eternal questions? 
                                                
26  The quotation continues: But truths as aged as that are always worn frightfully thin, and nevertheless it is only 
then  that  the  majority  recognises  them  and  recommends  them  to  the  community  as  wholesome  moral 
nourishment. There is no great nutritive value in that sort of fare, I can assure you; and, as a doctor, I ought to 
know. These “majority truths” are like last year’s cured meat – like rancid, tainted ham; and they are the origin 
of the moral scurvy that is rampant in our communities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
