Stefan Ingves: Basel III is simpler and stronger 
Op-ed by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, published in the Wall Street Journal, 15 October 2012. 
 The  economic  cost  of  the  global  financial  crisis  during  the  past  five  years  has  been 
frighteningly large. One clear lesson from the crisis is that regulatory capital requirements for 
the banking system were too low. Or in other words, leverage was too high.  
Under the pre-crisis rules, banks were allowed to increase their leverage to unprecedented 
levels.  This  increased  risk  in  the  financial  system  and  when  the  crisis  hit,  the  implicit 
guarantees resulted in massive public bailouts around the globe.  
The  Basel  Committee’s  capital  reforms,  known  as  Basel  III,  substantially  raise  capital 
requirements  from  pre-crisis  levels  to  reduce  the  probability  of  bank  failures  and  the 
associated risks to taxpayers and to financial stability.  
Recently, much has been made of the perceived shortcomings of Basel III. Some argue that 
Basel III, which comes into effect next year, is not enough. Others argue that Basel III is too 
complex and should be replaced by a simple leverage ratio, calculated as tangible equity to 
non-risk weighted assets.  
In  my  view,  the  Basel  III  agreement  fundamentally  enhances  national  and  global  financial 
stability  by  both  raising  the  level  of  capital  required  by  banks,  and  by  simplifying  the 
regulatory framework.  
It is no small task to reach a global consensus on these often quite technical matters. Part of 
the consensus is that Basel III should be seen as a set of minimum requirements. Hence, 
countries are free to impose more stringent rules if they wish.  
But we should not underestimate how Basel III strengthens bank-capital adequacy rules. A 
fundamental  feature  of  the  new  framework  is  the  significant  increase  in  required  minimum 
capital levels. All banks must hold common-equity capital of at least 7% of their risk-based 
assets, compared with only 2% previously.  
In the event of a credit boom, banks under Basel III would potentially need to hold a further 
2.5% in common equity, bringing the total to 9.5%. Finally, the most systemically important 
banks must hold up to 2.5% in additional common equity. That is a total of 12%, a sixfold 
increase from pre-crisis levels for these institutions.  
The Basel Committee supports a regulatory framework that is both prudent and as simple as 
possible.  Hence  the  Basel  III  agreement  introduces  several  simplifying  changes  to  the 
regulatory framework. For instance, the definition of capital now focuses on tangible common 
equity, the truest form of loss-absorbing capital. Moreover, all components of the capital base 
and associated deductions such as goodwill or deferred tax assets must be disclosed in a 
fully comparable manner.  
By  standardising  and  simplifying  the  measure  of  capital,  Basel  III  makes  the  regulatory 
framework easier to understand, and will enable market discipline to work better.  
Another  important  step  has  been  the  introduction  of  a  non-risk  based  leverage  ratio  as  a 
supplement  to  the  risk-based  requirement.  This  is  a  “belt  and  suspenders”  approach  to 
capital regulation. The leverage ratio will help contain the buildup of excessive leverage in 
the system, serving as a backstop to the risk-based regime and safeguarding against banks’ 
attempts to “game” the risk-based requirements.  
Equally  critically,  the  risk-based  framework  helps  ensure  that  banks  do  not  game  the 
leverage ratio. Let’s not forget that simple measures like a leverage ratio have been in place 
in the past and did not alone prevent banking failures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Risk-weighting  is  difficult  but  vitally  important.  Therefore  the  Basel  Committee  is  in  the 
process of reviewing the risk-weighting regime of the capital framework to ensure that it is as 
simple and comparable as can be while still capturing the risk profile of banks’ varied asset 
portfolios. 
Complexity is a byproduct of the desire, among regulators and banks, for risk sensitivity. Risk 
measurement  will  never  be  perfect.  Simplicity,  however,  can  sometimes  come  at  a  cost. 
Ignoring risk does not make it disappear. Without measuring risk properly, we may allow it to 
build up undetected.  
Operating only with a non-risk-based leverage ratio creates incentives to shed safe assets 
and  to  increase  the  riskiness  of  asset  portfolios;  to  forgo  risk-reducing  hedging  strategies 
because they could result in higher capital requirements; and to engage in off-balance sheet 
activities and other sophisticated structures that expose a bank to contingent risks. This is 
likely  to  increase  the  aggregate  risk  in  the  economy  and  thereby  create  global  financial 
stability concerns. 
The lesson, therefore, is not to rely on either risk-based or non-risk-based measures alone, 
but  to  have  each  reinforcing  the  other.  A  combined  approach,  as  Basel  III  introduces,  is 
better than any single approach. 
I  believe  Basel  III  strikes  a  reasonable  balance  by  strengthening  overall  bank-capital 
requirements  while  continuing  to  recognise  that  there  are  a  wide  range  of  risks  within  a 
bank’s  business.  Going  forward,  the  Committee  will  look  to  further  simplify  the  framework 
while  ensuring  that  it  appropriately  measures  and  responds  to  the  risks  it  is  supposed  to 
mitigate.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
