Andrew G Haldane: A leaf being turned 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, to 
Occupy Economics, “Socially useful banking”, London, 29 October 2012. 
 its 
journey  and  entered 
The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Mark Cornelius, Paul Fisher and Varun Paul for their comments and contributions. 
The theme for tonight is “Socially Useful Banking”. And what better place to discuss it than 
tonight’s venue – the main meeting hall of The Friend’s House, traditionally the venue for the 
annual meeting of the Quakers.  
The  Quaker  movement  famously  gave  us  two  of  the  UK’s  largest  banks,  Lloyds  and 
Barclays.  Between  them,  these  banks  have  almost  600  years  of  history.  For  most  of  that 
period, no-one questioned their social usefulness. They extended loans to businesses and 
helped  families  buy  homes.  Nationally  and  regionally,  they  were  part  of  the  social  fabric. 
Today, that fabric is torn. 
As  the  CEOs  of  these  two  institutions  have  both  recently  said,  these  banks  need  to 
rediscover their social usefulness. But this is not only a question for the banks. It is a key 
issue  for  wider  society  too,  who  have  after  all  felt  the  financial  consequences  of  banks’ 
failings and failures. What do we want our banking system to do? And how do we create that 
system? 
This is where Occupy enter the picture. It is now over a year since the Occupy movement 
commenced 
the  public  and 
policymakers. One year on, what has it achieved? 
Some  have  suggested  rather  little,  that  Occupy’s  voice  has  been  loud  but  vague,  long  on 
problems, short on solutions. Others have argued that the fault-lines in the global financial 
system, which chasmed during the crisis, are essentially unaltered, that reform has failed. 
I wish to argue tonight that both are wrong – that Occupy’s voice has been both loud and 
persuasive  and  that  policymakers  have  listened  and  are  acting  in  ways  which  will  close 
those fault-lines. In fact, I want to argue that we are in the early stages of a reformation of 
finance, a reformation which Occupy has helped stir. 
Let  me  start  with  the  contribution  of  the  Occupy  movement  itself.  Occupy  has  been 
successful in its efforts to popularise the problems of the global financial system for one very 
simple reason: they are right. 
By this I do not just mean right in a moral sense. For sure, Occupy have touched a moral 
nerve in pointing to growing inequities in the allocation of wealth and incomes globally. The 
99% certainly agrees. But so, more interestingly, do a high and rising share of the 1%.  
Yet it is the analytical, every bit as much as the moral, ground that Occupy has taken. For 
the hard-headed facts suggest that, at the heart of the global financial crisis, were and are 
problems of deep and rising inequality.  
We have seen, first, inequality-induced crisis and, latterly, crisis-induced inequality. The 99% 
have faced double-jeopardy. Let me explain why. 
the  collective  conscience  of 
The up-escalator 
Globalisation has conferred many benefits to the poorest in the world and narrowed global 
inequality. But it is well-known that income distributions within many advanced economies 
became increasingly skewed in the decades prior to the crisis. There was no single cause of 
this rise in inequality. Longer-term structural factors, such as dispersed levels of educational 
attainment, were clearly a key factor.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But so, too, were financial factors. James Galbraith’s recent book on Inequality and Instability 
argues  that  the  biggest single  cause  of  rising  levels  of  inequality  in  the  US  was  the  asset 
price boom which commenced in the early 1990s.  
This rising tide  of  asset  prices  added to  aggregate  wealth.  But  it  did  not  lift  all  boats. The 
asset rich, in particular the owner-occupying rich, became a lot richer. Meanwhile, the asset-
less and indebted fell further behind. In other words, the pre-crisis asset price bubble acted 
like a regressive tax.  
As Raghu Rajan describes in his book Faultlines, the response to this inequality problem, in 
the US but elsewhere too, was simple and, on the face of it, brilliant. It was to make asset-
holders  and  owner-occupiers  of  us  all.  But  for  the  majority  there  was  one  small  problem: 
these assets had to be financed with debt.  
So what followed was an era of ultra-cheap credit globally – the Heineken era, in which credit 
reached the parts of society it previously had not reached. Levels of debt, in particular among 
households, rose pretty much exactly in line with levels of inequality.  
Rising  credit  meant  expanding  bank  balance  sheets.  To  maintain  this  expansion,  banks 
began  to  manufacture  new  financial  products,  slicing  and  dicing  loans  to  meet  investor 
demand for high yield. The acronyms we have now come to know and loathe – the CDOs, 
the ABSs and the CDOs of ABSs – emerged to meet this demand. 
Manufacturing  high-tech  loans  was  a  lucrative  business.  Returns  to  banking  rose  to  their 
highest  levels  since  the  roaring  ‘20s.  Those  designing  and  selling  these  new  financial 
gadgets saw their salaries sky rocket. In 1980, an investment banker was paid roughly the 
same  as  a  similarly-skilled  professional  in  any  other  industry.  By  2007,  they  were  earning 
nearly four times as much.1  
Those salary differences were particularly pronounced at the top of the pyramid. In 1989, the 
CEOs of the largest US banks earned 100 times the median US household income. That is 
quite a gap. Yet by 2007, that multiple had risen to 500.2 A similar gap emerged for UK and 
European bank CEOs.  
These  widening  discrepancies  within  banks  compounded  the  widening  discrepancies 
between  banking  and  other  industries.  Banks,  especially  the  top  of  banks,  became  first 
among unequals. 
With  returns  sky-high,  there  was  then  a  great  sucking  sound  as  both  people  and  monies 
were  drawn  into  banking,  in  particular  the  high-risk/high  return,  sharp-suited  parts  such  as 
investment  banking.  A  generation  of  scientists’  and  mathematicians’  heads  were  turned 
towards  finance.  Funds  flowed  into  the  bank  money  machine,  with  balance  sheets  rising 
fivefold in less than 20 years, much of it to support short-term trading activities rather than 
long-term investment.  
Yet even while it was still inflating, this bubble was already having silent costs – costs to the 
economy and indeed costs to other parts of banking. Many of the best people and the best 
financial resources were drawn away from other sectors, including the retail banking sector. 
Industries outside of finance were starved of sunlight. 
The  costs  of  this  great  sucking  sound  are  only  now  being  properly  understood.  Recent 
research by the Bank for International Settlements suggests that, once bank assets exceed 
annual GDP in size, they begin to act as a drag on growth.3  
                                                
1  Philippon and Reshef (2009). 
2  Haldane (2011). 
3  Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Why? Because human and financial resources are drained from elsewhere in the economy. 
The sectors hardest-hit by this financial vacuum-cleaner effect are R&D-intensive businesses 
(who might otherwise have attracted the scarce, skilled labour that flowed into finance) and 
businesses reliant on external funds (whose financial cake was instead being eaten by the 
banking system). These are the very businesses that today we are seeking to re-nurture. 
At the same time, the ballooning of trading activities was starving basic banking of resources. 
In consequence, the offering to bank customers became a rather different one. The humble, 
regional  loan  officer  was  pensioned-off,  replaced  by  a  centralised  credit  risk  model  which 
neither answered back nor required a pension. Branches were closed in an effort to contain 
costs.  Banking  became  a 
transactional  business,  underpinned  by  a  sales-driven, 
commission-focussed culture. 
The down-escalator 
Nonetheless,  as  long  as  asset  prices  were  rising,  the  cheap  credit  strategy  seemed  to  be 
working like a dream. For those who had borrowed, debt was being inflated away, not by the 
traditional  route  of  goods  price  inflation  but  by  asset  price  inflation.  The  world  was 
experiencing the biggest bank bubble, perhaps in its history. 
In 2007, that bubble burst. Asset prices and balance sheets collapsed. The dream turned into 
a nightmare, as asset price deflation combined with high debts to put many balance sheets 
underwater.  
As the most leveraged institutions on the planet, banks were deepest underwater. To prevent 
those institutions sinking without a trace, governments were forced to ride to the rescue. This 
support came from both governments and central banks, in both cases underpinned by the 
tax-payer.  
All  in,  this  support  to  the  financial  sector  amounted  to  perhaps  as  much  as  two-thirds  of 
annual  GDP  in  the  UK  and  US,  somewhat  less  (but  still  rising)  in  the  euro-area.  Those 
government transfers were not shared equally even across the financial sector, with a strong 
skew towards institutions deemed too-big-to-fail. This protected species status meant large 
institutions benefitted – indeed, continue to benefit from an implicit subsidy from the state. 
This subsidy is big. For the global banking system, it may currently amount to as much as 
several  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars  each  year.  By  comparison,  that  is  multiples  of  the 
global aid budget. For UK banks, the subsidy amounts to tens of billions of pound each year. 
That too is multiples of the overseas development budget. These are extraordinarily large, 
and peculiarly-directed, government transfers to one sector.  
If  banks  have  been  the  winner  from  these  transfers,  then  the  wider  economy  has  clearly 
been the loser. The damage wrought by the pre-crisis debt mountain has been huge and is 
still  rising.  The  cumulative  loss  of  output  relative  to  trend  is  already  fast  approaching  one 
year’s output in the UK. As context, only world wars come with a heftier price tag.  
The strain is being felt by many homeowners, companies and, increasingly, governments. In 
the US alone, more than 4 million homeowners have so far lost their properties. Many more 
households and companies globally can only support their debts at near-zero interest rates. 
They are zombies, caught in a debt trap. 
In a way, none of this should have come as a surprise. We know from past crises that debt 
acts as a dragging anchor on growth for a protracted period. And we know too that the costs 
of crises are felt disproportionately by the worst-off in society whose living standards tend to 
fall not just relatively but absolutely too. So it has been during this crisis.  
So  if the  seeds  of the  crisis  were  sown  by  inequality,  then  the  crisis  itself  has germinated 
these  seeds.  The  returns  to  finance  were  privatised  in  the  upswing  and  the  risks  then 
socialised  in  the  downswing.  Having  lost  out  on  the  swings,  the  99%  have  been  forcibly 
ejected from the roundabouts.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Diagnosing the problems 
So what is to be done? 
Ferocious criticism has been levelled at the individuals at the helm of failing financial firms. A 
chunk  of that  is fully  justified. The  stewardship  of  many  financial  institutions  was  reckless, 
fuelled  by  a  cocktail  of  leverage  and  a  culture  which  put  short-term  transactions  ahead  of 
long-term relationships. Among especially the bigger banks, there was a quest for size over 
safety, for quantity over quality.  
It is important to punish negligence and criminality and this is being done across the financial 
sector in the light of the slew of recent scandals and mis-selling episodes. Heads have rolled 
and I imagine will continue to do so. Skeletons which had accumulated in the closet for the 
better part of two decades are being discovered and the bodies disposed of. 
But, as disappointing as this might sound to some of you, in building a new financial system I 
think there are limits to what can be achieved through a “heads on sticks” strategy. For me at 
least, the financial crisis was in the main not a story of individual fallibility, greed or hubris. 
There  are  400,000  people  employed  in  banking  in  the  UK.  The  vast  majority  of  those, 
perhaps  even  99%,  were  not  driven  by  individual  greed  and  were  not  professionally 
negligent. Nor, even in the go-go years, were they trousering skyscraper salaries. It is unfair, 
as well as inaccurate, to heap the blame on them. 
For me, the crisis was instead the story of a system with in-built incentives for self-harm: in 
its structure, its leverage, its governance, the level and form of its remuneration, its (lack of) 
competition. Avoiding those self-destructive tendencies means changing the incentives and 
culture  of  finance,  root  and  branch.  This  requires  a  systematic  approach,  a  structural 
approach, a financial reformation.  
A financial reformation 
I want to argue that we are in the early throes of such a financial reformation. And that this 
will help to deliver a more socially useful banking system. Let me mention some of the more 
important  of  these  reform  strands.  These  fall  into  five  categories  –  the  five  “c”s:  culture; 
capital; compensation; credit; and competition. It is easier to will the ends on these issues 
than it is to divine the means. How exactly do we change banking culture?  
So I want to give you some concrete, practical proposals for change. And I want to tell you 
not only that these should be delivered but that they will be delivered. Individually, none of 
these  reforms  may  sound  like  a  game-changer.  A  number  lack  the  pizzazz  of  a  “tar  and 
feathers”  strategy.  But  taken  together,  I  think  they  amount  to  the  most  radical  agenda  of 
financial reform for 80 years. Importantly, I also think they will work. 
First,  and  perhaps  foremost,  culture.  We  are  about  to  undertake  structural  reform  of  the 
global banking system, perhaps the largest since the 1930s. In the US, this is the Volcker 
rule.  In  the  UK,  it  is  the  Vickers  proposals.  Most  recently  in  Europe,  we  have  had  the 
Liikanen plans. 
Though different in name, these structural reform proposals contain a common thread. They 
will seek a separation – or at least a ring-fencing of retail and investment banking activities, 
legally, financially and operationally.  
Part of their motivation is to stop some of the riskier parts of investment banking, such as 
proprietary trading, infecting the indispensible parts, such as deposit-taking and loan-making. 
The crisis has provided ample evidence of the costs of such cross-contamination, with losses 
on risky trading portfolios imperilling bank depositors and borrowers.  
But at least as important is what such a separation might do ahead of crisis. Ahead of this 
time’s crisis, financial and human resources were diverted away from retail banking services 
and  non-bank  activities  towards  investment  banking.  At  the  same  time,  the  culture  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
practices of investment banking infiltrated retail banking – a sales culture which culminated in 
harmful cross-selling and unlawful mis-selling. 
If they are successful, these structural reform efforts will reverse this pattern. They will seek a 
separation, not just legally, financially and operationally, but culturally too between the very 
distinctive  sub-cultures  of  transactional  investment  banking  and  relationship  retail  banking. 
That cultural separation ought to be the acid test of the success of these structural reform 
proposals. 
There  are  those  who  doubt  whether  a  ring-fence  is  sufficient  to  achieve  that  cultural 
separation  in  banking  –  can  two  separate  sub-cultures  really  operate  underneath  a  single 
roof? Time will tell. If it is not possible, then full separation would be the logical next step. 
Alternatively, banks themselves might of course voluntarily choose to divest and separate, as 
some are already doing.  
Second, capital. Much greater levels of protection are being put in place for banks generally 
and for big banks in particular. New regulatory standards will mean that shareholders’ funds 
will  be  7  times  higher  than  before  the  crisis.  For  the  world’s  biggest  banks,  they  will  be 
10 times higher. And for the first-time ever, banks will have to hold sufficient liquid assets to 
pay out depositors in a timely fashion. 
Regulation of this type might sound rather arid and technical. Welcome to my world. But it is 
also important. Higher financial buffers are not about protecting the banks – just like other 
firms, they can and should fail. They are there to protect the customers of banks, reducing 
the  chances  of  them  suffering  panic  or  loss.  And  they  are  there  to  protect  taxpayers  too, 
reducing the chances of them footing the bill.  
Does  this  new  regulatory  protection  go  far  enough?  Banks  will  go  from  being  99% 
debt-financed to being 95% debt-financed – in other words, still high. Many academics have 
made the  case for tighter  regulatory  standards.  Their  analysis  is  compelling  and, frankly, I 
have seen no analytically-coherent counter arguments. But once again, time will tell. If more 
capital is needed, regulators will simply ask for more. 
Third, compensation. There is a deeply-rooted problem of short-termism in modern capital 
markets, with too great a focus on near-term versus longer-term, on spending over saving, 
on twisting rather than sticking. John Kay’s recent review for the UK government made some 
useful suggestions for tackling this problem. 
This short-termism problem is especially acute in the financial sector, where job tenures and 
performance  targets  have  tended  to  be  short,  especially  for  CEOs.  Pre-crisis,  this 
encouraged unhealthy rent-seeking and risk-taking, gambling on one more big bonus. This 
gave rise to all the wrong incentives if the aim was to generate long-run value for customers 
and investors.  
How  to  lean  against  these  incentives?  Altering  the  time  horizon  for  pay  would  be  a  good 
starting point. For example, some banks now use a remuneration model based on “deferral 
until retirement”. It would be fantastic if that caught on. It would align the time horizon of bank 
employees with that of their customers, reducing the incentives to put short-term sales ahead 
of long-term relationships. 
Fourth, credit. The rising tide of inequality either side of the crisis was given impetus by first 
the boom and then the bust in credit and asset prices. We must in future do a much better 
job of moderating those credit booms and busts, to prevent them acting like a regressive tax 
on the poorest in society.  
That  collateral  damage  is  all  too  evident  today  in  the  chronically  low  levels  of  credit  being 
extended on the high street – to first-time buyers wanting to put their foot on the first rung of 
the housing ladder, to business start-ups seeking to invest in assets, human and physical. 
Lending to UK households and companies has been contracting for 4 years and counting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In  preventing  a  repetition,  a  first  step  is  to  recognise  that  taming  the  booms  and  busts  in 
credit is a key public policy responsibility. Step two is charging someone with this task. And 
step three is getting on and doing just that.  
In  the  UK,  we  are  already  three  steps  along this  road,  with  the  introduction  of  a  Financial 
Policy Committee (or FPC) housed at the Bank of England from last year. Its remit is to keep 
the  system  safe  and  sound  while  supporting  lending  and  growth.  Right  now,  the  FPC  is 
playing its part in trying to cushion the effects of the credit squeeze I mentioned, by freeing 
up  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  reserves  to  enable  loans  to  be  made  to  companies  and 
households.  
If these sound like small steps for mankind, then they are giant ones for regulators. This is 
the  first  time  in  the  Bank’s  318-year  history  that  it  has  attempted  such  “macro-prudential” 
regulation. Of course, it is impossible for the FPC or anyone else to eliminate mini-booms 
and mini-busts in credit. But the FPC can legitimately aim to head-off the maxi-booms, such 
as the pre-crisis one, and the maxi-busts, the like of which we are currently experiencing.  
That  should  be  good  for  medium-term  growth,  by  preventing  a  build-up  of  excessive 
leverage. And because financial booms and busts are inherently inequitable, it ought also to 
be good for the distribution of this growth across society. 
Fifth,  we  really  must  do  a  much  better  job  of  promoting competition  in  financial  services. 
The  most  shocking  statistic  is  that,  up  until  2010,  no  new  bank  had  been  set  up  in  this 
country for a century. We need to raise our levels of ambition when breaking down barriers to 
entry into banking, to ensure bank customers get a fair and efficient deal.  
Although there is no silver bullet solution to the competition problem, I am attracted to recent 
proposals  which  would  place  some  core  banking  services  in  the  hands  of  a  shared  utility, 
storing  customer  account  details.  At  present,  this  information  is  private  which  acts  as  a 
barrier  to  entry  by  new  banks.  It  also  acts  as  an  impediment  to  consumers  switching  and 
searching between banks and their products.  
With customer information held in a network utility, like the electricity grid or railway network, 
banks  could  plug  and  play  when  offering  deposits  and  loans  to  customers.  The  costs  of 
entering the banking market would be lowered for new banks. And so too would the costs of 
searching and switching for customers, between banks and between products, rather as you 
might between gas or mobile phone suppliers.  
There is already some encouraging evidence of new entrants to the banking market. In weak 
moments, I think that we might even be on the cusp of a technological revolution in banking. 
Certainly, some new firms are bringing new technologies to banking – for example, through 
mobile payments. Others are mobilising pools of non-bank funds to finance lending directly – 
peer-to-peer lending, crowd-funding, invoice-financing. Others still are demonstrating that a 
clear  focus  on  retail  banking  services,  delivered  locally  by  forging  long  term  relationships, 
can be a winning strategy. 
For example, take Handelsbanken. How many of you have heard of them? They are not yet 
a  high  street  name,  by  comparison  with  say  a  Barclays  or  a  Lloyds.  But  that  is  changing. 
They may be the fastest expanding bank in the UK at the moment. On average, they open a 
new branch – not a cost centre, a branch every two weeks.  
Their  business  model  is  fascinating,  Quaker-even,  in  its  orientation.  They  offer  only  basic 
banking services, mortgages and small business loans, to people in a tight, locally-defined 
catchment area.  
All credit decisions are taken locally by people, not centrally by a computer. No bonuses are 
paid  and  no  one  has  a  sales-target.  When  the  whole  firm  out-performs,  a  contribution  is 
made  to  a  pooled  fund  which  is  invested  on  employees’  behalf.  The  fruits  of  success  are 
distributed equally and gratification is deferred.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
For banking, this is back to the future. If that sounds attractive, then it is down to us – not 
regulators, not politicians, you and I – to deliver it. If as bank customers we want to change 
the culture of banking, then  we should start by supporting those banks who are delivering 
that  change.  Putting  your  money  where  your  mouth  is  would  deliver  far  greater  and  more 
durable change than any amount of banker-bashing.  
Already  there  are  some  encouraging  signs  of  the  winds  of  change  blowing  through  the 
system, not just from the new entrants but among the UK’s oldest banks too. The new heads 
of the UK’s biggest banks have committed to restoring trust in their institutions and improving 
their  social  usefulness.  And  those  words  are  beginning  to  turn  into  actions.  Barclays  and 
today  Lloyds  are  seeking  to  change  their  sales-oriented  culture,  returning  to  their  Quaker 
roots. There is the quiet, but unmistakable, sound of a leaf being turned. 
If I am right and a new leaf is being turned, then Occupy will have played a key role in this 
fledgling  financial  reformation.  You  have  put  the  arguments.  You  have  helped  win  the 
debate. And policymakers, like me, will need your continuing support in delivering that radical 
change. 
References 
Cecchetti, S G and Kharroubi, E (2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance on growth”, 
Bank for International Settlements. 
Galbraith, James K. (2012), “Inequality and instability: a study of the world economy before 
the great crisis”, Oxford University Press. 
Haldane  (2011),  “Control  rights  (and  wrongs)”,  Wincott  Annual  Memorial  Lecture,  London, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/ 
at 
available 
speech525.pdf  
Philippon,  T  and  Reshef,  A  (2009),  “Wages  and  Human  Capital  in  the  U.S.  Financial 
Industry: 1909–2006”, NBER Working Paper 14644, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Inc. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2010),  “Fault  Lines:  how  hidden  fractures  still  threaten  the  world 
economy”, Princeton University Press.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
