Guy Debelle: Macroeconomics at the Melbourne Institute 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, 
Institute  50th  Anniversary  Conference,  Melbourne, 
6 December 2012. 
the  Melbourne 
to 
 It’s a pleasure to be here today to celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Melbourne Institute. 
The Institute has performed a pre-eminent role in the economic research and policy advice of 
the country. My brief today is to focus on its contributions in the area of macroeconomics.  
But before I get to that, I will take a detour onto the cricket field. In reading Ross Williams’ 
excellent book on the Institute, it is clear the important position that cricket occupied at the 
Institute. My association with a sizeable number of the staff members of the Institute, both 
past and present, is on the cricket field, or to be more precise, on the indoor cricket field.  
Now many of you know that a significant number of the Melbourne Institute staff spent their 
formative  years  at  the  National  Institute  of  Labour  Studies  (NILS)  at  Flinders  University. 
Indeed, NILS was somewhat of a feeder for the Institute for quite a while.  
Back in the mid-80s, being the economic geek that I am, I used to work at NILS during my 
uni vacations. As a result, I was a member of the highly acclaimed NILS indoor cricket side. 
Let me run you through some of the key members of the team. I used to open the batting 
with Robert Leeson, in his pre-Friedman days. Bob and I were renowned for our kamikaze 
running between the wickets, particularly when we failed to lay bat on ball (which was most 
of the time). The next pair was one Peter “Dawkie” Dawkins, fresh off the boat from England, 
and  Mark  Wooden,  recently  minted  national  surf  lifesaving  ski  champion.  Our  esteemed 
captain  was  NILS  chief  Dick  Blandy,  renowned  for  his  innovative  field  placing.  Other 
members of the team were Garry Goddard, now Deputy Under Treasurer in South Australia. 
Meredith Baker also made the odd cameo appearance. You may be surprised to hear that 
we  were  unable  to  coax  the  then  NILSite,  and  future  Productivity  Commissioner  and 
Australian Economics Editor, Judith Sloan, onto the pitch.  
As you can see, playing on that cricket team was a good leading indicator of employment at 
the  Melbourne  Institute,  and  indeed  even  a  pretty  good  indicator  of  actually  running  the 
Melbourne Institute. This seamlessly takes me to my main topic today which is the Institute’s 
contribution to macroeconomics.  
I  will  focus  on  three  main  areas  of  contribution  by  the  Institute  to  the  greater  good  of 
Australian  macroeconomics.  The  first  is  indeed  leading  indicators  and  business  cycle 
analysis. The second is modelling and forecasting. The third is surveys.  
Leading indicators and business cycle analysis 
For  many  years,  the  Institute  has  been  associated  with  its  series  on  leading  indicators,  a 
summary  statistic  that  aims  to  predict  economic  activity.  I  am  not  a  particularly  big  fan  of 
leading  indicators  as  a  general  rule.  Personally,  I  prefer  to  look  at  and  think  about  all  the 
components  of  a  leading  indicator  individually,  rather  than  attempt  to  summarise  the 
information in one index, particularly given that what matters most at different points in the 
economic  cycle  varies  through  time.  (The  NILS  leading  indicator  of  employment  at  the 
Melbourne Institute that I was just talking about probably does a better job of forecasting than 
the GDP leading indicator.) That said, if one were going to use one leading indicator series in 
Australia, then it would be the Melbourne Institute’s.  
As an aside, I was intrigued to learn from reading Ross Williams’ book that the Institute was 
the first body in Australia to publish seasonally adjusted and trend data, some time before 
the ABS began to do so.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Through the work of Ern Boehm, Don Harding and Adrian Pagan, the Institute has also made 
a significant contribution to business cycle analysis. Those three gentlemen have generated 
a number of great papers on the topic of measuring and dating business cycles. They have 
produced the definitive  body of work for the Australian economy. Out of that research has 
come the most cited dating of Australian business cycles.  
Modelling and forecasting 
The Melbourne Institute has been synonymous with modelling, particularly during the reign of 
Peter  Dixon.  The  modelling  by  Peter  Dixon,  as  well  as  that  done  by  Peter  Brain  was,  of 
course,  more  of  the  CGE  world  than  the  macroeconomic  world.  Now  a  critical  question  is 
whether those two worlds overlap. I am told by those who can still remember, that a fair bit of 
time was spent trying to marry the short-term macro forecasting models at the Treasury and 
the RBA with the CGE model of the Institute. Many conferences were held on the issue. I am 
not sure the question was ever really answered.  
But besides the modelling side of things, the Institute regularly publish an assessment of the 
Australian economy in the Australian Economic Review, as well as discuss the outlook for 
the economy. I can recall assiduously reading those assessments during my undergrad days 
in  the  Eric  Russell  Room  in  the  Adelaide  University  Economics  Department.  At  that  time, 
there was little in the way of such assessments emanating from the official sector, this being 
in the days before quarterly Statements on Monetary Policy. There was also little available 
from the private sector, as economic research in the banking sector was only in its infancy. 
So  the  Institute’s  assessment  was  an  important  contribution  to  the  policy  discussion  in 
Australia,  as  well  as  an  important  part  of  the  education  of  a  generation  of  budding 
macroeconomists.  
Surveys 
It is in the area of surveys that I think the Melbourne Institute has made its most significant 
and  enduring  contribution  to  the  state  of  Australian  macroeconomics.  Its  name  is 
synonymous with some of the highest profile and longest running surveys in Australia. Much 
of that contribution can be attributed to the foresight and work of Duncan Ironmonger.  
The  first  of  these  were  the  surveys  of  consumers,  which  were  based  on  the  surveys 
conducted  at  the  University  of  Michigan.  The  survey  of  consumer  sentiment  has  a  long-
running  history  back  to  1974.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia 
provided some of the funding for the survey at its inception.  
The length of that data series means that for consumers, we have a time series that spans a 
number of business cycles, something that cannot be said of quite a few other time series, 
including  most  business  surveys.  In  addition  to  the  time  series  information,  there  is  also 
invaluable  cross-sectional  information  that  has  proven  useful  in  informing  macro  policy 
setting.  
Out  of  the  survey  of  consumers  also  comes  the  series  on  inflation  expectations.  The 
behaviour of this time series has long befuddled many macroeconomists, and complicated 
the life of those inclined to estimate Phillips curves, as I have been known to do in an earlier 
existence. As you can see from the time series (Graph 1), for a fairly long period of time, one 
could broadly describe the series as a horizontal line with a structural shift downwards in the 
early 1990s.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 1 
 My  colleague  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  Jacqui  Dwyer,  spent  a  lot  of  time  working  with 
Don Harding in the mid-1990s to try to understand the behaviour of this inflation expectations 
series. From the Bank’s point of view, we were in the infancy of inflation targeting, and we 
were after a clean read on the public’s assessment of the credibility of the new policy regime. 
As a result of that delving by Jacqui and Don, they came up with a number of refinements to 
the nature of the survey. One of the problems was a round number problem. Respondents 
tended to answer either 0, 5 or 10. This was probably a reasonable response in the 1970s 
and 1980s, but didn’t really make much sense in the 1990s and beyond. Also, it turns out 
that  people  were  not  that great  with  percentages  and found  it  hard  to  distinguish  between 
levels and changes when it came to prices.  
As  a  result  of  their  digging,  the  survey  methodology  was  updated  to  better  reflect  the  low 
inflation environment. Consequently, the time series since the early 1990s is more nuanced 
and explicable. There is now quite a reasonable cluster of responses at 2 and 3 per cent. 
This  suggests  that  households  accept  and  understand  the  overall  framework  of  monetary 
policy.  
Now that the inflation expectations series has been cleaned up, we only  need to come up 
with a decent measure of the output gap and the estimation of Phillips curves  would be a 
breeze!  
Don Harding’s other contribution in the area of inflation was his work with Stephen Koukoulas 
(then  at  Toronto  Dominion)  in  generating  the  monthly  series  on  inflation.  This  series  is 
published  jointly  by  the  Institute  and  TD.  Australia  remains  one  of  only  two  advanced 
countries  (the  other  being  New  Zealand)  without  an  official  monthly  CPI  series.  Don  and 
Steve  worked  on  generating  a  monthly  series,  including  through  some  innovative  use  of 
electronic data.  
The final survey that the  Melbourne Institute is most associated with  is  the HILDA survey. 
This  longitudinal  study  was  based  on  the  similar  surveys  around  the  world,  including  the 
PSID in the United States, and tracks a set of households through time. While much of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
information in the survey is more useful for social policy rather than macro policy, there is still 
a wealth of information in it that has been, and continues to be, of great use to the Bank and 
Treasury in their macro policy decision making and policy advice. It has enabled an analysis 
of macro issues to be conducted by aggregating from the micro data in a  way that simply 
wasn’t possible before. In the end macro behaviour is, of course, purely the summation of a 
whole set of micro decisions.  
The HILDA survey is very much in the tradition of Ronald Henderson. It is a very rich source 
of data that can be used to analyse a vast number of socio-economic questions. Others will 
talk about it more over the course of the day, but it is to the Institute’s great credit that it took 
on the coordination of this important component of understanding the Australian economy.  
The  Bank  funded  a  wealth  module  in  the  HILDA  survey  in  its  first  round,  which  has 
subsequently  been  incorporated  into  the  survey  every  four  years.  Many  of  my  colleagues, 
particularly  in  the  financial  stability  area,  have  made  extensive  use  of  the  HILDA  data  in 
gaining  a  better  understanding  of  the  distribution  of  household  debt  in  the  Australian 
economy, as well as households’ saving patterns. This in turned has enhanced the Bank’s 
understanding  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  household  sector.  Quite  a 
sizeable share of the recent research paper output of the Bank’s Research Department has 
involved analysis of the HILDA data.  
Finally,  one  noteworthy  contribution  to  the  macro  policy  debate  that  doesn’t  completely  fit 
within my taxonomy is that of Peter Dawkins in injecting the Melbourne Institute squarely into 
the debate around unemployment with his critical role in the Five Economists Letter in 1998. 
Peter’s very prominent advocacy on this topic built on the foundations laid by Dick Blandy in 
refocusing the Institute on the labour market.  
Conclusion 
The Melbourne Institute has reached its half century. While these days the Institute is most 
associated with its work in the areas of the labour market and social policy, over its 50-year 
history,  the Institute  has  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  Australian  macroeconomics. In 
particular, as I have described today, I think its most significant and lasting contribution has 
been in instituting a number of important surveys, most prominently the consumer sentiment 
series,  the  inflation  expectations  series  and,  more  recently,  the  HILDA  panel  data  series. 
These  surveys  have  facilitated  a  better  quality  of  macroeconomic  analysis,  through  the 
wealth of data contained in them. In doing so, they have undoubtedly improved the quality of 
macro policymaking and outcomes, which was one of the founding goals of the Melbourne 
Institute.  
So,  on  behalf  of  the  macro  policymaking  community  of  Australia  over  the  past  50 years,  I 
would like to thank the Melbourne Institute, and particularly the staff, for their contribution. I 
trust the Institute will be able to convert this half century into a ton!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
