Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the South Wales Chamber 
of Commerce, Cardiff, 23 October 2012. 
 Of the many memorable moments in an eventful summer, recall that balmy night in late July 
when  attention  was  diverted  from  the  economy  by  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  Olympic 
Games.  The  sound  of  Welsh  children  singing  Cwm  Rhondda  on  that  beautiful  beach  in 
Rhossili filled the Olympic stadium. Inside the stadium, we saw not manna descending from 
heaven, but thousands of athletes and volunteers rising to their challenge.    
If the Olympics aimed to inspire a generation, the challenge for economic policymakers is to 
give that same generation the opportunities to make the best possible use of their talents in a 
vibrant economy. After a period of lopsided expansion, with growing trade deficits and debt 
levels, and a collapse of their banking systems, advanced economies across the world are 
facing  a  huge  adjustment.  Such  is  the  scale  of  the  global  adjustment  required  that  the 
generation we hope to inspire may live under its shadow for a long time to come.  
During the course of this year, the challenge has grown as the economic sky has darkened. 
The storm clouds coming from the Euro area have not yet lifted, and in other parts of the sky 
new  clouds  have  drifted  over.  China,  India  and  Brazil,  the  three  largest  emerging  market 
economies, are all slowing. According to the latest IMF projections output will fall this year in 
no fewer than 10 European economies. And the IMF recently lowered its forecast for growth 
in the advanced economies next year.  
Ours may be a sceptred isle, with its own currency and control of monetary policy, but we 
cannot  insulate  ourselves  from  these  events.  So  this  precious  stone  set  in  the  silver  sea 
seems  more  like  a  storm-tossed  vessel.  Despite  the  probable  rise  in  output  in  the  third 
quarter, the big picture is that GDP is barely higher than two years ago, and remains some 
15% below where steady growth since 2007 would have taken us. Total exports have risen 
sharply in the wake of sterling’s depreciation, but manufactured exports to Europe are falling. 
Recovery and rebalancing of our economy remain the main challenges for economic policy.  
Here  in  Wales,  despite  impressive  improvements  to  the  infrastructure  –  not  least  the 
remarkable regeneration of Cardiff Bay and the magnificent monument to Welsh culture in 
this Millennium Centre – your economy too is suffering with total production well below  its 
peak in 2007.  
In combating the downturn, monetary policy has played its part. Bank Rate has been cut to 
its  lowest  level  ever  and  the  Bank  has  purchased  £375  billion  of  assets  in  order  to  inject 
money  into  the  economy.  Although  this  unprecedented  degree  of  monetary  loosening  has 
prevented a depression, it has caused pain to those dependent on interest income. And we 
have not been able to avoid a sharp rise in youth unemployment.  
In the long run, we will need to rebalance our economy away from domestic spending and 
towards  exports,  to  reduce  our  trade  deficit,  to  repay  our  debts,  and  to  raise  the  rate  of 
national saving and investment. So you are probably puzzled by the fact that we seem to be 
doing exactly the opposite of that today. Almost four years ago now, I called this the “paradox 
of policy” – policy measures that are desirable in the short term appear diametrically opposite 
to those needed in the long term. Although we cannot avoid the long-term adjustment to our 
economy,  we  can  try  to  slow  the  pace  of  the  adjustment  in  order  to  limit  the  immediate 
damage to output and employment. Loose monetary policy today will eventually give way to 
a tighter stance of policy as the economy recovers. In confronting the paradox of policy, the 
Bank  has  had  to  show  some  of  the  same  fleetness  of  foot  and  ability  to  feint  as  my 
Cambridge  contemporary,  Gerald  Davies.  So  let  me  try  to  explain  this  evening  what 
monetary policy can do and what it can’t.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In doing this I am not going to pretend that I shall be entertaining. But these are serious times 
and you deserve a serious explanation of what we at the Bank can do and what we can’t, or 
shouldn’t. 
Let me start with what monetary policy can do. When banks extend loans to their customers, 
they create money by crediting their customers’ accounts. The usual role of a central bank is 
to limit this rate of money creation, so that an excessive expansion of money spending does 
not lead to inflation. But a damaged banking system means that today banks aren’t creating 
enough money. We have to do it for them. And as private sector balance sheets contract, 
public sector (government and central bank) balance sheets have to take the strain. The way 
in  which  the  Bank  of  England  expands  the  money  supply  is  to  purchase  government  gilts 
from the non-bank private sector and credit the bank accounts of people from whom the gilts 
are purchased. Please note that we are not giving money away.  
What is the effect of these purchases? They push up the price of gilts thus lowering yields. 
As the sellers of gilts use the proceeds to buy other assets, the price of those assets also 
tends to rise. Increases in asset prices boost wealth, and at the same time reduce the cost of 
borrowing  for  companies  and  households,  which  helps  to  stimulate  spending  and  hence 
output. The size of these effects is of course uncertain. But there can be no doubt that our 
economy  would  have  followed  an  even  more  painful  path  over  the  past  few  years  in  the 
absence of asset purchases.   
Some question the scope for further purchases, or their likely effectiveness. I do not have 
any concerns on the first point. The quantity of gilts in private hands is higher now than when 
we began our asset purchases, and the government continues to issue new gilts at a rapid 
rate. As far as the effectiveness of gilt purchases is concerned, it is of course true that as gilt 
yields have declined the room for further falls is reduced. But it is not the sole objective of 
asset purchases to push down on government bond yields. Raising the price and reducing 
the risk premium on a much wider class of assets is equally important.  
Although monetary policy can play a crucial role in supporting the economy in these difficult 
times,  there  are  limits  to  its  ability  to  stimulate  private  sector  spending.  Those  limits  are 
inherent in any form of monetary easing, not only asset purchases. Two limits are important. 
First,  monetary  policy  supports  demand  and  output  by  encouraging  households  and 
businesses to switch demand from tomorrow to today. But when tomorrow becomes today, 
an even larger stimulus is required to bring forward more spending from the future. Since the 
paradox  of  policy  has  been  evident  for  almost  four  years,  tomorrow  has  become  not  just 
today  but  yesterday.  When  the  factors  leading  to  a  downturn  are  long  –  lasting,  only 
continual injections of stimulus will suffice to sustain the level of real activity. Obviously, this 
cannot continue indefinitely. Policy can only smooth, not prevent, the ultimate adjustment. At 
some point the paradox of policy must be resolved.   
Second, the scale of the underlying adjustment is large, and monetary policy cannot put off 
for long the necessary change in the pattern of demand and output. A downward correction 
of  expectations  about  future  incomes  and  wealth  has  rendered  unprofitable  some  of  the 
investments  made  before  the  crisis.  A  good  example  is  the  investment  made  in  shopping 
centres  which  is  now  either  proving  less  valuable  than  anticipated,  or  making  redundant 
some  of  the  other  pre-existing  stock  of retail  space.  Almost  1,000  high street  chain  stores 
closed in the first half of the year. Lower asset values have left debt levels looking too high. 
Households, businesses and, especially, banks are all deleveraging.  
Nowhere  is  the  overhang  of  debt  more  obvious  than  in  the  banking  sector  where 
deleveraging is holding back the flow of new lending. During the crisis central banks have 
provided  liquidity  to  banks  on  a  truly  extraordinary  scale,  so  much  so  that  there  were  no 
takers for additional liquidity in our latest auction. It is still useful to keep that auction facility 
as  an  insurance  policy.  But  banks  are  now  overflowing  with  liquid  assets.  Their  problem 
remains insufficient capital. Just as in 2008, there is a deep reluctance to admit the extent of 
the undercapitalisation of the banking system in many parts of the industrialised world. The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
verdict of the market is clear – without central bank support banks still find it expensive to 
borrow.  
So the Bank of England, together with the Government, has set up the Funding for Lending 
Scheme  (FLS)  which  provides  banks  with  access  to  finance  for  up  to  four  years  at  below 
prevailing market rates for term funding. Crucially, the more banks lend to UK households 
and businesses, the more they can borrow from the Scheme and the cheaper is that funding. 
That provides a powerful financial incentive for banks to supply more credit. 
More than 20 banking groups, including the five largest lenders to the UK real economy and 
covering  nearly  80%  of  all  such  lending,  have  so  far  signed  up.  Since  the  Scheme  was 
announced bank funding costs have fallen by around 100 basis points (see Chart 1). Not all 
of  this  is  attributable  to  the  FLS  –  the  announcement  by  the  ECB  of  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions  has  also  played  an  important role.  But  it  is  noteworthy  that  UK  bank funding 
costs have fallen by more since June than have European bank funding costs (see Chart 2). 
The effect of the FLS will be seen in the lending data only after some months because of the 
time  it  takes for  banks  to  change  their  lending strategies  and for  data  to  be  collected  and 
published. 
The FLS can be only a temporary scheme. The window of opportunity which it provides must 
be  used  to  restore  the  capital  position  of  the  UK  banking  system.  I  am  not  sure  that 
advanced  economies  in  general  will  find  it  easy  to  get  out  of  their  current  predicament 
without  creditors  acknowledging  further  likely  losses,  a  significant  writing  down  of  asset 
values and recapitalisation of their financial systems. Only then will it be possible to return to 
a more normal provision of the vital banking services so crucial to an economic recovery. In 
the  1930s,  faced  with  problems  of  sovereign  and  other  debt  similar  to  those  of  today,  the 
pretence that debts could be repaid was maintained for far too long. We must not repeat that 
mistake. 
Over the past three years, the Bank of England has bought £375 billion of government bonds 
– gilts – from the private sector to create a lot of new money. Many – perhaps some of you – 
are understandably concerned about the use of such an unusual and unfamiliar policy. Some 
people  talk  about  the  dangers  of  money  creation.  I  want  to  explain  why  it  is  important  to 
distinguish  between  “good”  and  “bad”  money  creation.  In  essence,  the  argument  is  very 
simple. “Good” money creation is where an independent central bank creates enough money 
in  the  economy  to  achieve  price  stability.  “Bad”  money  creation  is  where  the  government 
chooses the amount of money that is created in order to finance its expenditure. Insufficient 
money creation can lead to a contraction of the money supply and a depression. We saw 
that  in  the  United States  during  the  Great  Depression  and  we  see  it  today  in  Greece. 
Excessive  money  creation  leads  to  accelerating  inflation  and  ultimately  the  collapse  of  the 
currency.  
The role of the Bank of England is to create the right amount of money, neither too much, nor 
too little, to support sustainable growth at the target rate of inflation. We are not doing it at 
the  behest  of  the  Government  to  help  finance  its  spending.  It  is  the  independence  of  the 
Bank that allows us to create money without raising doubts about our motives. But just as it 
is crucial that governments do not control the printing of money, so too the unelected central 
bank must not determine the levels of taxes and public spending. Fiscal policy is a matter for 
elected governments. 
There  has  been  some  talk  about  the  possibility  that  money  created  by  the  Bank  could  be 
used directly to finance additional government spending, or even that money could be given 
away. Abstracting from the colourful metaphor of “helicopter money”, such operations would 
combine monetary and fiscal policies.  
There is no need to combine them because, as now, once the Bank has decided how much 
money  should  be  created  to  meet  the  inflation  target,  the  case  for  the  Government  to 
increase spending or cut taxes to counter a downturn stands or falls on its own merits. What 
determines the interest rate at which the government can borrow, however, is the path for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
amount of government debt held by the private sector, rather than the total amount of gilts in 
issue. That is true when the Bank purchases gilts and will be true later when the Bank comes 
to sell the gilts. 
Not only is combining monetary and fiscal policies unnecessary, it is also dangerous. Either 
the government controls the process – which is “bad” money creation – or the Bank controls 
it and enters the forbidden territory of fiscal policy. It is peculiar, to say the least, that some of 
the same people who believe that the Governor of the Bank is too powerful also believe that 
he should stand on the steps of Threadneedle Street distributing £50 notes – a policy which 
you  will  appreciate  is  rather  hard  to  reverse.  For  the  same  reason,  the  Bank  could  not 
countenance any suggestion that we cancel our holdings of gilts. The Bank must have the 
ability to reverse its policy – to sell gilts and withdraw money from the economy – when that 
becomes necessary. Otherwise, we run the risk of losing control over monetary conditions.  
Giving  money  either to the  government  or  to  households  directly,  or  indeed  cancelling  our 
holding of gilts, means that the Bank of England has no assets to sell when the time comes 
to tighten monetary policy. And when Bank Rate eventually starts to return to a more normal 
level,  as  one  day  it  will,  the  Bank  would  then  have  no  income,  in  the  form  of  coupon 
payments on gilts, to cover the payments of interest on reserves at the Bank of England that 
we had created. The Bank would become insolvent unless it created even more money to 
finance those interest payments, and that would lead ultimately to uncontrolled inflation. That 
is  a  road  down  which  the  Bank  will  not  go,  and  does  not  need  to  go.  I  suspect  that  the 
advocates  of  “helicopter  money”  and  related  ideas  are  really  talking  about  a  relaxation  of 
fiscal policy. It would be better to be open about that.  
Enough  of  what  the  Bank  of  England  should  not  be  doing.  So  what  should  we  be  doing? 
Since the Monetary Policy Committee last published an assessment of the economic outlook, 
other central banks have been active. The European Central Bank announced its plans for 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  the  Bank of  Japan  expanded  the  scale  of  its  asset 
purchases, and the Federal Reserve committed to continue with its asset purchases until the 
outlook  for  the  labour  market  improves  substantially.  Our  current  programme  of  asset 
purchases  will  be  complete  by  next  month. What  happens  after  that  will  depend  upon  the 
outlook, beginning with an appraisal of where we are today. 
Judging the present state of the UK economy is far from easy. On the one hand, over the 
past two years total output, or GDP, has been much weaker than expected. In fact, output 
has been broadly flat over that period. And the zig-zag pattern of quarterly growth rates of 
GDP that we have seen this year  is likely to continue, as we may see  on Thursday when 
figures for the third quarter are released.  
On the other hand, there are other more encouraging signs. First, the labour market gives a 
very  different  picture to that conveyed  by  the  output  data.  In  the  private  sector,  more  new 
jobs have been created than over any other two-year period since the mid-1990s. And in the 
past  year,  unemployment  has  been  falling,  and  falling  faster  in  Wales  than  in  the  United 
Kingdom as a whole. Second, inflation has now fallen back to 2.2%, close to our 2% target. 
Although  recent  increases  in  domestic  energy  and  food  prices  are  likely  to  leave  it  a  little 
above  target  well  into  next  year,  the  fall  in  inflation  means  that  the  squeeze  on  real  take-
home pay, which accounted for much of the weakness in consumer spending over the past 
two  years,  has  eased  somewhat.  And  retail  sales  figures  are  consistent  with  a  pickup  in 
consumer spending.  
The  disparity  between  weak  output  growth  and  a  buoyant  labour  market  is  not  easy  to 
explain. It is not the product of a switch from full-time to part-time jobs because total hours 
worked have risen at the same rate as employment. Productivity per head is 4% below its 
level  of  five  years  ago.  No-one  really  understands  why.  Perhaps  the  output  data  are 
understating the true picture. Perhaps the black cloud of uncertainty moving towards us from 
the  euro  area  means  that  businesses  are  choosing  to  meet  demand  by  expanding 
employment,  which  can  if  necessary  be  adjusted  downwards  relatively  easily,  rather  than 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investing in new capital equipment which cannot. Perhaps flexible wages have encouraged 
employers  to  hold  on  to  labour.  Or  perhaps  forbearance  by  banks  has  allowed  inefficient 
firms  that  might  otherwise  have  had  to  contract  to  continue  with  more  labour  than  can  be 
employed in the long run.  
One thing we can see clearly is that the recovery and rebalancing of the UK economy are 
proceeding at a slow and uncertain pace. At this stage, it is difficult to know whether some of 
the recent more positive signs will persist. The Monetary Policy Committee will think long and 
hard  before  it  decides  whether  or  not  to  make  further  asset  purchases.  But  should  those 
signs fade, the MPC does stand ready to inject more money into the economy.  
Printing money is not, however, simply manna from heaven. There are no shortcuts to the 
necessary  adjustment  in  our  economy. The  problems  in  the  world  economy  mean that  we 
shall have to be patient. Over the past twenty years, during regular visits to Wales, I have 
seen several waves of restructuring of the Welsh economy. And the rebalancing of the UK, 
towards manufacturing, offers opportunities for Wales.  
As for the MPC, you can be sure we shall be looking for as much guidance as we can find, 
divine  or  otherwise. What  better  inspiration  than  the  memory  of those  children  on  Rhossili 
beach singing Cwm Rhondda.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Chart 1: Major banks’ indicative senior unsecured bond spreads(a) 
(basis points) 
 US
Europe
UK
Mansion 
House 
speech
Draghi 
speech
OMT QE3
Jul-11
Oct-11
Jan-12
Apr-12
Jul-12
Oct-12
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 (a)  Each line is an unweighted average of the spread between euro-denominated senior 
unsecured bonds and equivalent maturity swap rates for a selected bond issued by each of 
a selection of major banks in the region. The selected bonds have residual maturities of 
between two and six years. 
Source: Bloomberg and Bank of England calculations. 
Chart 2: Major banks’ indicative senior unsecured bond spreads since announcement 
  of FLS(a) 
(index, equal to 100 on 14/06/2012) 
 6 
 Mansion House 
speech
Draghi 
speech
OMT
QE3
US
Europe
UK
Jun-12
Jul-12
Aug-12
Sep-12
Oct-12
(a)  See footnote to chart 1. 
Source: Bloomberg and Bank of England calculations. 
125
100
75
50
25
0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
