DeLisle Worrell: Emotional talent – the final leadership frontier 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Emotional  Intelligence  Conference  “Emotional  talent  –  the  final  leadership  frontier”, 
Bridgetown, 19 October 2012. 
 I am delighted to welcome such a large and enthusiastic audience to today’s lecture. Many of 
you know that the Central Bank of Barbados has embarked on a strategy of renewal, based 
on the premise that we can be as efficient as possible only if we all strive to help each other 
to be as happy as we can be on the job. This is a revolutionary notion; we have grown up in 
a culture where work and happiness are at opposite ends of the spectrum. Work is a chore, a 
necessary evil, and happiness is for the weekend, our vacation, and blissful retirement, when 
someone will pay you a salary to do absolutely nothing. 
However,  many  of  us  have  realised  that  we  enjoy  working.  At  first  you  think  you  must  be 
really  weird, if you’re working through the night just because you are so absorbed in what 
you’re  doing,  but  then  you  notice  that  other  people  are  doing  similar  things,  on  occasions 
when they are specially motivated to do so; such as when there is a big occasion like this 
event to be organised, for example. 
So you begin to ask yourself – why can’t all work be like that? Why is it that, even with the 
most sophisticated management systems, as a general rule most employees are miserable 
on the job. And why is this true even of employees who enjoy what they do, are good at it, 
and are willing to work long hours? The missing element, we have come to realise, is the 
human element, and that is where our emotions come into play. We are emotional beings, 
and it matters a great deal to our motivation, our happiness and our performance, that our 
colleagues and our managers care about us. 
These emotional habits, caring about our staff, wanting them to do well and be happy, are 
what we are trying to cultivate at the Central Bank of Barbados. Already we have evidence 
that  this  is  a  sure  path  to  high  morale  and  enviable  levels  of  efficiency.  We  have  several 
examples of top class performance, and those involved can bear testimony to the wonderful 
spirit associated with these events. 
As we embarked on this journey, with the help of consultants skilled in the new technologies 
of  management,  we  became  aware  that  we  had  achieved  something  essential  for  the 
development  of  this  country  at  our  relatively  advanced  state  of  human  development.  In 
management practice, as in many other fields, Barbados must leapfrog to the head of the 
class, if we are to make our way in this increasingly competitive and unforgiving world. That 
is  what  Emotional  Intelligence  does  for  us.  The  practitioners  in  this  field  are  leading  a 
revolution in business practice, and we can place ourselves at the forefront, in implementing 
business practices that will distinguish the leading companies of the 21st century. Here today 
to  assist  us  on  that  journey  is  one  of  the  discipline’s  most  accomplished  practitioners,  Mr. 
Tim Sanders. We are honoured by your presence and we value the help you are offering to 
all the participants gathered here today, towards achieving our goal of outstanding efficiency 
and productivity through the cultivation of a happy and well motivated workforce.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
