Már Guðmundsson: Currency and exchange rate regime options 
Introduction by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, to a report 
issued  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  on  Iceland’s  currency  and  exchange  rate  policy 
options, Reykjavík, 7 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
1.1  
In the near future, Icelanders must make important decisions concerning the framework for 
the currency and monetary policy, the structure of the financial system, and the degree of 
integration with the world economy. These decisions must be taken in view of what can be 
learnt from the financial crisis and from previous monetary policy implementation in Iceland.  
Iceland  has  applied  for  membership  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  and,  if  membership 
materialises, it will define a clear path for most of these issues. If Iceland does not join the 
EU, the choices will be different. In both instances, Iceland must lift the capital controls that 
are currently in place. According to EU rules, this must be accomplished before accession. 
The experience of recent decades shows, however, that completely free movement of capital 
comes  with  significant  risk.  To  reduce  that  risk,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  a  regulatory 
framework that prepares the Icelandic financial system for the volatility that can accompany 
free  movement  of  capital.  That  regulatory  framework  may  entail  some  restrictions  on 
Iceland’s financial integration with other countries, particularly as regards domestic financial 
institutions’  freedom  to  conduct  international  business.  The  scope  of  such  restrictions  will 
depend, however, on which currency option Iceland chooses.  
This report was originally intended to explain in detail what EU membership and participation 
in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  would  entail  as  regards  exchange  rate  and 
monetary policy, and to analyse the pros and cons of Iceland’s membership in the EMU. In 
1997,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  published  a  similar  report,  entitled  The  Economic  and 
Monetary Union of the European Union – EMU (available in Icelandic). Much has changed 
since then. During the decade and a half of the EMU’s existence, it experienced success for 
much of the period, followed by the current severe crisis. Iceland faces a much more decisive 
assessment of the pros and cons of EMU membership than it did in 1997. As a result, it is 
timely to issue a new report on this topic. This publication is considerably broader in scope 
than the earlier one, as it also contains an analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of 
other options, including an exchange rate peg within a defined fluctuation band, a currency 
board, or adoption of another currency. Some of these options have been the focus of recent 
public  discussion  as  alternatives  to  euro  area  membership  through  EU  accession  or  the 
current flexible exchange rate regime. Consequently, these options should be analysed just 
as other possible solutions are. The possibility of retaining a flexible exchange rate regime 
while  making  relevant  changes  to  the  economic  policy  and  financial  regulatory  framework 
based  on  recent  experience  was  discussed  in  the  Central  Bank’s  2010  report  entitled 
Monetary  policy  in  Iceland  after  capital  controls.  The  present  report  therefore  does  not 
discuss those options in as much detail. In Chapter 3, however, is an in-depth discussion of 
Icelanders’ experience with independent monetary policy and a floating exchange rate. The 
strategy formulated in coming months must take into account this material if all options are to 
be  considered.  It  is  also  necessary  to  examine  which  prudential  rules  would  be  applied  in 
order to reduce the risks related to domestic financial institutions’ foreign assets and liabilities 
and  the  risks  related  to  unrestricted  capital  flows.  These  rules  are  discussed  in  a  newly 
published Central Bank report entitled Prudential rules following capital controls. That report 
discusses  the  limitations  on  liquidity  and  foreign  exchange  risk  and  the  restrictions  on 
domestic financial firms’ international operations that must be in place if movement of capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  unrestricted  in  other  respects,  particularly  if  Iceland  retains  its  own  currency.  The 
discussion below also takes account of these two publications.1 
Iceland’s experience with its own currency 
1.2  
Iceland has had its own currency since 1885, maintaining parity with the Danish krone until 
June 1922, when it was devalued by 23%, followed by a temporary float (see Chapter 12). It 
can be said that the króna came into existence as an independent currency at that time. The 
experience  with it has been mixed, and efforts to preserve the value of the currency have 
been largely unsuccessful. The króna is now worth only 0.05% of its value prior to the 1922 
devaluation; in other words, it has depreciated by 99.95%. In terms of consumer prices, the 
króna has eroded in value even more, or about 99.99%. In other words, its purchasing power 
in terms of goods and services is currently only 0.013% of what it was in June 1944, when 
the Republic of Iceland was founded. Nevertheless, over this period, Iceland developed from 
being one of the poorest countries in Europe to one of the richest in per capita terms, despite 
the  economic  costs  of  persistent  inflation.  Currency  depreciation  and  subsequent  inflation 
episodes have sometimes expedited the necessary adjustment following economic shocks, 
however, thereby returning the economy more quickly to a path of economic growth.  
Chapters  3  and  12  focus  on  certain  aspects  of  Iceland’s  experience  with  an  independent 
currency.  In  Chapters  9  and  13,  two  key  questions  are  asked.  First,  how  effective  is 
monetary policy in achieving the goals with which it is tasked? Second, has the flexibility of 
the  exchange  rate  facilitated  economic  adjustment  and  stability,  or  has  it  instead  been  a 
source  of  shocks?  Summarising  these  findings  reveals  that  Iceland’s  experience  of 
independent monetary policy and a flexible exchange rate has been poorer than that in many 
other countries, in that monetary policy has not been successful in achieving its goals and 
the flexible exchange rate has tended to be a source of shocks rather than a shock absorber. 
It  is  likely,  though,  that  the  flexibility  of  the  króna  has  facilitated  adjustment  to  severe 
downturns under certain circumstances, such as the collapse of the herring stocks in the late 
1960s and the steep contraction following the 2008 financial crisis. 
The possible reasons for this are explored in the above-mentioned chapters. It is too soon to 
draw  any  final  conclusions,  however,  and  research  beyond  the  scope  of  this  report  or 
conventional economic analysis is needed in order to shed light on why the objectives of low 
inflation  and  economic  stability  seem  so  elusive  in  Iceland,  and  why  undisciplined 
stabilisation  policy  and  an  environment  of  loose  financial  regulation  and  supervision  was 
allowed to flourish during the pre-crisis years. However, as is pointed out in the report, the 
ineffectiveness  of  independent  monetary  policy  and  the  possible  procyclical  influences  of 
floating currencies are not uniquely Icelandic phenomena, nor are they due solely to flawed 
stabilisation  policy.  To  some  extent,  they  can  also  be  attributed  to  exchange  rate  volatility 
where, as with any other asset price, expectations and speculation play an important role. In 
addition, there are indications that smaller countries have more difficulty than large ones in 
pursuing independent monetary policy while they are becoming more integrated globally. In 
this context, it is worth noting that, prior to the financial crisis, Iceland was by far the smallest 
country in the world with a floating currency. Further discussion of the possible reasons for 
small countries’ vulnerability to such problems can be found in Chapters 9 and 13.  
The euro project 
1.3  
At  the  core  of  this  report  is  a  discussion  of  the  euro  project.  It  examines  what  euro  area 
membership  entails  and  what  its  strengths  and  weaknesses  have  proven  to  be  so  far. 
Chapters  2  and  16  focus  on  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  since  its 
                                                
1   See  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  (2010),  Monetary  policy  after  capital  controls,  Special  Publication  no.  4,  and 
Central Bank of Iceland (2012), Prudential rules following capital controls, Special Publication no. 6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
establishment, with particular emphasis on the post-crisis period, and Chapter 17 compares 
the effects of the financial crisis on countries inside and outside the eurozone, with emphasis 
on a comparison of Iceland and Ireland. The objective is to inform the reader and report on 
research findings, with the aim of promoting informed discussion and policy-making on this 
major issue. Chapter 24 explores the changes that would be needed in Icelandic laws and 
regulations with respect to the currency and the Central Bank should Iceland join the EU and 
adopt the euro.  
Chapters  21-25  describe  the  Eurosystem  and  the  EMU  accession  process.  According  to 
EU regulations,  member  countries  are  to  adopt  the  euro  once  they  have  fulfilled  the 
Maastricht criteria for economic convergence. To fulfil the Maastricht criteria, the candidate 
country’s public sector debt and deficits must be within specified limits, its inflation and long-
term  interest  rates  may  not  deviate  beyond  a  certain  limit  from  the  levels  in  the  three 
EU countries with the lowest inflation, and it must participate in the European Exchange Rate 
Mechanism, ERM-II, for at least two years. Denmark and the United Kingdom are the only 
countries  permanently  exempted  from  euro  area  membership,  and  new  EU  member 
countries are unlikely to receive such an exemption.  
Chapter 23 discusses the Maastricht criteria, and Chapter 21 describes ERM-II and how new 
member  countries  have  fared  under  ERM-II.  The  conclusions  of  the  analysis  are  far  from 
unambiguous. The convergence that took place during the run-up to the euro collaboration 
proved  risky  for  many  countries,  as  capital  inflows,  declining  interest  rates,  and  increased 
optimism contributed to steep rises in asset prices and real exchange rates. This resulted in 
current account deficits and reduced competitiveness, which remained (and in some cases 
intensified)  long  after  entry  into  the  euro  area,  as  the  conversion  rate  upon  entry  into  the 
currency  area  proved  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  underlying  equilibrium  exchange  rate 
because  of  the  above-mentioned  developments  (see  Chapter  22).  Similar  developments 
could be seen before the financial crisis in countries participating in ERM-II, particularly the 
Baltics. ERM-II countries have avoided a currency crisis, however. 
Iceland  can  draw  a  number  of  lessons  from  this  if  it  takes  this  path.  ERM-II  is  a  useful 
prelude  to full  euro  area  membership  and,  other  things  being  equal,  will  reduce  exchange 
rate  volatility.  But  ERM-II  membership  is  not  a  magic  solution,  and  the  accession  process 
can prove risky. As a result, it is important that economic policy and the regulatory framework 
be designed to maintain economic stability and keep financial risk within acceptable limits. 
Most  of  the  changes  that  will  improve  economic  policy  under  a  flexible  exchange  rate  will 
also  be  helpful  in  the  run-up  to  euro  area  membership.  These  changes  are  discussed  in 
greater detail later in this chapter.  
Chapter 24 focuses on what euro area membership and full participation in European Central 
Bank (ECB) operations entails. A number of amendments must be made to the Act on the 
Central  Bank  of  Iceland  in  order  for  the  Bank  to  fulfil  the  requirements  made  of  national 
central banks in the euro area, as regards independence and the ability to carry out the tasks 
entailed in euro area membership. In addition, increased requirements are made concerning 
central banks’ participation in the formulation and implementation of financial stability policy 
(see Chapter 25).  
Money serves as a medium of exchange, a unit of account, and a store of value. The better it 
retains its value against goods and services and other currencies, the better a store of value 
and the more reliable unit of account it is. The more it used in trade and the more generally it 
is recognised in settlement, the better a medium of exchange it is. In this sense, the euro has 
been  successful,  and  the  current  crisis  in  the  euro  area  has  not  yet  changed  this  to  any 
marked degree. The euro is the world’s second-largest international reserve currency, after 
the US dollar, and is recognised in trade everywhere. Underlying it is one of the two largest 
and most efficient financial markets in the world. As is discussed in Chapter 2, inflation has 
been  close  to  the  2%  inflation  goal for most  of the  euro’s  existence,  averaging  2.1% from 
early 1999 until mid-2012 and currently measuring just under 2½%. On the whole, the euro 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
has retained its value against other currencies. At the end of August 2012, it was nearly 6½% 
stronger against the US dollar than at the beginning of 1999, and 4% above the average over 
the  intervening  period.  Euro  area  payment  systems  have  proven  effective,  even  in  the 
financial crisis. No controls have been imposed on movement of euro-denominated assets, 
either within or outside the euro area. As a result, there is no currency crisis in the area, and 
it is therefore misleading to speak of “the crisis of the euro” as such.  
This does not change the fact that the euro area is currently faced with a complex web of 
problems that, if worse comes to worst, could threaten its very existence if political support 
for the currency union wanes. The eurozone’s current economic and financial difficulties are 
due in part to the fact that, together with the US, the UK, and Switzerland, the euro area was 
one of the sources of the financial crisis that began in mid-2007 and peaked in autumn 2008. 
In the beginning, the crisis had little to do with flaws in the design of the euro area. Ensuing 
developments unveiled those flaws, however. When all is said and done, the flaws stem from 
the fact that, even though the euro area is referred to as an economic and monetary union, 
the  economic  and  fiscal  aspects  were  largely  missing  (see  Chapter  15).  Furthermore,  the 
EU regulatory  framework  for  cross-border  banking  operations  is  severely  flawed  in  that 
EU-wide operational freedom was coupled with national supervision and deposit insurance – 
and,  in  the  case  of  non-euro  countries  in  the  EU,  national  liquidity  facilities.  This  made  it 
much more difficult to address problems in the banking system at the peak of the financial 
crisis.  To  some  degree,  this  may  explain  why  the  European  banking  system  was  not 
sufficiently restructured at that time and to a lesser extent than, for example, in the US. The 
banking system was therefore more vulnerable when the sovereign debt crisis struck several 
euro  area  countries  as  a  result  of  prolonged  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  (see  Chapter  15), 
economic policy, and the financial systems of the countries affected.  
Therefore,  the  euro  area  is  currently  battling  a  fiscal  crisis  in  some  member  countries,  a 
competitiveness and current account crisis in the region as a whole, a deep banking crisis in 
some countries, and a fragile banking system in many others, which would be exacerbated if 
the sovereign debt crisis should end in default by any of the countries concerned. A currency 
crisis as such is not part of the problem, however, any more than it was in the US.  
As  is  discussed  further  in  Chapters  16  and  25,  a  number  of  reforms  have  already  been 
adopted in response to the shortcomings in the design of the euro area, but it is not certain 
that they will suffice to preserve the currency union in its current form. Forecasting near-term 
developments in the euro area crisis is beyond the scope of this report, however. The results 
of  the  reforms  made  to  date  have  not  yet  been  fully  tested.  If  they  prove  inadequate,  the 
crisis could be amplified and, in the worst-case scenario, could have severe repercussions 
for the future of the euro area in its current form. If they are successful, the reforms could 
strengthen the eurozone. The outcome has yet to be determined.  
Euro area membership: pros and cons for Iceland 
1.4  
According to the conventional economic theory of optimal currency areas (OCA theory; see 
Chapter  5),  a  given  country  is  better  suited  for  participation  in  a  larger  currency  area  the 
more its shocks are symmetric with shocks to the other countries in the currency area, the 
more open its economy is, the greater the share of trade is with the currency area, and the 
more flexible its labour market is. These OCA criteria centre on the balance between the cost 
of  relinquishing  monetary  independence  and  the  benefits  of  reduced  transaction  costs  for 
trade (see also Chapter 6). If economic shocks hitting the candidate country and the currency 
area  are  symmetric,  joint  monetary  policy  will  respond  effectively  to  them,  and  a  flexible 
exchange  rate  will  not  be  needed  as  a  shock  absorber.  The  greater  the  share  of  external 
trade,  the  greater  the  benefits  in  lower  transaction  costs  deriving  from  participation  in  a 
monetary union. At the same time, the effects of nominal exchange rate movements on the 
real  economy  will  be  less,  particularly  in  small,  open  economies  that  price  their  exports  in 
foreign currency and face given import prices in foreign currency. In other words, changes in 
the  nominal  exchange  rate  will  have  a  smaller  and  more  short-lived  effect  on  the  real 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exchange  rate.  Finally,  if  economic  shocks  extend  only  to  the  home  country  and  joint 
monetary  policy  is  insufficient  to  absorb  the  shock,  labour  market  flexibility  could  take  the 
place  of  nominal  exchange  rate  adjustment  once  the  domestic  currency  has  been 
abandoned.  
Consideration  of  these  criteria  based  on  historical  data  does  not  produce  an  unequivocal 
answer  about  Iceland’s  suitability  as  a  member  of  the  eurozone.  The  Icelandic  business 
cycle has been rather weakly linked to that of the euro area – and actually, to most other 
regions  and  countries  as  well  (see  Chapter  10).  Iceland’s  export  sector differs  in  structure 
from  that  in  most  other  industrialised  countries  (see  Chapter  4).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
economy is quite open to trade and the euro area is by far Iceland’s largest trading partner 
(see Chapters 4, 8, and 20). In addition, the domestic labour market is quite flexible, although 
downward flexibility of nominal wages has not been tested much and available data suggest 
that it has been relatively limited to date (see Chapter 14).  
The OCA theory has many shortcomings and does not take account of a number of potential 
benefits of participation in a large currency area such as the eurozone. Historical experience 
also suggests that currency unions can be successful even if the participating countries do 
not fulfil the OCA criteria at the outset (see Chapter 5). In this context, the following points 
are worth noting: 
• 
Research  indicates  that  currency  union  membership  will  stimulate  trade  with  the 
currency union without reducing trade with other countries. In part, this is because 
domestic firms will be enabled to participate more readily in external trade because 
of the absence of exchange rate risk. According to an estimate of this trade boost 
effect  if  Iceland  were  a  member  of  the  euro  area  (see  Chapter  8),  goods  trade 
relative to GDP could increase by 4–11 percentage points and, as a result, GDP per 
capita could rise permanently by 1½–11%. 
Research shows as well that the increased trade between member countries with a 
common  currency  could  cause  the  business  cycle  in  those  countries  to  become 
more  symmetric  over  time,  so that OCA  criteria  are  met to  a  gradually  increasing 
degree.  
The  use  of  money  is  subject  to  considerable  economics  of  scale;  for  instance,  in 
connection with currency issuance, the cost of providing monetary services (such as 
monetary  policy  and  payment  intermediation),  and  cross-border  foreign  exchange 
transactions. Other things being equal, participation in a larger currency area would 
lead to a more efficient and less expensive monetary system.  
In addition, small countries in a currency union can save foreign exchange reserves 
to a greater degree than is possible with an independent currency.  
The  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  is  small,  undeveloped,  and  relatively 
expensive  to  trade  in  (see  Chapter  12).  Euro  area  membership  would  provide 
access  to  a  large,  deep  financial  market  without  exchange  rate  risk.  This  would 
facilitate risk diversification domestically. In addition, the pool of financial products 
would  increase  and  competition  in  financial  services  would  be  enhanced,  thereby 
reducing  the  cost  of  capital.  Simulations  using  the  stylised  dynamic  stochastic 
general  equilibrium  model  in  Chapter  7  indicate  that  domestic  real  interest  rates 
would  decline,  the  domestic  capital  stock  would  grow,  and  GDP  per  capita  would 
rise permanently if a small country such as Iceland were to join a larger currency 
area (see also Chapters 2 and 21 for a discussion of other countries’ experience). 
Upon  joining  the  euro  area,  consumers  would  have  access  to  a  large  market  in 
which  they  could  use  their  home  currency.  This  would  facilitate  price  comparison 
and boost competition. It would also be easier for domestic firms to gain a foothold 
in larger markets and benefit more from economics of scale in their operations and 
production.  
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  With  euro  area  membership,  the  risk  associated  with  cross-border  banking 
operations would be reduced, as banking would take place in the home currency to 
a larger degree and the ECB would be responsible for providing liquidity. As a result, 
it  would  be  possible  to  ease  the  restrictions  on  cross-border  banking  that  would 
otherwise be necessitated by foreign exchange risk and maturity mismatches in the 
banks’ foreign-denominated assets and liabilities.  
EU and euro area member countries are subject to requirements concerning public 
finances  and  other  aspects  of  economic  policy,  which  aim  to  improve  policy 
discipline. In addition, member countries participate in a variety of consultative fora 
on  economic  policy  and  financial  stability,  which  should  also  promote  improved 
policy in these areas. Another benefit of euro area membership is access to rescue 
funds and a common safety net intended to address shocks in individual countries 
and reduce contagion among them.  
But euro area membership also entails risks for Iceland. It would no longer be possible to 
apply independent monetary policy and a flexible exchange rate in response to shocks and 
to  expedite  adjustments  to  changes  in  national  income.  Under  certain  circumstances,  this 
has been quite useful for the Icelandic economy. On the whole, however, domestic monetary 
policy has not proven particularly effective in achieving set goals, and more often than not a 
flexible  exchange  rate  has  proven  a  source  of  shocks  rather  than  a  shock  absorber. 
Consequently, relinquishing domestic monetary policy may not prove to be a great sacrifice 
unless  monetary  policy  can  be  improved  and  excess  exchange  rate  volatility  can  be 
mitigated. This possibility is explored later in this chapter.  
Another  risk  is  the  crisis  currently  facing  the  euro  area  and  the  design  failures  that  are  a 
partial cause of it. Because of this, it would be risky for Iceland to join the euro area before it 
can be determined, based on further developments, whether the euro area would be a better 
or worse choice in the long run.  
Exchange rate targeting and adoption of another currency 
1.5  
In some respects, the structure of the Icelandic economy calls for a flexible exchange rate. 
Offsetting  this  are  excess  exchange  rate  volatility  and  studies  indicating  that  the  Icelandic 
króna has tended to be a source of shocks more than a shock absorber. Furthermore, there 
are  various  benefits  of  euro  area  membership  through  EU  accession,  such  as  increased 
international trade and access to a deeper financial market without exchange rate risk. But if 
EU membership proves not to be an option – for instance, if an acceptable solution to the 
euro area crisis cannot be found and/or if a majority of the electorate is opposed to it – and 
Icelanders  are  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  address  the  pre-crisis  flaws  in  monetary  and 
economic  policy  without  sacrificing  exchange  rate  flexibility,  other  options  should  be 
examined, such as some type of exchange rate targeting or unilateral or bilateral adoption of 
another  currency.  These  options  are  discussed  in  Chapters  18  and  19,  while  Chapter  20 
focuses on the issues that must be considered in selecting a currency to adopt or use as an 
anchor.  
Exchange  rate  targeting  entails  defining  limits  on  exchange  rate  movements  and  applying 
monetary policy so as to keep the exchange rate within that band. Such bands can vary in 
width, the commitment to the exchange rate target can vary in strength, and the commitment 
can be backed by other declarations and policy actions that further support the target.  
One form of exchange rate target familiar to Icelanders is a declared target of an exchange 
rate index with a defined fluctuation band. Such an arrangement prevailed in Iceland before 
the inflation target and floating exchange rate were adopted in March 2001 (see Chapter 12). 
The original fluctuation band was rather narrow, at ±2½%. It was then widened to ±6%, and 
again to ±9%, after it proved more difficult, and in some ways riskier, to hold the exchange 
rate within a narrow band once restrictions on capital movements were lifted. But it was also 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growing imbalances in the domestic economy that contributed to the demise of the exchange 
rate  target.  Those  imbalances  were  due  in  part  to  excessively  accommodative  demand 
management, which provided insufficient support for the exchange rate policy.  
An exchange rate peg of this type has an advantage in that, in the long run, inflation will tend 
to  converge  on  inflation  in  the  anchor  currency  area  and  exchange  rate  volatility  will  be 
reduced.  However,  Iceland’s  experience  in  this  area  –  and  that  of  many  other  countries  – 
shows that it is difficult to maintain such a unilateral exchange rate peg when movement of 
capital is unrestricted and the exchange rate policy receives inadequate support from fiscal 
policy and other aspects of demand management (see Chapter 18). Thus it is not a given 
that  this  would  be  a  viable  option  for  Icelanders,  as  such  a  policy  might  lack  credibility 
because of previous experience. Adopting an exchange rate peg and a deviation band in an 
international collaboration with other countries could prove more propitious, however. Such a 
policy would be more credible because it would be supported by the actions and credibility of 
the other countries. The Bretton Woods exchange rate system, which was in place from the 
end of World War II until 1973, is an example of this. The difference, however, was that most 
participating countries also had capital controls. ERM-II, on the other hand, is an example of 
an  exchange  rate  targeting  system  based  on  international  cooperation  and  unrestricted 
movement of capital. It works because of the ECB’s credibility and its obligation to intervene, 
and because it is defined as a temporary arrangement with a clear exit path towards the euro 
area. The markets are thus not tempted for an unlimited period by a commitment to a peg 
that they can speculate against.  
A currency board has the same advantages as a conventional exchange rate peg in that, in 
the  long run,  average  inflation  should  align  with  that  in  the  anchor  area (see  Chapter  18). 
Because  a  currency  board  is  based  on  a  pledge  enshrined  in  law  or  even  the  country’s 
constitution  –  a  pledge  to  convert  the  domestic  currency  to  the  anchor  currency  at  a 
predetermined exchange rate – volatility vis-à-vis the anchor currency disappears. Because 
the pledge is more stringent than that implied by a conventional unilateral peg, it can also be 
more credible. Furthermore, it is more difficult to force a change in the exchange rate peg 
through speculative attack, but the repercussions of a successful attack could also be much 
greater. As a result, it is extremely important that a currency board, like any other exchange 
rate peg, be supported by fiscal and economic policy. If fiscal policy is not consistent with the 
fixed exchange rate policy, the peg is likely to fail in the end, no matter how strong the formal 
commitment to it is.  
The  main  disadvantages  of  a  currency  board  are  that  the  central  bank’s  possibility  of 
mitigating  volatility  in  banking  system  liquidity  is  more  limited,  and  the  money  supply 
fluctuates  with  the  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This  could  put  excessive  pressure  on  the 
domestic  financial  system  and  entails  a  risk  to  financial  stability.  The  foreign  exchange 
reserves must also be much larger than under a floating exchange rate regime. Most of the 
countries that have successfully used a currency board are small countries with close links to 
the anchor area or those planning to adopt the euro.  
There has been some discussion of the possibility of adopting another currency in Iceland 
(see Chapter 19). When a country adopts another currency unilaterally, the foreign exchange 
reserves are used to purchase banknotes and coin in the anchor currency, which is put into 
circulation instead of the domestic currency. The central bank deposits held by the national 
treasury and the domestic financial institutions are then converted to the anchor currency, as 
are  the  financial  institutions’  domestic  assets  and  liabilities.  Technically,  this  can  easily  be 
done, but what comes next?  
Many of the pros and cons of unilaterally adopting another currency are the same as those 
pertaining to the euro area: inflation is better anchored and exchange rate risk disappears in 
trade  within  the  currency  area,  although  independent  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate 
flexibility are relinquished as tools that can be applied in response to economic shocks. The 
fact that no formal agreements are needed and the process can be concluded swiftly could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
be viewed as an advantage over and above negotiated euro area membership. But the lack 
of a contractual framework embodies many of the disadvantages of this option in comparison 
with euro area membership or maintaining the domestic currency. The main problem is that 
the supply of the new currency in the country will fluctuate with capital in- and outflows, while 
counteractive  measures  are  much  more  limited  than  with  an  independent  currency  or  full 
euro  area  membership. For  instance,  capital  outflows  could quickly  develop  into  a  liquidity 
problem  for  the  banking  system  and  for  treasury  financing,  which  could  ultimately  lead  to 
default  and  a  financial  crisis  that  the  domestic  authorities  would  be  unable  to  stop.  The 
likelihood of this could be reduced through preventive mitigating measures, such as running 
the  central  government  at  a  significant  surplus  and  requiring  that  domestic  banks  either 
maintain  sizeable  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  their  own  or  have  credit  lines  with  foreign 
banks. But all such measures come at a significant cost, the foreign exchange reserves are 
always  limited,  and  experience  shows  that  credit  lines  with  private  banks  are  not  secure, 
particularly  when  they  are  most  needed.  Measures  of  this  type  can  therefore  never  fully 
replace  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  provide  liquidity  support  in  its  own  currency,  which  is 
virtually  unlimited  so  long  as  the  banks  are  solvent  and  can  provide  eligible  collateral. 
Unilateral adoption of another currency can therefore entail substantial risk to the stability of 
the financial  system. In  this  connection,  some  argue,  however,  that  providing  central  bank 
liquidity  facilities  to  the  banking  system  is  harmful  and  that  this  is  therefore  not  a 
disadvantage. But the problem is that even though a banking system based on a maturity 
transformation  has  contributed  significantly  to  output  growth  and  economic  welfare,  it  is 
extremely  risky  without  the  back-up  of  a  central  bank,  as  previous  experience  has  shown. 
The  banking  system  could  therefore  fail  “unnecessarily”,  at  enormous  cost  in  the  form  of 
economic contraction and elevated unemployment.  
In  addition,  there  is  the  disadvantage  of  needing  to  spend  the  country’s  foreign  exchange 
reserves  in  order to  acquire  the  anchor  currency,  whereas  with  negotiated  adoption  of the 
euro  via  EU  accession,  the  ECB  would  provide  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  with  euros  to 
replace all outstanding domestic banknotes and coins. Seigniorage revenues would revert in 
full to the foreign central bank, and when banknotes and coin are lost or destroyed, it would 
be  Iceland’s  loss  and  the  anchor  country’s  gain.  With  an  independent  currency  or  with 
participation in the euro area, however, such a loss is incurred by the individual concerned 
and not the economy.  
As  is  discussed  in  Chapter  19,  relatively  few  countries  have  unilaterally  adopted  another 
currency, and most of those that have done so are small in size. Most are former colonies of 
the  anchor  country  or  are  European  countries  with  a  special  status  in the  region. The few 
studies available suggest, however, that unilateral adoption of another currency yields little in 
the  way  of  significant  economic  advantages.  Panama  has  the  longest  experience  of  this 
arrangement,  but  it  has  been  forced  to  apply  17  times  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF) for assistance and has suffered its share of banking crises, due in part to lack of fiscal 
discipline.  
Some of the disadvantages of unilateral adoption could be reduced by negotiating a bilateral 
agreement  with  the  anchor  country  providing  for  central  bank  liquidity  facilities  for  the 
domestic banking system, a share in seigniorage revenues, renewal of banknotes and coin, 
and  participation  in  monetary  policy  formulation.  Such  an  arrangement  would  somewhat 
resemble euro area membership. But it could be difficult to obtain such a commitment from 
another  country,  and  there  is  no  precedent  for  it.  At  all  events,  it  is  likely  that  such  an 
agreement would be conditional upon giving the anchor country and its central bank a say in 
the domestic financial system regulatory framework and allowing it to participate in domestic 
financial  supervision,  as  the  historical  origins  of  financial  supervision  are  in  central  bank 
liquidity  facilities  and  lending  of  last  resort.  In that  case,  a  bilateral  agreement  of  this type 
would  entail  relinquishing  considerable  sovereign  powers,  even  more  than  in  the  case  of 
euro area membership.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1.6  
Flexible exchange rate and improved framework for demand management and 
the financial system 
As has already been discussed, Iceland’s experience of independent monetary policy and a 
flexible  exchange  rate  has  been  mixed,  to  say  the  least.  Monetary  policy  has  not  been 
effective enough, and more often than not the exchange rate of the króna has been a source 
of shocks rather than a shock absorber. For instance, fluctuations in private consumption are 
considerably larger in Iceland than in other developed countries, and much greater than can 
be explained by fluctuations in external conditions. But there is a certain problem concerning 
the implementation of various types of exchange rate peg, in that studies of the structure of 
the  Icelandic  economy  suggest  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is  in  some  ways  a  beneficial 
arrangement for Iceland. It is also clear that concluding Iceland’s EU membership application 
will take some time and, if Iceland does choose to join the EU, adopting the euro will take 
even longer. As a consequence, it is very important to ask whether monetary policy, demand 
management in general, and the regulatory and supervisory framework of the financial sector 
can  be  reformed  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  a  flexible  exchange  rate  on  the  basis  of  the 
Icelandic  króna  an  attractive  option  without  sacrificing  free  movement  of  capital.  Such  a 
solution could benefit Iceland either in the run-up to euro area accession or for the longer 
term.  
The Central Bank report entitled Monetary policy in Iceland after capital controls contains a 
discussion  of  possible  reforms  aimed  at  addressing 
in  demand 
management and the regulatory framework before the financial crisis. A subsequent report, 
Prudential  rules  following  capital  controls,  outlines  the  regulatory  framework  that  would 
reduce the financial system risk that can accompany free movement of capital. Together, the 
recommendations in these two reports would make domestic monetary policy more effective 
and would hopefully reduce excess exchange rate volatility. Furthermore, the risk to financial 
stability would be less, in part because domestic parties’ currency-related risk would be lower 
and  because  it  would  be  possible  limit  the  size  and  growth  of  the  banking  system.  To 
summarise, the possible reforms are as follows:  
• 
the  shortcomings 
Fiscal  policy  must  support monetary  policy  more  effectively. Well-formulated fiscal 
rules could help in this context.  
Improved financial stability policy where prudential rules and other instruments are 
applied in order to reduce risk in the financial system as a whole and address the 
procyclical interactions between it and the real economy (so-called macroprudential 
policy).  
Intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  with  the  aim  of  leaning  against 
excessive capital inflows and mitigating the negative impact of capital outflows on 
financial  system  stability.  Such  intervention  would  also  be  applied  to  smooth  out 
excessive exchange rate volatility.  
Prudential rules after capital account liberalisation:  
       Rules on domestic banks’ foreign liquidity and foreign exchange balance aimed 
at  reducing  foreign  exchange  risk  and  foreign-denominated  liquidity  risk  in 
domestic  financial  institutions,  as  well  as  making  it  more  difficult  for  them  to 
provide foreign-denominated loans to domestic borrowers without income in the 
borrowed currencies.  
Restrictions  on  deposit  accumulation  in  foreign  branches  of  domestic  financial 
institutions.  
A ban or other restrictions on foreign-denominated lending to borrowers without 
foreign-denominated income.  
A temporary tax or reserve requirements to temper excessive capital inflows.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Possible improvements to the monetary policy framework, including a longer target 
horizon  for  policy  formation,  which  offers  greater  flexibility  to  take  account  of 
longer-term risks to price stability, including those due to financial stability risk.  
Changes  to  the  financial  system  should  also  aim  at  improving  monetary  policy 
transmission.  
This  option  has  the  advantage  that  Iceland  retains  monetary  independence  and  a  flexible 
exchange rate and can therefore respond to future idiosyncratic shocks. Another advantage 
is  that  a  domestic  run  on  the  Treasury  and/or  solvent  banks  would  be  manageable. 
Furthermore, there is reduced risk of financial instability due to excessive capital inflows and 
a  subsequent  run  on  the  external  funding  of  the  banking  system  and  the  Treasury.  The 
disadvantages  of  this  option  lie  in  the  fact  that  the  possibilities  for  external  trade  without 
exchange rate risk will remain limited, and the domestic financial system will continue to be 
more expensive and less integrated with the global financial system than it would otherwise 
be.  In  that  case,  prudential  rules  restricting  domestic  financial  institutions’  cross-border 
operations will be needed. The feasibility of this option is also dependent on support for the 
necessary  reforms.  But  even  though  that  condition  is  fulfilled,  it  is  not  likely  that  excess 
exchange rate volatility  will disappear, as it is also rooted in the inherent volatility of asset 
prices and the small size of the domestic foreign exchange market. But the fluctuations need 
not  be  larger  than  many  other  and  larger  countries  appear  able  to  tolerate.  Finally,  it  is 
appropriate to emphasise that independent monetary policy under a flexible exchange rate 
regime can take many forms, including different types of price stability target and taking into 
consideration the role of money and credit in policy formation. It can therefore change from 
one  period  to  another  without  necessitating  major  decisions  concerning  the  currency  as 
such.  
Capital controls and exchange rate regime options 
1.7  
Lifting the capital controls is one of the most important yet most complex challenges facing 
Iceland at present. The controls have proven an important means of achieving stability in the 
wake of the financial crisis. Because of this, they were approved by signatories of the EEA 
Agreement  even  though  they  are  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  Agreement.  In  the  long  run, 
however,  it  is  critical  that  they  be  abolished. There  are  at  least two  main  reasons for this. 
First, the costs associated with the capital controls grow over time and will ultimately exceed 
the benefits. Second, they are in contravention of Iceland’s international obligations. For the 
long term, it will be impossible to retain universal restrictions on capital outflows and remain 
in the EEA. Iceland must therefore make a genuine attempt to lift the controls. It may prove 
complicated and time-consuming, but there is no other option.  
This gives rise to the question of how capital account liberalisation is related to the choice of 
currency and exchange rate policy. Do some policy options make it easier to lift the controls 
than others? Which comes first, lifting the controls or deciding the currency issue? At what 
exchange  rate  should  so-called  offshore  krónur  be  converted  if  Iceland  establishes  a 
currency  board  or  adopts  another  currency  unilaterally?  Is  it  possible  that  capital  account 
liberalisation will wait until – or even beyond – accession to the EU? These questions are not 
easy  to  answer,  and  exhaustive  answers  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  report,  but  a  few 
points can be made nonetheless.  
The most desirable option must be to lift the controls before deciding the currency issue. First 
of all, Iceland needs to lift them – for its own sake and due to international obligations – and 
the  process  has  already  begun.  Second,  it  appears  clear  that  either  the  controls  must  be 
lifted  before  Iceland  adopts  another  currency  or  establishes  a  currency  board,  or  onshore 
and offshore krónur must be converted at the same exchange rate. Any other course could 
be considered default, with severe repercussions for Iceland’s future access to foreign credit 
markets. Third, the EU regulatory framework assumes that capital controls will be lifted prior 
to membership.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If liberalisation proves so difficult that Iceland cannot achieve it without outside assistance – 
which hopefully will not be the case – the most straightforward solution would be to refer the 
problem  to  the  EEA,  as  free  movement  of  capital  is  provided  for  in  the  EEA  Agreement. 
Depending on the resolution there and the progress of the EU accession negotiations, the 
problem could be resolved in connection with the accession process itself. At this point, it is 
unclear  what  form  such  outside  assistance  would  take,  but  the  more  it  takes  the  form  of 
declarations concerning limits to exchange rate fluctuations backed by credibility and strong 
ability to intervene in the foreign exchange market, and the less it takes the form of offering 
loans, the better. On the other hand, it appears inevitable that, if Iceland joins the euro area, 
it would be necessary to convert all krónur at the same exchange rate, for the same reasons 
as with a currency board or unilateral adoption of another currency.  
Although  the  interaction  between  the  capital  controls  and  Iceland’s  currency  options  is 
complex in many respects, this is not true to the same extent of prudential rules restricting 
the international activities of domestic financial institutions. For instance, it would be safe to 
relax such rules if Iceland were a member of the euro area and its financial institutions could 
carry out a large share of its cross-border business in its home currency. This would be even 
more true if the EU framework for cross-border banking were reformed so as to provide for 
EU supervision of banks operating throughout the region, a pan-European deposit insurance 
scheme, and intervention in distressed financial institutions by a joint EU body.  
Conclusion 
1.8  
At this point, no unequivocal conclusion can be drawn concerning Iceland’s optimal currency 
and exchange rate policy option. All of the possibilities have advantages and disadvantages. 
Although  the  assessment  of  these  options  is  based  on  a  relatively  sound  economic 
foundation, there is no simple economic formula stating how these pros and cons should be 
weighted together so as to yield a clear answer. In addition, it is quite uncertain how these 
factors  will  develop  in  the  future.  But  it  should  also  be  noted  that  this  report  contains 
numerous findings indicating that the selection of a currency and exchange rate policy may 
be less important for economic welfare and stability than might be expected in view of the 
public  discussion  on  the  issue.  An  example  of  this  is  how  different  countries  have  fared 
during the financial crisis (see Chapters 16 and 17) and how likely asset price bubbles are to 
develop  inside  and  outside  a  currency  union  (see  Chapter  11).  Based  on  the  limited 
experience  to  date,  it  appears  that  fiscal  policy,  financial  system  structure  and  regulatory 
framework, and the incentives and opportunities of private agents to borrow are much more 
important. 
One  of  the  reasons  it  is  difficult  at  this  point  to  draw  a  clear  conclusion  about  which  path 
Iceland should take is the uncertainty about near-term developments in the two most likely 
scenarios:  an  improved  framework  for  the  króna  and  removal  of  the  capital  controls,  or 
EU membership and eventual adoption of the euro. It therefore appears sensible to continue 
to  analyse  and  develop  these  two  options  for  a  while  yet,  both  by  preparing  a  stronger 
framework for the króna and by pursuing Iceland’s application for EU membership.  
If  the  euro  area  crisis  is  resolved  in  the  near  future  and  the  currency  union  framework  is 
strengthened, and if Iceland decides to join the EU and the euro area, reforms to the current 
monetary framework will also prove helpful during the run-up to adoption of the euro. In a 
best-case scenario, euro area membership will take several years at the very least. Iceland 
must make a decisive effort to lift the capital controls. It is therefore critical to develop the 
monetary and exchange rate policies that would be used afterwards. These policies must be 
adequate until Iceland adopts the euro if it so chooses, although some changes could take 
place along the way, such as with participation in ERM-II. But the monetary framework must 
also be suitable for the long term. To the extent possible, it must be a viable alternative to 
euro  area  membership  so  that  Icelanders  can  assess  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  options 
available to them. The Central Bank of Iceland has recently invested considerable work in 
these  projects,  including  preparing  the  publications  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  and  further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
work is planned. The Bank has also invested a great deal of work in projects related to the 
EU application, as other candidate countries’ central banks have done.  
Although the choice of currency and exchange rate policies are in many respects technical 
issues, decisions regarding the monetary framework can never be severed from their political 
context.  Countries  take  a  position  on  this  issue  based  on  their  own  experience  and  their 
relationship  with  other  countries.  Full  participation  in  the  euro  area  cannot  come  to  pass 
without  formal  negotiations  and  EU  membership.  Such  a  decision  reaches  far  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  economic  analysis  and  cannot  be  taken  except  through  a  political  process 
wherein the population itself has the last word. It is not the role of the Central Bank to take a 
stand on such a major issue. Whichever decision is taken, it will have a decisive impact on 
Iceland’s monetary and exchange rate policy options. The Central Bank has a role to play in 
explaining what the options are. That is the function of this report. The Bank hopes that this 
publication  will  be  useful  in  promoting  informed,  substantive  discussion  of  currency  and 
exchange rate policy.  
In  closing,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  staff  members  who  devoted 
innumerable  hours  to  the  preparation  of  this  report.  Special  thanks  are  due  the  Chief 
Economist, Thórarinn G. Pétursson, who has steered this project for the past two years. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
