Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 November 2012. 
 Today,  on  27  November  2012,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  reviewed  and 
approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the latest monetary and economic 
developments in Albania, and following the discussions on their future outlook, the Bank of 
Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  decided  to keep the  key  interest  rate  unchanged,  at  4.00%. 
The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions are adequate to meet 
Bank of Albania’s inflation target in the medium term. These conditions ensure the necessary 
monetary stimulus to support the domestic demand.  
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.  
 Annual  inflation  fell  for  the  second  consecutive  month,  down  to  2.4%  in  October.  Its 
performance was driven by food price developments, which account for almost 70% of the 
inflation rate. Prices of other consumer basket items moved in different directions, retaining 
their contribution at the same levels as in the previous months.  
From the macroeconomic viewpoint, inflation rate continued to be determined by temporary 
externally-generated supply factors and structural changes in the domestic market. The slow 
performance of economic activity is associated with low increase in producer costs and low 
pressures on inflation. 
Also,  moderate  growth  of  monetary  indicators,  low  increases  in  global  prices  and 
well-anchored inflationary expectations have generated contained inflationary pressures. In 
general, this situation is expected to continue over the period ahead. 
Data on third-quarter economic activity are partial and are based on indirect indicators. Their 
analysis suggests positive but low growth of the domestic economy over this period. Industry, 
agriculture  and  services  are  the  sectors  that  have  supported  the  economic  growth,  while 
construction does not highlight any signs of improvement in the current and expected activity. 
In the aggregate demand, foreign demand remained the main driver to economic growth in 
the  third  quarter.  The  domestic  demand  appears  to  have  weakened  due  to  lack  of  fiscal 
stimulus and sluggish private investments and consumption. 
Fiscal policy was consolidating in 2012. It is reflected in the 19% decline in the budget deficit 
of  the  first  ten  months  of  the  year,  leading  to  maintaining  of  fiscal  indicators  sustainability 
over this period. On the other hand, the performance of expenditure and budget deficit did 
not support the aggregate demand growth.  
Public spending for the first ten months of the year resulted 0.2% less than a year earlier, 
reflecting  the  low  increase  in  the  budget  revenues.  The  latter  increased  at  low  annualised 
rates during the year, resulting at the end of October only 2% higher than a year earlier. The 
Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  though  the  cautious  consumer  behaviour  has  not  made  any 
direct impact on economic growth over this period, it has helped keep risk premia on track 
and has led to low long-term interest rates, thus contributing to boosting private investments. 
Looking  forward,  we  deem  that  the  fiscal  policy  should  retain  its  orientation  toward  fiscal 
indicators sustainability, supporting Albania’s economic and monetary stability and being an 
important pre-requisite for a stable and long-term growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Foreign  demand  continued  to  support  the  growth  of  exports  and  economic  activity 
throughout  2012. Trade deficit  narrowed  by  7.9%  in the third quarter,  reflecting mainly  the 
good performance of exports. The latter increased by 17% in the third quarter, retaining the 
previous quarters’ positive trend. On the other hand, imports performed poorly, reflecting the 
low demand for consumption and investment. In the third quarter, imports recorded positive 
annual growth of only 0.7%.  
Performance of monetary indicators attests to moderate pressures on monetary inflation. 
The annualised broad money growth rate decelerated to 6.8% in September. Reflecting the 
sluggish domestic demand, economic agents’ demand for money has been low. 
The  weak  demand for money  has  been  associated  with  a  constantly falling  contribution  of 
funding from public and private sectors to increasing the monetary supply throughout 2012. 
Private  sector’s  contribution  continued  to  slow  during  this  month;  its  annual  growth  rate 
reached 4.2%, recording one of the lowest historical levels.  
Latest financial market developments have reflected the easing monetary conditions and low 
or  downward  premia  of  inflation  and  liquidity  risks.  Interbank  rates  have  been  downward, 
following  the  monetary  policy  signals.  Also,  upon  resolving  the  structural problems  in  the 
primary  market,  the  treasury  bill  yields  dropped  sharply  on  all  maturities.  In  a  tranquil 
financial  market  and  lacking  additional  shocks  in  the  future,  the  previous  monetary  policy 
easing  is  expected  to  be  passed  on  to  other  financial  market  segments.  Under  these 
conditions,  raising  the  monetary  stimulus  in  the  economy  would  further  boost  aggregate 
demand, without affecting the price stability in the medium term. 
Developments  in  lending  and  financial  markets  reflect  households’  and  businesses’ 
reluctance  to  make  long-term  commitments.  However,  the  low  degree  of  credit  growth 
reflects the banks’ cautious in terms of lending. In this context, the Bank of Albania points out 
that,  notwithstanding  the  externally  generated  short-term  risks,  the  medium  and  long-term 
outlook  for  Albania  remains  sound.  Albanian  consumers  and  businesses  should  be  more 
realistic about their development plans and adopt a more pragmatist approach to increase 
current investments and consumption.  
Also,  the  banks’  sound balance  sheets  should provide  more financial funds  to  support the 
economy by increasing lending.  
Looking forward, the new information obtained during the last month confirms our previous 
projections on the expected performance of the Albanian economy over the monetary policy-
relevant horizon. The Albanian economic activity is expected to grow at positive but low and 
below  potential  rates.  The  poor  performance  of  private  investments  and  consumption 
restricts the room for economic growth. On the other hand, preliminary information suggests 
that the fiscal stimulus may be upward in the next year, complementing the foreign demand 
as  a  short-term  contributor  to  next  year’s  economic  growth.  However,  the  overall 
effect  of  fiscal  stimulus  will  depend  on  the  response  by  the  private  sector  and 
financial  markets.  At  the  same  time,  its  long-term  effect  will  depend  on  additional 
costs that it will bring about on the budget.  
The Bank of Albania deems that the aggregate demand will not exert upward pressures on 
inflation.  Against  the  backdrop  of  a  stable  monetary  environment,  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations  and  moderate  impact  from  import  prices  and  exchange  rate,  inflation  is 
expected to remain within the Bank of Albania’s target over the period ahead. Under these 
circumstances, our monetary policy is expected to retain its stimulating nature in the medium 
term.  
Concluding the discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 4.0%.  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
