Benoît Cœuré: Which models do we need in times of crisis? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Bank of France, CEPREMAP, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and Centre d’Analyse 
Stratégique international conference on “Macroeconomic modeling in times of crisis”, Paris, 
26 October 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Peter  McAdam  for  his  contributions  to  these  remarks.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions expressed herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to this conference.  
We are living in extraordinary times. Unprecedented challenges call for bold policy action, but 
the  bolder  we  are,  the  more  we  need  solid,  principle-based  policy  analysis.  This  is  all  the 
more  challenging  as  the  crisis  has  also  exposed  weaknesses  in  our  existing  tools.  This 
conference gives us a chance to reflect on the lessons that can be learnt and on how we can 
proceed. Let me share a few ideas based on the ECB’s experience. 
Prominent  economists  –  Akerlof  and  Shiller,  Buiter,  Krugman  and  Mankiw,1  as  well  as 
popular opinion2 – have concluded (from different perspectives) that the current generation of 
micro-founded theory-based models have somehow taken a wrong turning. Others – among 
them  Kocherlakota,  Lucas  and  Woodford3  –  have  reached  a  more  positive  assessment. 
Others still (such as John Taylor) point less to models and more to policy: specifically, the 
failure to adhere to the policy rules derived from those same models.4 The truth probably lies 
somewhere  in  between.  Thus,  I  take  the  view  that  while  we  should  acknowledge  the 
contribution  of  our  models,  we  must  likewise  acknowledge  their  limitations  and  make 
improvements. 
It’s worth reminding ourselves where we are and what’s been achieved. Policy interventions 
by the ECB, the Federal Reserve System and other central banks – lowering policy rates to 
historic  lows  and  employing  non-standard  measures  such  as  infinitely-elastic  liquidity 
provision or the ECB’s new “Outright Monetary Transactions” – have certainly eased financial 
market pressures. Although we are still grappling with tensions in credit and sovereign debt 
markets, and with the painful adjustment of our economies, the financial system is recovering 
and we are working hard to strengthen that process. In addition, banks are replenishing their 
capital  buffers  and  the  institutional  foundations  of  the  euro  are  being  strengthened,  e.g. 
                                                
1  References:  Buiter.  W.  (2009):  “The  unfortunate  uselessness  of  most  ‘state  of  the  art’  academic  monetary 
economics”, Financial Times, 3 March 2009; Akerlof, G. and Shiller, R. (2009): “Animal Spirits: How Human 
Psychology  Drives  the  Economy,  and  Why  It  Matters  for  Global  Capitalism”,  Princeton  University  Press; 
Krugman, P. (2010): “The International Finance Multiplier”. New York Times, 22 March. Mankiw, N. Gregory 
(2006):  “The  Macroeconomist  as  Scientist  and  Engineer”,  The  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  20  (4):  
29-46.23. 
2  Kay,  J.  (2011):  “The  Map  is  Not  the  Territory:  An  Essay  on  the  State  of  Economics”,  available  at 
http://www.johnkay.com/2011/10/04/the-map-is-not-the-territory-an-essay-on-the-state-of-economics. 
3  For  example,  see  Woodford’s  recent  essay  “What’s  Wrong  with  Economic  Models?”,  Institute  for  New 
Economic Thinking, Research Note 9, 2012. Lucas, R. (2009): “In defence of the dismal science”, Economics 
Focus Section, Economist 6 Aug. Kocherlakota, Narayana (May 2010): “Modern Macroeconomic Models as 
Tools  for  Economic  Policy”,  Banking  and  Policy  Issues  Magazine.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis. 
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications_papers/pub_display.cfm?id=4428. 
4  John Taylor has argued that protracted departures from well-known normative policy prescriptions based on 
consensus macroeconomic models (such as those based on the “Taylor rule”) have contributed to the crisis. 
Taylor,  J.  (2009):  “Getting  Off  Track:  How  Government  Actions  and  Interventions  Caused,  Prolonged,  and 
Worsened the Financial Crisis”, Hoover Institution Press Publication. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
through  the  Fiscal  Compact  and  the  forthcoming  banking  union,  together  with  improved 
regulatory frameworks.  
These decisions have not been taken in an intellectual vacuum. The notion that the Great 
Recession  would  have  exposed  fundamental  flaws  in  economic  theory  can  be  firmly 
dispelled. It is my conviction that more than ever – and here I quote John Maynard Keynes – 
“madmen  in  authority…are  distilling  their  frenzy  from  some  academic  scribbler  from  a  few 
years back”.5 Economic theories, some of them dating back to the 1930s,6 have helped us to 
incorporate financial insights tractably into our models – think of the financial accelerator, the 
debt deflation channel, the credit channel, the modelling of collateral-constrained and credit-
constrained agents, to name but a few. Therefore, saying that models had nothing to teach 
us about the crisis (before or after) is just not right. It’s true that we did not avoid the Great 
Recession,  but  if  we,  around  the  world,  were  able  to  prevent  a  much  more  damaging 
depression, we owe much of it to the science of economics.  
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  true  that  our  models  did  not  predict  the  crisis  and  provided  only 
limited policy guidance when it struck. Can we identify their weaknesses? Well, there are the 
usual  suspects: 
limited  agent 
heterogeneity  and  financial  imperfections.  Ex  ante,  these  choices  may  be  defended  as 
reflecting  the  need  for  parsimony,  logical  consistency  and  tractability  in  model  building; 
perhaps also the view that financial crises were rare. Clearly, those views need revising. 
Certainly,  structural  models  were  not  very  successful  at  forecasting  the  crisis.  But  I’m  not 
certain  that  there  were  other  tools  out  there  which  did  better.  Non-linear  models  are 
outwardly attractive – think of the strong pro-cyclical features of the current euro area crisis, 
such as the market impact of credit downgrades or the feedback loop between sovereign and 
bank  creditworthiness.  But  they  do  not  necessarily  deliver  substantive  gains  in  real  time.7 
Meta  models  or  models  which  markedly  over-fit  the  data  are  unlikely  to  help  policy 
deliberations.  Arguably  of  more  importance  is  the  better  identification  of  those  (currently 
under-developed) financial factors that matter for our short-term assessment. 
Let me now bring the ECB’s experience into the discussion. I would first like to emphasise 
the  valuable  contribution  that  the  current  generation  of  DSGE  models  have  made  to  the 
policy-making  process.  The  ECB  has  been  at  the  frontier  of  developing  and  estimating 
structural  models  for  policy  analysis.  Models  such  as  Smets-Wouters8  and  the  New  Area-
Wide  Model9  (NAWM)  have  played  an  important  role  in  policy  analysis  (for  example,  in 
policy-making under the zero lower bound for nominal interest rates and the effectiveness of 
rational  expectations,  complete  markets, 
linearity, 
                                                
5  Keynes J.M. (1936): The General Theory of Unemployment, Interest and Money, Chapter 24, paragraph 5. 
6  Seminal  contributions  include:  Fisher,  I.  (1933):  The  Debt-Deflation  Theory  of  Great  Depressions, 
Econometrica;  Bernanke,  B.  and  Gertler,  M.  (1989):  Agency  costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business  Fluctuations, 
American Economic Review, vol. 79, 1; Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997): Credit Cycles, Journal of Political 
Economy,  vol.  105;  and  Bernanke,  B.,  Gertler,  M.  and  Gilchrist,  S.  (1999):  “The  Financial  Accelerator  in  a 
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, Handbook of Macroeconomics, North Holland. 
7  The literature still debates the usefulness of non-linear forecasting methods, with so far mixed evidence (Stock 
and Watson 1999). The financial crisis has revived this debate. However, the currently available non-linear 
models do not systematically beat linear models in point forecasting or in real-time terms, as was shown at the 
recent  7th  ECB  workshop  on  forecasting  techniques  (e.g.,  Barnett  et  al.,  2012  and  Elliot,  2012).  See 
http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/ft_workshop2011.en.html,  and  Stock,  J.  H.  and  M.  W.  Watson 
(1999): “Forecasting inflation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(2), 293–335. 
8  Smets, F. and Wouters, R. (2003): “An estimated Stochastic Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro 
Area” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1123–1175. 
9  Christoffel,  K.,  Coenen,  G.  and Warne,  A.  (2008):  “The  New  Area-Wide  Model  of  the  Euro  Area:  A  Micro-
Founded Open-Economy Model for Forecasting and Policy Analysis”, ECB Working Paper No 944. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fiscal  policy).  Similarly,  the  Christiano-Motto-Rostagno10  model  represents  a  valuable 
extension of the canonical framework to explore and interpret financial linkages. 
In  recent  years,  at  the  ECB  and  comparable  institutions,  country  modelling  has  risen  in 
prominence.  Smaller  countries,  and  in  particular  the  EU/IMF  programme  countries,  whose 
impact  has  usually  been  small  relative  to  euro  area  developments,  have  extensively 
contributed to increased area-wide volatility. 
But  in  building  and  extending  our  models,  we  should  be  aware  that  there  are  other 
perspectives.  Behavioural  economics  and  behavioural  finance  spring  to  mind:  yes,  animal 
spirits  and  herd  behaviour  influence  market  dynamics.  Loss  aversion,  rule-of-thumb,  over-
confidence, lumpy decision-making and pattern-seeking are characteristics long understood 
by  behaviourists  that  can,  with  due  care,  illuminate  many  puzzling  market  outcomes.11  A 
more serious treatment of expectations is also high on the agenda. After all, information is 
costly both to store and to process. Hence, the cost of forming expectations has to be taken 
into account. 
“The  macroeconomics  of  the  future”,  as  Michael  Woodford  puts  it,  “will  still  make  use  of 
general-equilibrium  models  in  which  the  behavior  of  households  and  firms  is  derived  from 
considerations  of  inter-temporal  optimality,  but  in  which  the  optimization  is  relative  to  the 
evolving beliefs of those actors about the future, which need not perfectly coincide with the 
predictions  of  the  economist’s model”.12  That  said, for  the  behavioural  research  agenda to 
migrate into the mainstream of policy analysis, one still needs a sense of concrete and novel 
macro policy implications.13  
So what’s on our modelling wish-list? Models need to incorporate at least some of the key 
aspects of, and key players in, the financial crisis: financial factors and intermediaries, the 
shadow banking sector, the interaction between sovereign and banking solvency risks and 
financial  interconnectedness.  In  order  to  draw  the  full  lessons  from  the  previous  crises,  it 
would  be  important  to  include  elements  such  as  housing  markets  and  mortgage  finance, 
heterogeneous  agents  (borrowers  versus  lenders),  richer  flow  of  funds  analysis  and  asset 
and liability structure, as well as to develop good theories of maturity transformation. More 
generally, models should acknowledge the evolving role of money in the economy, including 
the determinants of inside money creation (e.g. within financial markets and in the shadow 
banking system) and how it interacts with central bank money. 
But the wish-list extends beyond financial matters: a more vigorous role for fiscal policy and a 
more  serious  treatment  of  expectations.  The  stronger  role  for  fiscal  policy  could  include 
distortionary  taxes,  as  well  as  complementarities  between  private  and  public  consumption 
and investment expenditures. Deeper research into expectations could comprise the use of 
bounded rather than rational expectations, where agents learn only about economic shocks 
very gradually, or, more exotically, “rational inattention”, which formally recognizes the limits 
to agents’ information processing abilities. These points are clearly high on the agenda as 
                                                
10  Christiano,  L.,  Motto,  R.  and  Rostagno,  M.  (2003):  “The  Great  Depression  and  the  Friedman-Schwartz 
Hypothesis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35(6), 1119–1197. 
11  Major contributions include: Benartzi, S.; Thaler, R. H. (1995): “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium 
Puzzle”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (1): 73–92; Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D. and Subrahmanyam, A. 
(1998).  “Investor  Psychology  and  Security  Market  Under-  and  Overreactions”.  Journal  of  Finance,  53  (6); 
Hogarth,  R.  M.;  and  Reder,  M.  W.  (1987).  Rational  Choice:  The  Contrast  between  Economics  and 
Psychology.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press;  Kahneman,  D.  and  Diener,  E.  (2003).  Well-being:  The 
foundations of hedonic psychology. Russell Sage Foundation. 
12  Woodford M. (op. cit.). 
13  For instance, a notable policy recommendation arising from Akerlof and Shiller’s book “Animal Spirits” was to 
set  targets  for  credit  growth.  And  yet,  credit  developments  already  are  an  important  input  into  the  ECB’s 
monetary analysis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
well. But what we don’t want on our wish-list is to include all these features in a single big 
model as was done in the 1960s and 1970s. That would be a recipe for utter complexity and 
obscurity. 
It is also evident to me, as a policy-maker, that policy decisions are shaped by interactions 
between actors or interest groups. Take the question of euro area adjustment. Who will bear 
the  cost  of  the  much-needed  sovereign  and  private  deleveraging?  To  what  extent  will  the 
social cost of the crisis bear on political outcomes, and thus on economic policy decisions? 
How much fiscal risk-sharing can be accepted by the people of Europe, and what should be 
the  optimal  combination  of  inter-temporal  risk-sharing  through  balanced  budget  rules, 
“horizontal”  risk-sharing  between  countries  (such  as  through  the  ESM),  and  “vertical”  risk-
sharing  through  a  common  fiscal  capacity?  To  answer  such  crucial  questions,  we  would 
need to plug a political economy model into a rich description of the euro area economy and 
financial sector, disaggregated at country level. We don’t have this in our toolbox. 
Yet, exciting new work is already arriving – some of it presented here at this conference. My 
hope is that these extensions will help us to understand the interaction between the balance 
sheets of central banks, on the one hand, and those of the private and public sectors, on the 
other hand. But they will also help us to grasp the determinants of inside money creation, to 
shed  light  on  spillovers  between  residential  and  non-residential  sectors,  macro-prudential 
issues,  and  to  quantify  trade-offs  in  different  policy  strategies.  The  ECB’s  most  recent 
contribution  was  the  establishment  in  2010  of  the  Macro-Prudential  Research  Network 
(MaRS for short) to develop frameworks and tools to improve macro-prudential supervision in 
the  European  Union.  Specifically,  progress  has  been  made  on  models  linking  financial 
stability and economic performance; early warning systems and systemic risk indicators; and 
on assessing contagion risks. The view from MaRS, already distilled through a large number 
of papers and conferences, should constitute a critical input to those matters in the coming 
years. 
In expanding our modelling frameworks, let me insist on the merits of pragmatism. As Paul 
Krugman  once  said,  “economists  as  a  group  mistook  beauty,  clad  in  impressive-looking 
mathematics, for truth”.14 Let’s not be too easily seduced by beauty. The search, for example, 
for  micro-foundations  shouldn’t  be  dogmatic.  As  an  illustration,  what  made  Christiano, 
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003) so important is that, whilst 
motivated by theory, they didn’t sacrifice the empirical side. Short cuts were taken: habits in 
consumption, investment adjustment costs, indexation etc. Such frictions have and can be 
micro-founded but the crucial, not to say bold, step was to incorporate them in the first place. 
One  might  say  the  same  of  “financial  frictions”.  In  times  of  crisis,  the  search  for  micro-
foundations  shouldn’t  paralyse  us  or  hinder  fresh  thinking.  For  instance,  though  rightly 
famous,  it’s  unclear  if  the  Bernanke-Gertler-Gilchrist framework  (op.  cit.)  correctly  depicted 
recent  events.  The  financial  crisis  looks  as  much  like  a  sudden  breakdown  in  financial 
intermediation  which  then  spilled  over  to,  and  exacerbated,  sovereign  debt  tensions,  as  a 
crisis  sparked  by  risky  corporate  leverage  or  banks  being  less  efficient  in  monitoring 
investment projects. 
In  effect,  we  should  find  out  and  emphasise  what  works.  Do  some  interest-rate  spread 
definitions  work  better  than  others?  Does  that  information  content  change  over  time?  Do 
frameworks  predicated  on  one  country  translate  to  another?  Can  we  understand  the 
dynamics  at  play  behind  the  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  financial  system,  and  what  it 
would take to reverse this trend?  
                                                
14  Krugman P. (2009), How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?, The New York Times, 6 September. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I  conclude.  For  both  model-building  and  policy-making,  the  agenda  is  formidable.  But 
conferences like this highlight that some of the best minds in the profession are pursuing that 
agenda, and pursuing it vigorously. 
Even though the models at our disposal proved to be relatively inadequate to deal with the 
complexity of the crisis, still it is the economic framework developed so far that has guided 
our policy decisions. To put it differently, economic models have shown severe limitations, 
but without them, policy-makers around the world would have been condemned to complete 
inaction or blatantly erroneous actions. Models are devices to help structure, organise and 
discipline  our  beliefs.  They  help  identify  the  key  assumptions  on  which  any  policy 
recommendation  rests,  and  provide  an  essential  framework  for  general-equilibrium  policy 
analysis. In economics, as in other sciences, they highlight channels of interest and abstract 
from  other  factors.  They  can  (and  should)  be  tested  against  data,  bringing  our  dismal 
science,  economics,  one  step  closer  to  Popperian  refutability.  They  also  encourage  the 
building  of  new  data  sets  and  decisions  upon  appropriate  data  concepts.  Ultimately,  they 
help us to learn from past errors and provide safeguards against political adventurism. 
As General Eisenhower once said: “In preparing for battle I have always found that plans are 
useless, but planning is indispensable”. When combating the crisis, models are sometimes 
useless, but modelling is indispensable. 
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
