Benoît Cœuré: Challenges facing financial integration and financial 
stability 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  3rd  Pan-Asian  Regulatory  Summit,  organised  by  Thomson  Reuters,  Hong  Kong, 
28 November 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a great  pleasure to  be  here  in  Hong  Kong and  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to 
thank  Thomson  Reuters  for  having  invited  me  to  speak  at  the  3rd  Pan-Asian  Regulatory 
Summit. 
Today I would like to focus on three closely  interrelated issues: first, I’ll discuss some key 
questions  related to financial  integration  and financial  stability,  and  second,  I’ll  touch  upon 
the nexus between financial integration and financial stability on the one hand, and monetary 
policy  on  the  other  hand,  highlighting  some  key  challenges  that  the  ECB  faces  today.  I’ll 
conclude my talk with some general remarks on the global perspective on financial regulatory 
reform. 
Financial stability and financial integration 
Policy debates on the relationship between financial stability and financial integration have 
intensified in the past few  years and the topic has become a high priority on the research 
agendas of central banks and academia. The increased attention is justified on account of 
recent  experiences  in  the  financial  crisis  which  provided  ample  evidence  of  how  quickly 
financial distress can spread from one institution to another, or from one financial system to 
another,  in  today’s  globally  integrated  financial  markets.  Several  jurisdictions  reacted  to 
these developments by “ring-fencing” certain institutions or business lines. At the same time, 
financial institutions were also keen to lower their cross-border exposures in order to reduce 
the  riskiness  of  their  portfolios  abroad.  These  efforts  resulted  in  increased  market 
fragmentation, in particular in Europe, with adverse consequences on monetary policy and 
financial intermediation.  
There  is  now  a  consensus  that  a  financial  system  which  is  stable  across  jurisdictions  can 
foster financial integration. As the ECB’s most recent Financial Integration in Europe report 
indicated, stable, highly integrated and adequately supervised markets contribute to a more 
efficient  allocation  of  resources  over  time  and  across  jurisdictions,  allow  inter-temporal 
smoothing  of  consumption  and  increase  the  supply  of  funds  for  profitable  investment 
opportunities.  Furthermore,  higher  levels  of  financial  integration  also  enhance  competition 
and  reduce  the  costs  of  intermediation,  thus  contributing  to  more  sustainable  economic 
growth. 
Naturally, the question arises whether this positive reinforcing relationship between financial 
stability  and  financial  integration  also  works  the  other  way  around  –  i.e.  does  financial 
integration also enhance financial stability? My answer to this question is yes, provided that 
certain conditions are met. Let me elaborate. 
First, we should have the appropriate policy tools to ensure that financial integration does not 
result  in  the  development  of  opaque  instruments  and  business  activities  which  diminish 
transparency and undermine confidence in financial markets. 
Second, we know that financial markets are prone to short-sightedness, herd behaviour and 
sudden changes in market sentiment which may be detrimental to financial integration and 
stability. It is therefore important that the incentives of managers and employees are aligned 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with  the  risks  they  are  taking  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  long-term  viability  of  financial 
institutions is appropriately taken into account in business decisions. 
Third, we have to prevent financial integration from leading to an excessive concentration of 
risks  and  leverage  in  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions.  This  may  pose  a  risk  to 
systemic stability. 
Fourth,  we  should  have  the  tools  to  mitigate  the  risks  of  contagion  across  institutions  and 
jurisdictions and, should problems arise, we need to be in a position to be able to resolve 
ailing  banks  in  a  timely  manner  within  an  efficient  framework  of  crisis  management  and 
resolution. 
Finally,  we  have  to  ensure  that  all  types  of  risk  and  all  types  of financial  activity  that  may 
imperil financial stability and financial integration are monitored, assessed and supervised in 
a comprehensive way. 
Overall,  all  the  steps  taken  to  enhance  financial  integration  need  to  be  complemented  by 
efforts  at  international  level  to  design  and  implement  consistent  policy  measures  that  can 
help to strengthen the resilience of the global financial system and reduce global systemic 
risks. 
In 2009, G20 leaders agreed that all systematically important financial institutions, markets 
and instruments should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight. The 
policy  agenda  has  made  good  progress  and  I  particularly  welcome  the  latest  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) report on the shadow banking industry.1  
Financial integration, financial stability and monetary policy 
I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  a  well-integrated  financial  system  for  the 
effectiveness of the single monetary policy in the euro area. Financial integration is one of 
the  key  preconditions  to  ensure  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  is  appropriately 
reflected  across  the  euro  area  countries,  thereby  reducing  heterogeneity  in  the  monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. The most immediate impact of changes in key policy rates is 
transmitted  via  money  markets.  Hence,  to  have  a  broadly  homogeneous  impact  across 
banks  and jurisdictions, fully  integrated  money markets  would  allow  full  access to markets 
and similar marginal costs for banks with similar creditworthiness. 
Likewise, the integration of further wholesale funding market segments, such as markets for 
debt securities and securitised assets, facilitates the smooth transmission of monetary policy 
decisions on banks’ funding costs. Further down in the intermediation chain, the integration 
of  banks’  wholesale 
the 
pass-through of monetary policy decisions on bank lending rates.  
In  general,  financial  market  integration  allows  the  banking  system  and  corporate  debt 
markets  to  facilitate  risk-sharing  and  efficient  capital  allocation  across  economies  and, 
thereby, allow companies and households to reap the full benefits of freely mobile capital. 
In  this  context,  the  financial  crisis  and  the  more  recent  sovereign  debt  crisis  had  a  strong 
adverse impact on euro area financial markets. Increasing price and return differentials for a 
priori similar categories of borrowers and lenders were the result and translated into rising 
disparities  in  market  conditions  across  euro  area  countries.  These  developments  led  to  a 
fragmentation in bank funding markets and other parts of the financial markets. 
Such  distortions  constituted  specific  impairments  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. Since the start of the financial crisis, the ECB has introduced an ample range of 
funding  markets  significantly  contributes 
to  homogenising 
                                                
1  Financial Stability Board: Initial Integrated Set of Recommendations to Strengthen Oversight and Regulation 
of Shadow Banking, 18 November 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
targeted  standard  and  non-standard  policy  measures  to  address  these  impairments.  And 
indeed, focusing on the last 12 months, we have observed our latest measures – the three-
year Long Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs) and, most recently, the announcement of 
outright monetary transactions (OMTs) – as having a positive impact on banks’ funding. This 
is  evidenced,  for  instance,  by  the  decline  in  bank  bond  spreads  and  renewed  primary 
issuance across jurisdictions. Replies to the Eurosystem’s Bank Lending Survey have also 
indicated  an  improvement  in  banks’ funding  and  liquidity  conditions  across  jurisdictions for 
the  same  reasons.  Let me  confirm  that  the  ECB  is  ready  to  undertake  OMTs  whenever  a 
country has successfully applied for an ESM precautionary assistance programme, with IMF 
involvement. 
The  ECB  can  address  the  symptoms  but  not  the  root  causes  of  financial  market 
fragmentation. The cures for the disease are very well known: first, ensure the solvency of 
sovereigns;  second,  make  individual  banks  safer  and  more  resilient  and  introduce 
appropriate macro-prudential instruments to address systemic risk; and third, break the link 
between the creditworthiness of banks and sovereigns.  
I will now elaborate on the second and third aspects from a central bank’s perspective. The 
crisis  has  also  revealed  two  major  lessons for our  supervisory  framework. The first  is  that 
macro-prudential  factors  should  play  a  much  larger  role  in  the  approach  followed  by 
supervisors.  The  second  is  that  a  common  banking  supervisor  is  essential  for  an  efficient 
monetary union. 
Turning to the first, and again looking back at the pre-crisis period, banking supervision was 
essentially  “micro-based”.  It  mostly  focused  on  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
individual  institutions,  while  taking  the  rest  of  the  financial  system  as  a  given.  The  implicit 
assumption  was  that  stable  individual  institutions  would  automatically  ensure  a  stable 
system.  This  micro-based  supervisory  approach  was  likely  to  underestimate  the  systemic 
component and  was  not  able  to  internalise  and target  the  negative  externalities  that could 
have built up as a result of increased risks for the system as a whole. 
The lending booms we experienced in some euro area countries before the crisis are a good 
illustration  of  the  problems  arising  from  an  excessive  reliance  on  this  micro-prudential 
approach.  During  the  upswing,  banks  reported  high  levels  of  profitability  and  low  levels  of 
measured  risk.  Both  of  these  factors  tend  to  improve  capital  ratios,  offering  a  reassuring 
picture  of  the  solvency  of  individual  banks  from  a  micro-supervisory  perspective.  Yet 
historical experience shows that rapid credit growth usually comes at the cost of increasing 
the  systemic  –  or  tail  –  risks,  for  instance,  by  lowering  lending  standards  via  undiversified 
housing  exposures  or  excessive  reliance  on  short-term  market  funding.  Again,  the  crisis 
raised  awareness  both  of  the  endogenous  nature  of  many  systemic  episodes  of  financial 
instability and of their negative externalities that could be of great importance in determining 
macroeconomic outcomes.  
From  a  policy  perspective,  the  new  focus  has  led  to  an  increased  interest  in  the 
macro-prudential approach to bank regulation and supervision. In Europe, the new regulatory 
and  supervisory  infrastructure  about  to  be  adopted  will  provide  supervisors  with  macro-
prudential  tools.2  European  economies  face  different  economic  and  financial  cycles  and 
different  types  of  systemic  risk,  and  their  financial  sectors  still  exhibit  different  structural 
features.  The  ECB  therefore  considers  it  important  that  authorities  can  apply  stricter 
macro-prudential requirements at national level.3  
                                                
2  Examples are the counter-cyclical buffer or the possibility for national authorities to adjust risk weights or set 
stricter criteria, e.g. loan-to-value ratio, for exposures secured on residential or commercial real estate. 
3  European Central Bank: Opinion on a proposal for a Directive on the access to the activity of credit institutions 
and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms and a proposal for a Regulation on 
prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms (CON/2012/5), 25 January 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This does not imply that the soundness of individual institutions should matter less. It is vital 
that euro area banks are adequately capitalised and self-insured against liquidity risks. The 
European  Banking  Authority’s  EU  Capital  Exercise,  completed  in  October  2012,4  has 
prompted  a  capital  injection  of  more  than  €200  billion  in  European  banks.  As  the  EBA 
pointed  out,  it  is  now  important  that  banks  maintain  their  capital  levels  on  the  path  to  the 
Basel III framework. 
The  other  important  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  the  fundamental  inconsistency  between  the 
single monetary policy of the euro area and the national responsibilities for banking policies. 
A  key  feature  of  the  present  crisis  is  the  increase  in  the  correlation  between  the  cost  of 
funding  of  euro  area  banks  and  that  of  their  respective  sovereigns,  particularly  in  some 
peripheral  economies.  Countries  suffering  from  a  loss  of  market  confidence  have  become 
progressively  more  dependent  on  domestic  sources  of  funding  and  less  responsive  to 
common  monetary  policy  impulses.  The  divergence  in  bank  funding  conditions  at  national 
level, in turn, gives rise to cross-country differences in lending conditions. The retrenchment 
of  credit  supply  within  national  borders,  coupled  with  funding  pressures,  impairs  the 
transmission of monetary policy, which in the euro area functions primarily via the banking 
sector. 
The  need  to  sever  the  negative  feedback  loop  between  banks  and  sovereigns  by  taking 
responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  at  European  level  has  become  clear. 
Following  the  euro  area  summit  of  29  June  2012,  the  European  Commission  presented  a 
proposal to establish a single supervisory mechanism (SSM) involving the ECB, on the basis 
of Article 127.6 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.  
The  implementation  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  key  not  only  to  enhancing 
financial stability but also to strengthening financial integration in Europe. Let me comment 
on three aspects of the SSM which are currently under discussion.  
First,  all  banks  should  be  covered  by  the  SSM,  so  as  to  have  a  level  playing  field  and  to 
support further integration of the industry. Many supervisory tasks – probably most of them – 
should  be  undertaken  by  national  supervisors;  after  all,  most  euro  area  governors  already 
fulfil  supervisory  responsibilities.  However,  this  should  be  within  a  centralised  decision-
making process and according to a single handbook.  
Second,  there  should  be  a  clear  separation  between  supervisory  decision-making  and 
monetary policy. Under the European Commission proposal, a separate Supervisory Board 
within  the  ECB  would  take  most  supervisory  decisions,  under  the  ultimate  authority  of  the 
ECB Governing Council. 
Third, the  SSM  is  necessary for  the  euro  area  but  it  may  be  desirable for  other  European 
countries  as  well.  Arrangements  are  being  worked  out  on  the  basis  of Article  127.6  of  the 
Treaty to allow them to participate and be fairly involved in the decision-making process. 
I  am  confident  that  European  leaders  can  agree  in  December  on  the  final  features  of  the 
SSM and confirm that it will start legally in January 2013 and operationally in 2014. Let me 
add  a  final  remark.  The  SSM  will  turn  the  ECB  into  the  home  supervisor  of  all  euro  area 
banks. But there cannot be a lasting situation with one single supervisor and 17 (or more) 
uncoordinated resolution authorities. As Mervyn King once noted, “global banks are global in 
life but national in death”. European banks should be European in death. I look forward to the 
European  Commission  proposing  a  single  resolution  mechanism  as  soon  as  possible  in 
2013. 
                                                
4  European Banking Authority: Final results of the EU Capital Exercise, 3 October 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Global perspective on financial regulatory reform 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  talk  with  some  general  remarks  on  the  global  perspective  on 
financial regulatory reform. 
Concerning  the  global  policy  response  to  the  crisis,  the  G20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
and  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  are  all  playing  a  key  role  in 
defining and prioritising the global regulatory reform agenda, coordinating the ongoing work 
on standard setting, and monitoring the implementation of measures that have already been 
agreed  upon.  Also,  the  Committee  for  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the 
International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) are playing a leading role in 
the crucial field of financial market infrastructures.5  
While  the  regulatory  framework  is  currently  undergoing  a  complete  overhaul,  the  work  is 
often perceived as being quite technical and difficult to follow by non-experts. This is why it is 
important  that  ongoing  efforts  are  well  understood  and  supported  by  all  stakeholders, 
including the general public. Policy-makers should therefore clearly explain how the global 
regulatory reform measures are linked to the lessons drawn from the crisis and how these 
policy measures may promote global financial stability and, ultimately, economic growth.  
These reform efforts enjoy unequivocal support in Europe. Let me briefly recall in this regard 
that  the  EU  has  been  one  of  the  main  jurisdictions  which  first  implemented  Basel II  and 
Basel II.5, and remains committed to promptly implementing Basel III, which I consider as a 
cornerstone  of  the  G20  reform  agenda.  Timely  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  new 
regulatory standards as well as uniform assessment of the implementation process based on 
common evaluation standards around the globe are crucial for strengthening the resilience of 
financial systems and restoring confidence in markets. Delayed implementation of Basel II.5 
and Basel III by any major jurisdiction would weaken the incentives for financial institutions to 
comply and also cast serious doubt on the overall reform effort. 
Finally, an area where, in my view, enhanced coordination is required concerns the structural 
measures being proposed in different jurisdictions. Since recent initiatives in the US (Volcker 
rule),  the  UK  (Vickers  report)  and  the  EU  (Liikanen  report,  on  which  the  European 
Commission will now follow up) will mainly target internationally active banks, coordination at 
global  level  in  this  policy  area  is  important  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  and  to  avoid 
regulatory arbitrage by banks with significant cross-border activities. 
Clearly, regulators, supervisors as well as financial institutions are facing several challenges 
in the years ahead both as regards policy design and implementation. There is a risk that 
weak economic growth and an increasing focus on domestic policy priorities can weaken the 
incentives and appetite for coordinated reform efforts. But well-integrated and well-regulated 
financial  markets  are  needed  more  than  ever  for  sustainable  and  stable  growth,  both  at 
global and at regional level. But I’m confident that a successful accomplishment of the reform 
agenda and a consistent implementation of the policy measures will help to achieve this goal. 
I thank you for your attention.  
                                                
5  CPSS and IOSCO: Principles for financial market infrastructures. April 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
