G Padmanabhan: Techno – banking – prospects and challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the 6th ET Banking Technology Conclave '12, Mumbai, 9 October 2012. 
 Inputs  from  Shri  B  Sambamurthy,  Director,  IDRBT  and  the  assistance  provided  by  Nikhila  Koduri,  Radha 
Somakumar and Saswat Mahapatra in the preparation of this speech is gratefully acknowledged.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  honoured  to  be  invited  to  deliver  the  key  note  address  at  the  6th  edition  of  the  ET 
Banking Technology Conclave. I am also thankful to the organizers for their kind gesture in 
asking me to deliver the inaugural rather than the valedictory address, as originally intended. 
I  was  rather  apprehensive  of  delivering  a  valedictory  address  in  a  Seminar  like  this,  since  
– drawing a cricket analogy – it  would be like going in as the last man  to bat, having just 
walked into the stadium, having no clue about the state of the match! 
Over the past few decades, modern business organizations have been investing increasingly 
substantial amounts of money in information technology (IT) with the objective of improving 
their  operational  efficiency,  product  innovation  and  competitive  ability  in  the  industry.  This 
has  enabled  them  in  simplifying  their  processes,  improving  efficiency  levels,  and  also 
reaching out to a wider range of customers. The banking sector too has followed the same 
path. Use of technology has also opened up new markets, new products, new services and 
efficient  delivery  channels  particularly  for  the  banking  industry.  Further,  technological 
innovation has enabled a broader reach for consumer banking and financial services, and in 
India’s case, it is playing an important role in moving towards continued and inclusive growth. 
Global perspective 
Let us see what is happening globally and how technology enabled banking is being taken 
forward.  In  the  recent  past,  banking  has  seen  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  traditional 
competitors due to industry consolidation. At the same time, there has been an increase in 
the  number  of  competitors  for  each  customer  and  relationship.  Technology-enabled 
improvements  and  the  desire  to  improve  earnings  have  led  many  banks  to  enter  new 
markets (global and national) driving increased competition in local markets by the adoption 
of  new  technology.  Competition  from  non-banks  and  virtual  entities  have  also  increased. 
This, combined with a growing appetite for customization and personalization, has driven the 
need  to  constantly  transform  applications  and  offerings  to  meet  new  competition  and 
changing customer preferences, expectations, and needs. 
As customers are now demanding new levels of personalised and prompt service, the banks 
have adapted/are adapting to survive/find new value in  their existing systems and ways to 
explore  new  market  opportunities  while  relentlessly  improving  their  quality  of  products  and 
services. 
Innovation  leading  to  product  differentiation  is  going  to  play  an  important  role  in  days  to 
come.  Many  of  you  must  have  recently  read  about  Japanese  banks  planning  to  introduce 
ATMs that allow customers to carry out transactions with a scan of their palm in case they 
forget  or 
lose  their  plastic  cards.  Another  experimentation  of  using  heartbeat  for 
authentication of users is also on. While such areas should also be the focus areas for banks 
in  India  too,  the  more  obvious  concern  for  us  here  is  the  need  for  using  technology  and 
innovations towards achieving an inclusive growth. In this context, I would now like to focus a 
little on the Indian technology story. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Bharat story 
Just to trace how this has been possible, I would like to take you back in time. Till the early 
80s,  no  major  breakthrough  in  technology  implementation  was  achieved  by  the  industry. 
Since then adoption of information and communication technology in a phased manner has 
enabled  a  transformational  change  in  banking  operations  and  payment  systems  in  the 
country. 
Has this technology adoption helped the banking sector in achieving a profitable growth? The 
business  of  the  Indian  banks  over  the  last  10  years  alone  has  gone  up  10  times  without 
banks  having  to  recruit  additional  manpower  even  in  a  scenario  when  the  stated  aim  of 
technology adoption in India was not labour saving. IT has also had a positive impact on the 
payment  and  settlement  systems  of  the  country  with  some  of  the  path  breaking  initiatives 
having  been  implemented  in  this  sphere  of  activity.  The  “electronification”  of  payment 
systems has been the hallmark of the decade that has gone by and this has resulted in risk 
mitigation to a large extent. The positive trend in the profitability indicators1 – Net profit, Profit 
Per  Employee  and  Business  Per  Employee  over  the  years-may  be  attributable  to  the 
successful  implementation  of  IT  initiatives/innovation  by  the  banks.  Further,  research  has 
shown a positive correlation between the level of implemented IT and both profitability and 
cost savings. In the Indian context, technological innovation and investment in IT during the 
period 2005–06 to 2009–10 has led to efficiency gains for the scheduled commercial banks 
(Rajput and Gupta, 2011).2 
The basic technology adoption by banks in the country is more or less complete. It is now 
essential  for  banks  to  look  at  improving  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  IT 
Infrastructure created. Technology has its own set of challenges to be addressed. These are 
the  need  to  have  high  availability  of  IT  systems,  efficient  and  effective  business  continuity 
plans, system of periodical assessment of the risks for IT and IS systems, conduct of regular 
audit,  taking  care  of  IT  obsolescence  and  the  likes.  Newer  areas  of  technology  initiatives 
apart  from  risk  management  of  the  enterprise  include,  CRM  using  business  intelligence, 
improving internal effectiveness and managing risks arising out of IT implementation. Today, 
the banks are at cross roads as far further technology adoption is concerned. 
Important questions that need to be answered before moving ahead are: 
(a) 
Is the ROI on technology spending satisfactory? For instance, banks that were in the 
forefront  of  adopting  cheque  truncation  have  now  started  asking  whether  they 
aggressively go for cheque truncation or full electronification of payments. 
How  do  banks  balance  the  goals  of  profitability  using  technology  and  customer 
interest  protection  which  includes  passing  on  the  gains  of  technology  adoption  to 
customers? 
What were the failings of technology model in the past? Should the entire banking 
system  have  gone  in  for  standardization  in  critical  areas?  Today,  there  is  no 
standardization  even  of  account  numbering  convention  or  a  common  identifier  for 
different types of payments. Are these proving to be hurdles for smooth migration to 
next level of technology deployment? 
Is sharing of infrastructure here to stay or is the financial sector special, throwing up 
the issues of security and confidentiality of customer data? What are its implications 
on the costs? 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
These issues lead me to the related big question flagged for discussion at this Conclave. 
                                                
1  Global Journal of Enterprise Information System Volume-3 Issue-I 
2 
ibid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Investments in technology – does it require a strategic shift? 
Banks have implemented CBS which marked a paradigm shift in more sense than one and 
branch  customers  are  now  bank  customers  as  they  can  access  their  accounts  from  any 
branch for defined purposes. Although CBS provides much-needed flexibility to innovate and 
adapt to a dynamic environment, the challenge lies in assessing the effect of CBS especially 
the basic assessment as to whether it can be leveraged to achieve new goals? The move to 
the  next  trajectory  may  include  addressing  the  changing  customer  imperatives,  using 
technology for inclusive banking, aligning IT with future business objectives, risk and fraud 
management,  meeting  the  changed  regulatory  prescriptions  etc.  This  often  presupposes 
shared  infrastructure,  standardisation,  and  interoperability.  The  move  from  “ownership”  to 
“membership” model is also seen as an effective solution for banks. The regulatory initiatives 
relating  to  ATM,  POS  and  Mobile  banking  which  have  resulted  in  these  infrastructures 
becoming national are important steps towards these goals. However it may be necessary to 
ponder  and  evaluate  the  benefits  of  technology  for  a  common  customer  of  a  bank.  An 
average customer of a bank has a savings bank account, a fixed deposit account, makes a 
few remittances in a year and has a loan account as well. Has he been able to make use of 
technology for the conduct of these transactional services, especially if he has no access to 
the Internet? Such a customer may still have to continue through branch based banking and 
may not really feel the benefits of technology at all. 
An issue that has caught the fancy of all, these days is Cloud computing which as you know 
may  be  understood  as  “a  model  for  enabling  convenient,  on-demand  network  access to  a 
shared  pool  of  configurable  computing  resources  (e.g.  networks,  servers,  storage, 
applications,  and  services)”.  However,  the  processes  for  Cloud  accreditation,  Cloud  audit 
assurance,  etc.  are  yet  to  mature.  Further,  issues  relating  to  Cloud  Governance,  data 
security and privacy for customers of banks, etc. are also yet to be completely examined. In 
short, cloud computing solutions do provide an opportunity for development, but, subject to 
resolution of critical issues relating to security, privacy and governance. 
Use of technology to facilitate regulatory compliance 
Now  let  us  shift  our  focus  to  other  issues  that  banks  are  grappling  with,  especially  those 
related to credit risk and need for complying with KYC/AML/CFT requirements. Can use of 
technology or shared efforts make these tasks easier without compromising on quality? The 
step  taken  by  the  Securities  Exchange  Board  of  India  in  setting  up  a  KYC  Registration 
Agency (KRA) is often cited for replication in the banking industry. 
As you may aware, a Working Group constituted by the Government of India has proposed 
the  introduction  of  unique  identifiers  for  customers  across  different  banks  and  Financial 
Institutions (FI) for setting up a centralized KYC Registry. In fact, banks have been advised to 
make  an  immediate  beginning  to  issue  a  unique  customer  identification  code  (UCIC)3  for 
their customers. This UCIC would enable the banks to identify a customer, track the facilities 
availed,  monitor  financial  transactions  in  various  accounts,  improve  risk  profiling,  take  a 
holistic view of customer profile and smoothen banking operations for that customer. Once 
this  is  implemented  across  the  banks  and  FIs,  it  would  be  feasible  to  move  towards  a 
centralised  KYC  Registry,  which  will  eliminate  duplication  of  efforts  and  refine  the 
KYC/AML/CFT verifications across the financial system. 
The  industry  is  also  looking  to  Aadhaar  database  for  compliance  of  KYC/AML/CFT 
requirements. UIDAI now provides an e-KYC service, through which the KYC process can be 
performed electronically. 
                                                
3  RBI circular DBOD. AML.BC. No.109/14.01.001/2011–12 dated June 08, 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Similarly,  Aadhaar  holds  tremendous  potential  as  an  authentication  tool  in  financial 
transactions.  In  our  “Payment  Systems  in  India:  Vision  2012–15”  we  have  echoed  this 
sentiment.  In  our  roadmap  for  securing  card  present  transactions,  we  have  identified 
Aadhaar  biometric  authentication  for  securing  “mag  stripe”  cards.  The  Aadhaar  Enabled 
Payment  Systems  (AEPS)  which  would  facilitate  fund  transfer  through  micro  ATMs  would 
utilise this authentication. However, banks need to overcome the technology challenges of 
integrating  Aadhaar  with  their  legacy  systems  to  leverage  on  the  benefits  of  biometric 
authentication. 
Be customer centric  
Manage the business of tomorrow with the same discipline as the business of today  
Foster an innovative culture  
Manage innovation with structure and discipline  
Invest in and leverage leading technologies  
Downloading ideas from other sectors to banking 
As  a  result  of  all  the  technology  initiatives,  the  era  of  big  data  is  upon  us.  Today  data  in 
banks  is  growing  much  faster  than  their  business  growth.  In  many  industries,  the  data  is 
growing at over 50% and banking industry is no exception. Big data should not be viewed 
from the perspective of storage. The volume, velocity and variety, (3 Vs as they are called) 
are the three dimensions of big data. There is a huge opportunity to leverage big data for 
sustainable business growth and improving customer engagement and customer intimacy. 
A study4 has revealed that only two banks are listed among the world’s 50 most innovative 
companies. So what can banks learn from innovation leaders in other industries and how can 
they  use  this  knowledge  to  industrialise  their  innovation  capabilities  and  truly  differentiate 
themselves? This study has identified some key areas which banking industry may have to 
keep in mind as below: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  contrast,  it  is  easier  to  push  innovative  ideas  in  other  sectors  as  innovation  thrives  in 
organisational cultures and environments that foster flexibility, creativity and risk-taking. Let 
us see the innovation stories in other sectors. Innovation in the retail sector has come a long 
way in the recent years. It is revolutionising the way we transact business or communicate 
with persons or do research or play games. The extent and reach of the likes of Amazon, 
Flipkart,  Google,  Twitter,  Facebook,  Wii,  X-box  and  so  many  more  innovations  is  just 
amazing. 
Speak of innovation and technology, one cannot resist talking about Apple and Steve Jobs. 
What amazes everyone is the vision of this person who thought so ahead of his times. Let us 
not get into his style of functioning; the gadgets that he has given to us are world class. The 
user friendly nature of the gadgets that Apple produces makes them the “most preferred” in 
their class. Be it the I-pod, I-phone or the I-pad – they continue to dominate the sales in their 
respective markets with their innovative products. Can banking in India become the ultimate 
customer experience? 
It  is  aptly  said  that,  Narayana  Hrudayalaya  is  Walmart  personifying  the  service  spirit  of 
Mother  Teresa.  By  thinking  differently  about  everything from the  unusually  high  number of 
patients it treats to the millions for whom it provides insurance – and by thinking a lot like the 
world’s largest retailer – the hospital group is able to continually wring out costs. The hospital 
negotiates  for  better  prices  and  buys  directly  from  manufacturers,  cutting  out  distributors. 
Starting with cardiac care, an equipment-intensive specialty, made it easier for the hospital 
                                                
4 
Innovation Excellence: What Banks Can Learn from Top Innovators in Other Industries, Accenture 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
group  to  expand  into  other  areas  that  require  the  same  infrastructure.  Can  banks  look  to 
reduce costs like the way Narayana Hrudayalaya has done? 
The key lesson for banks to learn is that perhaps they need not wait for their customers to 
decide  what  they  want  but  to  take  the  lead  when  it  comes  to  developing  new  products  or 
technologies. Companies like Apple or Google did not wait for innovation to happen, rather 
they were proactive and their innovation processes never stop. 
What should the banks do to emulate these examples? Of course the first fundamental pre 
requisite is to refine the quality of data. It is this data which facilitates banks to profile their 
customers,  which  in  turn  would  enable  them  to  be  well  on  a  growth  trajectory  using 
technology.  While  banks  have  made  investments  in  building  technology  infrastructure,  the 
same cannot be said of building and digitizing quality data. Present IT systems of banks are 
essentially built to manage structured data. There are lot of business insights and value in 
semi-structured and unstructured data. CBS of today is essentially a transaction processing 
engine which handles structured data. Banks need to build systems to capture and analyze 
unstructured  and  semi-structured  data  as  well.  In  short,  banks  need  to  look  at  BEYOND 
CORE  BANKING  and  move  from  a  mere  transaction  processing  system  to  an  information 
processing  system  with  focus  on  CRM,  data  warehousing,  business  intelligence,  risk 
management etc. 
I would like end my thoughts on the subject quoting Einstein, who once said, “Any fool can 
make things bigger more vibrant and more complex. It takes a touch of genius and lots of 
courage to move in the opposite direction”. 
HR Tools : necessity for next wave of growth 
The last decade was impressive for the Indian banking industry. The banking industry has 
grown at an average annual growth rate of over 18 percent over the last decade, with the 
return  on  assets  at  around  1.1  percent  as  on  March  31,  2012.  However,  even  though 
opportunities have increased for banks, some HR issues and challenges have emerged that 
banks will have to resolve if they are to emerge successful in the medium to long term. 
The  main  HR  challenges  that  banks  face  today  relate  to  recruiting  and  retaining  talent. 
Historically,  Indian  Banks  have  attracted  talent  in  the  country,  which  has  helped  them  not 
only develop a strong leadership base but also an efficient frontline. However, in the coming 
years,  owing  to  a  large  number  of  retirements,  and  attrition  rates  across  organisations, 
banking  sector  in  general,  and  public  sector  banks,  in  particular,  may  face  a  growing 
manpower  crisis.  How  do  they  cope  with  this?  Attrition  is  manageable  to  a  certain  extent 
provided acquisition keeps pace with attrition. The solution lies in not just recruiting skilled 
professionals but in nurturing the talent in a manner so as to provide the right atmosphere to 
enable  them  grow  with  the  institution.  We  also  need  to  realise  that  unless  this  talent  is 
properly trained, motivated and mentored; it is difficult to retain them. 
The other HR challenges faced by banks are related to putting in place systemic succession 
planning,  empowering  the  “second  rung”,  stimulating  all  cadres  of  employees,  managing 
effective change within the organisation and outsourcing. While the HR has a lot of work to 
do  while  it  comes  to  dealing  with  the  issues  cited  above,  the  one  related  to  outsourcing 
requires more than a HR intervention. The assessment of performance across a myriad of 
functions  in  banks  also  needs  to  be  reviewed  so  as  to  result  in  employee  motivation  and 
thus, retention. 
It  is  but  natural  for  banks  to  outsource  their  IT  related  activities  including  application 
development  when  the  sector  as  a  whole,  is  facing  a  shortage  of  skilled  professionals. 
However  outsourcing  brings  in  its  wake,  several  risks.  The  failure  of  a  service  provider  in 
providing  a  specified  service,  a  breach  in  security/  confidentiality,  or  non-compliance  with 
legal and regulatory requirements by either the service provider or the outsourcing bank can 
lead to financial losses or loss of reputation for the bank and could also lead to systemic risks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
within  the  entire  banking  system  in  the  country.  It  has  happened  in  the  past  and  it  could 
happen in future too. It would therefore, be imperative for any bank outsourcing its activities 
to ensure effective management of these risks. 
How  can  these  issues  be  effectively  managed?  Can  this  be  achieved  by  maintaining  a 
subsidiary employing professionals with the requisite IT skills and remuneration at par with 
their  peers  in the  IT  industry  so  as  to  obviate  the  necessity  of  outsourcing. The challenge 
here  is  to  provide  the  right  remuneration  and  a  career  progression  path  for  the  recruited 
skilled talent. Please remember these employees would not only be comparing themselves 
with  their  colleagues  in  the  parent  organisation  but  also  their  peers  in  the  IT  industry  and 
vice-versa. To keep them motivated is, therefore, not a small challenge. 
We  could  unanimously  agree  with  N  R  Narayana  Murthy  who  has  once  said,  “Our  assets 
walk  out  of  the  door  each  evening.  We  have  to  make  sure  that  they  come  back  the  next 
morning”. In other words, retaining talent is as important as identifying and recruiting them in 
the first place. 
Concluding thoughts 
I  have  shared  some  of  my  thoughts  on  the  sessions  scheduled  for  the  day.  In  the  sixth 
edition  of  this  conclave,  I  would  like  to  leave  you  all  with  a  few  more  questions  with  no 
definite answers, hoping that some views emerge during the course of the day. 
How can we work towards balancing customer’s comfort, convenience and security? 
Studies have shown that customers acceptance of electronic banking depends on factors like 
convenience,  experience,  perceived  accessibility,  safety  and  security.  Despite  measures 
taken  by  the  banks  and  the  industry  as  a  whole,  new  means  of  perpetrating  cyber  frauds 
bypassing the security measures are emerging. We need to keep ahead of the fraudsters by 
investing and adopting technology. 
Having  said  that,  let  me  flag  the  other  side  of  the  story  viz.  customer’s  convenience. 
Customers prior to onset of electronic banking used to carry out “face to face” banking in a 
branch.  Customers  have  high  level  of  confidence,  sense  of  security  and  ease  and 
convenience in such banking. This is now being replaced by electronic banking and paper 
based cheques with electronic payments. Does the electronic banking provide same level of 
comfort and convenience? 
For  ensuring  safety  and  security,  banks  and  RBI  have  taken  several  initiatives  such  as 
additional factor of authentication, OTPs, multilayer passwords, etc. Have we given a thought 
about  the  inconvenience  caused  to  customers  when  OTPs  are  not  delivered  on  time, 
payment  pages  expire  while  prompting  PIN/OTP,  keying  in  multilayered  passwords,  etc. 
Have  we  thought  of  the  customer’s  difficulty  in  navigating  through  the  maze  of  security 
protocols? Do these security measures put in place for securing transactions discouraging 
the customers from adopting electronic banking? Banks need to examine how they can make 
the electronic transactions safe and secure while providing customers equal or more level of 
ease, comfort and convenience when compared to branch banking. 
How do we protect the customer in an electronic banking environment? 
Let  me  also  raise  the  issue  of  consumer  protection  and  responsibilities  of  banks  and 
customers  in  an  electronic  banking  environment  where  physical  transaction  is  replaced  by 
electronic transaction, physical trail is replaced by electronic trail, a signature is replaced with 
a  digital  one.  How  can we  define  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  banks  and  customers  in 
such an environment to achieve a win-win situation for all? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Will e-banking be affected by language and literacy barriers? 
Inadequate  knowledge,  lack  of  support  and  handholding,  unfamiliar  language  and  literacy 
could be barriers in using electronic banking. So focus should be on removing these barriers. 
Currently  all  interface  pages  on  internet  banking  are  mostly  in  English.  Use  of  Hindi  and 
other local languages could facilitate easy understanding by customers. Further, adoption of 
electronic  banking  would  require  moving  the  customers  from  being  “assisted”  initially  to 
becoming  “self-reliant”  in  using  modern  banking  technologies.  Another  related  customer 
service issue is how to service differently-abled customers in a e-banking scenario? 
Is pricing of electronic banking transactions competitive? 
Benefits of using technology include cost reduction, convenience, service improvements, and 
risk mitigation, etc. for the banks. These benefits should percolate to the customer as well. 
On the other hand, banks would also need to recover costs to fund their existing and future 
technological requirements to maintain and improve their service level. Thus, the banks must 
find  ways  of  balancing  the  two  sides  appropriately.  Is  this  best  left  to  banks  or 
regulators/government? 
How can banks help in moving towards a less-cash society? 
As  a  penultimate  thought,  let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the  Vision  we  have  for  Payment 
Systems  in  India.  The  focus  of  the  Vision  Document  is  to  inculcate  the  habit  of  cash  less 
payments in the citizens of the country for a less-cash society. This would require concerted 
efforts  from  all  of  us.  As  a  regulator,  at  best,  we  can  facilitate  an  enabling  regulatory  and 
policy  framework.  However,  the  execution  and  achievement  of  the  Vision  would  be  purely 
driven  by  the  banks  and  non-bank  entities.  In  this  context,  could  the  industry  think  setting 
quantitative targets for itself? Is it possible for the industry to set quantifiable targets in terms 
of  reducing  the  number  of  cheques,  increasing  the  number  of  electronic  transactions, 
increasing  the  acceptance  infrastructure  etc?  Could  the  industry  also  think  of  providing 
incentives for banks for achieving the quantifiable targets? 
Finally,  since  the  theme  of  the  Conclave  is  on  profitable  growth,  let  us  understand  that 
profitable growth pre-supposes a few premises as under: 
(a) 
Do  we  have  a  compelling  mission,  vision  and  differentiated  strategy  that  all  our 
stakeholders fully understand and accept? 
Do we have the right people, processes and organizational structure to achieve our 
aspirations? 
Do we have an organization-wide culture that helps us grow profitably and ethically? 
Do  we  have  an  environment  where  technology  based  systems  are  risk  free, 
convenient to use and cost effective as well as being efficient? 
Finally, has it become relevant for every organization to mandatorily publish annual 
reports on IT covering certain essential aspects in a prescribed format? 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
I would like to conclude with what Aristotle said: “We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence 
then is not an act but a habit”. Let us work towards this. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
