Mario Draghi: Text of the video message given at the award ceremony for 
the second Luca Pacioli Award 
Speech  (via  video)  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, at the award ceremony for the second Luca Pacioli Award, 
13 October 2012. 
 It is a great honour for me to receive this award today from the university where, at the end of 
the 1970s, I had my first professional experience as a professor. 
It is an honour, above all, because of the grounds on which the award is given: innovation, 
versatility, an interdisciplinary approach, the integration of research and policy. All of these 
qualities are necessary if we are to find adequate responses to the current challenges posed 
by the rapid social and economic transformation undergone in the last few decades.  
It is with regret that I cannot be there with you today but international obligations keep me far 
from Venice, a city of which I have many memories and that I regard with much affection. 
 “Double-entry bookkeeping … is one of the finest inventions of the human mind and every 
prudent master of a house should introduce it into his economy”,1 to quote one of Goethe’s 
characters in Wilhelm Meister’s Theatrical Calling. 
Luca Pacioli, whose name the award bears, was an extraordinary man of science, but also 
took a keen interest in philosophy and art, a typical representative of our Renaissance. The 
invention  of  double-entry  bookkeeping  is  generally  attributed  to  him,  although  historians 
agree that he never laid claim to it himself. At the very least, Pacioli defended the value of 
this practice, probably in use for centuries, right here in this city which welcomed him in 1464 
shortly before he turned 20, and which published his key works, including “De computis et 
scripturis”, which was consistently used by researchers of accountancy as a reference work 
for more than 500 years. 
Pacioli  could  see  the  potential  of  double-entry  bookkeeping  as  an  instrument  for  scientific 
and economic progress in a fundamental profession such as that of a merchant in Venice in 
the  15th  and  16th  centuries. On this  point,  I  would  like  to quote  a  brief passage from  “De 
computis  et  scripturis”,  which  forms  part  of  his  well-known  book  “Summa  de  arithmetica, 
geometria,  proportioni  et  proporzionalità”  (Review  of  arithmetic,  geometry,  ratio  and 
proportion): “My method is nothing but an appropriate way of bringing order to the merchant’s 
fantasy, allowing him to gain an overview of all his affairs and to see easily whether they are 
in good shape or bad.”  
It seems to me that these few words underscore the crucial role of knowledge and method in 
business administration and management. This was an attitude that became standard in the 
course of the following centuries but which must have been revolutionary at that time, a time 
characterised  by  a  strong  spirit  of  innovation.  And  what  was  certainly  new  and  extremely 
modern was the approach we know today as “quantitative” in matters such as trade, which 
had until then remained far removed from any scientific concept. The sections that make up 
his “Summa” are evidence of this: arithmetic and algebra, their use in trade, bookkeeping, 
currency and exchange, pure and applied geometry.  
                                                
1  J. W. Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters theatralische Sendung, Book 2, Chapter 8. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In his biography of Pacioli, Emmett Taylor sums up his work with these words:  
“Pacioli’s great contribution to civilization consisted of digging up old material on 
mathematics and putting it in shape for the use of modern students. He was the 
first in modern times to make a science out of mathematics. He accumulated the 
accepted  knowledge  on  the  subject  and  systematized  and  formulated  it  with 
reference to the discovery of general truths and the operation of general laws.”2  
His  teachings  are  still  valid  today,  in  more  ways  than  one.  It  is  now  generally  agreed  by 
economists that the key flaw in macroeconomic models prior to the crisis was the omission of 
the balance sheets of various players in the economy – banks, households, businesses. The 
models were built on flows, with little or no attention paid to stocks. But it was precisely from 
stocks that the irregularities and hence the crisis arose. Non linearities arise on a balance 
sheet when capital falls to zero and the agent goes into default.  
But I think Luca Pacioli was also one of the first figures in history to strive to create common 
standards for use in complex trade operations, requiring various parties to work together and 
the  sharing  of  a  common  language,  to  the  full  advantage  of  economic  development  and 
therefore of the common good.  
 Fast-forwarding several centuries to today, the consensus seems to be that if the crisis that 
began in 2007 has taught us anything, it is that there was an extraordinary lack of common 
rules at the global level, in particular in the field of financial stability. In this regard, a concrete 
outcome  has  been  the  collective  acknowledgement  that  the  financial  markets  need  rules. 
And that as a result of the ever increasing globalisation of markets, national practices need to 
be set aside to make way for new and, to the extent possible, common rules.  
Major steps have been taken in recent years to strengthen the financial system, both at the 
European and the global level, in the interests of and in order to protect savers and investors. 
Both the G20 and the Financial Stability Board have taken on greater importance and have 
proven to constitute – together with the International Monetary Fund – a useful mechanism 
for brokering agreement on the launching of an agenda for necessary reforms.  
Allow me to mention, in particular, the work carried out by the Financial Stability Board – the 
organisation  over  which  I  had  the  honour  of  presiding  between  2006  and  2011  –  on  the 
regulation of the financial markets. The Board has put forward proposals on how to reinforce 
banks’ capital without putting their fundamental role in the real economy at risk; on how to 
reduce the risk of moral hazard for systemically important financial institutions (those that are 
“too  big  to  fail”);  on  how  to  increase  transparency  in  financial  markets  (in  particular  in 
derivatives).  Even  matters  relating  to  accounting  standards  have  not  been  overlooked: 
significant efforts have been made to increase the comparability of methods and concepts at 
the international level.  
Also with regard to Europe, significant progress has been made but much still remains to be 
done, particularly in relation to devising a new institutional structure for the euro area aimed 
at creating the necessary conditions for long-lasting prosperity for all countries in the area.  
It  is  clear,  however,  that  we  must  move  towards  greater  economic  integration  among  the 
countries which share the euro. No union can be based on the assumption that a country can 
cause “externalities” and economic damage to other member countries by pursuing its own 
national economic policy priorities.  
Within the European Monetary Union, progress needs to be made in three areas: budgetary 
policy, structural reforms and financial market regulation. With regard to budgetary policies 
                                                
2  R. Emmett Taylor, No royal road: Luca Pacioli and his times, The University of North Carolina press, 1942. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and those aimed at strengthening the flexibility and productivity of the weakest economies, it 
is  vital  that  there  be  real  multilateral  surveillance.  The  necessary  solidarity  between 
economies and countries which share the same monetary unit cannot be disassociated from 
a  deep-rooted  sense  of  joint  responsibility.  Economic  policy  decisions  have  in  large  part 
become collective decisions.  
With regard to financial markets, centralised authorities must be created in order to limit the 
excessive risks undertaken on the part of banks and increase the efficiency of common rules. 
Furthermore,  a  legal  framework  for  managing  and  resolving  banking  crises,  which 
safeguards public finances, needs to be put in place, as is happening in other countries.  
In this way, the European Commission’s recent proposal for a European Council Regulation 
which establishes a single banking supervision mechanism for the euro area – in which the 
ECB  will  play  an  important  role  –  is  a  bold  and  necessary  step  towards  creating  a  single 
financial market which ensures financial stability in the euro area and the European Union  
 I would now like to return to the issue of economic structural reform.  
When devising new rules for public finances and financial stability, it must not be forgotten 
that such matters are closely tied to issues of competitiveness and employment. The issue of 
financial  stability  in  particular  cannot  be  separated  from  that  of  competitiveness  and  of 
economic development.  
As economic theory teaches us, growth is the result of labour and capital dynamics and of 
their productivity. It is vital to promote innovation, particularly in the European economies in 
which  an  ageing  population  is  tending  to  reduce  the  size  of  the  working  population.  An 
economy’s ability to be innovative depends in large part on its human capital. In this sense, 
improving human capital through high quality education is crucial in increasing productivity 
and,  in  this  way,  creating  the  necessary  conditions  for  robust  and  sustainable  economic 
development.  
With  the  rapid  advances  in  technology  in  recent  years  and  the  growing  importance  of 
emerging  economies  in  international  markets,  human  capital  has  played  an  increasingly 
important  role  in  guiding  the  transformation  of  the  productive  structure  found  in  advanced 
countries which, although to varying degrees, have increased their specialisation in activities 
requiring higher levels of knowledge.  
Education improves the quality of the labour force, increasing the efficiency of a fundamental 
factor in production processes. Moreover, having highly-trained human capital facilitates the 
assimilation  of  technological  progress  and  innovative  technology,  increasing  the  overall 
productivity of the economic system.  
It is then clear that it is vital for our economies that we exploit the skills and capabilities of our 
students  in  order  to  improve  competitiveness  and  vigour  of  the  firms  which  offer  these 
students work, or which the students themselves will go on to set up.  
Innovation  and  human  capital  are  all  the  more  important  the  closer  a  country  is  to  the 
technological frontier, and, in order to grow, a country has to know how to innovate. In the 
1950s and 1960s, growth meant learning how to use and replicate well-known technology. 
This is no longer enough. We have to innovate and to do this we need two things: education 
and competition. 
 Allow me to conclude these few brief remarks by reiterating my gratitude for having selected 
me for this award. I would like to wish the Rector, Professor Carlo Carraro, lecturers and the 
students  at  this  university  a  year  filled  with  success;  my  warmest  wishes  and  all  the  very 
best.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
