Jean-Pierre Danthine: Financial development – can we have too much of 
a good thing? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  International  conference  on  “Financial  development,  stability  and 
growth”,  jointly  organised  by  the  State  Secretariat  for  Economic  Affairs  (SECO)  and  the 
Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, Geneva, 25 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Claudia Strub and Till Ebner for their valuable support in drafting this speech. 
Introduction 
Typically, the term “development” has a positive connotation. A state of higher development 
is  perceived  to  be  superior  to  a  state  of  low  development.  The  same  is  true  for  the  term 
“financial development”, which we associate with improved financial products, processes and 
institutions.  Financial  development  leads  to  an  improved  allocation  of  capital,  empowering 
entrepreneurs  and  facilitating  risk  bearing  and  consumption  smoothing.  All  in  all,  financial 
development  increases  welfare  and  potentially  promotes  growth.  As  Schumpeter  saw  it, 
“Bankers are the gatekeepers of capitalist economic development. Their strategic function is 
to  screen  potential  innovators  and  advance  the  necessary  purchasing  power  to  the  most 
promising.”1  And,  indeed,  the  pre-crisis  economic  literature  on  financial  development  was 
strongly influenced by King and Levine’s empirical study2 suggesting that “Schumpeter may 
be right”. Using data on 80 countries over the 1960–89 period, the authors concluded that 
the cross-county evidence was consistent with the view that the financial system promotes 
growth. The same message is conveyed by a more intuitive interpretation of key historical 
episodes in which finance appears to have played a key role in increasing overall welfare. I 
have in mind, for instance, the financing of railway expansion in the 19th century (an early 
form of syndicated loans), the financing of high-technology firms in the 20th century (venture 
capital),  or  “microfinance”,  allowing  local,  small-scale  business  initiatives  in  low-income 
countries to tap the global capital market. 
The  recent  financial  crisis,  however,  has  prompted  us  to  review  this  benign  assessment. 
Today,  there  is  broad  support  for  the  view  that  not  all  forms  of  financial  development  are 
favourable to economic stability, growth and welfare. More extreme views are also prevalent, 
such as Paul Volker’s, “I wish that somebody would give me some shred of neutral evidence 
about the relationship between financial innovation recently and the growth of the economy.” 
How can we reconcile the pre and post-crisis views on the question posed in the title of my 
address today? 
To try and answer this, at least partially, I will focus on one specific and very visible aspect of 
financial development – financial liberalisation. 
During the final two decades of the last century financial liberalisation led to a deepening of 
credit markets on a global scale. The end of what many have called “financial repression” 
permitted households, banks and sovereigns to accumulate increasing amounts of debt. 
Of course, debt is not bad per se. It is part and parcel of an optimal allocation of resources – 
including capital – and of a financial system that enhances growth and welfare. But there can 
                                                
1  Schumpeter, J. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, Duncker & Humblot,Leipzig. Trans. R. Opie 
(1934), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
2  King  R,  Levine  R.  (1993),  Finance  and  Growth:  Schumpeter  might  be  right,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, Vol. 108, No. 3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
be  such  a  thing  as  excessive  indebtedness.  And  indeed,  the  indebtedness  of  banks, 
sovereigns  and  households  was  growing  exceptionally  strongly.  For  instance,  on  a  global 
scale, the ratio of domestic credit to GDP increased from 74% in 1980 to around 138% in 
2009.3 This very high level of indebtedness is considered to have been a key feature of the 
crisis. 
This  raises  two  major  questions  in  my  mind.  First,  what  is  the  reason  for  the  disconnect 
between our initial perception of financial development as being something positive, and the 
observed dismal outcomes? And, second, what lessons can we draw from our diagnosis? 
Market failures, behavioural biases and regulatory design failures 
When our economic system malfunctions, it is natural to try and identify sources of what we 
generically  refer  to  as  “market  failures”.  Typical  market  failures  include  market  power, 
information  asymmetries,  external  effects  and  public  goods.  Uncorrected,  these  traditional 
market failures give raise to sub-optimal outcomes. 
To analyse the case at hand it is useful to extend the list of these usual suspects. 
Let me begin with the banking sector. Because this is a heavily regulated sector, regulatory 
design failures (or possibly even system design failures) could equally well be the source of 
inefficient outcomes. 
When  thinking  about  public  debt,  it  is  also  clear  that  distorted  market  mechanisms  are 
unlikely to be the only culprit. But even in the case of household indebtedness, I would argue 
that cognitive or behavioural biases as well as other forms of psychological influence (e.g. 
emotions) are equally important as a potential explanation – even if less recognised. These 
biases  imply  that  individual  decision-making  may  deviate  from  the  principles  of  rational 
choice  on  which  the  welfare  theorems  are  based  (and  on  which  our  understanding  of  the 
performance  of  the  market  system  is  founded).  If  the  basic  assumptions  about  rational 
behaviour  do  not  hold,  the  decentralised  decisions  of  individuals  can  –  plausibly  –  lead  to 
sub-optimal market outcomes. 
Indebtedness of banks, sovereigns and households 
Let us now turn to the factors explaining the excessive indebtedness of banks, sovereigns 
and households. 
In  the  case  of  excessive  leverage  in  the  banking  sector  we  can  make  a  conventional  and 
probably little disputed diagnosis. It is widely accepted that one main cause of over-leverage 
in  banking  is  the  existence  of  distorted  incentives,  originating  from  faulty,  or  defective, 
system  design  and  regulation.  The  move  from  Basel  II  to  Basel  III  is  an  explicit 
acknowledgement  that  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  ahead  of  the  crisis  were  too  lax. 
This was particularly the case for too-big-to-fail institutions. The implicit state guarantee for 
these institutions is a major source of incentive distortions. It is in complete contradiction with 
the functioning of a free market system and the hypotheses of our welfare theorems. Limited 
liability  and  the  prevalence  of  bonus  systems  provide  other  significant  distortions  affecting 
individual  decision-making.  At  various  levels  of  financial  institutions,  decision-makers  face 
asymmetric  incentives.  To  give  you  an  example,  remuneration  levels  were  high  when  risk 
taking  paid-off,  but  there  were  no  negative  consequences  –  except  possible  job  losses  – 
when risks materialised. It is not surprising that excessive risk-taking was the consequence. 
                                                
3  Domestic credit to private sector refers to financial resources provided to the private sector, such as through 
loans,  purchases  of  nonequity  securities,  and  trade  credits  and  other  accounts  receivable,  that  establish  a 
claim 
Indicators,  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ 
FS.AST.PRVT.GD.ZS/countries/1W?display=graph. 
repayment.  Worldbank,  World  Development 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  problem  of  socially  excessive  risk-taking  is  even  more  damaging  in  the  case of  large 
interconnected  institutions  whose  failure  would  endanger  other  institutions,  with  adverse 
consequences for the broader economy. Here, a clear externality is at work.  
My  focus  on  incentive  problems  does  not  eliminate  the  possibility  that  cognitive  or 
behavioural  biases  could  also  play  a  prominent  role  in  driving  excessive  leverage  in  the 
banking  sector.  Herding  behaviour  and  “group  think”  were  certainly  prevalent  in  “subprime 
investment”. A possible explanation for herding behaviour here is the propensity to suspect 
that “they know something that I don’t know”. This bias is prevalent in complex and opaque 
situations which are surely predominant in the modern financial system. 
Turning  to  the  indebtedness  of  sovereigns,  we  cannot  put  the  blame  for  excessive 
indebtedness on financial incentives. But the overweighting of current benefits and the over-
discounting of future costs can easily be attributed to electoral considerations and the finite 
career of elected politicians, careers which become shorter when they cannot “seduce” their 
electorates. 
At  a  cognitive  level,  I  would  also  put  the  blame  on  another  factor  that  could  be  called  a 
“Keynesian  bias”.  Here,  I  refer  to  the  conviction  that  countercyclical  policies  should  be 
activated in downturns to mitigate the social cost of output and employment losses, but that 
they need not be reversed in upturns. This conviction is based on the view that there is no 
natural,  theoretical  or  even  apparent  practical  limit  to  state  indebtedness,  at  least  for 
developed  economies.  This  cognitive  bias  is,  in  my  view,  a  major  explanation  for  the 
observed  structural  deficits  in  government  accounts  leading  to  an  ever-rising  debt  to  GDP 
ratio. In the OECD as a whole, for instance, the public debt to GDP ratio has increased from 
70% in 2000 to 103% today! 
While we can dispute the precise diagnosis, we cannot disagree with the fact that the present 
crisis  should  and  will  serve  as  a  wake-up  call.  Sovereigns,  like  banks,  need  to  build  up  a 
buffer ahead of potential unfavourable economic developments. The recent work by Rogoff 
and Reinhart suggests this would mean making sure that the 90% debt to GDP ratio is not 
reached, even after a plausibly serious stress scenario.4 Seen in this light, we may doubt that 
the  60%  debt  to  GDP  ratio  that  has  been  the  reference  since  the  Maastricht  Treaty  is 
sufficiently prudent. 
Let us now turn to the case of household indebtedness. Here the intermediating factor has 
been, in most recent examples, the burst of a housing bubble leaving, in particular, the most 
recent generation of buyers with a mortgage exceeding the value of their houses – that is, 
with negative equity. Besides system design failures which include policies that portray home 
ownership as a goal to be reached by everyone (President Clinton declared in 1994, “More 
Americans  should  own  their  own  houses!”)  and  that  are  encouraged  by  public  sector 
institutions, behavioural biases can be blamed as the main drivers of indebtedness.5 I could 
mention, first, a form of herding which is the simplest explanatory factor for an asset price 
bubble and, second, a “keeping up with the Joneses” effect, which is a plausible reason for 
the very low American savings rate and which Rajan, among others, uses as a potential link 
between the rise of inequality and increased indebtedness. In the words of Cynamon, 2008, 
“A family, in isolation, might choose a more conservative financial path, but the influence of 
neighbours, both those who have a physical presence and those whose lifestyles are piped 
in through the media, drives both consumption and debt higher.”6  
                                                
4  Reinhart C., Rogoff K. (2010), Growth in a Time of Debt, American Economic Review, American Economic 
Association, vol. 100(2). 
5  Rajan R. (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton University Press. 
6  Cynamon B., Fazzari S. (2008), Household Debt in the Consumer Age: Source of Growth—Risk of Collapse, 
Capitalism and Society, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 3(2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Finally,  sub-optimal  levels  of  savings  and  corresponding  excessive  indebtedness  may 
originate from time-inconsistent  preferences that  lead  human  beings to deviate  today  from 
behaviour they defined as optimal yesterday. We might, for instance, have planned to save 
more (and consume less) in the future but – when the time comes – we postpone our plan to 
save  because  of  so-called  “present-biased”  preferences.7  This  behaviour  may  result  in  a 
reduction of lifetime utility because our “long-run selves” do not appreciate it.8 Already in the 
18th century, David Hume wrote “There is no quality in human nature, which causes more 
fatal  errors  in  our  conduct,  than  that  which  leads  us  to  prefer  whatever  is  present  to  the 
distant and remote”.9  
Mitigate the downsides of financial development 
What  lessons  can  we  draw  from  this  multi-faceted  diagnosis?  How  can  we  ensure  that 
financial liberalisation does not lead to excesses that can endanger financial stability? How 
can we make sure that finance in advanced countries is conductive to the public good? 
Again, the answer is most evident in the case of the banking sector. Excessive leverage is 
the result of a faulty system design. Hence, we must improve the system design. This is what 
Basel III and the TBTF work programme are about. On the one hand, it aims at removing the 
main incentive distortion – the implicit state guarantee. The critical element here is to make 
sure that it will be possible to allow a big complex institution to fail, which means resolving it 
in an orderly manner. On the other hand, increased capital and liquidity requirements as well 
as a leverage ratio serve as stronger safeguards in the event that incentives cannot be fully 
corrected,  and  also  because  externalities  are  present  in  the  case  of  large  and  complex 
institutions. 
In  my  view  we  are  on  the  right  track,  but  we  have  not  yet  reached  our  destination.  It  is 
important that we stay on this path, and do not get caught in the “disaster myopia trap” which 
means, as the crisis fades in our memory, forgetting progressively the dismal consequences 
of the identified faults in the system and – as a consequence – losing our determination to 
correct them. 
As for the indebtedness of sovereigns, the key word is  “prudence”: countries should make 
sure that they use the good times to lower their debt to GDP ratio so as to have a buffer for 
bad  times.  In general,  the future  cost  of  stabilising the  debt to GDP ratio  should  be  better 
taken into account when evaluating the benefits of countercyclical macroeconomic policies. 
And,  given  the  electoral  and  political  biases  I  have  mentioned,  the  benefits  of  institutions 
promoting  fiscal  discipline  should  be  taken  on  board.  The  constitutional  debt  brake  rule 
(“Schuldenbremse”),  adopted  in  2002  by  a  very  large  majority  of  the  Swiss  people,  is  an 
excellent case in point. It has effectively led to  a significant reduction in the public debt to 
GDP ratio in Switzerland, from above 50% in 2002 to below 40% today, with a target of 31% 
for  2015.  This  reduction  in  sovereign  debt  has  had  no  negative  consequences  for  the 
momentum of Swiss economic growth. On the contrary, before the Great Recession, Swiss 
GDP growth rates were above trend for five years in a row. Even if it can be argued that we 
benefited  from  lucky  timing,  the  Swiss  success  with  this  form  of  commitment  is  an 
                                                
7  Time-inconsistent preferences should not be confused with “impatience”.  
8  For theoretical and empirical references on hyperbolic discounting and the self-control problem see, among 
others: O’Donoghue, R. (1999): Doing it now or later, American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No.1.; Benton, M. 
et al. (2007): Overborrowing and Undersaving: Lessons and Policy Implications from Research in Behavioral 
Economics, Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston; Heidhues P. et al. (2010): Exploiting Naivete 
about  Self-Control  in  the  Credit  Market,  American  Economic  Review  100;  Laibson  D.  et  al.  (2000):  A  Debt 
Puzzle, NBER Paper No. 7879; Meier, Sprenger (2008): Charging Myopically Ahead: Evidence on Present-
Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing; Azfar O. (1999): Rationalizing hyperbolic discounting, Journal 
of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 38. 
9  Hume, D. (1739), A treatise of human nature.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
encouraging  sign,  as  it  shows  that  deleveraging  is  not  always  inconsistent  with  economic 
growth. 
Turning to the indebtedness of households, the diagnosis does not point to easy solutions. 
Thus, regulatory measures at the microprudential level that enforce stronger discipline on the 
supply side of credit are all-important. Complementary macro-measures aimed at preventing 
excessive exuberance should also be deployed. In this context, I am referring to interest rate 
policies  which  –  whenever  feasible  –  “lean  against  the  wind”,  but  also  to  more  targeted 
macroprudential  measures  which  directly  address  the  dynamics  of  the  credit  market.  The 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  an  important  example.  Besides,  facing  more  directly  the 
behavioural  biases  that  are  at  the  root  of  the  problem  requires  an  increased  level  of 
“awareness”. In the words of Shefrin (2012), raising people’s awareness means “reminding 
ourselves  of  our  psychological  fallibilities  so  that  we  can  avert  some  crises  and  mitigate 
others”.10 More specific consumer protection regulations or system design measures come 
as a second step. An interesting example is Thaler’s proposal for the “default” option in the 
design  of  pension  plans.  The  idea  is  to  directly  counter  the  time-inconsistency  and  other 
behavioural biases when designing default or “no action required” options, in order to nudge 
people towards making rational savings decisions.11,12  
At the public policy level, we should similarly take the existence of behavioural biases into 
account.  This  may  mean  going  against  usual  practices.  The  very  common  tendency  of 
promoting home-ownership points in the wrong direction. Public policies (and politics!) should 
not “seduce” people into accumulating debt. 
More  generally,  the  awareness  that  financial  liberalisation  –  while  generally  positive  –  can 
also lead to inferior outcomes is a good postulate for emerging economies embarking on the 
road towards higher financial development. 
References 
Azfar,  O.  (1999):  Rationalizing  hyperbolic  discounting,  Journal  of  Economic  Behavior  and 
Organization, Vol. 38. 
Benton,  M.  et al. (2007): Overborrowing  and  Undersaving:  Lessons and Policy Implications 
from Research in Behavioral Economics, Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 
Cynamon, B., Fazzari S. (2008), Household Debt in the Consumer Age: Source of Growth – 
Risk of Collapse, Capitalism and Society, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 3(2). 
Heidhues,  P.  et  al.  (2010):  Exploiting  Naivete  about  Self-Control  in  the  Credit  Market, 
American Economic Review 100. 
Hume, D. (1739), A treatise of human nature. 
King,  R.  and  Levine,  R.  (1993),  Finance  and  Growth:  Schumpeter  might  be  right,  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, No. 3. 
Laibson, D. et al. (2000): A Debt Puzzle, NBER Paper No. 7879. 
Meier, S. and Sprenger, C. (2008): Charging Myopically Ahead: Evidence on Present-Biased 
Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing. 
                                                
10  Shefrin,  H.  (2012),  Behavioral  Finance  in  the  Financial  Crisis  –  Market  Efficiency,  Minsky,  and  Keynes, 
discussion paper available at www.russellsage.org/blog/new-research-crisis-and-regulation-financial-sector. 
11  Thaler  R.,  Sunstein  C.  (2008),  Nudge  –  Improving  Decisions  about  Health,  Wealth,  and  Happiness,  Yale 
University Press. 
12  A  “default”  option  or  “no  action  required”  option  could  substantially  boost  participation  in  pension  plans  as 
individuals do not actively have to decide whether or not to make a contribution to savings. However, it does 
not inhibit their individual freedom to choose, as they can still adjust their contributions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
O’Donoghue, R. (1999): Doing it now or later, American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No.1. 
Rajan R. (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart, C. and Rogoff K. (2010), Growth in a Time of Debt, American Economic Review, 
American Economic Association, vol. 100(2). 
Schumpeter, J. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig. 
Trans. R. Opie (1934), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Shefrin,  H.  (2012),  Behavioral  Finance  in  the  Financial  Crisis  –  Market  Efficiency,  Minsky, 
and  Keynes,  discussion  paper  available  at  www.russellsage.org/blog/new-research-crisis-
and-regulation-financial-sector. 
Thaler, R. and Sunstein, C. (2008), Nudge – Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness, Yale University Press. 
Worldbank,  World 
FS.AST.PRVT.GD.ZS/countries/1W?display=graph. 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ 
Development 
Indicators, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
