Masaaki Shirakawa: Reviewing the economies of Switzerland and Japan 
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 30th Anniversary 
Luncheon  of  the  Swiss  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  in  Japan  (SCCIJ),  Tokyo, 
10 October 2012. 
 Before  I  begin,  I  would  like  to  thank  Chairman  Thomas  Jordan  for  his  detailed  and 
informative  presentation  on  the  state  of  the  Swiss  economy  and  the  issues  faced  by  the 
Swiss National Bank. I believe that everybody in this room would agree that we have learned 
a great deal. In the next five minutes, instead of commenting directly on what Thomas has 
just  explained,  let  me  offer  you  some  thoughts  that  come  to  my  mind  when  I  look  at  the 
Swiss and Japanese economies. 
Switzerland and Japan are very different. Switzerland is land-locked. It is in effect an island 
in  the  sea  of  the  European  Union,  where  about  60  percent  of  its  exports  are  headed  and 
80 percent  of  its  imports  derive  (Chart  1).  Japan  is  far  more  populous.  The  Japanese 
economy  is  about  nine  times  as  large  as  the  Swiss  economy.  Nevertheless,  there  are 
similarities. For example, both countries enjoy, or even suffer from, very stable prices. The 
average  annual  inflation,  measured  by  headline  CPI,  over  the  twenty  years  from  1992  to 
2011 was 1.1 percent in Switzerland and 0.1 percent in Japan (Chart 2). In August this year, 
the  year-on-year  change  was  –0.5  percent  in  Switzerland  and  –0.4  percent  in  Japan. 
Consequently, interest rates are also low (Chart 3). In recent weeks, the yield on ten-year 
government  bonds  has  been  hovering  around  0.5  percent  in  Switzerland,  slightly  below 
Japan’s  0.7  to  0.8  percent  range.  Both  currencies,  as  Thomas  has  explained,  are  at 
historically elevated levels. 
In  this  regard,  the  news  media  and  the  public  are  usually  focused  on  a  specific  traded 
exchange  rate  between  currencies,  such  as  the  Swiss  franc  to  the  euro  or  the  yen  to  the 
U.S. dollar. These rates are important, but there are additional indicators for exchange rates.  
In order to understand what  would happen in an economy when exchange rates fluctuate, 
exchange  rates  for  all  the  trading  partners  must  first  be  taken  into  account.  From  this 
viewpoint, we must look at the nominal effective exchange rate, which is a trade-weighted 
index  of  exchange  rates.  In  the  case  of  Switzerland  and  Japan,  compared  with  January 
2000,  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rates  in  August  2012  were  41.4  percent  and 
17.4 percent higher, respectively (Chart 4). 
Secondly, we also need to consider the fact that higher inflation will erode competitiveness. 
In other words, further information could be derived from the real exchange rate, which is the 
nominal rate adjusted for inflation. When a higher nominal exchange rate is offset by lower 
inflation, the real exchange rate stays at the same level. Actual calculation of these rates is 
admittedly difficult because of issues involved with comparing inflation between economies, 
but the rates fluctuate considerably over the long term. For example, between January 2000 
and  August  2012,  the  real  effective  exchange  rates  for  Switzerland  appreciated  by 
12.5 percent, whereas Japan’s depreciated by 19.3 percent (Chart 5). 
More recently, between December 2007 and August 2011, the real effective exchange rates 
for Switzerland and Japan moved in tandem with each other, appreciating by 16.9 percent 
and  23.3  percent,  respectively.  These  movements  of  the  last  few  years  are  to  an  extent 
representative  of  the  fallouts  from  the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  The  prevalent  mood  of  risk 
aversion resulted in the unwinding of carry trades. Both countries are now also confronted by 
the so-called flight-to-safety capital flows. The appreciation of the two currencies coincided 
with the most severe financial and economic dislocations in the advanced economies. 
With  regard  to  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  in  Switzerland,  the  Swiss 
National Bank has the power to intervene. In Japan, the government – not the central bank – 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  mandated  by  law  to  direct  such  interventions.  The  Bank  of  Japan  is  conscious  of  the 
effects that the rapid appreciation of the yen could have on Japan’s economy and inflation 
outlook in terms of the conduct of the Bank’s monetary policy. Concern over these effects of 
exchange rate developments has been one of the factors that influenced the Bank’s series of 
decisions to further ease its monetary policy. 
While both Switzerland and Japan suffer from strong exchange rates, I am also struck by the 
dynamism of the Swiss economy. The U.S. dollar value of exports in Switzerland increased 
by  192  percent  between  2000  and  2011,  a  threefold  increase,  whereas  the  comparable 
figure for  Japan  was  an  increase  of  74  percent.  Meanwhile,  the  domestic  currency  values 
increased  by  53  percent  and  28  percent,  respectively  (Chart  6).  Exports  by  the 
pharmaceutical, precision machinery, and  watches industries have  increased considerably. 
This is particularly remarkable in view of the Swiss franc’s significant appreciation during the 
period, which was more than the yen’s, and such large shocks as the Great Financial Crisis 
and the more recent turmoil in the euro area. 
All in all, one often underappreciated benefit of globalization is the enhanced opportunity to 
learn from each other’s similarities and differences. Today, Thomas has provided us with a 
valuable insight into Switzerland, and I hope that he can take something home from this visit 
to  Japan.  Let  me  now  conclude  by  thanking  him  once  again  for  his  superb  presentation. 
Thank you, Thomas.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
