Yaseen Anwar: Developing leadership skills and vision for Pakistan’s 
economic growth and prosperity 
Chief guest/keynote speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at 
the  4th  CEO  Summit  and  Book  Launch  of  “100  Business  Leaders  of  Pakistan”,  Karachi, 
8 November 2012. 
 Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  prestigious 
gathering!  As  I  look  around  here,  I  can  see  some of  the  most  talented  individuals  that 
Pakistan  has  ever  produced. Each success story  is as unique as it is brilliant.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen, I do not need to tell you this, but you have arrived! 
The successes of Pakistani CEOs are a collection of stories about fearless leadership, in the 
face of adversity. Let’s admit it: the business environment in this country could be better. We 
may  have  numerous  problems,  but  a  lack  of  entrepreneurial  spirit  and  drive  is  not  one  of 
them. What have you, as entrepreneurs and managers, not faced in this environment? You 
have  faced  changes  in  governments  and  policies;  you  have  faced  high inflation;  you  have 
faced the depreciation in the value of the currency; you have faced shortages of electricity 
and energy; you have faced multiple security issues and a constant threat to both life and 
property; in fact, we haven’t made your job any easier by keeping interest rates on the higher 
side! But you have persevered and persisted, committed and dedicated your energies to your 
businesses  and  workers.  And  now  your  success  stands  in  front  of  you.  You  have  created 
corporate empires within Pakistan – ones that now provide essential goods and services to 
the economy, ones that are the engine of growth for this economy. This is why, ladies and 
gentlemen, you have arrived! And this is why I would like to applaud your success. 
But there is one thing that concerns me. And let me throw it out as a challenge.  You  have 
conquered  the  Pakistani  market  it  would  seem. Yes,  the  local  market  holds  tremendous 
potential  for  growth,  but  I  think  the  time  has  come  for  you  to  lead  Pakistan  forward, 
beyond  our  borders.  Yes,  I  challenge  you,  to  take  the  wonderful  skills  that  you  have 
acquired  here  in  the  face  of  adversity,  and  build  up  your presence in the world. 
Companies  from  the  developing  world  have  a  unique  advantage  over  their  peers  in 
industrialized  economies.  They  are  survivors  in the  face  of  challenges  that  your  peers  in 
the  developed  world  have  not  had  to  face.  They  learn  to  adapt  in  the  harshest  of 
environments,  and  can  take  that  nimbleness  in  their  ventures  abroad.  The  last  two 
decades, 
rise  of  EMNCs  –  emerging  multinational 
companies.  Our  corporate  sector  has  survived  in  perhaps  one  of  the  most  challenging 
environments,  and  yet  it  has flourished.  There  are  challenges  to  expanding  abroad  –
challenges that our companies may not have encountered previously. But I, for one,  would 
like  to  see  more  of  our  corporate  sector  aggressively targeting  the regional  and  global 
market.  I  challenge  you to  dream larger than ever before. 
This  is  where  the  role  of  visionary  leadership  comes  in.  Can  a  Pakistani  multinational  be 
recognized as a regional or global powerhouse?  Our  peers  in  the  developing  world  have 
been  surging forward here. Jaguar, the icon of British royalty, was recently bought by Tata 
motors. Mittal Steel acquired the European company Arcelor, and Arcelor-Mittal is now the 
world’s largest steel maker. Russia’s Gazprom surpassed Microsoft in 2006 to become  the 
world’s  third  most  valuable  company.  China  Mobile’s  market  capitalization  has  now 
surpassed  that  of  Vodafone’s.  Orascom  of  Egypt  led  Europe’s  largest  ever  leveraged 
buyout. It is apparent we are in the middle of a paradigm shift – let’s not get left behind. 
The  path  to  internationalization  of  any  corporate  is  slow  and  gradual.  There  is  a  steep 
learning  curve,  lots  of  false  starts,  and constant  feedback  loops.  I  may  not  be  the  best 
person  to  deliver  a lecture  on  expanding  overseas,  but  I  am  convinced  that  the  lessons 
in  particular,  have  seen 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  State  Bank,  we  are  concerned  about 
learned  here,  can  easily  be  applied  in  other  economies,  where  companies  from  more 
developed  countries  may  not  be  able  to  adapt  as  quickly.  So  let  us  expand  into  other 
developing countries first. Let us expand into other countries in South Asia for instance. The 
African market is another possible destination as well. Let us develop  a  regional  presence 
before  we  can  take  on  the  markets  in  industrialized  nations.  Let  us  also  not  forget 
that  the  millions  of Pakistanis abroad will give you an edge as you venture abroad. They 
will  be  familiar  with  your  brands,  and  with  the  quality  of  your products.  They  may 
just  hold  the  key  to  giving  you  a  foothold  in international markets. 
But for all this to happen, we need your vision and your leadership. 
At 
the  current  state  of  Foreign  Direct 
Investment  or  FDI.  We  are  concerned  for  a  good reason. Most of the time, it is a very 
good  indication  of  the  health  of the  economy.  The  reasoning  is  something  like  this:  if  the 
economy  is doing well, companies abroad will want to invest in the country. But we’re  not 
living  in  normal  times.  Most  companies  in  the  west  are themselves struggling with their 
domestic  markets.  Would  they  then  consider  investing  abroad  in  another  country  and 
assume  all  the risk  that  entails,  especially  in  times  like  these?  As  business  leaders, you 
know the answer better than I do. 
So  where  does  this  leave  us?  The  market  opportunities  in  developing  nations  are  still 
there.  But  FDI  flows  from  industrialized  nations have been falling. That is where EMNCs 
have emerged to fill in that vacuum.  And  that  is  where  our  companies  should  expand.  It’s 
time for reverse capital flows. 
Outward  FDI  (OFDI)  is  a  metric  that  has  been  largely  forgotten  and  relegated  to  just  a 
number  in  most  developing  countries’  balance  of  payments  two  decades  ago.  Now,  it  is 
increasingly  becoming  a  measure  that  signifies  the  health  of  the  country’s  corporations 
and  their  competitiveness  abroad.  Last  fiscal  year  that  number  was  $63  million  for 
Pakistan.  That  is  very  small  by  any  standard  and  it  is  a challenge we should undertake to 
change. 
I have also noticed that there seems to be some apprehension surrounding  outward  FDI  in 
Pakistan.  We  have  fallen  prey  to  a mindset where inward FDI is good, and outward FDI 
is bad. From a strictly  balance  of  payments  perspective,  that  is  very  true;  and  it  is my job 
to be concerned about that and at the same time to manage it in a prudent and disciplined 
manner. The flows of FDI, both inward and outward, reflect something deeper. Inward FDI 
reflects  the  potential  in  the  domestic  economy.  Outward  FDI  reflects  the  willingness  and 
ability  of  domestic  corporations  to  compete  in  the international market. The two are not 
inversely  proportional.  One  of  more  does  not  imply  less  of  the  other.  There  is  another 
distinction to be  made  here.  FDI  does  not  include  investments  in  financial  assets, such as 
investments  in  stock  or  bond  markets.  FDI  is  investment  in  tangible  assets  in  the  real 
sector. That means that money and capital flows  through  FDI  are  not  very  volatile.  And  it 
is  the  volatility  in such flows that keeps any central banker awake at night. 
Let  me  digress  here.  The  point  that  I  hope  to  communicate  is  that our  economy  should 
move  away  from  a  persisting  fascination  with inward  FDI  as  a  metric  of  the  economy’s 
health  and,  at  least,  give  OFDI  the  attention  it  deserves.  Again  it  is  your  leadership  and 
vision  in  taking  your corporations to the next frontier  that  will take us forward into this new 
paradigm.  Your  corporations  are  the  engines  of  this  economy,  and  our  economy  needs  a 
paradigm shift. 
I  have  noted  that  a  few  of  our  corporations  have  tentatively  started venturing into foreign 
markets. The United Arab Emirates has been a  particularly  favored  destination.  I’ve  seen 
many  of  our  brands there, particularly from the textile industry. One   of our conglomerates 
recently  acquired  a  company  in  the  North  American market.  We  know  a  couple  of  our 
banks  are  extremely  keen  on entering the Indian market. So yes, a few of our more daring 
enterprises have ventured outside their comfort zone, and I respect them for that. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
lesson 
that  we  have 
the  most  significant 
But there is a great deal more that needs to be done. And there is a great  deal  more  that 
can  be  done.  The  current  breed  of  Pakistani  CEOs  is  the  street-smart  entrepreneur, 
who  will  learn  to  adapt  to  any  environment.  That  is  going  to  be  our  competitive 
advantage  in the  global  market.  Once  again  the  challenge  is  to  put  your  skills  to the test 
on  the  global  stage.  I  am  confident  that  you  will  create  a  new  success  story  with  each 
challenge. 
I  would  certainly  be  remiss  in  not  pointing  out  that  the  world  today is  passing  through  a 
turbulent  phase  that  requires  a  realignment  of  our  leadership  approach  to  managing 
businesses.  Today’s  business  leader  is  faced  with  a  multitude  of  challenges,  both  on 
external  and internal  fronts. The  complexities  arising  in  the  eco-system  of  any business 
may  arise  in  the  shape  of  macro  economic  imbalances  that  include  sagging  demand, 
inflation,  volatility  in  financial  markets, etc. While  demanding  situations  on  the  internal 
front  arise 
from  personnel  management,  investment  ambiguity  that  there  are  always 
complex  matrices  linking  external  challenges  with  internal  ones  and  therefore,  successful 
business  leaders  will  never  make  internal  business  decisions  in  isolation.  An  uniformed 
business  leader  is  a leader without a vision and quite likely without any success. 
Like  any  real  life  crisis,  the  present  turmoil  in  the  financial  sector provides an opportunity 
to  learn  from  the  financial  world’s  mistakes  and  overzealousness.  This  gives  us  the 
opportunity to look back and see  what  went wrong  and  structure our  own financial  houses 
so that this  does  not  happen  to  us,  or  so  severely  affect  the  world  again. In this  regard  I 
feel 
learnt  from  recent  events  is  the 
importance of fundamentals in risk management. For  instance  there  is  a  basic  rule  since 
inception  of banks which says “do not put all your eggs in one basket”. Had this simple rule 
been followed, many institutions could have avoided huge losses. 
The  challenges  posed  by  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  have  impacted leaders  of  all  major 
businesses.  Elevating  corporate  governance  should  not  be  confined  to  banks,  but 
commercial  concerns  must  also  do  the  same.  We  all  know  the  pace  of  globalization  has 
accelerated,  resulting  in  increased  domestic  and  global  economic  integration.  Today  we 
cannot just shrug off failures within a particular sector or sometimes even a single entity if it 
has  global  linkages.  Gone  are  the  days  when  a 
in  one 
country  could  be  contained  to  that  country;  now  there  are  several  contagion  effects  at 
different levels. That is why emphasis on good corporate governance  regimes  cannot  be 
underscored  more  as  it  creates  an  attractive  investment  climate  necessary  to  maintain 
investors’  confidence,  resulting  in  positive  impact  on  the  share  price  and  creating 
possibilities  for  raising  low  cost  Capital. It  is  imperative that  we  develop  and  implement 
good governance practices in order to provide impetus to economic growth. 
Given  Globalization  and  the  crisis  we  all  face,  let  me  highlight  the  traits  of  effective 
leadership  that  are  universally  applicable  and  that  I  have  cited  in  earlier  talks.  Leaders 
must  be  visionary  to  see  the  future  trends,  anticipate  institutional  bottlenecks,  remain 
competitive  and  be  able  to  adap  rapidly  to  changes.  They  should  be  continuous 
learners,  a  necessity  for  enhancing  leadership  skills.  Leaders  need  also  to  take  into 
account their corporate  social  responsibility  so  that  profit  seeking is  balanced  against 
the  objective  of  social  service  and  well being  of  society. Leadership  success  requires 
strong conviction and  belief. Yet  having  humility  and  recognizing  the  need  to reinvent 
and  inspire  their  organization  to  adapt  to  new  challenges  remain  an  integral  part  of 
successful  leaders.  This  is  vital  if  businesses  want  to  remain  at  the  forefront  of  new 
innovations,  critical  for  long  term  competitiveness.  All  these  and  more  comprise 
the 
necessary  characteristics  for  dynamic  leaders that push the frontiers of excellence. Such 
corporate leaders fuel the drive towards long-term growth and stability. 
I’ll  conclude  my  thoughts  with  a  small  personal  aspiration.  Twenty  years  from  now,  I 
would  like  to  hear  the  story  of  how  a  Pakistani corporation  entered  the  global  market, 
the  challenges  it  faced  and  overcame,  and  became  the  first  Pakistani  company  to  be 
financial  or  political  crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
consistently  featured  in  the  Fortune  Global  500  list  of  companies.  I look  forward  to  being 
in an audience of thousands, listening to that story. That is my final challenge to you. 
So,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  have  arrived.  But  there  is,  as  I  have said  in  my  talk,  that 
other  frontier  that  still  needs  to  be  conquered. And  I  am  confident  that  your  leadership 
skills  and  your  vision  are more  than  sufficient  to  achieve  that  ambitious  but  reachable 
goal. After all, a man’s reach should exceed his grasp or what’s a Heaven for. That is what 
will usher this country into a new age of economic growth and prosperity. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
