Rundheersing Bheenick: Past Imperfect, Present Tense and Future 
Conditional 
Speech  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators, Pailles, 6 December 2012. 
 Taking stock 
I have been here nearly six years and I thought it opportune tonight to look back, take stock 
before  the  past  is  truly  past,  and  then  try  to  peer  into  our  hazy  economic  future  as  we 
continue  to  battle  through  what  certainly  looks  like  an  extended  period  of  economic 
uncertainty. 
The past six years 
The most obvious change at the Bank in these past six years has been the new and, some 
might say, sumptuous building. I inherited that, and since moving in, I have been conscious 
of the necessity for the Bank to deliver even better value for money than in the past. For as 
Lord Kelvin has said: 
Large  increases  in  cost  with  questionable  increases  in  performance  can  be 
tolerated only in race horses and fancy women. 
leaders,  and  consumer  associations.  We  have 
We had to pay greater attention to our performance. The Bank plays a supportive role in the 
economy. But the global financial crisis – which happened to coincide with my assuming the 
role of Governor; I trust not a case of post hoc ergo propter hoc – encouraged me to look a 
little  beyond  our  traditional  role  to  embrace  that  of  promoting  socio-development  by  giving 
new life to some of the little-used statutory powers of the Bank. 
So  I  set  out  to  improve  governance  by  putting  in  place  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC).  I  called  upon  external  talents  and  developed  clear  lines  of  communication  with 
economic agents. The MPC has been worth its salt and I pressed for statutory changes to 
make it more transparent and accountable by publishing the minutes of its meetings and the 
individual voting pattern of MPC members. 
I  also  embraced  an  open-door  policy  responding  to  the  concerns  of  the  various  economic 
stakeholders  going  well  beyond  the  banking  industry,  to  include  real  sector  operators, 
academia,  opinion 
regular  public 
consultations through press conferences and public addresses. I initiated, amongst others, 
MERI − the Mauritius Exchange Rate Index −, PLIBOR – the Port Louis Interbank Offered 
Rate − and the Inflation Expectations Survey to focus more sharply on expectations to help 
us track changing market sentiment. We initiated two new regular reports, one on Financial 
Stability and the other on Inflation. 
In addition, we have brought in some internal reorganisation endowing the institution with a 
flatter structure enabling more delegation, faster response, and greater flexibility in decision-
making. New operating units were created to address new issues, such as financial stability 
and Islamic finance, or to give sharper focus to specific work areas such as financial markets 
and  compliance.  Banking  supervision  and  regulation  were  strengthened;  the  payments 
system  was  modernised  allowing  for  cheque  truncation  and  bulk  clearing;  financial  market 
infrastructure  was  spruced  up  with  single-maturity  auctions  of  Treasuries;  financial  literacy 
programmes  were  initiated.  All  these  required  strong  emphasis  on  capacity-building  and 
training, and continuous interaction with regional and global networks to keep up to the mark. 
Above all, I have been steering affairs, guided by Rabindranath Tagore’s great prayer, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Give  me  the  strength  never  to  disown  the  poor,  nor  bend  my  knees  before 
insolent might. 
We continue to prize our independence and we defend it in the best interests of the country. 
Often  we  remind  the  most  powerful  in  the  land  that  our  concerns  extend  not  least  to 
pensioners and those constrained to live off their savings; for our task at the Central Bank 
extends to promoting a stable and growing economy for all. It is vital for the Bank to respond 
to  the  interests  of  all  sectors,  not  just  the  most  powerful,  the  best-connected,  or  the  most 
vociferous. 
Now if Paul Getty’s formula for success was 
…rise early, work late and strike oil 
I have had to adapt that to the circumstances of Mauritius where there is no black gold. Not 
finding oil here, the Bank has taken to buying gold; we bought two metric tonnes of it from 
the  IMF  in  November  2009  for  2  billion  rupees:  that  gold  is  now  worth  nearly  3½  billion 
rupees. The profit from this should pay for a few tower blocks or even a few new botanical 
gardens. And to ensure all Mauritians have easy access to a similar deal, we now offer for 
sale to the public solid gold bars; so do come by and make a mint while the stocks last. 
This  offer  comes  during  the  course  of  our  45th  anniversary  year  as  the  central  bank  in 
Mauritius and we have had a series of international events in celebration. As a more lasting 
commemoration, we shall be issuing a souvenir book on central banking, the economy and 
Mauritian society. 
Riding the storm 
Now, many theorists have speculated on the causes of the continuing international financial 
crisis  −  perhaps  as  many  as  those  whose  speculation  promoted  it!  Some  here  have 
contributed to this mountain of analysis. 
On these occasions, I usually offer a new Law to illuminate the issue of concern. We’ve had 
Maradona’s  law  of  interest  rates;  Einstein’s  law  of  success;  Newton’s  laws  on  physical 
response;  and  now  I  offer  you  Poul  Andersen’s  law.  This  is  the  obverse  of  the  law  of 
Occam’s razor for simplicity of explanatory hypotheses. So I offer you tonight Andersen’s law 
of the shaving brush, in which he declared: 
I have yet to see any problem, however complicated, which, when looked at in 
the right way, did not become still more complicated. 
This law underpins much of the writing about the recent crisis. But for my own part I prefer to 
go  straight  to  the  point,  as  Liaquat  Ahmed  has  done  in  his  brilliant  analysis  of  the  Great 
Depression, when he wrote: 
More  than  anything  else…the  Great  Depression  (1929–31)  was  caused  by  the 
failure  of  intellectual  will  and  a  lack  of  understanding  about  how  the  economy 
operated.  
Similarly,  I  put  down  the  lingering  crisis  to  the  dual  impact  of  market  failure  in  the  capital 
market and supervisory and policy failure at the level of financial boards and the regulators. 
Incredibly, other banking Boards did not see the demise of Barings as prime evidence of a 
fatal flaw that could engulf the banking world and much beyond, as it did. To correct this flaw 
required just a little imagination and courage. Unfortunately, this turned out to be beyond the 
grasp of every western bank board, every regulator and supervising agency, every Minister 
of Finance and every Government. Thus the poor tax payer has had to pick up the tab for the 
gross  failure  of  top  financial  management,  leaving  the  banksters’  bonuses  and  golden 
parachutes  largely  intact.  Those  in  charge  just  lacked  the  courage  to  ensure  that  if  banks 
went bust so must the bankers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Which rather reminds me of Lord Salisbury’s observation on the political scene: 
You will find as you grow older that courage is the rarest of qualities to be found 
in public life. 
So, where are we now in Mauritius in the lingering crisis? 
We’ve done rather well in fact. In the last six years the total assets of banks have expanded 
by 70 per cent; our 21 banks have almost 35,000 shareholders and employ over 7,000 staff. I 
have  granted  five  new  banking  licences,  the  public  now  has  access  to  216  branches  with 
2.5 million accounts – or 2 accounts per head of population. More than half of the bankable 
population  are  internet-banking  users.  The  footprints  of  our  banks  stretch  from  the  Indian 
Ocean  islands,  to  Malawi,  Mozambique  and  Zimbabwe  on  the  continent,  and  across  to 
Maldives and India. The list of the Top 80 Banks in Africa in terms of assets includes three of 
our banks. We have consistently logged positive economic growth, and enjoyed social peace 
with low inflation and moderate unemployment. 
Despite the lingering global economic crisis, our banking and financial system has remained 
robust,  resilient  and  well-managed.  Strong  supervision  and  prudent  management  have 
earned us a coveted place on the short list of countries that actually had a rating upgrade this 
year when the likes of the United States, France and, more recently, the European Stability 
Mechanism,  have  been  stripped  of  their  coveted  triple-A  ratings.  Banks  in  Mauritius  have 
continued to make extraordinary profits, beyond those of even our top six companies in the 
real  economy!  Let’s  hope  our  top  bankers  will  share  this  wealth  judiciously  with  all 
stakeholders to the benefit of all the people of this land. A fair deal for bank customers is very 
much at the top of our agenda. 
It is not exactly a secret although it may not be very widely known in financial circles but we 
do have very fishy banks in Mauritius – and large ones too. It is also an area where there are 
many  sharks.  Worse,  these  fishy  banks  are  all  under  water.  Now,  before  you  look 
suspiciously  at  the  banker  sitting  at  your  table,  let  me  give  you  the  names  of  these  fishy 
banks.  Do  I  feel  a  chill  running  through  our  bankers?  Out  with  the  names  then!  They  are 
Sudan bank, Nazareth bank, and Saya de Malha bank. These banks, which do not require a 
bank licence, are within our territorial waters of 2 million km2 and are very fishy indeed. They 
provide us with our white fish for the dinner table and occasionally, like now, with a fishy tale 
for dinner table chat as well. We have here a clear case of fishy banks without fishy bankers. 
If any of our scoop-hungry press is ruminating over a catchy headline: “Very Fishy Banks in 
Mauritius,  Governor  says”.  let  me  gently  remind  them  of  the  benchmark  for  this  kind  of 
mis-reporting set by a cub-reporter covering the visit of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the 
US, landing in New York.  
The  Archbishop  had  been  advised  to  be  cautious  with  the  scandal-mongering  press.  “Be 
discreet: be very discreet; but with a smile”. On arrival he was hijacked by a bevy of press 
men clamouring for a story. 
One reporter asked “What do you think of the night clubs in New York?” Remembering to be 
discreet,  with  a  smile,  the  Archbishop  ironically  responded  “Are  there  any  night  clubs  in 
New York?” 
Headlines next day: Archbishop’s first question on landing in New York “Are there any night 
clubs here?” 
Some people have continued to express dismay that we are not continuing to achieve the 
5% growth that they had come to feel was our birth-right. May I say, this is just unrealistic. It 
arises  from  a  failure  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  economic  growth.  These  dynamics 
change as you emerge from the developing to the developed stage. To move into the higher 
income  bracket,  escaping  the  middle-income  trap  is  a  long  haul.  It  requires  quite  different 
capacities and is not done at the sprint of 5% but more at the pace of a long-distance runner. 
It is good to remind ourselves − especially if we are inclined to agonise over the estimated 
3.4% GDP growth rate this year − that 1% on our national income now is far greater than 5% 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
was  twenty  years  ago.  Why?  Simply  because  the  national  cake  is  much  bigger!  Just  the 
annual incremental output in 2012 – at an estimated nominal Rs21 billion – is greater than 
the entire GDP of the country was as recently as 1987. 
“Growth  at  any  cost”  has  never  been  our  credo.  Equitable  growth,  inclusive  growth, 
sustainable growth is what we have been pursuing with, as even the most carping critic must 
concede, impressive results in terms of rising national income, a stable multi-ethnic society, 
and a democratic polity. Our track record may not be perfect; our present may be tense; and 
our  future  may  look  conditional  –  that  may  in  fact  well  serve  as  an  apt  diagnosis  of  our 
predicament at any point in our recent history. What we should avoid is the risk of blowing it 
all by pursuing an unrealistic agenda of higher growth by monetary fixes. Instead of growing 
at a brisk sprint, galoping inflation is the more likely outcome if we rush down this route. 
We must adapt to the “new normal” of reduced growth in the western economies on whose 
coattails our export-driven economy has been riding. What we need to power future growth is 
not cheap labour but increasing productivity, greater competitiveness, more innovation and a 
more agile, cerebral management in both the public and the private sectors. 
But if we have indeed weathered the storm, some of our sails are looking rather shabby, and 
badly in need of a refit. But what sort of refit do we need? And what sort of strategy must we 
devise to continue to face up to the turbulent world? 
Lessons we have learned 
We  should  be  wise  to  acknowledge  another  of  oilman  Paul  Getty’s  maxims,  this  time  on 
banking: 
If you owe the bank $100, that is your problem. If you owe the bank $100 million, 
that’s the bank’s problem. 
Which reminds me of the story of the very distinguished banker, if there are any left standing. 
Our  banker  was  attending  a  grand  international  conference  of  bankers.  The  sessions  that 
day had been long, with detailed workshops and breakout sessions. After a formal dinner he 
paused for a night-cap in a quiet bar in the hotel. As he was relaxing over a screwdriver, his 
favourite cocktail, a fashionably-dressed lady, slid into the seat beside him, flashed a smile 
and engaged him in conversation. He could not remember her in the conference sessions, so 
he explained he was a banker at the conference of international bankers taking place at the 
hotel. 
She took up his offer of a drink and settled down with a screwdriver, too. 
“Much obliged”, she said, sipping appreciatively, and giving him her best come-hither look. 
As our banker just looked into his glass, wondering who he was dealing with, she added, “I 
also oblige – for a fee of course.” 
“I oblige my clients anytime”, she went on. 
Our banker was trying to puzzle this out. 
She vaguely reminded him of a Churchillian wartime speech as she continued: 
“I oblige them in the train; I oblige in the car; I oblige in the office, I oblige in the lift, I oblige 
on the golf course…” 
“Oh,  blow  me!”  interrupted  our  banker,  as  the  penny  finally  dropped,  “why  −  you  are  a 
banker, like the rest of us! Tell me, which bank are you with?” 
Now, I have sanitised the story considerably for sensitive ears, but you get the gist of it! 
So,  be  on  your  guard  when  you  come  across  an  obliging banker!  If  there  is  one  thing  we 
must learn, it is how to bring banking and accountancy back in from the righteous wind of 
public anger, for a refit with refreshed ethics, a new sense of corporate probity and a bolder 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
capacity  for  corporate  governance.  That  is  exactly  what  we  seek  to  achieve  by  the  new 
Guidelines  on  Corporate  Governance  that  we  introduced  in  August  this  year.  Not  to  be 
outdone, the Banker’s Association has announced that it is coming up with a new Code of 
Ethics and Banking Practice. Not a minute too soon, one might be tempted to say! 
So I must say that I am very pleased to hear that after the Diamond era of super bonuses 
and the alleged massaging of the figures in rampant rate-rigging, one of the largest banks 
concerned is to refocus on the retail trade. Good news indeed! 
For  here  we  are  initiating  the  separation  of  domestic  banking  from  international  banking 
business,  as  a  sound  precaution  against  any  further  global  infection.  Let’s  just  hope  that 
bankers everywhere remember whose money they are speculating on − not their own money 
but yours! 
So what can we learn from the past few years? To be sure, we should be more vigilant in 
identifying  the  first  tell-tale  signs  of  bubbles.  We  should  be  wary  of  unsustainable  credit 
levels and fat profit margins. Banks must again pursue the function of promoting the optimum 
allocation  of  capital,  and  not  just  sit  on  it.  We  must  also  remember  that  real  estate  is  just 
houses,  buildings  and  land  that  have  fundamental  economic,  social  and  environmental 
functions, only some of whose value appears in the accountants’ books. We need to account 
for all these functions more clearly.  
We may also draw lessons for the future as we approach key decisions on advancing the 
regional integration agenda with Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, Southern 
Africa Development Community, Association of African Central Banks and the rest. For we 
need  forms  of  management  in  business  and  political  governance  that  rise  above  the 
self-interest of the nation-state. 
When 90% of the people of the south western Indian Ocean are living in poverty − I speak 
principally  of  Madagascar  and  the  Comoros  −  we  might  ask  ourselves,  not  how  we  can 
continue to be in the lead at the top of the Mo Ibrahim Index for Africa, but what have we 
done  with  that  leadership  to  secure  development  in  our  region  to  relieve  poverty,  and  to 
promote  growth.  What  we  lack  now  is  a  clear  vision  for  our  future,  a  long-term  picture  of 
where we want to be in 2030 based on greater intra-regional cooperation and reinvigorated 
trade,  amongst  others.  To  turn  round  the  famous  Clinton  adage  on  political  priorities,  it 
seems to me that on the regional integration issue: 
It’s all about trade, stupid! 
fiscal  and  monetary  management  and 
A future prospectus 
We  have  been  promoting  greater  financial  integration  and  facilitating  regional  banking 
initiatives.  The  IOC  is  promoting  new  regional  ventures  in  air  and  sea  transport  and  in 
communications; many businesses are extending their regional links. But we would do well to 
think  ahead  about  combining  regional 
the 
development of regional governance through some sharing of sovereignty. 
But if intra-regional trade is where the EU, and indeed the USA, began, we have yet to reach 
the starting blocks. We need free movement of capital and labour; we need social union with 
common  frameworks  for  labour  law,  portable  pensions  and  social  security;  we  must  foster 
greater  international  competitiveness  and  probity;  we  need  fewer  cartels  and  more 
competition.  We  need  to  nurture  greater  savings  and  investment  with  a  regional  fund  for 
development and less reliance on external aid programmes. Banking union is a very distant 
prospect; and dare I even mention that far-off dream of a common currency? For our dreams 
need to keep in touch with reality and not turn into debilitating daydreams. 
If our dreams are to be, then as Tagore has declared: 
We have no time to lose, and having no time we must 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Scramble for our chances. We are too poor to be late… 
Or as Ovid remarked, for those who still have some Latin: 
Tempus edax rerum. 
And for those who don’t have the Latin, I might broadly translate that as 
Time [is] the devourer of all things. 
That is why I have put so much effort in recent years into the tasks of getting banking ready 
for regional lift-off. For I am doing nothing less than banking on the future of Mauritius as a 
regional leader in this field. We must avoid the pitfalls that are testing the EU, seeing the task 
not to enrich ourselves but to enrich all the peoples of these beautiful African lands.  
As  I  close,  let  me  say  that  last  year  some  of  you  were  kind  enough  to  say  they  liked  my 
speech. Others suffered a mild bout of indigestion and were less kind. A few are still smarting 
from the mere recollection. But words, whether meant in earnest, or spoken half in jest, are 
just  precursors  of  greater  things.  I  trust  that,  over  my  six  years  as  Governor,  I  have 
adequately  demonstrated  that  I  go  well  beyond  word-smithing.  In  these  matters,  I  am  a 
disciple of the Athenian Statesman, still celebrated for his rhetorical prowess, Demosthenes, 
who declared (and here I will save you from the original Attic Greek): 
First in oratory is action; second is action; and again third is action! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
