Manuel Sánchez: The European Union ten years after the euro zone 
crisis 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the National 
Bank  of  Poland  conference  on  “The  future  of  the  European  Economy”,  Warsaw, 
18 October 2012. 
 I  am  pleased  to  be  with  you  today  in  the  culturally  vibrant  city  of  Warsaw,  and  to  be  a 
participant in this conference on the timely and important topic of the future of the European 
economy. I would like to thank President Marek Belka and the National Bank of Poland for 
the invitation to share my thoughts with you. 
The process of integration in Europe has been long and quite remarkable, reflecting strong 
leadership and social consensus in favor of unity and cooperation. The process can also be 
considered  an  economic  success  on  the  basis  of  the  expansion  of  trade,  investment,  and 
growth resulting from the reduction of barriers to international transactions.  
Furthermore, the current stage of economic and monetary union in the EU shows additional 
economic benefits accruing to its members as a result of the elimination of transaction costs 
related to currency exchange in the area, the efforts by member countries to comply with the 
convergence criteria, and the price stability attained.  
Notwithstanding  this  progress,  the  ongoing  crisis  has  revealed  crucial  deficiencies  in  the 
design  and  operation  of  the  EMU,  engendering  prolonged  financial  instability  and  casting 
doubts  on  its  viability.  The  identified  weaknesses  have  called  for  policy  measures  whose 
effectiveness will, to a large extent, determine the future of the monetary union. Given the 
importance of the EMU to the EU, in what follows, I will focus my comments on what I believe 
are  the  key  policy  issues  in  the  euro  zone,  the  opportunities  for  the  Central  and  Eastern 
European countries, and the impact on the world economy.  
As always, my comments are my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Policy challenges and the future of the EMU 
One  of  the most  urgent  policy  tasks  in the  EMU  is the  end  of  the  negative feedback  loop 
between  unsustainable  public-debt  paths  and  the  weak  conditions  in  the  banking  system 
prevailing in many countries. To this end, fragile banks must be recapitalized by the private 
sector  which,  exceptionally,  may  imply  supplementary  backing  by  corresponding  national 
governments. Such a step requires an assessment of the “true value” of public-sector debt 
on the banks’ balance sheets.  
Efforts  towards  fiscal  consolidation  demand,  in  many  instances,  substantial  corrections  of 
primary deficits that have resulted from previous stimulus measures, automatic stabilization 
mechanisms, and bank support programs, among other factors. Borrowing costs for troubled 
issuers  have  risen  significantly  above  pre-crisis  levels,  adding  to  the  burden  of  fiscal 
pressures. Widening yield spreads on sovereign bonds, however, seem to better reflect the 
situation of individual credit risks in a manner which is consistent with the absence of a safety 
net, as originally envisioned in the “no bailout” clause of the Maastricht Treaty.  
It is worth noting that actual and potential rescue programs seek to restore the confidence of 
investors in the EMU. As usual, these packages will have to be evaluated in terms of their 
effectiveness in containing the crisis and their possible unintended consequences. It is not 
unreasonable  to  expect  that  a  bailout  of  one  country  may  generate  the  speculation  of  a 
bailout of another country, provoking financial contagion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  the  context  of  the  limited  resources  available  and  the  tensions  stemming  from  the 
distribution  of  funding  costs  for  ever  larger  rescue  plans,  bailouts  could  become 
self-defeating. One possibility for limiting moral hazard is to incorporate in all programs some 
degree  of  debt  restructuring,  which  in  turn  may  affect  banks’  balance  sheets.  The 
implementation  of  such  initiatives  is  itself  very  challenging,  particularly  when  official 
institutions become significant holders of problematic debt.  
A  second  urgent  problem  is  the  lack  of  competitiveness  shown  by  some  economies, 
especially in peripheral countries, reflected in the difficulties they have had correcting large 
current  account  deficits,  which  are  inconsistent  with  capital  outflows.  Because  the  euro 
nations  cannot  resort  to  currency  devaluation,  wage  flexibility  and  productivity-enhancing 
reforms  are  the  only  significant  tools  available.  Labor  mobility  and  the  moderation  of 
consumer lending are complementary means.  
In  view  of the fact  that  labor mobility  in  the  euro  zone  has  been  much  lower  than  what  is 
customary in a federation of states such as the United States, homologized labor laws in the 
euro area seem warranted. Indeed, aside from language and cultural problems, which may 
not be the most significant obstacles in light of other international migration experiences, the 
size,  heterogeneity  and  lack  of  portability  of  labor  benefits  could  be  a  major  discouraging 
factor. Also, other structural reforms may require international coordination, such as unified 
liberalization of remaining trade barriers in the services sector. 
For the medium term, three institutional issues stand out. First, the integrity of the European 
Central Bank should be respected given the key role the bank has played in the EMU and its 
excellent  record  on  price  stability.  The  absence  of  persistent  attacks  on  the  euro  and  its 
relative strength vis-à-vis other currencies even in the worst moments of the crisis suggest 
that markets believe in the permanence of the EMU.  
It seems to be best that the central bank maintain price stability as its primary objective. In its 
role as a lender of last resort, it may be advisable that the bank abide by rules of liquidity 
provision  strictly  oriented  toward  solvent  banks.  Also,  it  is  absolutely  essential  that  no 
pressures  be  exerted  for  the  ECB  to  engage  in  quasi-fiscal  operations.  Any  new 
responsibility that may be assigned to the central bank should be carefully examined in order 
not to compromise the bank’s credibility. 
Second,  the  regulatory  and  especially  the  supervisory  framework  for  financial  institutions 
should  be  greatly  enhanced.  Credit  and  real  estate  bubbles  created  with  traditional 
unsophisticated bank products led to a severe type of crisis even in countries where banking 
regulations were widely regarded as exemplary. Financial policies need to be more prudent 
in  the  future,  potentially  including  an  active,  though  not  necessarily  discretionary  use  of 
macro-prudential tools. 
It is not clear which regulatory model can yield the best results. But if the centralization of 
powers  is  the  preferred  option,  as  seems  to  be  the  case  at  present,  then  some  caveats 
should be examined. Centralization will have to be limited to a general level, leaving micro 
supervision to local supervisors. Furthermore, if overriding authority is conferred to the ECB, 
the bank may have to face possible conflicts between supervisory and monetary policy tasks. 
For example, outright sovereign bond purchases in secondary markets, justified as a means 
of restoring the monetary transmission mechanism, may compromise the ECB’s credibility as 
a bank supervisor, given that financial institutions are large holders of sovereign bonds. 
Third,  governments  should  have  sufficient  inter-temporal  resources  to  face  cyclical 
fluctuations  and  long-term  obligations,  thus  making  rules  for  sustainable  fiscal  surpluses 
indispensable. Yet, many coordination efforts for the sound functioning of the monetary union 
necessarily  carry  fiscal  implications  at  the  EMU  level  and  involve  the  possibility  of  inter-
country transfers. Examples are uniform deposit insurance and resolution mechanisms within 
a  banking  union,  euro-level  stabilization  funds  for  times  of  crisis,  support  for  countries 
affected by negative shocks, and the euro bond initiative.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
For fiscal coordination to be credible it seems necessary to move in the direction of a political 
union,  implying  budget  rules  for  individual  countries  and  a  substantial  surrender  of 
sovereignty.  The  change  has  to  be  profound  given  the  lack  of  enforcement  of  previous 
commitments, such as those expressed in the 1997 Stability and Growth Pact, which were 
later  even  relaxed.  The  sustainability  of  a  fiscal  union  may  eventually  require  letting  a 
particular national government fail if it becomes insolvent, as was the case in the history of 
the state governments of the United States.1  
These and other challenges will have to be faced in order to normalize the operation of the 
EMU and enhance its growth potential. The necessary transformations are complex as they 
require  the  approval  of  sovereign  states  and,  hence  they  may  take  several  years  to 
implement,  in  turn  prolonging  the  pain  of  the  adjustment  process.  The  adjustment  could 
indeed result in a long period of low growth, high unemployment, and financial volatility.  
In  the  end,  however,  it  seems  likely  that  both  the  EU  and  EMU  will  become  different  and 
strengthened, with better rules, more solid institutions, and healthier financial systems. The 
possibility  of  some  exits  from  the  EMU  cannot  be  excluded,  but  they  would  not  inevitably 
mean  the  breakup  of  the  monetary  union  as  a  whole,  and  they  could  be  a  test  of  its 
endurance.  
The future for the EU can hardly be described as one of marginalization. The expected more 
rapid growth of emerging-market economies will necessarily confirm the long-term decline in 
the relative importance of Europe and other advanced regions within world GDP and trade 
and  investment  flows.  In  spite  of  this,  the  EU  will  likely  continue  to  be  the  largest  world 
economic area at least for the next two decades.2  
Opportunities for Central Eastern European countries 
During the last two decades, the Central and Eastern European countries have transformed 
themselves from centrally planned into market economies, thereby augmenting their rates of 
growth  and  living  standards.  In  their  opening  process,  they  have  experienced  increasing 
trade and investment ties with the EMU, making their business cycles more attuned to those 
of Western European nations.  
Close to half of the CEE countries are already members of the EU, while a few states belong 
to the monetary union. Before the current crisis, there was a queue of countries waiting for 
admission to the euro zone. The ongoing problems, however, have reduced the interest of 
these and other possible candidates in becoming members of the monetary union. In fact, 
some  CEE  countries  scheduled  to  enter  the  EMU  have  explicitly  postponed  their 
incorporation.  
It  is  only  rational  that  these  and  other  countries  remain  in  a  “wait-and-see”  mode.  The 
needed  institutional  changes  in  the  euro  zone  may  eventually  include  a  revision  of  the 
accession criteria, which could affect the possibilities of the CEE countries of becoming euro 
members. But even if this is the case, these nations seem to be in a privileged position.  
CEE countries will have more time for evaluating the net benefits of joining the euro and can 
prepare  themselves for such  a  step,  should  they  opt  for it,  and  complete  requirements for 
convergence  and  other conditions  deemed  beneficial. Also,  in  the meantime, CEE  nations 
will be able to rely on exchange-rate flexibility and monetary policy to face any idiosyncratic 
shocks.  
                                                
1  For an analysis of the U.S. federal government´s refusal to bail out states in the 1840s, see Sargent, T. J. 
2012, Wall Street Journal, “An American History Lesson for Europe”, February. 
2  See, for example, European Commission 2010, Europe 2050. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
At the same time, CEE economies will likely deepen their integration with Western Europe 
because of their geographic proximity. It is well known that further economic gains can be 
achieved  from  monetary  union  membership.  But  if  business  integration  is  reinforced  over 
time,  the  case  for  these  countries’  incorporation  into  the  EMU  will  be  even  stronger.3  And 
there  is  always  the  possibility  for  these  nations  to  unilaterally  adopt  the  euro  as  a  legal 
tender, as some small economies have already decided to do. 
The impact on the world economy 
The  prospects  for  the  growth  of  the  global  economy  remain  dependent  on  the  strength  of 
international trade and investment flows. In the next few years, world economic growth will 
likely  be  led  by  developing  countries,  while  the  developed  nations  will  continue  to  exhibit 
lower rates of expansion.  
This  dual-velocity  path  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  emerging  economies  should  grow 
faster than mature ones, since they have a wider set of investment opportunities to exploit. 
More  importantly,  however, is  the fact that many  advanced  nations  will  have  to  implement 
restrictive  fiscal  measures  in  order  to  ensure  debt  sustainability.  As  a  consequence,  the 
share of emerging economies within global GDP and trade will likely continue to expand.4  
Given  the  importance  of  the  EU,  however,  developments  in  Europe  will  continue  to  be  a 
determining  factor  in  the  economic  outlook  of  many  countries.  Specifically,  there  is  high 
business interdependence between the United States and Europe, as they hold the largest 
trade and investment bilateral relationship in the world. Furthermore, U.S. banks are highly 
exposed to European assets, and European banks have an important presence in the U.S. 
financial system. Therefore, deterioration of financial conditions or a significant slowdown in 
the  economic  activity  of  the  EU  could  affect  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  the  United 
States considerably. 
Something qualitatively similar can be said about emerging economies. These nations have 
different  degrees  of  integration  with  Europe  and,  hence,  they  experience  diverse  impacts 
from  developments  in  that  region.  As  stated,  the  CEE  countries,  as  well  as  large  nations 
such as China and India, are often the most affected by events in the EU.  
Turning to my own country, approximately 8 percent of Mexico’s foreign trade is with the EU, 
making  this  area  Mexico’s  third-largest  trading  partner,  after  the  United  States  and  China. 
Furthermore,  during  the  last  decade,  the  EU  has  been  Mexico’s  second  most  important 
investment  partner,  contributing  with  almost  one-fifth  of  total  accumulated  foreign  direct 
investment.  
Further deceleration of EU growth could hurt Mexico’s economic prospects, indirectly if the 
U.S. economy slows as a result, but also directly through less dynamic exports of goods and 
services to Europe, especially in vehicle shipments which are the most important export item, 
and lower European investment, likely in manufacturing and financial services, which have 
been  the  leading  recipient  sectors.  Regarding  the  latter  sector,  the  Mexican  banks  have 
healthy balance sheets and are well capitalized, but some subsidiaries of European banks 
could nevertheless be impinged by events affecting their parents. 
                                                
3  See,  for  example,  Frankel,  J.  2008,  “Should  Eastern  European  Countries  Join  the  Euro?  A  Review  and 
Update  of  Trade  Estimates  and  Consideration  of  Endogenous  OCA  Criteria”,  Faculty  Research  Working 
Papers Series, Harvard, Kennedy School of Government. 
4  For  forecasts  on  different  economies,  see  International  Monetary  Fund  2012,  World  Economic  Outlook, 
October.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
The  current  financial  crisis  represents  the  first  meaningful  test  of  the  EMU.  Deep 
transformations are necessary in order to consolidate the long-term viability of the monetary 
union  and  the  strengthening  of  the  institutions  supporting  the  EU.  The  challenges  call  for 
decisive  actions  implemented  in  a  comprehensive  way,  since  a  piece-meal  approach  may 
weaken  the  credibility  of  the  initiatives  over  time.  Although  a  breakup  scenario  cannot  be 
ruled  out  for  the  EMU,  long-held  integration  efforts  are  a  guarantee  of  the  common 
willingness to find solutions to problems. 
CEE countries are in an advantageous position since they have time to continue pondering 
the net benefits of joining the euro area while, at the same time, they can further integrate 
their  economies  with  Western  Europe.  Developments  in  the  EU  will  continue  to  affect  the 
growth  and financial  prospects  of many  nations,  especially  those  with  the  closest  ties  with 
this large economic bloc.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
