Ardian Fullani: Needed – a new way of thinking, a new approach to economic policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  6th  South-Eastern 
European  Economic  Research  Workshop,  organized  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana, 
19 November 2012. 
 Dear workshop participants, 
Dear central banks colleagues, 
I am very happy to be here today, in this 6th South-Eastern European Economic Research 
Workshop.  This  Workshop  is  an  annual  event  that  Bank  of  Albania  organizes,  aiming  to 
successfully bring together researchers and their work from the region and beyond. We are 
very glad for your personal contribution and your institutions’ commitment to this activity. The 
participation map extends every year and we take this development as a sign of recognition. 
This activity takes place as Albania celebrates its 100 anniversary of independence, which 
happened  on  28  November  1912;  we  are,  therefore,  very  happy  to  welcome  you  on  the 
occasion of this very important event.  
The South-Eastern European Economic Research Workshop provides a platform to discuss 
and, most importantly, improve our work. It also provides a platform that contributes to the 
extension of regional cooperation in the area of research, making an additional contribution 
to the cooperation in other important areas of Central Banking in the region.  
As  I  have  previously  mentioned,  countries  of  the  SEE  region  are  similar  in  many  aspects 
including the state of economic problems and economic research. We are focusing on finding 
the problems in the existing models. However, the actual economic conditions, the state of 
policy  variables  and  level  of  policy  instruments  represent  tails  events  rather  than  normal 
behaviour. Therefore, our empiric understanding lies outside the set of solutions offered by 
models,  which  are  built  and  tested  in  normal  times.  Above  all,  the  biggest  challenge  is 
adopting a new philosophy and a new way of thinking into policy design and implementation.  
Central banks are perfect environments for these new ideas to emerge and develop. They 
bring together distinguished analysts and the research community with a demanding set of 
problems  that  need  solutions.  Its  network  is  available  to  researchers  while  financial, 
technological,  statistical  and  intellectual  support  for  research  is  practically  limitless. 
Moreover, the research community in central banks has the opportunity to directly influence 
policy  design  and  implementation.  This  particular  characteristic  endows  central  bank 
researchers  with  the  opportunity  to  implement  their  findings  and  practically  test  their 
conclusions in practice. 
In this respect your conclusions have far reaching impact on people’s welfare and economic 
outcome.  Therefore,  you  have  an  immense  responsibility  to  adopt  the  best  practices  of 
academic methods  and writing  and  make  your  research  available  to  scrupulous  critique  at 
the  bank  and  outside  it  as  well  as  for  the  research  community.  Always  be  reminded  that 
when your research and analysis have potential effects on other people’s lives.  
I  sincerely  invite  you  to  adopt  this  spirit  of  cooperation  during  the  proceedings  of  this 
workshop, as you have always done in the previous workshops.  
I would also like to remind you of the relatively long journey that you have taken together with 
the Bank. The quantity and quality of your work has increased and improved throughout this 
journey. Therefore, I would like to challenge you to reach beyond this particular event and 
present your work more frequently in similar activities in the region or in the EU. I would like 
to  encourage  you  to  spend  more  time  and  efforts  to  disseminate  and  implement  your 
research findings within the institution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Results  and  conclusions  should  not  be  your  last  station.  Organize  activities  that  focus  on 
explaining and disseminating results and research techniques to the rest of the bank. Raise 
the awareness on research developments and extend your cooperation with your colleagues 
within  the  bank.  I  invite  you  to  extend  cooperation  beyond  borders.  Benefit  from  this 
wonderful  network  that  we  have  created  and  extend  the  spirit  of  cooperation  beyond 
workshop  participation  by  engaging  in  joint  research  projects  with  national  and  regional 
focus. You will be amazed by how much you can learn. 
Finally,  I  would  also  like  to  encourage  the  others  economists  of  the  bank  to  crush  the 
monotony  of  repeated  dull  analysis  and  frequent  reliance  on  untested  hypothesis.  Enrich 
your  work  with  results  of  recent  research,  engage  in research  work  yourself.  Devote  more 
efforts and energy to the study of economic phenomena and the way they affect your work. 
Research is not and should not be an exclusive monopoly of monetary policy and financial 
stability. It takes many forms, and should extend across all areas of central banking. Few of 
the  materials  that  will  be  discussed  today  and  tomorrow  illustrate  this  initiative  very  well.  I 
hope there will be more similar examples in future workshops. 
The  presentations  and  discussions  today  and  tomorrow  address  a  wide  range  of  issues, 
reflecting the nature of problems that our economies are facing. 
I understand from the programme that our guests’ focus of research is similar to the one at 
the  Bank  of  Albania.  During  the  past  year,  we  have  focused  on  financial  stability  and 
monetary  policy,  trade  integration  and  trade  relations,  and  the  modelling  of  stochastic 
economic  process.  But  above  all,  the  crisis,  its  implications,  the  channels  of  transmission, 
and policy response have become the focus of empiric and theoretic research in the central 
banks and academia during the last 4 years. The results of this research and analysis have 
taken central banks and their monetary and regulatory policies beyond what was considered 
sacred limits of monetary policy. However, this has not proven very helpful for the economy. 
It  is  now  five  years  since  the  crisis  began  and  the  more  authorities  deal  with  short-term 
problems  of  growth  and  unemployment,  the  more  they  reveal  long-term  imbalances  and 
structural problems of national and global scale. In the meantime, we still cannot fully define, 
understand and model the economy in its true stochastic form. 
Typically,  long  and  deep  economic  and  social  crisis  have  become  the  breeding  ground  of 
new  philosophies  of  economic  thinking,  which,  in  turn,  have  encouraged  significant  policy 
changes  and  opened  the  road  to  economic  prosperity.  Adam  Smith,  John  Keynes,  Milton 
Friedman, and their economic thinking have emerged in the dusk of big crisis. Unfortunately, 
we are still waiting for a new philosophy; so the question arises: where is our philosopher? 
We  clearly  need  a  new  way  of  thinking,  a  new  approach  to  economic  policy,  a  lot  of  new 
ideas. 
These new ideas are not easily discovered. They do not pop up themselves; they hide in the 
layers  of  economic  and  financial  data,  history  of  economic  developments  and  economic 
thought, and philosophy of social interaction in the macro and microeconomic scale. It is not 
surprising  that  economists  and  politicians  have  started  to  challenge  some  beliefs  that  are 
regarded as universal economic truths. For example, GDP and growth are challenged as the 
best measure of happiness and prosperity, globalization is challenged for its externalities in 
the labour market and inequality, inequality itself is under investigation as a potential culprit 
of  economic  slowdown.  Economic  research  must  broaden  its  scope  to  consider  all  these 
areas in their work. Research must be designed like an increasing spiral, where the newly 
gained  knowledge  in  philosophy,  economic  history,  empiric  research  and  application  of 
mathematic and statistical models must return to the starting point to confront the set of all 
new  and  old  problems,  prove  the  generality  of  its  application,  and  evaluate  the  set  of 
potential externalities.  
As I mentioned at the beginning, this is the 100th jubilee of Albania’s independence and our 
annual conference this year focused on the development of monetary policy during the last 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
100 years and paid particular attention to the impact that domestic and international political 
and economic events have had on the nature of the central bank and its monetary policy. 
Addressing the mixture of historic and economic developments, the large variety of monetary 
regimes, abrupt swings in economic, politic and philosophy systems, and modern economics 
was  amazingly  refreshing,  interesting,  and  thought-provoking.  It  certainly  deserves  more 
attention. 
Our  traditional  approach  to  research  has  largely  contributed  to  our  understanding  of 
monetary and financial stability issues and models with a large set of parameters, forecasts 
and  shock  analysis.  It  has  enriched  the  envelope  of  models  and  methodologies  that  are 
available  in  the  process  of  policy  design  and  implementation  and  has  increased  our 
confidence.  However,  it  is  time  to  go  deeper  in  the  understanding  the  fundamental  of 
economic behaviour as an individual and social phenomenon. This understanding requires, 
among  others,  proficient  research  in  economic  history  and  economic  behaviour  and 
economic welfare. I reiterate you do not have to do this alone and isolated. 
International scientific collaboration allows for increased access to research resources and 
infrastructure.  Teaming  up  with  professionals  with  complementary  skills,  benefitting  from 
knowledge generated beyond boundaries is a modern and effective endeavour. We hope this 
Workshop as well as other conferences and activities we are hosting throughout the year will 
contribute to this end.  
I wish you great success during the Workshop proceedings and in your everyday efforts. It is 
my  hope  that  getting  to  know  each  other’s  work  will  lay  the  foundations  for  further  future 
cooperation.  
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
