Andreas Dombret: Deutsche Bundesbank’s 2012 Financial Stability 
Review – the risks to the German financial system 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at the  presentation  of the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review 
2012 “The risks to the German financial system”, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2012. 
 Risks: an overview 
1. 
The risks to the German financial system remain high. For a number of years now, we have 
seen the risk situation being shaped by the development of the financial and debt crisis. I do 
not expect these factors to decouple in the near future. That is why the European sovereign 
debt crisis remains the greatest threat to financial stability in Germany. 
At  the  same  time,  the  risk  map  will  need  to  be  redrawn,  as  monetary  and  fiscal  policy 
measures  on  a  massive  scale  were  needed  to  stabilise  the  financial  system.  This  has 
entailed an ever greater transfer of risk to the public sector and has caused the low-interest 
rate  environment  to  become  entrenched.  The  side-effects  of  short-term  stabilisation 
measures can leave a difficult legacy for financial stability in the medium to long term. 
That is why we need to make a distinction between acute risks and medium-term risks. Acute 
risks  are  like  a  rear-view  mirror  in  which  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  visible. 
Acute  risks  are  located  primarily  in  the  legacy  portfolios  of  asset-backed  securities  and 
sovereign risk in the context of the sovereign debt crisis. 
Medium-term risks, meanwhile, require us to look ahead and consider what might be around 
the next corner. Preventive macroprudential oversight has to take medium-term risk factors 
very seriously. Its task is to promptly identify potentially unhealthy developments that might 
unfold and endanger financial stability in the future. 
Today, we can see a growing number of the risk factors that played a role in the run-up to the 
financial crisis. The Financial Stability Review 2012 addresses three topics: 
• 
First, the entrenched low-interest rate environment. This is spurring the search for 
yield. 
Second,  real  estate  prices.  These  are  showing  accelerated  growth  in  Germany’s 
urban  centres.  The  experiences  of  other  countries  show  that  precisely  such  an 
environment of low interest rates and high liquidity can encourage exaggerations on 
the real estate markets. And this can pose a considerable threat to financial stability. 
Lastly,  the  global  shadow  banking  system  still  plays  a  major  role  and  is  closely 
linked to the German financial system. 
  I would now like to discuss each of these three topics in greater detail. 
 Low-interest rate environment shapes financial system 
2. 
The  low-interest  rate  environment  undoubtedly  forms  the  backdrop  for  the  medium-term 
development  of  the  financial  system.  Persistently  low  interest  rates  give  rise  to  both 
incentives and the need to adjust. They encourage investors to search for yield while taking 
on greater risk. 
It is now clear that yield-seeking investors today face conditions which are different to those 
prevailing before the financial crisis broke out. Back then, the “Goldilocks” economy – one in 
which neither economic growth nor inflation was likely to present any substantial problems – 
was  a  highly  influential  macrofinancial  theory.  Nowadays,  these  scenarios  are  much  more 
sceptical. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Hence, investors searching for yield today are doing so in a different environment altogether. 
For one thing, banks are in a weaker position. Large parts of the corporate sector now have 
a better credit standing than the banking sector. Logically, enterprises are now increasingly 
funding their operations via bonds, bypassing the banks. 
The Financial Stability Review identifies various signs for the current search for yield: 
• 
Corporate  bonds  are  highly  valued,  despite  the  gloomier  outlook  for  the  economy 
and for the enterprises’ credit risk. 
Investments in hedge funds are rising strongly worldwide; over the past five years, 
they have risen by two-thirds in nominal terms to US$1.5 trillion. 
 Challenge for insurers 
3. 
German life insurers have been noticeably affected by the persistently low interest rates. This 
low-interest  rate  environment  is  being  reflected  ever  more  strongly  in  the  yield  on  their 
investments. The net return on investment dwindled to 4.1% in 2011 and the downward trend 
is  expected  to  continue.  A  wide  variety  of  measures  are  being  taken  to  counter  falling 
earnings: 
• 
• 
Insurers have reduced the profit participation share. 
The  German  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  has  once  again  lowered  the  maximum 
technical interest rate for new contracts, most recently from 2.25% to 1.75%. 
Furthermore, an “additional interest provision” was set up. 
• 
Yet  it  goes  without  saying  that  life  insurers  are  also  seeking  a  strategic  response  to  the 
persistently  low  interest  rates.  There  are  signs  that  they  are  cautiously  realigning  their 
investment strategy. New business areas such as infrastructure and real estate financing or 
direct  lending  are  being  developed  and  extended.  It  is  essential  that  they  set  up  an 
appropriate risk management system that takes account of Solvency II. At the same time, the 
advance of insurers is intensifying competition in these markets, and this, too, is transforming 
the environment in which banks operate. 
 German real estate market gaining momentum 
4. 
In a low-interest rate environment, developments on Germany’s real estate markets warrant 
particular attention. The real estate loan is a heavyweight element of financial stability. Real 
estate loans make up over two-thirds of households’ debt. Conversely, they account for 40% 
of total domestic lending; in the case of savings banks and credit cooperatives, this share is 
as high as around one half. 
Residential property prices are rising at an accelerated pace in urban areas. The observed 
set  usually  comprises  a  group  of  seven  large  cities:  Berlin,  Cologne,  Düsseldorf,  Frankfurt 
am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart. In 2011, prices rose by over 9% on average for 
new residential property in these cities and by 7% for pre-owned property. 
The  upward  trend  appears  to  have  continued  in  the  first  half  of  2012.  This  is  shown  in  a 
narrower definition which comprises only owner-occupied dwellings. Prices in this segment 
are expected to rise by an average of around 11% this year, and thus even somewhat more 
sharply than last year, when they went up by just over 8%. 
Special  factors  are  also  at  play  here.  Savers  are  increasingly  channelling  their  funds  into 
forms  of  investment  which  they  view  as  a  hedge  against  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
instability.  Price  exaggerations  therefore  cannot  be  ruled  out  in  individual  regional  market 
segments. 
All  the  same,  there  are  no  signs  yet  of  a  rapid  build-up  of  risks  to  financial  stability  in 
Germany. The guideposts are: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First,  households’  robust  debt  sustainability;  their  debt  in  relation  to  disposable 
income has been on the decline for years. 
Second, the moderate growth in loans; housing loans rose by only 1.2% last year. 
Third,  the  conservative  terms  of  housing  lending  in  Germany  with  longer  interest 
fixation periods and limited debt financing shares.  
However, the mortgage lending of regional credit institutions is showing a tendency towards 
local concentration. 
 Shadow banking system: small in Germany, but globally active  
5. 
The search for additional risk factors which contributed to the financial crisis inevitably leads 
us to the shadow banking system, which, as we know, played a major role in the spill-over of 
the subprime exaggerations from the USA to Germany and Europe. 
The  Financial  Stability  Review  first  explains  the  structures  in  Germany,  distinguishing 
between shadow banking entities and shadow banking activities. 
The  largest  entities  by  far  in  the  German  shadow  banking  system  are  open-end  mutual 
funds. Three-quarters of the total is attributable to specialised funds for institutional investors. 
By contrast, money market funds and hedge funds play only a minor role. Shadow banking 
entities  in  Germany  manage  net  assets  of  around  €1.3  trillion.  This  corresponds  to 
approximately 15% of the total assets of the regular banking system. However, the very term 
“shadow bank” itself, and thus its definition, are fraught with some ambiguity. Still, it may be 
said that Germany’s shadow banking system is thus relatively small. 
Some of the particularly important activities of the German shadow banking system are repos 
and securities lending transactions. The increasing re-use of collateral is one of the primary 
sources of the risk of contagion in the financial system. 
Moreover,  the  German  financial  system  remains  closely  linked  with  the  global  shadow 
banking  system.  Foreign  shadow  banking  entities  provide  funding  to  German  banks, 
especially  in  US  dollars.  German  credit  institutions  are  also  continuing  to  operate  shadow 
banking  entities  abroad  which  have  been  given  guarantees  and  liquidity  lines  by  their 
domestic parents. Lastly, shadow banks such as hedge funds impact on market liquidity. 
Problems  in  the global  shadow  banking  system  could  still  rapidly  spill  over  to  the German 
financial system. We do not live on an island. The global shadow banking system should be 
monitored very closely and be subject to internationally consistent regulation. Only a global 
approach will truly help to contain contagion effects – including those on German banks and 
insurers. 
 Summary of the medium-term risk situation 
6. 
To  sum  up  with  regard  to  identifying  medium-term  risks:  we  are  aware  that  pressure  on 
banks  and  insurers  is  rising.  The  persistently  low  interest  rates  are  the  primary  challenge 
facing  insurers.  At  the  same  time,  a  wide  variety  of  measures  are  being  taken  to  counter 
falling  earnings.  Banks  are  confronted  with  a  difficult  environment;  one  that  encompasses 
rising  funding  costs,  fierce  competition  in  domestic  markets  and  growing  disintermediation 
which  bypasses  banks.  We  cannot  rule  out  exaggerations  in  real  estate  markets  in  urban 
areas.  However,  the  risks  to  financial  stability  are  limited  at  present.  We  note  that  the 
German  financial  system  is  closely  linked  with  the  global  shadow  banking  system. 
Germany’s shadow banking system itself, however, is small. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Necessary measures: what needs to be done? 
7. 
Our Financial Stability Review, however, seeks not just to identify risks, but also points out 
the measures that need to be taken to safeguard the stability of the financial system over the 
medium to long term. 
German credit institutions can contribute greatly to protecting themselves, and the financial 
system,  against  the  build-up  of  risk  via  the  real  estate  market.  It  is  essential  that  they 
maintain  the  conservative  terms  of  real  estate  loans.  The  report  also  refers  to  the 
foreseeable  medium  to  long-term  challenges  to  banks  and  their  earnings.  Above  all,  they 
should not attempt to take advantage of the low-interest rate environment in order to delay 
the clean-up of bank balance sheets. 
In  the  low-interest  rate  environment,  German  insurers  naturally  need  to  continue  to  make 
provisions in order to sustain guaranteed returns in future as well. 
Policymakers, too, have to contribute to financial stability. 
The major policy decisions – where push comes to shove, so to speak – have to be the right 
ones; therefore, 
• 
• 
• 
monetary policy should not be overburdened, 
the reform course should be continued in Europe 
and  the  ability  of  the  banking  union  to  function  should  be  ensured  –  before  the 
transfer of competencies to the European level. 
In addition, financial market reform needs to be given an additional boost. 
• 
• 
The shadow banking system must be broadly identified. 
Attention should be paid to the coherence and cumulative impact of financial market 
regulation. 
International implementation of derivatives market regulation must be expedited. 
And – very importantly – credible resolution regimes need to be introduced in order 
to bring the “too big to fail” problem under control once and for all. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
