András Simor: Anchor 2013 
Speech  by  Mr  András  Simor,  Governor  of  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of 
Hungary), at the Anchor 2013 Conference, Budapest, 7 December 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Two statements, three proposals: these will be the main points of my speech today. Let me 
begin with the first statement.  
First statement: Predictability and stability are required for growth  
Let us try to imagine that Hungary is a successful country once again. Admittedly, this is no 
easy  feat  as  we  enter  the  fifth  year  of  the  crisis.  Still,  let  us  toy  with  the  idea.  What  does 
success mean in economic terms? It means at least three things. If you want to work, you 
can  find  a  job.  Your  income  increases.  And  last  but  not  least,  you  need  not  worry  about 
inflation,  or  your  savings  losing  their  value.  In  other  words,  success  also  requires  price 
stability.  Every  country  that  we  can  consider  as  a  model  has  price  stability.  Even  where 
inflation is not on target at present, monetary policy has managed to create a persistently low 
inflationary environment,  which  ensures  that  the  expectations  of  economic  agents are  well 
anchored.  
Price stability is not the luxury of rich countries, it is a prerequisite for growth. Price stability is 
an  indispensable  component  of  a  predictable  economic  environment  where  it  is  worth 
investing and creating jobs. When prices are stable, the highest rate of economic growth can 
be reached over the longer term, not only in developed countries but also in emerging ones.  
However,  in  addition  to  price  stability,  growth  also  requires  predictability  in  terms  of  laws, 
regulations, taxes, that is, the predictability and stability of the entire regulatory environment 
for businesses.  
Second statement: Hungary has a severe growth problem, which cannot be remedied 
by  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus.  What  is  more,  the  recovery  from  the  debt  trap  is 
hindered  not  only  by  the  adverse  international  environment,  but  also  by  a  complex 
crisis of confidence.  
Hungary’s  potential  growth  already  slowed  down  before  the  crisis,  and  the  process  of 
catching-up  with  the  euro  area  halted  close  to  a  decade  ago.  Before  the  crisis,  analysts 
mostly  blamed  the  problem  on  the  long-term  unsustainability  of  the  budget  and  the 
disincentives  prevalent  in  the  labour  market.  The  tax  wedge,  which  was  excessively  high 
compared  with  other  countries  of  the  region,  the  welfare  benefits  system,  which  was  too 
generous  for  our  level  of  development,  and  tax  evasion  due  to  the  high  tax  rates  all 
contributed to undermining Hungary’s growth potential.  
We have made significant progress towards a sustainable growth path since the outbreak of 
the  crisis.  The  previous  government  already  started  to  remedy  the  country’s  structural 
problems. The government currently in office also has as its priority removing the obstacles 
to  improved  economic  performance,  focusing  on  improving  labour  market  incentives.  We 
have made considerable achievements. The fiscal deficit has fallen to around 3% despite the 
crisis;  banks  have  stopped  lending  in  foreign  currency;  the  country’s  current  account  has 
been in surplus for years. And external debt has also been declining gradually, albeit slowly.  
Although the adjustment has required huge sacrifices, we have not reached the end of the 
road. We have not been able to place the economy on a balanced growth path, we have not 
become  an  attractive  target  for  investments,  we  have  been  declining  in  the  international 
competitiveness  ranks,  our  credit  rating  is  worse  than  it  has  been  ever  since  the  political 
transition and we have remained at the bottom of the regional league in terms of growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It  is  difficult  to  escape  from  this  situation,  because  the  unpredictability  of  future  economic 
developments renders rational calculation nearly impossible. If we consider the future to be 
uncertain,  we  postpone  major  decisions  with  long-term  effects  until  the  fog  lifts.  This 
response,  which  is  rational  for  the  individual,  leads  to  subdued  consumption,  postponed 
investments  and  jobs  not  created  at  the  macroeconomic  level.  Without  growth,  debt 
reduction becomes an uphill struggle.  
Today,  the  international  and  domestic  uncertainties  reinforce  each  other;  we  are  living 
through a highly complex crisis of confidence.  
In respect of the global economy, there is no proven recipe for stimulating the recovery of 
developed countries as they run out of ammunition for fiscal and monetary stabilisation and 
struggle with high debt.  
In the past, the recovery of countries hit by debt crises typically occurred along an export-
driven growth path, which was supported by a favourable international economic climate. In 
the current crisis, we have not been given such a forward escape route, due to the adverse 
external  environment.  Consequently,  the  time  required  for  debt  reduction  is  even  more 
uncertain, along with the growth rate that the Hungarian economy can produce during that 
time.  
Our  future  therefore  is  highly  dependent  on  factors  beyond  our  control.  But  we  have  to 
realise that small, open economies do not have any other option. At the same time, external 
market conditions are regularly turning out to be worse than expected, and this continuously 
increases the extent of adjustment expected from us. It is hardly surprising that weariness 
with this struggle creates an intense demand for, let us say, novel economic policy proposals 
which promise to painlessly set the economy on a growth path. However, ideas that do not 
pass the test of economic rationality are of no help. Indeed, they may actually make things 
worse by adding to the confusion. I am convinced that the only way to overcome the crisis is 
to do our utmost to reduce uncertainty, at least in the areas under our control and to create a 
predictable  institutional  environment.  In  the  words  of  James  Madison,  4th  President  of  the 
United States: “It will be of little avail to the people, that the laws are made by men of their 
own choice, if the laws be so voluminous that they cannot be read, or so incoherent that they 
cannot  be  understood;  if  they  be  repealed  or  revised  before  they  are  promulgated,  or 
undergo such incessant changes that no man, who knows what the law is to-day, can guess 
what it will be to-morrow.”  
 What are the potential building blocks of confidence and predictability?  
 
Fiscal  consolidation  must  be  made  credible,  and  public  debt  must  be  set  on  a 
sustainably  declining  path.  At  the  same  time,  the  predictability  of  the  legal  and 
regulatory environment must be ensured.  
The  operation  of  the  financial  intermediation  system,  which  ensures  the  smooth 
operation of the economy, must be restored.  
Price stability must be achieved.  
 
There is no chronological or preference order in the implementation of these three tasks. If 
we  are  to  create  a  predictable  economic  environment,  they  need  to  be  performed 
simultaneously and in combination with each other, rather than at one another’s expense.  
First task: Stabilisation of the fiscal outlook  
The  crisis  put  an  end  to  the  excessive  fiscal  spending  that  characterised  Hungarian 
economic policy in the first half of the 2000s. The narrowing of cheap funding opportunities 
necessitated the stabilisation of long-term fiscal prospects.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As a result of the adjustment measures adopted since 2006, the deficit has been reduced 
substantially,  and  several  sub-systems  of  general  government  have  undergone  major 
structural  changes.  The  systems  for  education,  health  care,  welfare  benefits  and  local 
governments  have  all  been  changed.  These  changes  have  led  to  an  improvement  in  the 
balance in the short term, but their effects on fiscal sustainability will only be manifested in 
the longer term.  
Since the onset of the crisis, fiscal tightening has faced strong headwinds. The fiscal room 
for manoeuvre of Hungarian governments has been continuously diminishing, and easy-to-
play cards have become scarce. After the initial programmes based on expenditure cuts with 
significant immediate debt-reducing effects, revenue-increasing measures came to the fore. 
So, overall, tax centralisation has not been reduced, what happens is that some are paying 
less tax and others are paying more.  
Furthermore, the improvement in the budget balance was not accompanied by greater long-
term  sustainability  and  the  stabilisation  of  the  economic  policy  outlook.  As  a  result  of  the 
pressure from short-term deficit targets and excessive government optimism relating to the 
future,  a  number  of  temporary  measures  severely  distorting  economic  activity  have  been 
implemented, postponing the reinforcement of a sustainable fiscal structure to a later date.  
Another equally important problem is that the frequent changes in the regulatory environment 
and  the  windfall  taxes  have  rendered  all  commercial  calculations  concerning  the  future 
uncertain,  leading  to  a  predictability  chaos.  It  is  hardly  surprising  that  the  fiscal  easing 
financed  from  the  nationalisation  of  pension  funds  did  not  yield  the  results  hoped  for.  The 
deterioration  in  business  prospects  and,  consequently,  the  postponement  of  investment 
plans  was  aggravated  particularly  by  the  measures  affecting  the  banking  system,  which 
severely undermined the competitiveness of Hungarian financial institutions and the chances 
of banks in competing with their regional peers for the funds of their parent institutions. In 
turn,  postponed  investment  plans  and  an  unemployment  rate  stuck  at  a  persistently  high 
level have impaired the growth potential of the economy, and debt servicing has become an 
ever greater burden in a weak economy.  
Thus  today,  despite  the  numerous  painful  measures  and  the  few  structural  reforms  which 
were actually implemented, we cannot claim to have anchored expectations relating to long-
term  fiscal  developments.  This  is  also  supported  by  the  fact  that  so  far  we  have  only 
managed  to  reduce  our  debt-to-GDP  ratio  by  nationalising  private  pension  fund  assets, 
rather than by improving our economic performance.  
Fiscal  consolidation  cannot  be  successful  unless  it  creates  a  predictable  environment  and 
thereby promotes long-term growth. Instead of improvised temporary measures, government 
decisions should focus on gradual consolidation to set out a longer-term path. Improving the 
potential for growth hinges on the abolishment of the tax regime distorting investment and 
saving decisions, as well as on the creation of a regulatory environment which strengthens 
competition, creates a level playing field for competitors, restores legal certainty and assures 
legal guarantees.  
Second task: Stop the decline in lending  
The  smooth  operation  of  the  financial  intermediary  system  is  indispensable  for  economic 
growth. Through the efficient allocation of savings and lending, the banking system maintains 
the  circulatory  system  of  the  economy  in  good  health.  Currently,  the  Hungarian  banking 
system fulfils this role only with severe limitations. Lending has been contracting continuously 
since the start of the crisis, and we are in the rear guard in the region in this respect as well.  
In addition to the obvious decline in demand for credit, there are signs indicating that banks 
are  also  reluctant  to  lend  or  will  only  do  so  at  a  higher  price  and  only  to  premium  clients. 
Primarily, this is not due to tight liquidity or insufficient capital levels. The problem is that the 
ability of borrowers to repay their debts has worsened dramatically due to the deteriorating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
economic outlook. The marketability and value of collateral behind the defaulted portfolio is 
uncertain;  the  series  of  regulations  and  taxes  introduced  unexpectedly  and  without 
consultation undermines the best of business plans, and the government unpredictably but 
systematically takes away part of the income earned by the banks through the bank levy, the 
financial transaction tax or other means.  
Unfortunately,  given  the  impossibility  of  business  planning  and  the  highly  uncertain 
profitability, it is a natural reaction if foreign shareholders decide to gradually downsize their 
operations in Hungary.  
The  retreat  of  parent  banks  may  last  for  years.  Make  no  mistake:  owners  may  implement 
substantial  capital  increases  where  necessary,  but  they  are  not  doing  this  to  enhance  the 
lending capacity of their subsidiaries. In this period, withdrawals of deposits by parent banks 
are several times higher than the amount of capital injections, which indicates that owners do 
not consider operations in Hungary to be a profitable business. In other words, the additional 
capital  is  needed  only  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  system  so  that  the  downscaling  or 
potential winding-down of operations can be conducted in an organised manner, without any 
major disturbances.  
Furthermore, the reduced credit supply deepens the recession, which in turn increases the 
probability  of  corporate  bankruptcies.  The  recession  also  erodes  public  revenues,  and 
therefore the government seeks new revenue sources and finds some of them in the banking 
system which is already hit by its deteriorating loan portfolio. Thus, the government’s policy 
exacerbates  the  recession  by  causing  an  even  deeper  decline  in  lending  and  investment. 
However, the price of this economic policy is eventually paid by us all, through unrealised job 
opportunities and falling income levels.  
The behaviour and expectations of the government, banks, businesses and households all 
have an influence on one another. Still, there is only one participant that is sufficiently large 
and  has  the  coordination  potential  to  break  the  negative  spiral:  the  government  itself. 
Individual banks by themselves are unable to do this; even if any of them started lending, it 
would have no noticeable effect at the macroeconomic level. The government, on the other 
hand, might be able to provide incentives to the banking sector to boost lending by reducing 
and stabilising the burdens on the banking system and making the regulatory environment 
more  predictable,  which  could  eventually  place  the  system  onto  an  equilibrium  path. 
Consequently, a “compromise” is called for between the government and banks, or else we 
cannot expect lasting growth to emerge. And the first move must be made by the stronger 
player by restoring the climate of trust.  
And finally, the third task: the central bank must achieve price stability  
Similarly  to  other  public  entities,  pro-growth  monetary  policy  also  needs  to  play  its  part  in 
creating a predictable environment with the lowest possible risk level for economic agents. 
The  central  bank  can  contribute  to  this  most  efficiently  by  achieving  price  stability.  This  is 
also  a  precondition  for reducing  long-term  interest  rates  and  avoiding  excessive exchange 
rate volatility.  
What does a central bank need to do to create price stability? Over the past two decades, 
price  stability  has  been  achieved  in  almost  all  developed  countries  and  a  number  of  less 
developed ones. The experience of these countries shows that the most important element 
of  success  is  the  transparent  and  systematic  operation  of  the  central  bank.  Inflation 
expectations  become  anchored,  that  is,  lasting  price  stability  and  monetary  policy  itself 
become credible, if the central bank clearly states its inflation target, and economic agents 
see  that  the  central  bank  will  act  to  curb  any  developments  threatening  to  result  in  a 
persistent deviation from that target.  
This conduct is greatly facilitated by a supportive fiscal policy. Expectations of exchange rate 
devaluation due to the increasing fiscal imbalance and the expected adjustment measures, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unknown as yet in every detail, can unsettle inflation expectations despite the best efforts of 
the central bank, and thus offsetting inflationary shocks may cause an output loss. It is no 
accident  that  in  most  countries  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  coincided  with  the 
strengthening  of  fiscal  discipline  or  the  compliant  nature  of  fiscal  policy.  In  Hungary,  ever 
since the introduction of inflation targeting in 2001, the central bank has unfortunately had to 
work  against  a  headwind  in  its  effort  to  achieve  its  statutory  objective  of  price  stability, 
against a backdrop of fiscal policy which fuelled inflation with various measures, under each 
government, without exception. This has had a grave effect on the effectiveness of our work.  
Globally, inflation targeting passed the test of the crisis with flying colours  
Positive  experiences  contributed  to  the  decision  of  several  countries  to  adopt  inflation 
targeting during the crisis, and the Bank of Japan and the US Federal Reserve also decided 
to  introduce  explicit  inflation  targets.  Thus,  the  operation  of  the  central  banks  in  these 
developed countries came very close to the practices of inflation targeting countries.  
The  lessons  learned  during  the  crisis  underlined  the  importance  of  anchoring  inflation 
expectations and creating price stability. On the other hand, the crisis refined and expanded 
thinking  about  the  mandates  of  monetary  policy.  In  addition to  traditional  tools,  the central 
bank  can  contribute  to  economic  stability  by  macroprudential  regulation  affecting  the 
systemic  behaviour  of  banks  during  periods  of  expansion,  by  providing  liquidity  and 
supporting  inadequately  functioning  market  segments  or  by  using  other  unconventional 
instruments in times of economic downturn.  
The  macroprudential  and  monetary  policy  functions  coexist  peacefully.  Macroprudential 
instruments assist and promote monetary policy by restraining credit booms, real estate and 
exchange rate bubbles and overheating, while monetary policy keeps price stability in focus. 
The  central  bank’s  work,  supplemented  by  these  new  instruments,  may  become  more 
efficient in stabilising economic fluctuations as well.  
And what about Hungary?  
Since  2001,  the  Central  Bank  Act  has  required  the  MNB  to  achieve  and  maintain  price 
stability. That is when the elements of inflation targeting started to appear in monetary policy. 
However,  delivering  on  the  price  stability  mandate  has  been  hindered  by  obstacles 
throughout most of the ensuing period. Prior to the spring of 2008, the central bank had to 
follow a dual objective of the inflation rate and the nominal exchange rate, and was only able 
to react to inflation developments within the constraints of the exchange rate band. The dual 
objective of the central bank and the frequent conflicts between these targets compromised 
the efficiency of monetary policy. The dual objective was abandoned in 2008; since then, the 
MNB has worked within the framework of an inflation targeting regime. It strives to stabilise 
inflation expectations at a level consistent with the 3% target.  
2008 was the year when the crisis began, and since then the central bank has had to face 
exceptional challenges. In a period of extremely volatile capital flows, monetary policy has 
given priority to safeguarding the financing of the economy. Along with interest rate policy, 
the  MNB  has  employed  a  number  of  unconventional  instruments  to  restore  the  efficient 
operation of money markets as soon as possible. After the acute stage those risks abated, 
even  though  the  high  level  of  debt  and  the  volatile  risk  environment  continues  to  demand 
great care in the implementation of monetary policy. On the other hand, the decisions of the 
central  bank  may  gradually  return  to  normal,  as  inflation  and  growth  prospects  come  into 
focus again.  
What are the current dilemmas of monetary policy?  
At the beginning of the crisis, we saw that the protracted recession upset all of the price and 
wage-setting routines that had led to the stubborn inflation of previous years. Disregarding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the effects of tax increases and commodity prices, Hungary has as low rate of inflation as its 
neighbours. Price stability, however, is not merely a question of the level of inflation today; 
rather, it depends on what economic agents think about future inflation. Even though demand 
continues  to  be  subdued,  we  think  that  the  disciplined  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour 
which the private sector has exhibited in the past two or three years is beginning to loosen 
up, and analysts’ longer-term inflation expectations have also risen. It is to be feared that – 
as a result of the repeated additional price rises due to a sequence of tax measures, rising 
commodity prices and soaring food prices – economic agents will consider an inflation rate 
considerably above the target to be normal. In such a situation, it is very difficult to assess 
the  level  at  which  inflation  will  settle  when  the  extra  price  increase  generated  by  the 
government no longer has an effect. The various answers to this question also contribute to 
the  division  in  the  Monetary  Council.  In  my  opinion,  when  inflation  expectations,  i.e.  the 
longer-term  inflation  outlook,  become  uncertain,  the  central  bank  should  act  much  more 
firmly to keep price and wage-setting behaviour disciplined.  
Why is price stability important now?  
Some think that – regardless of the answer to the question of whether the high inflation will 
“fall or stick” – the central bank must abandon its rigid stance and give priority to growth. This 
is a peculiar idea in a country where economic policy in the past two decades has always 
seen  the  solution  in  inflating  away  macroeconomic  problems,  without  any  tangible 
improvement in growth, I might add. Indeed, we had to learn the hard way that even though 
leniency  on  inflation  may  appear  attractive  in  the  short  term,  it  has  never  produced  any 
welfare gain. By contrast, our neighbours – who have created price stability with consistent 
and tight monetary policy and a supportive fiscal policy – are leaving us behind one after the 
other.  
Despite  these  bitter  experiences,  some  schools  of  economic  thought  still  stubbornly  insist 
that there is a trade-off between inflation and growth. Unfortunately, this is true only in one 
direction: overcoming inflation inertia may indeed demand substantial real economic sacrifice 
in  a  country  accustomed  to  inflation,  but  no  country  has  managed  to  produce  any  lasting 
growth  surplus  by  letting  inflation  loose.  Otherwise  the  countries  of  Europe  and  North 
America that maintain price stability would not be the wealthiest in the world and developing 
countries with a low inflation environment would not be the fastest in catching up. Because 
as soon as it becomes clear that the central bank wants to achieve higher growth by letting 
inflation loose, this is incorporated into the exchange rate, price and wage decisions, which in 
turn leads to higher interest rates in the market. Thus, monetary conditions are not effectively 
relaxed:  we  just  end  up  in  a  situation  that  is  much  less  predictable  and  much  worse  for 
growth. Consequently, monetary policy can stimulate growth only as long as it is certain not 
to jeopardise price stability.  
International experience shows that inflation targeting is an appropriate framework – in my 
opinion  the  most  appropriate  one  in  the  case  of  Hungary  –  for  anchoring  inflation 
expectations  and  achieving  price  stability.  I  hope  that  after  so  many  dead  ends  and  blind 
alleys, Hungarian economic policy will strengthen its commitment to macroeconomic stability. 
If  fiscal  policy  is  placed  on  predictable  foundations,  inflation  targeting  can  be  efficient  in 
Hungary as well. The institutional framework is there.  
The Hungarian economy is still characterised by deficit. Unlike in the previous period, today 
the primary problem is not the fiscal deficit, but rather a lack of confidence. The solution is 
not easy, but it is possible to find. If the lack of confidence can be addressed in the economy, 
fast,  spectacular  results  would  follow.  To  this  end,  we  need  to  consult  course  books  on 
economics, adapt the experiences of successful countries to the circumstances of Hungary, 
bring  common  sense  back  into  economic  policy,  achieve  a  sustained  reduction  in 
government debt, boost the incentive for banks to lend and, ceterum censeo, deliver price 
stability.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Stability, predictability and confidence: these are the best tools available to stimulate 
growth. 
  7
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
