Malcolm Edey: OTC derivatives regulation 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Malcolm  Edey,  Assistant  Governor  (Financial  System)  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA) 
Conference, Sydney, 18 October 2012. 
 initiatives,  consulting  extensively  with 
I would like to thank Mark Manning for his assistance in preparing this speech. 
Good morning, and thank you once again for the opportunity to speak to you today.  
A great deal has happened since I last addressed this gathering a year ago. Markets around 
the world remain under pressure, with the sovereign debt crisis and fears over the future of 
the  Euro  continuing  to  weigh  on  confidence.  Australia  has  been  somewhat  sheltered  from 
these developments. As reported in the Bank’s recent Financial Stability Review, Australian 
banks’ asset quality has held firm, their usage of wholesale funding has been wound back, 
and overall bank funding costs have fallen over the past year.  
While Australia’s financial sector and the condition of the real economy remain favourable by 
international comparison, many of the lessons of the global financial crisis remain as relevant 
in Australia as elsewhere. The Australian authorities have continued to be involved in both 
domestic  and  international  debates  over  refinements  to  regulatory  settings.  The  aim  of 
course  is  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  further  distress,  and  to  ensure  that  in  the  event  that 
problems do emerge the authorities have the appropriate tools to deal with them effectively.  
Over  the  past  year,  the  agencies  that  comprise  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators  have 
progressed  a  number  of  regulatory 
industry 
participants on matters such as the implementation of Basel III in Australia, enhancements to 
the  resolution  regime  for  banks,  and  reforms  to  the  regulation  of  financial  market 
infrastructure. But today I’d like to focus again on the area of reform I discussed here a year 
ago: the regulation of OTC derivatives markets.  
As  everyone  in  this  room  is  aware,  at  the  Pittsburgh  Summit  three  years  ago  the  G-20 
leaders  agreed  that,  ‘all  standardised  OTC  derivatives  contracts  should  be  traded  on 
exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms,  where  appropriate,  and  cleared  through  central 
counterparties  by  end-2012  at  the  latest.  OTC  derivatives  contracts  should  be  reported  to 
trade  repositories.  Non-centrally  cleared  contracts  should  be  subject  to  higher  capital 
requirements’.  
When I spoke to this group last October, the Council of Financial Regulators was engaged in 
a  consultation  on  central  clearing  of  OTC  derivatives.  I  talked  about  a  number  of  policy 
challenges that the Council agencies were grappling with, including whether central clearing 
of  Australia’s  most  systemic  OTC  derivatives  markets  should  be  mandatory,  and  whether 
such clearing should be required to take place through a domestic central counterparty.  
Consultation on these matters continued through the remainder of 2011 and the early part of 
this year. At the same time, arrangements in other international jurisdictions, most notably in 
the  United  States  and  Europe,  were  becoming  clearer  and  domestic  financial  institutions 
were beginning to examine and adapt to the third-country reach of the prospective new rules. 
Also,  in  part  reflecting  strong  views  expressed  by  the  Australian  authorities,  the  Financial 
Stability Board developed the notion of ‘four safeguards’ for a resilient global framework for 
central counterparties. This work recognised that, in meeting the G-20 commitments, market 
participants  in  some  jurisdictions  may  be  reliant  on  offshore-based  central  counterparties. 
Authorities  and  market  participants  alike  therefore  needed  to  have  confidence  that  such 
arrangements  would  protect  their  interests,  both  for  domestic  financial  stability  and  for  the 
effective functioning of markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Don’t mandate immediately, but establish the power to do so 
Specifically,  the  four  safeguards  comprise:  ensuring  effective  international  cooperative 
oversight of global CCPs; fair and open access criteria; appropriate liquidity arrangements in 
all  relevant  currencies;  and  procedures  for  effective  resolution.  The  Principles  for  financial 
market  infrastructures,  released  in  April  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  this  year, 
embed some elements of the four safeguards; other elements are left to domestic authorities 
to implement in their own regulatory frameworks and approaches.  
Having considered the views of stakeholders and assessed the implications of developments 
internationally, the Council delivered a policy recommendation to the Deputy Prime Minister 
and Treasurer in March this year. The recommendation had three main elements:  
1.  
The  Council  agencies  recommended  that,  where  possible,  industry-led  solutions  –  in  part 
reflecting  appropriate  regulatory  incentives  –  should  be  relied  upon  to  steer  the  market 
towards  the  desired  outcome.  Nevertheless,  they  also  recommended  that  the  authorities 
should be granted a legislated power to mandate outcomes in the event that the incentives 
prove insufficient to drive the necessary change on an acceptable time frame. One concern 
would be if there were perceived to be an opportunity for regulatory arbitrage between the 
Australian  regime  and  those  of  other  jurisdictions.  Another  would  be  if,  in  assessing  the 
sufficient equivalence of the Australian regime, other jurisdictions took into account whether 
or not a regulatory mandate was in place.  
Reliance  in  the  first  instance  on  market  incentives  is  particularly  relevant  in  the  case  of 
central  clearing.  Premature  regulatory  intervention  could  interfere  with  the  competitive  and 
commercial  responses  of  central  counterparties,  clearing  participants  and  other  service 
providers. A flexible approach should allow for the transition to occur with maximum choice 
available to participants on issues such as the commercial terms of agreements, the choice 
of counterparties and central counterparties, and operational changes that might be needed.  
The  Council’s  assessment  was  that  higher  capital  requirements  for  non-centrally  cleared 
transactions, as well as  the implementation of emerging international standards for margin 
requirements  on  non-centrally  cleared  OTC  derivatives,  should  create  a  sufficiently  strong 
economic incentive to channel trades through a central counterparty. Once a critical mass of 
market participants have begun to clear centrally, it is likely that other market participants will 
follow,  so  as  to  be  able  to  trade  with  counterparties  who  have  already  shifted  to  central 
clearing. The policy responses of other jurisdictions are also important in this regard. To the 
extent that financial institutions headquartered in other jurisdictions are required to centrally 
clear  by  their  local  regulators,  they  are  likely  to  –  or,  in  some  cases,  may  have  to  –  also 
centrally clear transactions executed in the Australian market.  
2.  
A  central  counterparty  operating  in  Australia  must  have  either  an  Australian  Clearing  and 
Settlement  Facility  Licence  or  a  valid  exemption.  The  regulatory  regime  in  Australia 
specifically permits an overseas-based central counterparty to operate in this jurisdiction, as 
long as its home regulatory regime is deemed to be sufficiently equivalent to that in Australia. 
The consultation last year sought views on whether it should be mandated that any central 
counterparty  clearing  OTC  derivatives  markets  of  systemic  importance  to  Australia  be 
located in Australia. Having given this further consideration during the consultation process, 
the  Council  agencies  concluded  that  to  do  so  would  unduly  constrain  market  participants’ 
choices, reduce the effectiveness of economic incentives in driving outcomes, and potentially 
have other unintended consequences.  
In  the  Council’s  view,  any  additional  risks  associated  with  reliance  on  an  overseas-based 
central  counterparty  may  be  managed  through  implementation  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board’s  four  safeguards.  In  the  spirit  of  these  safeguards,  the  Council  has  developed  a 
framework  for  regulatory  influence  over  cross-border  clearing  and  settlement  facilities. 
A qualifying central counterparty may be either domestic or overseas-based 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Specific  requirements  would  be  expected  to  be  applied  in  a  graduated  and  proportional 
manner and would include the following:  
• 
all  licensed  CCPs  must  demonstrate  legal  compatibility  of  the  facility’s  rules  with 
Australian  regulatory  objectives,  and  have  adequate  mechanisms  to  demonstrate 
compliance with all licence obligations;  
where  licensed  CCPs  have  material  Australian-based  participation  and/or  provide 
services in Australian-related products, they must have governance and operational 
arrangements that promote stability in the Australian financial system;  
where a CCP is deemed to be systemically important by the Reserve Bank, it must 
hold an Exchange Settlement Account (ESA) at the Bank to better manage liquidity 
and settlement risks around Australian dollar obligations.  
  Establish a licensing regime for trade repositories 
The  Australian  regulators  are  also  closely  engaged  with  ongoing  international  work  on  the 
recovery and resolution of financial market infrastructure. This work will be a key input into 
the  development  of  a  fully  articulated  recovery  and  resolution  regime  for  financial  market 
infrastructure in Australia. It will also establish a benchmark for assessment of the recovery 
and  resolution  regimes  applicable  to  overseas-based  facilities  seeking  to  operate  in 
Australia.  
3.  
The  Council  recommended  that  a  licensing  regime  for  trade  repositories  be  established, 
largely  modelled  on  the  existing  licensing  regimes  for  market  operators  and  clearing  and 
settlement  facilities  under  the  Corporations  Act.  ASIC  will  have  primary  responsibility  for 
administering this regime and overseeing any trade repositories licensed under the regime.  
These  elements  have  since  been  reflected  in  draft  legislation  issued  by  Treasury  for 
consultation  in  July  and  introduced  to  Parliament  in  September.  It  is  anticipated  that  the 
framework  will  be  in  place  by  year-end.  Under  the  proposed  framework,  the  Minister  for 
Financial Services and  Superannuation will have the power to prescribe certain classes of 
derivatives as subject to mandatory reporting to a trade repository, mandatory clearing by a 
central  counterparty,  or  mandatory  execution  on  a  trading  platform.  To  give  effect  to  any 
mandate, ASIC will be tasked with developing “derivative transaction rules”. These rules will 
clarify matters such as the institutional and product scope of the obligation.  
Among  the  regulators,  therefore,  ASIC  will  have  the  primary  role  in  implementing  the  new 
framework and in doing so will work closely with the Bank and APRA. The Bank, in particular, 
will have three main functions in the new regime:  
• 
A  market-monitoring  function.  In  carrying  out  its  market  operations  and  in  its 
financial stability role, the Bank will need to understand the implications of market 
developments  in  response  to  the  new  rules;  and  in  particular  the  evolution  of 
participant behaviour and the participation structure of the market. This will include 
the  analysis  of  data  sourced  from  trade  repositories,  monitoring  the  interaction 
between  the  centrally  cleared  and  non-centrally  cleared  segments  of  the  market, 
and observing changes in collateral demand and usage.  
An advisory function. Before prescribing a class of derivatives under the framework, 
the Minister must seek the advice of the Bank, as well as APRA and ASIC. ASIC 
must  also  consult  with  both  the  Bank  and  APRA  before  issuing  any  derivative 
transaction rules.  
An  oversight  function.  In  its  role  in  overseeing  clearing  and  settlement  facilities 
operating in Australia, the Bank will, with ASIC, advise the Minister on any licence 
applications from central counterparties seeking to provide OTC derivatives clearing 
services in Australia. And, once a licence has been granted, the Bank will oversee 
any newly licensed central counterparty against the Financial Stability Standards.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In parallel with the passage of the legislation through Parliament, the Council agencies are 
monitoring  developments  in  the  Australian  OTC  derivatives  market  to  establish  whether 
economic incentives are already beginning to work. A comprehensive survey was circulated 
to  market  participants  in  July,  and  an  analysis  of  the  results  is  expected  to  be  published 
towards the end of this month. The results of this assessment will be an important input into 
possible recommendations to the government around mandatory obligations. The Australian 
agencies  currently  anticipate  that  additional  assessments  will  be  undertaken  over  the  next 
year or so, in order to monitor the Australian market’s progress in making the transition to 
central clearing, along with the other G-20 commitments around OTC derivatives reforms.  
Even  if  these  assessments  conclude  that  the  industry  is  making  adequate  progress,  the 
Australian  agencies  will  also  continue  to  examine  whether  the  existence  of  mandatory 
obligations  could  deliver  other  benefits.  For  instance,  there  could  potentially  be  a  case  to 
impose a mandatory obligation for central clearing if to do so would make it more likely that 
other relevant jurisdictions considered the Australian regime to be sufficiently equivalent, and 
therefore reduced the compliance burden for domestic market participants when trading with 
overseas-based counterparties.  
The  current  assessment  is  likely  to  confirm  the  previous  position  that  Australian  dollar 
interest rate swaps, cross-currency swaps and other foreign exchange derivatives are likely 
to  be  the  priority  asset  classes  for  the  purposes  of  meeting  the  G-20  commitments. 
Developments  in  these  asset  classes  are  likely  to  be  monitored  most  closely  in  future 
assessments.  
In the near term, the priority for any recommendations around mandatory obligations is likely 
to be trade reporting. As noted elsewhere, the Council agencies regard trade reporting to be 
not only good practice, but also a means of ensuring the availability of good data to monitor 
market  developments  in  support  of  regulators’  financial  stability  and  market  conduct 
objectives.  However,  given  the  time-frames  required  to  consult  on  and  pass  the  relevant 
legislation,  it  could  be  some  months  before  a  definite  move  towards  mandatory  reporting 
obligations  could  be  made.  ASIC  would  then  have  to  develop  the  associated  derivative 
transaction rules, which would be subject to a regulatory impact study and further industry 
consultation. It would also be necessary to license at least one trade repository to operate in 
this jurisdiction. As a result, it could be well into next year before any mandate is actually in 
force.  
The  effectiveness  of  the  regime  will  also  require  a  range  of  responses  from  market 
participants. If the transition to new arrangements, whether or not triggered by the issuance 
of a mandate, is to occur on an acceptable time-frame, institutions should already be making 
the  operational  and  organisational  changes  needed  to  move  towards  greater  use  of 
centralised infrastructure. Based on the Council agencies’ market assessment and ongoing 
dialogue with stakeholders, I’d like to identify five areas in which more work will need to be 
done.  
First, international banks and the large domestic banks have already had to begin making the 
transition, in part in response to regulatory reforms already underway in some jurisdictions. In 
the case of central clearing, efforts to date also reflect the economic incentive of an emerging 
price  differential  between  cleared  and  non-cleared  transactions.  This  work  is  ongoing. 
International  banks  active  in  the  Australian  market  are  generally  already  actively  clearing 
Australian  dollar-denominated  interest  rate  swaps  via  offshore  entities  that  participate  in 
LCH.Clearnet’s London-based SwapClear service or CME Clearing in the United States. In 
most cases, the large domestic banks have taken the initial step of concluding client-clearing 
agreements for some of their OTC derivatives business. For several of these institutions, the 
transition to central clearing for this segment of their business is having profound implications 
for the organisation of their operations. Indeed, these institutions have been confronted with 
a  number  of  legal  and  operational  issues,  such  as  clearing  agreements  that  often  contain 
more  restrictive  contractual  terms  than  in  their  existing  ISDA  Master  Agreements  with 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
bilateral counterparties. They have also had to adjust to new operational dependencies on 
the  clearing  participants  through  which  they  channel  their  business.  For  the  Council 
agencies, the experience of these institutions has illuminated a number of issues that may 
warrant further consideration, and which may shape the design of derivative transaction rules 
should mandatory clearing be imposed.  
Second, it is evident that in the absence of similar pressures, smaller and more domestically 
focused institutions are generally at an earlier stage in this process. Given the complexity of 
the  required  adjustment,  these  institutions  are  encouraged  to  accelerate  their  transition 
plans.  In  the  case  of  central  clearing,  it  is  likely  that  these  institutions  will  be  reliant  on  a 
relatively limited number of large, probably international, providers of client-clearing services. 
Recognising these dependencies, the Council agencies continue to examine matters such as 
client  monies  rules,  so as  to  ensure  adequate  protections for  Australian  institutions.  Client 
monies remain an important area of focus for regulators around the world, with international 
work under way under the auspices of IOSCO.  
Third, the scope for Australian-domiciled institutions to access central counterparties directly 
to  clear  Australian-dollar  denominated  derivatives  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  no  central 
counterparty  is  yet  licensed  to  provide  these  services  in  Australia.  Similarly,  no  trade 
repository  is  yet  licensed  to  operate  in  Australia.  ASIC  and  the  Bank  acknowledge  their 
responsibility  for  dealing  with  any  licence  applications  received  from  central  counterparties 
or,  once  the  new  regime  is  in  place,  trade  repositories  seeking  to  provide  services  in 
Australia. The large Australian banks continue to discuss operational, legal and commercial 
terms  of  access  with  both  domestic  and  overseas-based  central  counterparties  that  are 
interested  in  providing  services  in  this  area.  An  important  consideration  is  how  any 
international services would be adapted to the Australian market and time zone, including in 
relation to the provision of operational support, valuation methodology, margin collection and 
collateral  eligibility  criteria.  The  tax  treatment  of  payments  to  an  overseas-based  central 
counterparty  has  also  been  identified  as  a  potential  issue.  Ultimately,  any  central 
counterparty offering services to Australian-domiciled institutions will need to meet the needs 
of  the  Australian  market  place,  the  requirements  for  cross-border  regulatory  influence 
articulated  by  the  Council,  and  possible  future  requirements  that  might  be  set  out  in 
derivative transaction rules in support of any mandatory clearing obligations.  
Fourth, at the November 2011 Summit in Cannes, the G-20 leaders called for international 
standards for the margining of non-centrally cleared OTC derivatives. In accordance with this 
request, an international working group led by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
and IOSCO released, in July, a set of draft principles for consultation. The principles propose 
harmonised  margining  arrangements,  consistent  with 
for  central 
counterparties.  While  variation  margin  is  already  typically  exchanged  in  respect  of 
non-centrally  cleared 
less  widespread. 
Implementation of the principles is therefore likely to lead to a substantial increase in demand 
for collateral assets that are eligible to meet initial margin requirements. The working group 
has conducted a quantitative impact study to assess the possible magnitude of the increase 
globally,  the  results  of  which  will  inform  the  group’s  final  proposal.  The  Council  agencies 
have been considering how the new arrangements might be implemented in the Australian 
context, a key area of concern being the increase in demand for high-quality collateral.  
Finally, the Council agencies will continue to assess how best to enhance transparency in 
OTC derivatives markets, within the parameters of the new regulatory framework. This work 
will consider the role platform-based execution might play in enhancing pre- and post-trade 
transparency.  It  will  also  examine  any  legal  and  confidentiality  constraints  to  making 
aggregated trade-repository data on OTC derivatives market activity publicly available.  
So,  clearly,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  progress  over  the  past  year.  But  our  work  is  far  from 
done.  While  the  Council’s  direction  is  clear  and  the  legislative  process  underpinning  the 
framework  is  well  underway,  there  remains  a  fair  amount  of  work  ahead  to  complete  the 
the  application  of 
initial  margin 
in  place 
trades, 
those 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
transition; for market participants, infrastructure providers, and regulators alike. I hope that 
when  this  group  meets  in  a  year’s  time,  many  of  these  outstanding  issues  will  have  been 
resolved.  
Once again, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today, and for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
