Mugur Isărescu: The power of the mind 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  and 
President of the Romanian Association for the Club of Rome, at the Annual Conference of 
the Club of Rome “The Power of the Mind”, organized by the Club of Rome, the Romanian 
Association for the Club of Rome (ARCoR) and the National Bank of Romania, Bucharest, 
2 October 2012. 
 Dear colleagues of the Club of Rome, 
Honoured guests, Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure and a privilege for the Romanian Association for the Club of Rome and for 
the National Bank of Romania  to  be  the  host  of  the  International  Conference  of  the  Club 
of  Rome,  here  in  Bucharest,  with  such  a challenging topic: “The Power of the Mind”. 
As we all know, 2012 is an anniversary year for the Club of Rome, since we are celebrating 
the  40th  anniversary  of  the  first  Report  to  the  Club,  which  was  entitled  “The  Limits  to 
Growth”.  When  this  Report  was  published,  it  created  shockwaves  all  over  the  world, 
including  the  communist  countries.  I  can  testify  this,  because  I  addressed  comments 
concerning this issue when I was a young research fellow, after graduating the University. 
Actually, I confessed to my colleagues that my first public appearance in 1973 was related 
to  the  Club’s  first  Report.  But  the  debates  were not limited to Romania or to Europe. They 
were manifest all over the world, and are still continuing today. 
I dare to sustain that nowadays, with the global economic crisis still ongoing and this fight 
for resources, the above-mentioned  issues  appear  to  be  highlighted  even  more  now  than 
in  1972.  Of  course,  today,  being  in  recession, particularly  we  in  Europe  are  in  recession, 
we  dislike  considering  limits  to  growth,  except  perhaps  putting  some limit to money supply 
growth. 
Not all the predictions of the Club of Rome came true. Nevertheless, it has initiated not only 
debates, but also radical changes  in  human  behaviour,  many  of  them  still  ongoing  today 
–  for  example  the  environmental  movement  that  started  early  in  the  ‘70s  with  the  first 
Report to the Club of Rome; or the need to increase the efficiency of energy consumption 
(just  recall  how  big  and  low  efficient  American  cars  were  40  years  ago).  But,  above  all, 
these  debates  have  changed  our  way  of  thinking.  Like  Albert  Einstein  used  to  say,  “The 
world we have created is a product of our thinking; it cannot be changed without changing 
our thinking”. 
Related  to  this  issue,  one  of  the  central  themes  addressed  by  the  Report  to  the  Club 
looking  to  the  future  is  education.  Professor  Mircea  Maliţa,  a  Romanian  veteran  of  the 
Club  of  Rome,  identified  the  potential  of  education  in  his  1979  Report  “No  Limits  to 
Learning”,  which  was  like  a  mirror to  the first  Report.  It  is  him who  will  reiterate today  the 
topic  of  education,  together  with  Richard  Ernst,  who  will  present  an  interesting  paper,  “An 
Inseparable Pair: Education and Ethics”. 
We  will  equally  have  the  opportunity  to  listen  today  to  Mr.  Roberto  Peccei’s  “The 
Significance  of  Limits  to  Growth  for  the  Work  of  the  Club  of  Rome”,  as  well  as  to  the 
co-authors  of  the  first  Report,  Dennis  Meadows  and  Jorgen Randers, who will look at the 
lessons of the first Report nowadays. In the new Report, “2052 – A Global Forecast for the 
Next Forty Years”, Jorgen Randers underlines the need to use the values or the lessons of 
the first  Report  for the future.  And  actually  looking  back  40  years,  he  will look  to  the  next 
40 years. We are eager to listen to him to see what the prospects are for the next 40 years. 
Looking  at  today’s  agenda,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  relationship  between  humankind 
and nature. We’ll have a special  session,  where  Ernst  Ulrich  von  Weizsäcker  will  discuss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
about  “Factor  Five:  Transforming  the  Global  Economy”  and  Anders  Wijkman  about 
“Bankrupting  Nature”.  I  will  also  address  the  topic  of  transforming  the  financial  and 
monetary system. 
I am sure that today’s debate will bring light to our faces and we will find together the best 
answers to the future of the humankind. I invite the panellists to start the first session. Thank 
you very much! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
