Joachim  Wuermeling:  Artificial  intelligence  (AI)  in  finance  -  six
warnings from a central banker
Intervention  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the 2nd Annual FinTech Conference, Brussels, 27 February 2018.
1 Don’t miss out on the opportunities of AI in finance …
 AI in finance could impact on the functioning of our financial system in a profound way. Some
suggest  that AI  is  enhancing  the  power  of  the  human  brain  in  the  same  way  that  electricity
enhanced the power of the body 150 years ago. Hence, it could become a big thing in finance.
Artificial intelligence and big data are currently the strongest and most vivid innovation factors in
the financial sector. Using AI in finance may trigger dramatic improvements in many businesses.
AI elevates the role of data as a key commodity. Used wisely, big data make outcomes more
reliable and may improve financial mediation. Process chains can be organised in new ways.
“The scope and nature of banks’ risks and activities are rapidly changing,”  as  a  recent  Basel
Committee analysis puts it.
This evolution towards increased use of non-human intelligence is not something that has just
occurred in the last few years. The first invention of neural networks, a central pillar of most AI
systems, dates back to the year 1943.
Until a few years ago, the main users of big data and AI in the area of finance were certain hedge
funds and high-frequency trading firms. In recent times, the application of AI in finance has begun
to  spread  widely,  via  “normal”  banks,  FinTechs  and  other  financial  service  providers,  to  the
general public.
Since 2011, HFT has accounted for about 45–50 % of all trading in US equities. The figures for
the main European indices are in the same region (with about 40 % for German DAX futures).
Taken  together  with  all  other  “normal”  algorithmic  trading  activities,  we  currently  estimate  the
amount  of  algorithmic  trading  to  be  in  the  realm  of  80–90  %  of  the  entire  trading  volume  for
equities (and somewhat less but still very high in other market segments).
A single normal trading day generates about 3–6 million data points about prices, order deletions
and modifications in DAX futures alone. No human can analyse these amounts of data simply by
looking  at  them  in  an  Excel  spreadsheet.  More  sophisticated  and  sometimes  also  AI-driven
techniques are necessary to do the job.
AI profoundly changes the functioning of our financial system in at least three areas: products,
processes  and  analysis.  This  is  true  for  both  front  office  functions  (eg  customer  business,
trading)  and  back  office  functions  (eg  executing  trades,  risk  management,  market  research).
Special-purpose  AI  can  solve  specific  problems,  eg  in  customer  engagement,  financial
management or cybersecurity.
Applications  focused  on  market  operations  cover  various  core  areas  eg  trading,  portfolio
composition, backtesting and validation of models, market impact analysis, modelling trading of
large  positions  and  stress  testing.  Dynamic  portfolio  adjustment,  depending  on  the  macro
environment, may be strengthened by AI.
With the help of AI, various human shortcomings in dealing with finance can be mitigated. As
behavioural  finance  has  taught  us,  biases,  inertia  and  ignorance  lead  to  the  malfunctioning  of
markets. AI allows humans to reach out beyond their intellectual limits or simply avoid mistakes.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2 … but beware of the risks
But opportunities are always accompanied by risks. As regards the financial system, if too much
trust  is  put  in  “intelligent”  systems,  the  stability  of  financial  markets  may  be  at  stake.  The
workings of AI can be a mystery; it can trigger loss of control, make fatal  errors,  and  have  a
procyclical effect due to its mechanistic functions. Pattern recognition has its limits. This can be
dangerous particularly in crisis scenarios. An autopilot would never have been able to land a jet
on the Hudson River. Nor can algorithms stabilise in periods of financial stress.
Looking at the recent turbulence in equities and the market for VIX-related financial products, it
can  be  concluded  that  the  events  of  5  February  share  many  similarities  with  a  “flash  crash”.
Unfortunately, as with the original flash crash of May 2010, we have only limited knowledge about
the direct drivers that triggered the event. It can be assumed that algorithmic market participants
were quite active during the relevant period. But as to which strategies were applied and to what
effect, we have no knowledge so far. The rise in volatility in the S&P 500 then nearly instantly
affected the VIX industry, making it not the cause but more the first victim of this market event,
with losses up to 95 % on assets. We do not expect this phenomenon to disappear in the future.
On the contrary, more of these flash events are to come.
AI is still in its infancy. Continuous processes for the entire AI lifecycle still have to be defined and
scaled for business needs. That means that AI must be embedded in the process of acquiring
and organising data, modelling, analysis and delivering analytics. The skills gap, particularly with
regard to data science and machine learning expertise, is the foremost challenge. At this stage,
non-human intelligence is far from replacing the human brain in any respect. Computers are like
school pupils dividing numbers mechanically without having understood what they were doing.
3 Consumers should take care: they remain the risk-takers
What makes this development so significant is the fact that it is not just occurring at the level of
systemic  institutions,  markets  and  stock  exchanges.  With  robo  advisers,  for  example, AI  can
directly  influence  and  control  the  daily  financial  decisions  of  customers  and  ultimately  their
personal  wellbeing.  Society  has  barely  begun  to  understand  the  economic,  ethical  and  social
implications of AI.
While client interaction is made more convenient by mobile banking, chatbots or virtual customer
assistants, banks can find out more about customer habits and provide them with tailor-made
financing.
Consumers may be rated by AI when applying for a mortgage. Pooling data points from internal
transactions, social networks and other sources provides a more meaningful picture of banks’
borrowers. But denials may be hard to understand. It may become even harder to challenge a
decision made by algorithms.
The proper functioning of the applications is not a given. Simple flaws, cyberattacks and criminal
behaviour render the systems extremely vulnerable. Consumers should be cautious. They need
to be protected. Laws may have to be modified to cover new threats. Responsibility and liability in
the case of malfunctioning machines have to be clarified.
4 FinTechs should not ignore the legitimate concerns of society and supervisors
Agile tech companies are driven by an admirable energy and inspiration. By nature, they take
risks.  They  create  an  idea,  build  a  prototype  and  try  it  out  immediately  in  the  real  world.
Regulation, supervision, obligations and requirements must make them extremely nervous.
But the wellbeing of society depends on rules. The public demands cybersecurity, data privacy,
consumer  protection  and  financial  stability.  FinTechs  should  not  brush  aside  the  concerns  of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
their stakeholders. Business can only flourish if it is broadly accepted by citizens.
FinTechs usually pick up specific elements of the work chain of finance or create new features.
Using  technology,  they  modularise  and  customise  products  as  a  third  party  or  standalone
provider.
FinTechs are part of the finance sector but are not necessarily supervised. As long as they carry
out  tasks  for  supervised  entities,  these  institutions  are  responsible  for  the  behaviour  of  the
FinTech.
5 AI needs new forms of supervision
“Artificial  intelligence”  may  sound  glamorous  from  a  technological  perspective,  but  in  banking
supervision, the well-established principle of "same business, same risk, same rules" has so far
proved to be a sound standard for innovations. Whether they employ AI themselves or outsource
it to FinTechs, from the supervisors’ point of view responsibility remains entirely with the bank.
For  German  supervisors,  IT  governance  and  information  security  nowadays  are  equally  as
important as capital and liquidity requirements.
All  financial  institutions  should  address  the  risks  posed  by  new  technologies.  Banks  have  to
implement  effective  control  environments  needed  to  properly  support  key  innovations.  This
includes the requirement to have appropriate processes for due diligence, risk assessment and
ongoing monitoring of any operations outsourced to a third party.
The European MiFID II includes the requirement that firms applying algorithmic models based on
AI  and  machine  learning  should  have  a  robust  development  process  in  place.  Firms  need  to
ensure that potential risks are considered at every stage of the process.
Regulators increasingly have to apply AI-supported analytical methods themselves to recognise
vulnerability patterns, scan lengthy reports or analyse incoming data.
In  any  case,  we  must  strike  a  balance  between  financial  stability  and  avoiding  barriers  for
potential  new  entrants,  products  and  business  models.  Alongside  technological  progress,
regulators  have  to  constantly  reassess  the  current  legal  framework,  supervisory  models  and
resources.
6 Central banks should embrace AI
Central  banks  have  access  to  huge  amounts  of  very  valuable  data  stemming  from  market
operations, supervision, payments and statistics. They are well positioned to tap the benefits of
AI so they can enhance their ability to fulfil their mandate for price stability and the stability of the
financial system.
Machine learning is already  being  used  at  the  Bundesbank  in  different  narrow  segments.  The
experiences  of  all  users  have  been  good  without  exception.  While  monitoring  the  technical
progress, we are currently discovering further use cases and defining our AI foundation, strategy,
organisation and processes.
Here is a list of examples, which is by no means exhaustive:
In  risk  management,  neural  networks  assess  and  evaluate  the  financial  soundness  of  the
markets. Market research is supported by adopting web mining techniques and machine learning
in  content  analysis,  topic  modelling  and  clustering  of  relevant  articles.  In  statistics,  machine
learning  enables  new  methods  for  data  quality  management,  eg  in  the  context  of  securities
holdings  or  the  classification  of  company  data.  Furthermore,  the  informational  content  of
seasonality tests is assessed by a random forest machine learning technique. For our IT user
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
help desk, the handling of routine requests via automated chatbot responses could be a useful
support  measure.  We  use  social  media  data  to  detect  trends,  turning  points  or  sentiments.
Machine learning methods can be applied for variable selection purposes in econometric models.
ANNEX: Use case – monitoring of real estate markets
An interesting data source is internet platforms. For example, some rental and housing platforms
have the potential to improve the analysis and monitoring of real estate markets via the provision
of  information  such  as  list  prices  and  structural  and  locational  characteristics  of  the  property
market at a disaggregated level.
This is mainly based on the assumption that these data contain information on the expectations
and  interests  of  economic  agents  with  respect  to  future  decisions.  In  such  contexts,  a  wide
range of topics or "search strings" are often potentially relevant. This can result in many different,
highly correlated time series.
Furthermore, the "textual analysis" method is increasingly applied in research, as large amounts
of "unstructured" information on businesses and the economy are available electronically on the
internet.  In  order  to  operationalise  textual  data  for  econometric  analysis,  machine  learning
algorithms can be helpful. Learning methods can be applied to classify textual documents into
different categories which can then be used to draw statistical inferences.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
