François Villeroy de Galhau: New Year wishes to the Paris financial
centre
New Year wishes to the Paris financial centre by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the
Bank of France, Paris, 18 January 2018.
 I would like to thank all of you for coming, like each year, to our Golden Gallery. I am pleased to
welcome you, together with Denis Beau, Deputy Governor since July and first Deputy Governor
since yesterday. I also commend Anne Le Lorier, who unfortunately left us on 5 January but who
has contributed so much to the Banque de France over the past six years: this evening is an
occasion to thank her. And I am delighted to announce the appointment of Sylvie Goulard, who
will  be  taking  over  from  her. As  of  next  Monday,  she  will  bring  to  the  Banque  de  France  all
her competence and independence.
I would like to start by extending to you our warmest wishes for 2018, for you and your loved
ones, as well as for all of your staff, hoping that 2018 will be an excellent year; an excellent year,
not only for each of you, but also for Europe and our country. But before presenting my collective
wishes for this new year, I would like to return to 2017 and three positive elements that marked it.
1. 2017, a turnaround year
At  this  same  time  last  year,  I  made  the  paradoxical  wish  that  the  euro  area,  despite  all  its
electoral uncertainties would be "an area of relative stability". 2017 was supposed to be a year full
of dangers in Europe; and yet, our continent, and France above all, has proven to be a beacon of
hope and strong growth, whereas the United States has abdicated from its leadership role. Two
figures  illustrate  this:  that  of  GDP growth,  which  greatly  exceeded  forecasts  in  2017  –  it  is
expected to reach 1.9% in France according to our latest forecasts, with notably 280,000 net job
creations, and 2.4% in the euro area, which is the highest rate since 2010; the other key factor
is confidence, reflected notably by the confidence in the euro, 74% of euro area citizens – the
highest  figure  since  the  outset  –,  71%  of  French  citizens,  and  as  many  as  81%  of  German
citizens claim that they are attached to our single currency.
The second positive element in 2017: the acceleration of reforms in France. This acceleration
of  reforms  has  changed  the  image  of  France  in  the  eyes  of  Europe  and  the  world,  which  is
extremely positive. 
Lastly,  in  2017 Basel  III  was  finalised.  Bankers  –  largely  represented  this  evening  –  had
expressed, alongside others, serious concerns. The agreement of 7 December 2017 is the best
possible agreement for our country and for Europe, thanks to the particularly active commitment
of French negotiators. We maintain, against all temptation of  nilateralism or deregulation, our
commitment  to  the  multilateral  rules  of  the  game  in  place  since  2009. And  we  are  stabilising
these rules once and for all: there will not be a Basel IV.
In  sum,  2017  positively  marked a turning point  for  both  the  United  States  and  France.  The
beginning of 2018 has thus been characterised by a welcome optimism, but one which must not
act  as  a  disincentive:  confidence  yes,  complacency  no.  We  must  not  lie  back  and  enjoy  the
return  of  blue  skies;  we  must  take  steps  to  ensure  that  this  improvement  is  transformed  into
stronger  and  sustainable  growth.  To  this  end,  I  wish  to  make  four  collective  wishes  for  the
coming year.
2. Four wishes for 2018
My first wish concerns Europe. This does not so much concern our monetary policy, which has
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
entered a gradual normalisation phase, and which is a success; I will not discuss it further this
evening during the "silent period". 2018 must above all be the year of Economic Union, which still
largely remains to be built. We must now or never take advantage of the recovery to tackle the
shortcomings of the euro area. Because France and Germany’s electoral calendars are aligned
for the first time in 15 years, and since last Friday, there is a prospect of a pro-European coalition
in Germany. And because now is the time to strengthen our economic instruments in order to
deal  with  a  future  European  recession,  the  day  it  comes.  Otherwise  monetary  policy  may  be
overburdened.
My second wish concerns our country. The French economy is in much better shape, but there
are still major drags on growth. At around 1.9%, we are above our potential growth rate, which
means that we are coming up against more structural limiters. There are at least two indications
of  this:  a  persistent  negative  growth  differential  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  of  around  half  a
percentage point, and a current account deficit and hence a lack of competitiveness. In order to
increase the speed of the French economy, we need to boost the power of the engine: reforms,
including  those  underway,  are  therefore  necessary.  And,  beyond  bureaucratic  barriers  or
corporate interests, the greatest priority is to reform vocational training and apprenticeships:
we cannot remain in a situation where we have almost 3 million unemployed, of whom 600,000
are young people, and companies cannot recruit the skills they need. I hear this everywhere from
the  entrepreneurs  who  participate  in  the  advisory  boards  of  the  Banque  de  France,  from
Besançon to Châteauroux last week. According to INSEE, hiring difficulties have been the main
obstacle to corporate activity.
My third wish is for financing. Often, the Governor of the Banque de France encourages banks
to  lend  more;  this  is  not  the  case  at  present!  Bank  lending  in  France  is  very  buoyant.  Bank
lending to households and firms is growing at almost 6% per year. This is good news, but we
must avoid excesses. There are thus several efforts to be made in 2018 to ensure the smooth
financing of our economy:
Remain  vigilant  to  ensure  financial  stability,  first  and  foremost.  At  last  December's
meeting  of  the  Haut  Conseil  de  Stabilité  Financière  (HCSF  –  High  Council  for  Financial
Stability), we decided to take a macroprudential measure to limit the sharp rise in the debt of
certain large companies, including bond debt. It will apply as of 1 July after approval by the
European authorities. If credit cycle risks persist – i.e. growth that is significantly higher than
that justified by economic fundamentals – we stand ready to act further at any time in 2018,
including if necessary by implementing a countercyclical capital buffer.
Promoting the attractiveness of the Paris financial centre in the context of Brexit,
second:  irrespective  of  the  possible  transition,  the  City  will  most  likely  lose  its  EU
passporting rights. The Paris financial centre must continue to develop, notably in the area of
the clearing of financial instruments, and promote its numerous qualities, enhanced by the
arrival of the EBA, in order to become the main euro area centre for market activities. This is
our  collective  challenge,  over  and  above  announcements  of  welcoming  registered  head
offices.
Lastly, better  channelling  our  savings.  Overall,  the  French  economy  has  no  lack  of
financing, thanks also to the soundness of its financial institutions. Our challenge concerns
more the nature of this financing: developing equity financing more than debt financing. Flat
tax  is  a  welcome  step  towards  a  greater  tax  neutrality  between  the  different  forms  of
investment. I have already  stated  this,  insurers  must  create  new  tailored  products,  in  the
area  of  life  insurance,  which  are  less  liquid  but  allow  savers  to  benefit  from  the  higher
returns offered by equities in the long term, with a form of capital protection. The PACTE law
on growing and transforming companies, presented by the Minister of the Economy, could
provide  an  opportunity.  Banks  are  also  considering  offering  a  new 
long-term
savings product: I understand this point of view, provided that the aim isn't to create a new
tax loophole; we have had enough of this great French speciality.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
My last wish concerns the Banque de France, and it is a commitment to our transformation,
which we want to be exemplary for the public service. In 2018, we will be over half way with our
strategic "Ambitions for 2020" plan, which aims to improve our services to the French and
European economies, while achieving significant savings: as of this year, our net spending will
be almost EUR 100 million lower, in current euro, than it was in 2015: this is what we are "giving
back" to the national community. In 2018, let us also be exemplary in our commitment to the
social and territorial cohesion of the country, in order notably to help our most underprivileged
citizens.  In  this  respect,  I  wish  to  make  a  concrete  commitment  to  the fight  against
overindebtedness,  with,  since  1  January  2018,  a  simplified  procedure,  which  will  reduce
processing times by several months for many of the 180.000 families that we help each year. I
also wish to commit to promoting financial inclusion: we have recently adopted, together with
banks  and  associations,  the  recommendations  to  extend  the  diffusion  of  specific  banking
services to vulnerable customers, because there is still insufficient awareness of this right, with
only 10% benefiting from it. Lastly, as regards the economic and financial education of the
public, in order to build on the achievements of 2017 with our 450,000 pages consulted on our
website  "mesquestionsdargent.fr",  and  almost  15,000  social  service  providers  and  3,000
teachers have been given information by Banque de France staff, we will do more still in 2018.
I  have  two  last  wishes  to  make,  anniversary  wishes  this  time:  for  our  Golden  Gallery,  whose
300th anniversary we are celebrating, a venerable age, and for the European Central bank, which
will celebrate its 20th anniversary on 1 June 2018. Two more joyous occasions for us to meet
again this year. Happy New Year to you, to your businesses, and to our country.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
