Benoît  Cœuré:  Making  our  monetary  union  stronger  and  more
resilient
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Finanzmarktklausur of the CDU Wirtschaftsrat, Berlin, 14 March 2018.
Let me thank the organisers for inviting me here today.
 Our common monetary policy has been much discussed in recent years, also here in Germany,
where the highest court has been asked to examine the lawfulness of some of our measures.
While the European Court of Justice has confirmed that the ECB has acted at all times within its
mandate, many of the institutional failings which caused and perpetuated the crisis, and which
contributed to the ECB adopting a series of unconventional policy measures, remain unresolved.
These  shortcomings  are  well  known.  When  there’s  growth  and  the  sun  is  shining,  euro  area
Member  States  have  few  incentives  to  pursue  sound  policies  and  keep  their  economies
productive  and  flexible  enough  to  prosper  in  a  monetary  union  on  a  sustainable  basis.  This
leaves them vulnerable when rainy days come.
In such an environment, where the governments of the 19 Member States have retained core
responsibilities in crucial areas such as fiscal policy, business environments and labour market
policies,  the  central  bank  can  quickly  become  a  scapegoat  or  be  the  focus  of  unrealistic
expectations. Worse, there is hardly a single European public discourse in which the common
monetary  policy  can  be  communicated.  Take  the  title  of  this  panel  as  an  example.  The
connotation  that  people  attach  to  the  term  “Nullzins”  will  likely  be  different  from,  say,
“geldpolitischer Impuls” – although both terms in essence describe the same thing.
Worse,  monetary  policy  can  quickly  become  overburdened  if  national  fiscal  and  economic
policies fail to internalise the effects they have on the common currency. The temptation to free-
ride is always present in a monetary union. It is easy to see that if fiscal policy is loosened during
an expansion, or tightened during a recession, the burden on the central bank to stabilise the
economy increases mechanically.
Even today, euro area growth still relies too much on monetary policy support. According to ECB
staff estimates, the contribution of our easing measures to annual euro area GDP growth was
half a percentage point in 2017 and will still be around one-third of a percentage point in 2018.
And monetary policy can do little to lift the long-term growth rate of our region.
All of this means that our currency union needs further reform – both at Member State and euro
area level. I believe there is wide agreement on this. Where we still lack agreement, however, is
on how these reforms should look in practice.
1
I  have  described  elsewhere  the  requirements  of  reform  from  the  perspective  of  the  single
monetary policy.  As the central bank of the euro area, we have a stake in the success of the
current discussion. Without further reforms, and depending on the nature of the next crisis, we
may  well  be  forced  to  test  the  limits  of  our  mandate  –  a  concern  that  has  been  voiced  by
Germany in particular.
I offered three “lines of defence” that any well-functioning monetary union depends on: flexible
markets,  adequate  national  fiscal  buffers  and  a  common  fiscal  instrument  to  cope  with  large
shocks.
The  logic  is  simple  and  compelling.  Flexible  markets  for  goods,  services,  labour  and  capital
reduce  the  need  for  costly  macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  curb  contentious  debates  about
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis management. They reduce both the likelihood and impact of shocks and allow economies
to bounce back more quickly. And they save much of the precious political capital governments
had to spend on acrimonious crisis discussions.
But flexible markets come at a price. In a downturn, they often impose economic hardship on
workers through job losses or wage cuts. Governments can mitigate these effects. Unlike the
United States, however, the European Union is not a federation. This means that – as a rule –
stabilisation needs first to take place at Member State level. Building and maintaining adequate
room for action at national level is therefore essential. This is what our fiscal rules are about. And
contrary  to  common  perceptions,  this  is  not  only  about  bringing  general  government  deficits
under the 3% line, but it is also about bringing them closer to balance or to surplus in the medium
term so that fiscal space can be used in the event of a recession.
But  even  ex  ante  solvent  governments  can  come  under  pressure  in  the  face  of  very  large
shocks. Absent national stabilisers, such as an autonomous monetary policy and exchange rate,
such shocks have already tested the cohesion of the currency union as a whole. This is why a
common monetary policy needs a complement in the form of a common fiscal instrument that
can support – under proper democratic control – aggregate demand if need be.
Many  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  reform  proposals  that  are  currently  being
discussed would help bolster these three lines of defence.
Enhancing  national  ownership  of  structural  reform  efforts,  for  example,  could  help  make  our
economies more agile. A true capital markets union, leveraging the benefits of fintech innovation,
would significantly boost the capacity of our financial markets to diversify and reduce risk, while
the ECB has often argued that a European deposit insurance scheme is a precondition for a truly
integrated  banking  system  and  safe  money. And  the  Single  Market  still  has  a  lot  of  untapped
potential, in particular in the field of services. These should be priorities.
More  credible  fiscal  rules  and  greater  market  discipline  would  strengthen  the  second  line  of
defence. A nimbler European Stability Mechanism, meanwhile, together with steps towards an
area-wide  stabilisation  budget,  could  effectively  complement  the  euro  area’s  institutional
architecture.
Reforms along these lines are needed to help us create a more stable and safer currency union.
A stable, resilient and more integrated euro area is in everybody’s interest, including, and maybe
especially  so,  Germany’s.  That  is  why  Germany  for  decades  joined  forces  with  its  European
partners  to  strengthen  the  European  Union,  including  by  establishing  a  monetary  union.  It  is
reassuring  to  see  that  the  coalition  agreement  gives  strong  support  to  the  European  project.
Indeed, governments and parliaments of Member States, together with the European Parliament,
must be the driving force in this process.
This is particularly important at a time when the multilateral order based on cooperation is being
challenged,  at  a  time  when  one  of  Germany’s  long-standing  partners,  the  United  Kingdom,  is
about  to  leave  the  European  Union,  and  at  a  time  when  anti-European  forces,  elected  and
unelected, in other parts of the Union are calling into question not just the EU’s four freedoms but
also the values of an open, free and democratic society.
In this environment, Germany, as one of the founding members of the Union, has a responsibility
to  promote  and  nurture  a  reform  debate  that  is  constructive  and  that  will  help  to  bridge
differences  of  opinion.  A  strong  Franco-German  commitment  is  a  necessary  condition  for
moving  forward,  but  all  Member  States  have  to  be  on  board.  It  means  that  we  should  move
beyond the north-south divide which has too often shaped past discussions on EMU. Economic
fragmentation  is  receding  on  our  continent,  thanks  to  a  broad  cyclical  recovery,  the  ECB’s
actions  and  the  bold  reforms  initiated  in  several  countries.  We  should  be  careful  not  to  allow
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
political fragmentation to jeopardise these achievements.
Ultimately, what matters is that we strike the right balance between solidarity and responsibility
and that we embrace a vision which secures the integrity and resilience of the euro area. We all
know that this is not easy. But failure to do so would leave the ECB alone at the forefront of
macroeconomic stabilisation in the euro area. This is a risk not worth taking.
Thank you.
1
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “The euro area’s three lines of defence”, speech at the conference “Deepening of EMU”,
Ljubljana, 2 February.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
