Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Ready in the age of great convergence
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Security Bank Economic Forum, 21 November 2017.
 SBC  Chairman  Alberto  Villarosa;  President  and  CEO  Alfonso  Salcedo,  Jr.;  Department  of
Finance  Undersecretary  Gil  Beltran;  fellow  speakers/panelists,  esteemed  guests;  ladies  and
gentlemen, good afternoon.
It is a pleasure to be here at Security Bank‘s annual Economic Forum, to discuss developments
and prospects in the global and domestic economy and to take stock of challenges ahead.
At present, four key financial sector issues seem top of mind. First, is uncertainty over the pace,
timing,  and  magnitude  of  tightening  of  global  financial  conditions.  The  potentially  divergent
monetary  policies  of  advanced  economies  (AEs)  would  likely  trigger  bouts  of  volatility  in  the
financial markets.
Second, is peso volatility with specific concern over its possible sharp depreciation.
Third, is the perceived risk of overheating in the economy. 
And fourth is the challenge of disruption brought about by fintech.  The use of digital technologies
challenges the status quo,   even making an impact on monetary policy.  
Anchors of stability
1
We can rely on several anchors of stability to manage these pressing issues.
The  Philippines  sustained  its  robust  macroeconomic  fundamentals.    It  is  one  of  the  fastest
growing economies in the world, with 75 consecutive quarters of uninterrupted and increasingly
broad-based growth.  Annual growth has been running above 6 percent in the last five years.  For
the third quarter of this year, GDP picked up to 6.9 percent. 
Prospects remain bright as growth is predicted to be between 6.5 and 7.5 percent this year and
7.0  and  8.0  percent  over  the  medium-term.    Growth  will  be  increasingly  investment-led  as
government and private sector investments ramp up. 
The stable inflation environment provides support to domestic demand. Inflation has averaged
3.2 percent in the past ten months, in line with the 2017 target.  Latest baseline forecasts show it
will likely settle around the middle of government’s target range of 2 – 4 percent in 2017 to 2019.
We are ready to deploy the full array of our monetary policy toolkit to deal with possible market
volatility as policy settings evolve and normalize in the US and other advanced economies.  We
are  also  watchful  of  geo-political  risks  that  could  pose  challenges  to  the  country’s  trade,
remittances, and foreign direct investments. 
Recently, the depreciation of the peso has been a cause of some market unease.  Such concern
is overdone.
The peso‘s moderate and controlled depreciation mirrors bullish economic growth indicated by
strong  imports  demand,  residents’  increased  direct  and  portfolio  investments  abroad  for
expansion  and  risk  diversification;  as  well  as  public  and  private  sector  debt  prepayments  to
manage foreign exchange risks.  There is also outflow of hot money.  We see these as healthy
adjustments. 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The peso is expected to be broadly stable over the medium-term, backed by strong underlying
economic fundamentals, ready market access, and robust international reserves.  Our foreign
exchange reserve buffer, as of end-October 2017 stands at US$80.6 billion.  This is equivalent to
more than 8 months’ imports of goods and services and is greater than our foreign exchange
liabilities.  We have additional liquidity buffer as well from our regional safety net arrangements. 
Sustained  inflows  from  overseas  Filipino  remittances,  business  process  outsourcing,  tourism
receipts,  and  the  strong  recovery  in  exports  further  support  the  peso.    We  can  likewise  look
forward to increased foreign direct investments that are attracted by our growth prospects.  With
the country’s external debt on a sustainable downtrend and ample fiscal space, there is scope to
pursue high quality investments in physical and human capital that will expand potential output. 
At the current range, the peso’s competitiveness has improved back to 2008 levels as measured
by the real effective exchange rate (REER) index.
The  Philippine  banking  system  is  very  stable  and  very  dynamic,  with  good  asset  quality,
sustained profitability, and adequate capitalization. For the third quarter of this year, total banking
system resources expanded by 14.1 percent year-on-year, to P14.6 trillion. This was funded by
sustained deposit inflows which grew by 15.3 percent, to P11.3 trillion.
The non-performing loan (NPL) ratios further improved to 1.9 percent, with adequate and prudent
provisioning for credit losses.
Bank capital is being beefed up by strong earnings from core income sources particularly lending
activities. Capital adequacy ratio, recorded at 16.0 percent on consolidated basis, is well above
the BSP and international minimum.
The risk of economic overheating has been raised by some analysts.  We do not believe we are
there yet and we remain very vigilant to avoid it.  The current pace of credit growth is manageable
. Our credit-to-GDP ratio of 63.6 percent as of Q2 2017 is still one of the lowest by far in Asia,
indicating relatively low overall leverage.
Bank  loans  are  diversified  across  economic  sectors  and  are  backed  by  durable  economic
activity  with  89  percent  going  into  production  sectors.    Moreover,  BSP  monetary  operations
indicate  just  sufficient  domestic  liquidity  to  support  expansion.    Amid  the  stronger  growth  in
liquidity, inflation dynamics remain manageable.
Key  indicators  of  credit  expansion  likewise  are  below  established  international  thresholds.
Current property prices, as reflected by latest Colliers data and the latest BSP Residential Real
Estate Price Index (RREPI), also do not show misalignment from fundamental values.
We continue to closely monitor credit growth and risks to overheating, even as we stand ready to
deploy macroprudential measures if necessary, to deal with sectoral issues in a targeted way.
Staying ahead: new norm, new tools 
Economist Richard Baldwin published a book in November 2016 on the four phases of global
economic  evolution.  According  to  him,  the  fourth  phase  (1990  to  the  present)  is  The  Great
Convergence,  characterized  by  globalization  of  knowledge  and  information  resulting  from  the
information and communication technology (ICT) revolution.
To stay abreast, we must adopt new tools and policies. As products, services, and processes
evolve,  the  BSP  constantly  expands  its  policy  toolkit  to  include  macroprudential  measures,
surveillance  tools,  and  stress  indices  such  as  the  early  warning  system  (EWS)  on  currency
crisis and the Philippine Composite Index of Financial Stress (PCIFS).
We are upgrading our monetary operations framework:  The interest rate corridor (IRC) system
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
was deployed last year to enhance the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  The IRC is
also  compatible  with  the  further  development  of  our  capital  market.    We  shall  continue  to
enhance the IRC for a more market-friendly implementation of monetary policy.
We  continue  to  pursue  progressive  prudential  reforms  to  maintain  the  financial  system’s
resilience against external shocks.
Since the start of this year, the BSP implemented reforms to upgrade corporate governance and
risk management standards, and to promote financial system integrity and transparency.  Good
governance is the backbone of a safe and stable financial system. Consistent with this, we have
also enhanced the reporting governance of banks.
We have seen significant progress in the adoption of Basel III reforms, particularly in the areas of
capital, leverage, liquidity and regulation of systemically important banks.  More recently, we have
rolled out a four-phased program for liquidity risk management.
The first phase, which was approved by the Monetary Board through Circular No. 981, covers
guidelines  on  liquidity  risk  management,  including  intraday  liquidity.  Next  in  the  pipeline  are
amendments to the LCR standard and  issuance of the complementary Minimum Liquidity Ratio
(MLR), a simplified version of the LCR requirement for less complex financial institutions.  Third,
we will issue guidelines implementing the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) standard to ensure
that banks have adequate long-term stable funding. Lastly, the BSP will issue intraday liquidity
reporting  guidelines  to  complement  the  qualitative  intraday  risk  management  guidelines  under
Circular No. 981.
In line with the upcoming full adoption of the Philippine Financial Reporting Standards Financial
Instruments  (PFRS  9),  a  consultative  document  on  the  “expected  credit  loss”  model  was
released. In 2014, BSP started preparing banks on the use of the expected loss methodology
through Circular No. 855. Parallel to this, we will enhance the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements for
incorporation  in  banks’  annual  reports.  The  guidelines  on  accreditation  of  external  auditors
across  sectors  are  also  being  reviewed.  These  reforms  promote  market  discipline,
transparency, and resiliency.
Financial market development
Part and parcel of our strategic policy reforms is to accelerate financial market development with
particular focus on local currency debt and foreign exchange (FX) markets. We envision a more
balanced financial ecosystem where the banking system is complemented by a deep and liquid
capital  market.  This  can  support  the  long-term  financing  requirements  of  corporates  and  the
Government, particularly with the “Build, Build, Build” program roll out.
As you know, the BSP, in collaboration with the SEC, DOF and the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr)
is working on a package of initiatives to be rolled out in a sequenced approach to ensure smooth
implementation.  The  reform  agenda  will  officially  start  with  the  launch  of  the  Government
Securities Repo Program on November 27 2017, in coordination with industry associations. 
Through nine waves of reforms since 2007, the BSP has undertaken measures to liberalize the
foreign  exchange  (FX)  market.  Currently,  we  are  pursuing  even  more  ambitious  FX  reforms
aimed at deepening the FX market and increasing resilience of our domestic economy against
external  shocks,  even  as  we  continue  to  allow  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility.  This
demonstrates a thrust towards greater openness given the country’s increasing integration with
global markets. 
Soon,  the  BSP  will  release  an  exposure  draft  on  the  liberalized  rules  on  foreign  currency
borrowings of the private sector to move away from prior BSP approval, simplify the registration
process to primarily focus on information gathering, and minimize documentary requirements. 
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Other  future  amendments  will  address  unnecessary  friction  on  investment  and  other
transactions. 
Over the medium term, we are implementing a sequenced approach that will enhance market
conduct, increase FX market transparency, and promote a market-determined exchange rate 
consistent with the characteristics of an organized FX market.
Taken  together,  the  FX  and  domestic  debt  market  development  initiatives  are  complementary
reforms  that  will  deepen  market  liquidity,  establish  a  more  reliable  reference  yield  curve  for
domestic  interest  rates,  and  strengthen  market  integrity.  These  reforms  will  pave  the  way  for
more  innovation  and  increased  availability  of  financial  products  that  meet  diverse  funding
requirements  with  more  choices  and  more  flexibility.    These  will  also  enable  the  creation  of
hedging  instruments  that  enhance  risk  management  capabilities  of  banks,  corporates,
government units, MSMEs, and the general public.
Dealing with disruptive technology
At the BSP, we have a very open-minded approach to Fintech. This means that we take a very
active role in ensuring that our policy provides opportunities for innovation that can help advance
inclusive  growth  and  deliver  more  efficient  financial  services. At  the  same  time,  we  want  to
ensure risks are well managed, particularly technology, money laundering/ terrorist financing, and
consumer protection risks. 
As far as I know, we are a pioneer among central banks in using the “test and learn” approach,
now known as regulatory sandbox, to allow controlled roll-out of new financial technology. 
Even as we allow fintech into our system, we are mindful of related risks.  Earlier this year, we
issued various regulations aimed at mitigating the effects of technology risks, as well AML/CFT
concerns. 
for  money  service
businesses and pawnshops to ensure effective AML compliance.  This also extends to entities
that use virtual currency as underlying instruments for remittance. To date, there are two virtual
currency exchanges registered with the BSP with several more under evaluation. 
include  comprehensive  supervisory 
frameworks 
  These 
We  have  also  allowed  proportionate  and  technology-enabled  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)
procedures for low-risk clients to facilitate frictionless customer on-boarding.  More recently, the
Monetary  Board  approved  the  cyber  security  risk  management  framework  under  Circular  No.
982.
Finally, we are pursuing digitization of the payment system as part of our firm commitment to the
national strategy for financial inclusion. 
The BSP is actively working to make universally available to all a basic transaction account in a
bank or regulated non-bank financial institution, to be able to send and receive payments via any
electronic  device.    At  the  same  time,  we  are  working  with  other  government  agencies  and
Congress  to  establish  a  biometric  national  ID  system.    These  two  —  universal  transaction
accounts and a digital ID system – are key foundations of a robust and inclusive digital financial
system.
We are one step closer to achieving the vision of a cash-lite economy with the recent launch of
the  Philippine  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  (EFT)  System  and  Operations  network,  also  called
“PESONet” last November 8, 2017.  This is the first Automated Clearing House (ACH) under the
National Retail Payment System (NRPS).  It supports batch payment credit transactions and will
eventually replace paper check payments for most applications.  Early next year, we will launch
“InstaPay”, the ACH for low-value real time push payments ideal for mobile payments in support
of e-commerce.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the heightened convergence of the global and the domestic economy,
fuelled by ICT revolution, is a force to reckon with. One has to catch opportunities created by
these big changes and adapt to manage new risks.  As economic agents seek novel ways of
doing  things,  the  role  of  BSP  becomes  more  critical.    In  this  regard,  we  assure  of  our
commitment and capability to foster an enabling environment so we are ready in the age of the
Great Convergence.
Thank you for your kind attention.
1
 Manyika, J. et al. (2013). “Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global
economy”. McKinsey Global Institute, May 2013.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
