  Opening remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Inaugural Intergovernmental Fintech Outreach Workshop 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Pretoria 
 19 April 2018 
 The fintech phenomenon: five emerging habits 
that may influence effective fintech regulation 
 Introduction 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Welcome to the inaugural Intergovernmental Fintech Outreach Workshop. 
 Let us begin with the words of Joseph Schumpeter: “Situations emerge in the process 
of creative destruction in which many firms may have to perish that nevertheless would 
be able to live on vigorously and usefully if they could weather a particular storm.”1 
 There  is  no  doubt  that  we  are  witnessing  a  wave  of  disruptive  innovation  and 
technology that one can liken to Schumpeter’s ‘creative destruction’, one that will leave 
no aspect of human endeavour untouched. Financial services in particular are within 
the eye of the storm of the change as a result of financial technology, or ‘fintech’. An 
elementary  Google  search  on  fintech  results  in  no  fewer  than  35.2 million  hits. 
Investment  in  fintech  over  the  last  three  years  is  estimated  to  have  been  well  over 
US$300 billion dollars.2  
                                                            
1  Joseph A. Schumpeter (2013). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. Routledge. 
2  KPMG (August 2017). Global analysis of investment in fintech. 
 Page 1 of 11 
Attention to the emergence of fintech has come from every quarter. There have been 
contributions  from  the  World  Economic  Forum  reflecting  the  potential  of  distributed 
ledger  technology  across  wide-ranging  financial  services  and  activities.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  has  been  vocal  about  the  potential  impact  of 
cryptocurrencies.  More  recently,  under  the  Argentinian  presidency,  the  G203  has 
committed  to  deepening  the  analysis  on  how  financial  inclusion  could  be  achieved 
through digital innovations. All of these examples  suggest a heightened expectation 
of shifts to financial services as a result of fintech. 
 At  the  outset,  it  may  be  appropriate  to  attempt  to  define  what  fintech  is.  ‘Fintech’ 
usually refers to innovative start-ups or underlying technologies such as blockchain, 
cloud  computing,  and  machine  learning.  Founded  on  an  activity-based  analysis 
conducted by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), the evolving definition of ‘fintech’ is 
that  it  is  neither  the  fintech  firms,  nor  the  start-ups,  nor  the  emerging  technologies. 
Rather, ‘fintech’ is the technology-enabled innovation in financial services as a result 
of the process of ‘creative destruction’. It may lead to new business models and new 
configurations within financial services. 
 The potential of financial technology 
 The  potential  of  fintech  is  well  described  in  one  of  the  earliest  reports  on  fintech 
commissioned  by  the  UK4  Treasury.  This  report  is  useful  in  that  it  outlines  how 
countries can positively position themselves in relation to fintech. A key finding of this 
report  is  that  a  country  could  establish  a  well-functioning  fintech  ecosystem  and 
competitively position itself provided that a holistic view is taken that focuses on the 
following four core ecosystem attributes: policy, talent, capital and demand. 
 Policy refers to the following: 
(i) 
regulatory regimes, which includes regulatory support for new entrants and 
innovative business models; 
                                                           
3  Group of Twenty 
4  United Kingdom 
 Page 2 of 11 
(ii) 
government programmes, including sector-growth initiatives which, in turn, 
include efforts to open up the sector, increase competition, attract foreign 
fintechs, and improve cyber-resilience; and 
(iii) 
taxation policy, which refers to the introduction of appropriate incentives to 
drive  greater  investment  in  fintech,  but,  dare  I  add,  should  also  include 
revisions to the tax code to ensure that profits generated are included in the 
taxation net of this nascent sector. 
 While  clear  and  appropriate  fintech  policies  are  important  catalysts  to  innovation, 
without talent and capital, fintech is likely to grow at a slower pace.  
 Talent refers to both the availability of technical, financial sector and entrepreneurial 
talent as well as the strengthening of the talent pipeline through immigration policies 
and  the  promotion  of  fintech  in  schools  and  universities  with  specialist  modules, 
apprenticeships and sponsored work placements. 
 Capital refers to access that start-ups and scale-ups should have to seed and growth 
capital  as  well  as  to  public  capital  markets.  The  report,  for  example,  lists 
investor-focused programmes such as the sponsorship of events for venture capital 
funds to meet early-stage fintechs and the creation of a growth capital fund to finance 
fintechs. 
 Last,  but  not  least:  although  each  of  the  previous  factors  is  necessary  for  the 
emergence  of  fintech,  actual  demand  relates  to  the  end-client  demand  across 
consumers, corporates and financial institutions. Governments can play a significant 
role in promoting the adoption rate of fintech through the  modernisation of payment 
and  supply  chain  solutions.  Although  demand  is  not  a  prerequisite,  without  it 
innovation in financial services is likely to take off at a slower pace. 
 This framework lays the foundation for developing fintech, especially at a time when 
the demand for cheaper, faster, simpler and more convenient financial services is high. 
As  policymakers  and  regulators,  we  have  been  acutely  aware  of  the  power  of 
developing  ecosystems.  I  further  believe  that  fintech  can  play  a  significant  role  in 
 Page 3 of 11 
addressing  broader  public-policy  objectives  such  as  financial  deepening,  increased 
competition, and greater efficiency in the provision of financial services. For regulators, 
though, the challenge is to balance the benefits that fintech may bring with its potential 
risks. 
 The global and domestic approaches to financial technology 
 Over  the  past  year,  the  FSB  and  the Bank for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  have 
also analysed fintech and its implications for policy objectives such as greater financial 
inclusion and financial stability. Although the BIS concluded that, at present, there are 
no  compelling  risks  from  emerging  fintech  innovations,  it  does  highlight  that  the 
assessment  of  financial  stability  implications  for  fintech  are  challenging  due  to  the 
limited availability of data and the fact that many innovations have not yet been tested 
through a full financial cycle. 
 South African policymakers and regulators have been following the developments and 
discourse on fintech very closely. Given the global developments, the local innovations 
as well as the fast-paced and cross-cutting nature of fintech, we have established an 
Intergovernmental  Fintech  Working  Group  (IFWG).  The  IFWG  comprises  National 
Treasury,  the  Financial  Services  Board,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Centre,  and  the 
South African Reserve Bank. It is anticipated that the National Credit Regulator and 
the Competition Commission will join the working group in due course. 
 Effective  coordination  between  policymakers,  central  banks,  financial  supervisors, 
regulatory authorities, financial ombudsmen and others, all with responsibilities related 
to fintech, is key to ensuring  that that policy is coordinated and synchronised in the 
financial sector. Regulation has to be harmonised. Given the cross-border nature of 
digital services, coordination on a global scale is vital, and the role of bodies such as 
the FSB and G20 will be important in this regard. 
 In South Africa, the Twin Peaks model of financial sector regulation, which is currently 
being implemented, aims to put in place a regulatory framework that better responds 
to  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  financial  sector,  including  fintech.  The  model  places 
 Page 4 of 11 
emphasis on ensuring consistent, harmonised regulatory approaches to activities in 
the 
financial  sector,  so 
that  comparable  activities 
face  similar 
regulatory 
requirements -  regardless  of  whether  the  institution  performing  the  activity  is  a 
‘traditional’ financial institution or a new fintech entrant. This approach is intended to 
better  keep  pace  with  changes  in  the  sector,  including  those  brought  about  by 
technological innovations. An example is the establishment of the IFWG mentioned 
earlier,  which  is  a  positive  development  in  driving  a  coordinated  and  consistent 
approach under the Twin Peaks model. 
 Given  this  broad  background  and  context  on  fintech,  and  with  this  coordinated 
approach in mind, I would like to turn our attention to this inaugural fintech outreach 
established  by  the  IFWG.  Why  is  this  outreach  important?  And  what  is  the  IFWG 
attempting to achieve through these engagements? 
 The importance of IFWG outreach 
 To  position  this  outreach  initiative,  and  to  draw  out  its  importance,  allow  me  to 
synthesise the findings from three seminal reports. These reports collectively point to 
possible best practices related to regulators’ efforts on fintech. The reports are: 
 the FSB’s Fintech Issues Group (FIG) report on Fintech supervisory and regulatory 
issues that merit authorities’ attention (published in June 2017);  
 the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) report on the Implications of 
fintech  developments 
for  banks  and  bank  supervisors 
(published 
in 
December 2017); and  
 the Fintech Action Plan released by the European Commission in March 2018. 
 These  reports  highlight  five  emerging  practices  that  may  influence  effective  fintech 
regulation  over  time.  These  practices  may  be  important  in  fostering  responsible 
innovation, promoting financial stability, and aligning regulators’ efforts to achieve a 
more inclusive and a more competitive financial system. 
    Page 5 of 11 
Practice 1:  focused  attention  on  innovation  as  a  result  of  technological 
advancements and the active review of regulatory regimes  
 The first best practice is for policymakers and regulators to dedicate attention to fintech 
innovations and be supportive of them - or at least to ensure that any barriers to fintech 
innovations are limited. This could be achieved through ensuring clear and appropriate 
regulatory regimes. The pro-innovation stance is drawn out in each of the reports. 
 The FIG report suggests that regulators should be agile whenever there is a need to 
respond  to  the  fast  changes  in  the  fintech  space,  and  they  should  be  quick  to 
implement  or  contribute  towards  a  process  of  reviewing  the  regulatory  perimeter 
regularly.  The  suggestion  is  to  adopt  an  approach  that  is  technology-agnostic  or 
neutral, and to focus on financial service activities. 
 In the BCBS report, it is suggested that while bank supervisors must remain focused 
on  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system,  they  may  wish  to 
consider  ways  of  executing  their  mission  without  unduly  hampering  beneficial 
innovations in the financial industry. 
 In the European Union’s (EU) Fintech Action Plan, one of the explicit goals is enabling 
innovative  business  models  to  scale  up  across  the  EU  region  through  clear  and 
consistent 
licensing 
requirements.  Actions 
include 
reviewing 
regulation  on 
investment-based  and  lending-based  crowdfunding  service  providers  for  business. 
The proposal specifically aims to ensure an appropriate and proportionate regulatory 
framework, which allows crowdfunding platforms that want to operate cross-border to 
do so with a comprehensive ‘passporting’ regime under unified supervision. Another 
action  that  supports  innovation  includes  a  review  of  the  current  authorising  and 
licensing  approaches  for  innovative  fintech  business  models.  The  European 
Commission will set up an expert group to assess whether there are any unjustified 
regulatory  obstacles  to  financial  innovation  in  the  EU’s financial  services  regulatory 
framework. 
  Page 6 of 11 
Authorities should therefore not merely acknowledge or observe innovation but should 
actively review fintech innovations (including those with new business models) with a 
view to ensuring proportionate and consistent authorising and licensing regimes. This 
practice  is  driven  by  an  underpinning  open  philosophy  and  a  flexible  approach  to 
fintech. Speakers and participants who have had experience of this approach in other 
jurisdictions  will  tell  us  more  about  the  impact  of  this  practice.  We  will  hear  how 
initiatives  in  cryptocurrencies,  digital  identity  and  digital  mobile  wallets  may  benefit 
from  a  pro-innovation  philosophy.  We  will  also  hear  from  jurisdictions  with  Smart 
Nation  policies  about  the  importance  of  such  national  philosophies and  policies.  Of 
course, as authorities, we will need to ensure level playing fields and manage the risk 
of  regulatory  arbitrage.  This  is  why  a  coordinated  multiple  regulator  approach  is  so 
important. 
 Practice 2: the creation of innovation facilitators such as hubs and sandboxes 
to keep close to emerging developments and foster shared learning  
 The  second  practice  is  the  review  and  creation  of  structural  mechanisms  to enable 
ongoing market engagements. These include efforts aimed at collecting fintech data, 
organising market outreach initiatives, and implementing structures such as innovation 
hubs, innovation accelerators and regulatory sandboxes. 
 Each  of  the  reports  strongly  encourages  shared  learning  with  a  diverse  set  of 
private-sector  parties. In  order  to  support  the  benefits  of  innovation  through  shared 
learning  and  through  greater  access  to  information  on  developments,  authorities 
should  continue  to  improve  communication  channels  with  the  private  sector  and 
should  continue  sharing 
their  experiences  with 
innovation  hubs, 
innovation 
accelerators and regulatory sandboxes, besides other forms of interaction. The reports 
suggest  that  the  successes  and  challenges  derived  from  such  approaches  may 
provide fruitful insights into new emerging regulatory engagement models. 
 Given the rapid pace of change as well as the emergence of new business models, 
I believe that, over time, the second practice that may influence effective regulation is 
the establishment of innovation facilitators. We will hear and learn from our colleagues 
 Page 7 of 11 
from the World Bank about the successes and learnings from those that have already 
implemented such mechanisms. We are pleased to also have the Monetary Authority 
of  Singapore  with  us  today;  they  can  share  first-hand  their  experience  with  their 
Innovation Hub, the Looking Glass and related initiatives, such as Project Ubin. 
 Practice 3:  coordination,  collaboration  and  communication  between  domestic 
regulators 
 We suggest that the third practice relates to coordination and collaboration between 
regulators. With the emergence of innovations such as crypto-assets or crypto-tokens, 
initial coin offerings and other alternate financial services platforms, there is often a 
‘grey area’ around the relevance and applicability of current regulatory frameworks. 
Furthermore,  the  development  of  new  regulatory  regimes,  if  applicable,  requires 
coordination between regulators.  As noted before, such coordination is important in 
ensuring consistent understanding and approaches between regulators. 
 The  importance  of  this  coordination  is  emphasised  in  the  FIG  report.  Due  to  the 
growing importance of fintech activities and the interconnections across the financial 
system,  authorities  may  wish  to  develop  further  their  lines  of  communication.  The 
BCBS report highlights that fintech developments are expected to raise issues that go 
beyond  the  scope  of,  for  example,  prudential  supervision,  as  other  public-policy 
objectives may also be at stake. This may include objectives such as the safeguarding 
of data privacy, cybersecurity, consumer protection, the fostering of competition, and 
compliance  with  anti-money  laundering  and  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism 
regulations. 
 I would like to emphasise the importance of harmonised approaches and regulatory 
regimes between domestic regulators. The principle that has to be emphasised is that, 
as  innovations  are  reviewed  and  as  regulatory  frameworks  are  developed  (where 
required  and  appropriate),  regulators  that  are  best  placed  to  supervise  certain 
activities should be given the  task to do so. Regulations should be appropriate and 
purposeful. Over the next two days, we will hear from you on how important you think 
 Page 8 of 11 
this coordination and collaboration between domestic regulators is and what steps we 
can take to further improve such coordination and collaboration. 
 Practice 4: global cooperation with standard-setting bodies 
 Turning  our  attention  to  the  fourth  practice,  we  suggest  that  continued  cooperation 
with  our  international  peers  and  standard  setting  bodies  remains  important.  In  an 
environment of financial services that are unconstrained by geographical borders and 
globally  situated  third-party  financial  services  providers  such  as  cloud  providers, 
continued  sharing  and  coordination  is  necessary.  Three  areas  that  require 
international cooperation by authorities are suggested in the FIG report: the monitoring 
of macrofinancial risks (such as procyclicality), the mitigating of cyber-risks, and the 
managing of operational risks from third-party providers. 
 In  support  of  this  cooperation,  the  European  Commission’s  report  highlights  the 
importance  of  the  development  of  standards.  Standards  for  open  banking  and 
application programming interfaces (APIs) as well as standards to limit cyber-threats, 
to  improve  regulatory  reporting,  and  for  distributed  ledger  technologies  (where 
appropriate) may be areas of priority. Through these engagements, the IFWG would 
appreciate your feedback on how important you think this global cooperation is and 
the  areas  where  you think  we may  need  to strengthen  coordination  with  regards  to 
standards development. 
 Practice 5:  building  staff  capacity  through  deep  knowledge  of  exponential 
technologies  
 The  last  practice  is  about  developing  deep  knowledge  structures  due  to  the 
fast-evolving innovation landscape. For the first time in the history of humankind, we 
have a new form of money: digital money. This type of ‘creative destruction’ does not 
have a single issuer, and it is not the liability of any single entity. Rather, it can appear 
in multiple databases at the same time. It cannot be changed except through defined 
updating  protocols. To understand this, and to apply  appropriate  regulatory tools to 
 Page 9 of 11 
these  innovations,  is  not  a  simple  matter.  Equally,  assessing  the  impact  of  these 
innovations on monetary policy and financial stability is not straightforward. 
 Technologies such as the Internet, cryptography, blockchain, Big Data and machine 
learning are shifting the types of skills and knowledge required to remain relevant  in 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Work that is routine will likely be replaced by robotics 
and/or  artificial  intelligence.  Regulators  also  need  to  evolve,  and  new  skills  will  be 
required in order to keep pace with market innovations. Making appropriate regulatory 
assessments will depend on such refined skills sets. We suggest that the last practice 
relates to building deeper knowledge and related skills sets of regulatory staff. Each 
of  the  mentioned  reports  raises  the  importance  of  intentionally  building  these  skills 
sets. 
 Conclusion 
 In conclusion: in reviewing the emerging regulatory practices deemed best, we have 
hopefully motivated, through reflections on three influential reports, why this outreach 
event and future market engagements are pivotal. You will notice during this workshop 
that the IFWG is pursuing the five practices discussed earlier. In this round, we look 
forward to hearing your views on private cryptocurrencies and initial coin offerings. We 
welcome  a  balanced  and  honest  approach  to  reviewing  both  risks  and  benefits. 
Learning humbly and openly from other jurisdictions on what works and what does not 
work will help us improve our own regulatory approach and regime. These should be 
appropriate  for  our  context  and  conditions.  Our  society  remains  divided  and 
sometimes deprived of important financial services. Financial inclusion is an important 
consideration in this Digital Age. Shifts such as open banking and APIs may play a 
role  in  financial  deepening.  We  look  forward  to  hearing  how  innovation  facilitators 
could be customised for our unique conditions. 
 Fintech is no doubt the consequence of disruptive innovation and as such will lead to 
the demise of many previously thriving businesses. It offers an immense opportunity 
to unlock efficiencies and reduce frictions, and could offer an important boost to our 
economy. Fintech can therefore play an important role in making inroads in addressing 
 Page 10 of 11 
the triple challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality. In order to achieve this, 
all  of  us -  whether  we are  regulators,  government  or  private business -  have a  vital 
role to play to deepen our understanding of this nascent sector and the opportunities 
and  risks  that  it  presents, and  above all  to  collaborate and  coordinate  much  better, 
both  domestically  and  internationally.  If  we  succeed,  we  would  have  contributed 
towards  improving  the  lives  of  millions.  If  we  fail,  we  would  have  missed  a  golden 
opportunity  to  make  a  meaningful  difference.  Hence,  we  do  not  have  the  luxury  of 
allowing this workshop to turn out to be yet another ‘talk shop’. Too much is at stake. 
 Please participate actively. We welcome your views, and I would like to assure you 
that  this  outreach  workshop  is  designed  in  such  a  manner  that  your  inputs  will  be 
carefully considered by the IFWG leadership. With this thought, let me wish you well 
in your deliberations over the next two days. 
 I would like to conclude with more words from Schumpeter: “Profit is the payment you 
get when you take advantage of change.” We could adopt this saying and claim that 
economic progress is the payment you get when you take advantage of change. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 11 of 11 
