Jens Weidmann: Opening statement at the 2018 press conference
on the annual accounts
Opening  statement  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 2018 press
conference on the annual accounts, Frankfurt am Main, 27 February 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to our press conference to present our annual accounts.
Before I discuss the most important points of our annual accounts with you, I would like – as is
my custom – to say a few words about economic developments and monetary policy. I will also
talk about the institutional architecture of the monetary union, which is the backdrop to monetary
policy in the euro area. As you know, the debate on developing the monetary union gained a lot of
traction  last  year  as  a  result  of  the  proposals  put  forward  by  Emmanuel  Macron  and  the
European Commission.
Following my introductory words, Mr Thiele will discuss in greater detail selected aspects of our
annual financial statement. After that, we will, as always, be happy to answer your questions.
2 Review of 2017
As you know, 2017 was the year of the German G20 presidency. We managed to put important
issues, such as the impact of digitalisation on the financial sector as well as cyber risks, on the
international agenda. Finance ministers and central bank governors are now aware that cyber
risks pose a potential systemic risk. The WannaCry attack that took place in the summer of 2017
drove home the fact that supervisory authorities need to keep a very close eye on this subject.
In addition, we were able to finalise the Basel III negotiations last year. That was another step
towards a safer banking system. It also gives banks planning certainty, as they can now gauge
what capital requirements their credit and investment decisions, for instance, involve.
In macroprudential supervision, German legislators created new macroprudential instruments for
the residential property market last year. This, too, was an important contribution towards greater
financial stability, as it established the legal basis for supervisors to step in to prevent overly lax
lending standards for loans for house purchase should financial stability risks emanate from the
residential real estate market.
Another important issue for us last year was, of course, Brexit. This was particularly true of our
banking  supervisors,  who  are  working  closely  with  BaFin  and  the  ECB  to  ensure  a  smooth
transition  for  the  financial  industry.  In  particular,  that  means  providing  information  and  being
available to answer questions from banks that have, to date, operated their European business
from London and now wish to establish offices or expand their presence in Germany.
Currently, the European Union and the United Kingdom are negotiating their future relationships
and  a  possible  transition  period.  However,  it  is  impossible  at  the  moment  to  predict  what  the
future relationships will look like and whether there will, indeed, be a transition period.
Financial institutions should therefore not be lulled into a false sense of security. Banks that wish
to continue to do business in the other economic area – that is, in an EU 27 country or in the
United Kingdom, respectively – should at least establish the necessary base units there. And for
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the European Union, base unit means more than just a “letterbox” company. It means that there
must be enough qualified staff at the respective location in the EU to support critical operations at
all times.
Last year also saw us complete our gold transfers. You may remember that the Bundesbank’s
Executive Board decided back in 2012 to repatriate by 2020 some of the gold reserves that are
stored  abroad.  These  transfers  have  now  been  concluded  successfully  and  well  ahead  of
schedule.
German  gold  is  now  stored  in  only  three  locations:  half  of  the  gold  reserves  are  held  at  the
Bundesbank in Frankfurt. The other half is stored with our two partner central banks, the Federal
Reserve Bank in New York and the Bank of England in London. The fact that the gold holdings
were spread across the individual storage sites was mainly due to historical reasons. With the
transfer  of  the  gold  to  the  remaining  storage  locations,  the  Bundesbank  has  adjusted  to  the
changed environment in terms of the objectives of safety, liquidity and cost efficiency.
Ladies and gentlemen
Although this list is not exhaustive, you can see that we faced challenges across the breadth of
our tasks in 2017 – and these tasks comprise more than just monetary policy.
But when it comes to the presentation of our annual accounts, the central bank balance sheet
and thus the profit and loss account are, of course, very much influenced by monetary policy.
3 Monetary policy
And that brings me to economic developments and monetary policy.
Economic performance was very satisfactory last year – in Germany, the euro area and beyond
– and the recovery accelerated further in the second half of the year especially. The upswing now
rests on a broad base everywhere.
Year-on-year growth in 120 countries accelerated last year. That includes the vast majority of
euro area countries.
Economic activity expanded at a far brisker pace here in 2017 than it had one year earlier. An
annual average growth rate of 2.5% was achieved – the best figure in ten years.
This is partly why the unemployment rate fell to its lowest level, 8.7%, since early 2009.
A host of sentiment indicators for the euro area are at their highest levels in many years. The
favourable  developments  in  economic  activity  are  therefore  expected  to  continue  in  the  first
instance.  In  December  last  year,  Eurosystem  economists  thus  again  raised  their  growth
forecasts for this year and the next. They now expect growth rates of 2.3% this year and 1.9%
next year.
Of course, not all euro area countries are experiencing the same pace of growth. But the good
news is that the range of growth rates recorded in the euro area narrowed last year, meaning
that here, too, the upturn is broad-based.
The German economy is even booming now. Employment hit new record highs in 2017, and
year-end  joblessness  was  at  its  lowest  level  since  reunification.  The  healthy  labour  market
situation was a boon to private consumption and housing investment; heavy capacity utilisation
led to a strong increase in industrial investment, too. Overall, the German economy expanded by
a seasonally and calendar-adjusted rate of 2.5% in 2017, with a  similar growth rate expected for
this year.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  both  the  euro  area  and  Germany,  the  economy  is  therefore  growing  at  a  faster  pace  than
potential  output,  and  this  has  already  been  the  case  for  some  time.  Enterprises  are  seeing
increasingly heavy capacity utilisation.
What this also means is that the real economic situation and the monetary policy stance have
rarely diverged as much as they do now.
This is because price pressures in the euro area remained relatively sluggish in 2017, too, even
though economic conditions have picked up. However, the higher oil price and the strengthened
upswing  helped  make  inflation  much  stronger  in  2017  than  in  2016.  The  slight  drop  in  the
headline rate in the past two months is due not only to one-off factors, but also to the oil price
effect now being washed back out of consumer price inflation.
The  subdued  domestic  price  pressures  reflect  the  fact  that  some  countries  are  still  trying  to
boost  their  price  competitiveness  by  keeping  wages  down. And  in  Germany,  the  migration  of
workers from other EU countries over the past few years has suppressed wage pressures and
hence domestic price pressures.
The Governing Council of the ECB was therefore agreed that expansionary monetary policy is
still  necessary. At  the  same  time,  we  agreed  that  the  more  dynamic  upturn  allowed  for  the
monthly asset purchases to be scaled back.
As you will also know, this prompted the Governing Council to decide in October 2017 to reduce
the  Eurosystem’s  monthly  asset  purchase  volume  from  €60  billion  to  €30  billion,  starting  in
January 2018.
But I’m sure you will also be aware that I believe there would have been a good case for reducing
the asset purchases sooner and setting a clear end date.
After all, a number of signs are suggesting that the tendency towards increasing domestic price
pressures is likely to be sustained. The robust state of the economy confirms the consensus
view on the ECB Governing Council that inflation will move towards the inflation target of below,
but close to, 2%. This can also be seen in the latest Eurosystem price forecast, as it happens.
And  it  is  also  demonstrated  by  the  current  pay  agreement  in  the  metalworking  and  electrical
engineering  industry  in  Germany.  The  agreement  is  not  only  consistent  with  the  expectations
underpinning our forecast, but also shows that the Phillips curve certainly retains its validity in
Germany.
In October last year the markets, too, expected the asset purchases to be terminated by the end
of 2018. A point that is also worth noting in this regard is that monetary policy will remain very
expansionary even after the end of the net asset purchases.
After all, the degree of monetary policy accommodation in the euro area is determined not so
much by what volume of assets are purchased each month as by the stock of assets held on the
Eurosystem balance sheet. And that stock comes to around €2.3 trillion in the meantime.
This stock of assets will, of course, remain constant even after the net purchases have been
terminated, because the ECB Governing Council long ago decided to reinvest the proceeds of
maturing  assets  in  bonds  even  after  the  end  of  the  net  purchases,  and  to  do  so  until  further
notice.
Ending the net purchases, then, won’t fully put the brakes on monetary policy. It will simply mean
not running at full throttle any more.
By  the  way,  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  euro  doesn’t  change  the  very  accommodative
monetary policy stance in the euro area either. This is because the euro’s price trend is – at least
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
partly  –  a  reaction  to  the  euro  area’s  improved  growth  prospects.  What  is  more,  there  are
indications that exchange rate movements are having a smaller impact on the inflation rate today
than they did in the past.  But it’s clear, of course, that the Governing Council will always keep a
close eye on the impact of exchange rate changes on the objective of price stability.
1
Ladies and gentlemen
There’s another thing that seems clear to me: the normalisation of monetary policy in the euro
area  will  take  quite  some  time.  That’s  why  I  believe  it  is  also  important  to  gradually  and
dependably  reduce  the  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  when  the  outlook  for  price
developments in the euro area permit us to do so.
The stock market turbulence at the start of the month shows that dependability in communication
plays a particularly significant role in this regard. Of course we don’t tie ourselves to the mast like
Odysseus, in monetary policy terms; instead, we always make our decisions on the basis of
current data and projections. But there needs to be clarity about our monetary policy reaction
function. 
Although the current low-interest-rate environment is supporting the upswing in the euro area, it
also makes it vulnerable should there be another economic cool-down.
The low interest rates create a kind of illusion of sustainability, for example with regard to public
finances. Against this backdrop, I find it very troubling that many finance ministers aren’t seizing
on  the  savings  they  have  made  from  the  low  interest  rates  and  favourable  developments  in
economic activity and using them to put their public finances on a sound longer-term basis.
The key metrics for government budgets improved in the past year – both the government debt
ratio and the deficit ratio are likely to have shrunk in the euro area overall – but the outturn is not
yet available. Yet this budgetary improvement is not down to consolidation efforts.
The  cyclically  adjusted  primary  surpluses  –  which  reflect  the  consolidation  efforts  –  have
remained steady or even declined of late.
Favourable economic developments should not obscure the fact that there is still some way to
go if we are to safeguard public finances. It is crucial for the sustainability of public budgets to
remain  beyond  reproach,  even  if  the  interest  rate  setting  returns  to  normal  or  the  economic
situation takes a turn for the worse and, for instance, the automatic stabilisers take effect.
However, finance ministers are not the only ones being called upon to take action in the current
phase of low interest rates. The banks, too, need to make efforts to ready themselves to weather
changes  in  the  macroeconomic  climate.  After  all,  an  economic  slowdown  might  also  be
accompanied by a renewed rise in credit risk.
One  of  the  side-effects  of  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  is  that  the  longer  the  low-
interest-rate environment persists, the greater the strain on banks becomes. An abrupt rise in
interest rates would then take a particularly heavy toll on banks’ earnings – such is the finding of
our low-interest-rate survey that we, together with BaFin, conducted once again last year among
the banks that we supervise.
The survey also revealed that small and medium-sized German banks and savings banks plan to
expand  alternative  sources  of  income  –  commission  business,  say  –  as  a  result  of  shrinking
margins in interest business. In addition, they want to roll out cost-cutting measures. On balance,
however, most of the institutions are expecting their annual profits to contract further on average
until 2021. This also means that, within the scope of their own planning, they have less leeway to
further build up their capital buffers, should they need to. 
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
As the majority of institutions are currently well capitalised, they will be able to withstand many of
the future stresses and strains arising from a potentially protracted spell of low interest rates.
Nevertheless,  the  longer  the  low-interest-rate  environment  persists  and  the  quicker  monetary
policy then has to be normalised, the greater the provision banks will need to make.
4 Use positive economic climate as an opportunity for reform
Ladies and gentlemen
The economy may be booming right now, but that should not blind us to the fact that there is still
a need for action – and that doesn’t just apply to fiscal policymakers and the banks.
It is true of other policy areas as well.
The recent improvement in the economic situation is largely a cyclical phenomenon. Long-term
growth prospects have not improved.
According to the latest calculations from the European Commission, potential growth will remain
lower over the next years than it was prior to the onset of the financial crisis.
Relying on monetary policy to move the euro area economies up to a persistently higher growth
path would be a risky undertaking, as monetary policy holds no sway over long-term growth. Only
governments can put economies back on a path of persistently higher growth – and they do so
by setting the proper gears in motion in labour market, competition and social policy.
This  is  why  the  ECB  Governing  Council  frequently  points  out  that  the  highly  expansionary
monetary policy needs to be flanked by growth-enhancing structural reforms.
That goes for Germany, too, where the current upbeat state of the economy is no reason for the
country to rest on its laurels. That’s because, there is a trend in Germany, too, towards lower
average growth rates, which will likely culminate in Germany having the second-lowest rate of
economic growth of all 42 OECD countries until 2030.
First, average productivity growth per hour worked has been contracting since 1970.
To make matters worse, a large number of skilled workers will leave the labour market in the
years to come. Both of these developments will put a damper on potential growth.
Thus, the challenge for Germany, too, is to boost productivity growth. This it could achieve, for
instance, by tapping into the opportunities provided by digitalisation and technological advances.
For one thing, Germany needs a state-of-the-art digital infrastructure and an education system
that  gives  as  many  people  as  possible  the  necessary  skills  to  make  the  most  of  the  new
technologies.
For another, flexible labour and product markets combined with a fit-for-purpose social safety net
will actually enable workers to switch to the most productive areas of the economy.
Furthermore, it will be imperative over the coming years to increase labour force potential.
This could be achieved by, say, boosting the participation of women in the labour force and, at
the very least, creating no further incentives for early retirement.
The foreseeable decline in the labour force could also be lessened by the influx of skilled workers
from abroad.
5 Developing monetary union
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The institutional architecture of monetary union likewise needs to be overhauled.
Setting  up  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism
(SSM) has rendered the euro area more resilient to crises. However, it would be a mistake to
believe that the euro area is now equipped to deal with all eventualities.
In that respect, I was pleased to see the debate on the future of monetary union gain renewed
traction last year.
In  a  speech  he  gave  in  September,  the  French  President  Emmanuel  Macron  proposed,  for
instance, communitising more policy areas such as defence, immigration and climate protection.
In  other  words,  he  advocates  taking  joint  decisions  in  these  policy  areas  and  financing  them
jointly.
Towards  the  end  of  last  year  the  European  Commission  presented  proposals  of  its  own  on
deepening European integration.
Ladies and gentlemen
Challenges  such  as  combatting  climate  change,  securing  external  borders  and  developing
common  communications,  energy  and  transport  networks  can  probably  be  handled  more
efficiently at the European than at the national level.
But in my view, further integration depends crucially on the order in which the steps towards it
are taken. It makes sense to begin by agreeing on what policies should be formulated jointly.
Only then should we address the issue of joint financing.
Conversely, however, in the interests of efficiency, thought also has to be given to what areas
under EU responsibility might be better dealt with by the individual member states themselves.
After all, the principle of subsidiarity, which remains the guiding principle of the EU, states that
responsibilities should only be transferred from the local, regional or national level to the EU if
they can be carried out more efficiently there. 
If tasks are tackled jointly, then it stands to reason that they should be financed jointly as well.
And if the joint financing of these tasks is based on each member country’s ability to pay, this can
also act as something of a stabiliser in the event of what are referred to as asymmetric shocks.
On the other hand, I consider a dedicated stabilisation facility tasked with cushioning asymmetric
shocks  to  be  unnecessary  and  inexpedient.  Under  the  present  institutional  architecture  of  the
euro  area,  a  member  country  with  sound  public  finances  can  use  fiscal  mechanisms  to  take
effective measures against downturns or crises, without breaching the fiscal rules or having to
resort  to  outside  assistance.  And  according  to  the  advocates  of  such  a  stabilisation  facility,
countries with unsound public finances should not be permitted to avail themselves of it in any
case.
And if a crisis threatens to overwhelm a member state financially, it can always turn to the ESM.
The ESM, of course, only grants assistance if conditions are met that are intended to eliminate
the  country’s  economic  problems.  In  my  view,  we  need  to  stick  to  this  practice,  since  ESM
assistance means that extensive risks are communitised.
For  the  very  good  reason  that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  in  practice  between  country-specific
shocks and structural problems, there is always a danger that such a stabilisation facility may
ultimately lead to permanent transfer payments.
6 The Bundesbank’s balance sheet and profit for the year
Ladies and gentlemen, the question surrounding the road ahead for monetary union is of great
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
significance to the work of the Bundesbank and of the entire Eurosystem.
For me, it is crucial that the institutional architecture of monetary union is designed in such a way
that  monetary  policymakers  are  freed  up  to  concentrate  on  their  objective  of  safeguarding
permanently stable prices.
First  and  foremost,  this  means  staking  out  the  framework  conditions  so  that  that  monetary
policymakers  do  not  come  under  pressure  to  make  high  levels  of  debt  sustainable,  to
compensate for low potential growth with an accommodative monetary policy, or to rush to the
aid of banks with liquidity assistance.
It  would  be  good  to  see  the  institutional  architecture  evolve  this  year  in  a  way  that  renders
monetary union more stable. Among others, steps towards this goal would include completing
the banking union – though subject to the condition that legacy assets are not communitised as a
result, that the sovereign-bank nexus is broken, and that the protection systems which function
successfully,  like  the  institutional  protection  scheme,  remain  intact.  This  would  probably  also
have  a  positive  effect  on  monetary  policy  going  forward,  as  it  would  reduce  the  likelihood  of
monetary policymakers having to act as a “crisis response unit”.
But  for  now,  monetary  policy  is  what  it  is  –  and  it  played  a  major  part  in  shaping  last  year’s
balance sheet.
And this brings me to the third item I want to discuss: our annual accounts and the central bank
profit.
The accommodative monetary policy that was pursued in 2017 once again led to an expansion of
our balance sheet. The assets side grew primarily as a result of the bond purchases and the
targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II).
Under the asset purchase programmes we bought bonds with a net value of around €160 billion
over the course of last year. A further €30 billion or thereabouts was added to this amount under
the longer-term refinancing operations.
On the liabilities side, the largest increase was recorded for deposits by credit institutions and
resident and non-resident depositors. Our excess liquidity totalled around €575 billion at year-
end.
The lengthening of the Bank’s balance sheet also drove up its profit, which stood at €2.0 billion
for the 2017 financial year. This is roughly €1 billion more than one year before.
Around €100 million of our profit is attributable to the fact that pension obligations are discounted
at a higher average interest rate following an amendment to the German Commercial Code. As
in the year before, however, the difference resulting from this is subject to a statutory restriction
on distribution.
The remaining distributable profit of €1.9 billion will today be transferred to the Federal Finance
Minister and used for budgetary financing.
The Bundesbank’s profit is higher due, in particular, to the rise in deposits of credit institutions on
the liabilities side of our balance sheet. As you are aware, we currently charge a negative interest
rate of –0.4% for these deposits.
By contrast, given the current low-interest-rate environment, there is de facto no interest income
on the assets side. This applies, in particular, to our bond purchases.
This means that our usual income situation has been reversed. In “normal times” it is the assets
which generate income, notably refinancing operations with banks. Now it is the opposite way
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
around.
As  I  pointed  out  in  the  last  two  years,  this  creates  considerable  interest  rate  risk  for  the
Bundesbank.
The interest income on the liabilities side can quickly turn into interest expenditure if the policy
rates pick up. However, given the comparatively long time to maturity of its investments, we will
also generate almost no income on the assets side in the longer term.
The continuation of the asset purchases has driven up interest rate risk. This is why we raised
our provisions for general risks by €1.075 billion.
Mr Thiele will give you more details on this in just a moment.
But first, I would again like to stress the point I made on this occasion one year ago. It would be
wrong to benchmark the monetary policy decisions against the central bank’s profit or loss. The
sole benchmark is whether our monetary policy succeeds in preserving price stability. And as far
as  this  is  concerned,  we  are  on  the  right  track.  If  the  upturn  continues  and  prices  rise
accordingly,  I  see  no  reason  why  the  ECB  Governing  Council  should  not  end  the  net  asset
purchases in the current year.
7 Conclusion and handover to Mr Thiele
With that, I will now hand over to Mr Thiele, who will provide you with more details on the annual
accounts.
We will then be happy to answer your questions.
Thank you for your attention.
1
See European Central Bank (2016), Exchange rate pass-through into euro area inflation, Economic Bulletin
7/2016, pp 27 ff.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
