William C Dudley: Important choices for the Federal Reserve in the
years ahead
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at Lehman College, Bronx, New York City, 18 April 2018.
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today at Lehman College.  In my remarks, I
will focus on the economic outlook—both over the near and longer term—and I will discuss some
of  the  important  monetary  policy  issues  that  will  be  considered  in  the  years  ahead,  after  my
tenure at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is (sadly) over.  As always, what I have to say
reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
1
(FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
The economic outlook
Over the near term, the economic outlook remains quite favorable.  I anticipate that the economy
will continue to grow at an above-trend pace in 2018 and 2019, which will put sufficient pressure
on the nation’s resources to push up inflation to the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent objective. 
There  are  several  reasons  to  be  confident  in  this  growth  outlook:  Monetary  policy  remains
accommodative, financial conditions are still easy, and the global economy is in the midst of a
synchronized expansion.  Moreover, significant fiscal policy stimulus from tax cuts and increased
federal  spending  will  boost  real  household  disposable  income  and  corporate  profits,  which
should support further gains in consumption and capital spending. 
In this context, I would not take much signal from the slowdown in consumer spending in the first
two months of this year.  As I see it, this slowdown was mostly due to two transitory factors: a
retrenchment  following  the  spurt  in  activity  from  recovery  efforts  following  Hurricanes  Harvey,
Irma, and Maria, and the delay in this year’s tax refund payments to those receiving certain tax
credits.    
2
Strong payroll employment gains also suggest that the slowdown in household spending will be
temporary.  Over the last three months, payroll gains have climbed to a monthly pace of 202,000
jobs,  somewhat  above  2017’s  monthly  average  of  182,000.    Robust  job  gains  coupled  with
moderate growth in labor compensation should ensure that household incomes will continue to
rise at a solid rate, even before factoring in the impact of this year’s reduction in personal income
taxes. 
With respect to inflation, most of the evidence is consistent with a slow movement toward the
FOMC’s 2 percent objective.  On a year-over-year basis through February, the overall Personal
Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index and the core PCE price index—which excludes
the  more  volatile  food  and  energy  components—have  risen  by  1.8  percent  and  1.6  percent,
respectively, from troughs of 1.4 percent and 1.3 percent last summer.  Further gains appear
likely at the end of this month, when the sharp decline in cellular telephone services prices that
occurred a year ago drops out of the year-over-year calculations.    
In  the  current  environment,  I  see  three  important  issues  regarding  the  appropriate  monetary
policy stance:
1.  How quickly to remove monetary policy accommodation—is a gradual path of removal still
appropriate now that the unemployment rate is 4.1 percent?
2.  How far to go in removing monetary policy accommodation—will monetary policy have to
move to a somewhat restrictive setting in the years ahead?
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
3.  How should the FOMC factor fiscal policy and trade policy developments into its monetary
policy decisions?
I will take each of these in turn.
As  I  see  it,  a  gradual  path  of  interest  rate  increases  remains  appropriate.    Even  though  the
unemployment rate is low, inflation remains below our 2 percent objective.  As long as that is
true, the case for tightening policy more aggressively does not seem compelling.  My conclusion
is reinforced by the fact that we do not know with much precision how low the unemployment
rate can go without prompting a significant rise in inflation.  We do not directly observe the non-
accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU.  Rather, we only infer it from the response
of wage compensation and price inflation as the labor market tightens.  
Also,  the  U.S.  labor  market  may  have  more  slack  than  the  4.1  percent  unemployment  rate
suggests.    Over  the  past  six  months,  the  unemployment  rate  has  remained  steady  despite
robust payroll gains.  As the labor market has improved, more people have been actively seeking
employment.  As a result, the labor force participation rate has flattened out despite the ongoing
aging of the workforce population.  Furthermore, because the U.S. labor force participation rate
for prime age workers is low compared to many advanced economies, the labor market could
conceivably improve even further before encountering significant resource constraints. 
That said, the Federal Reserve should not overstay its welcome.  It is important to get monetary
policy back to a neutral setting before the labor market becomes so tight that wages and prices
begin to rise at a pace inconsistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective.  Our mandate
from Congress is maximum sustainable employment and price stability—not simply a high level
of employment at one point of the business cycle. 
With respect to how far the FOMC should go in removing monetary policy accommodation, two
major issues stand out.  First, what represents a neutral monetary policy setting?  Second, under
what circumstances would it be appropriate to move beyond neutral to a restrictive setting?
Unfortunately,  we  do  not  also  observe  the  neutral  real  (i.e.,  adjusted  for  inflation)  short-term
interest  rate,  or  r*.    There  is  a  wide  range  of  estimates  at  any  time,  and  they  evolve  as  the
economic  environment  changes.    For  example,  all  else  equal,  continued  buoyant  financial
conditions  amid  recent  and  anticipated  future  rate  hikes  imply  that  r*  may  be  higher  than
previously estimated.  A shift to a more stimulative fiscal policy could also imply a somewhat
higher r*, at least temporarily. 
One’s view of the neutral rate may also be influenced by one’s assessment of the longer-term
economic  environment.    For  example,  if  we  are  in  a  period  of  “secular  stagnation”—
characterized by chronic excess global savings and aging populations—then one would expect
r* to remain persistently low.  But, if we are in a world of abating headwinds as we recover from
the  financial  crisis,  then  one  would  expect  r*  to  rise  over  time.    This  lack  of  clarity  about  the
environment increases the degree of uncertainty about the level of r*.
3
Despite all these uncertainties, one still has to have a viewpoint.  In the current circumstances, I
would judge that r* over the medium term is likely to be somewhere around 1 percent.  Although
that is higher than the estimates from some models, I have nudged up my estimate because
financial  conditions  are  still  easy  and  fiscal  policy  will  likely  be  quite  stimulative  in  2018  and
4
2019.  
If  the  neutral  real  interest  rate  is  around  1  percent,  there  is  still  some  distance  to  go  before
monetary policy actually gets tight.  At the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective, my estimate of r*
implies that the federal funds rate would need to rise to around 3 percent for monetary policy to
be considered neutral.  Of course, as the factors that influence r* change, my estimate of r* will
also move around over time. 
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
Whether monetary policy will need to move to a restrictive setting depends crucially on how low
the unemployment rate can go without inflation climbing meaningfully above 2 percent.  Although
the jury is still out on this question, last month’s Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, is
instructive.     Most  FOMC  participants—including  me—have  the  unemployment  rate  moving
considerably  below  their  estimate  of  NAIRU  by  2020,  with  inflation  climbing  slightly  above  2
percent and the federal funds rate moving above their estimates of its likely long-run value.  Thus,
the March SEP implies that most FOMC participants expect that monetary policy will need to
become slightly restrictive in the years ahead. 
Recent  fiscal  and  trade  policy  developments  are  likely  to  increase  the  uncertainty  around  the
distance to a neutral monetary policy stance and the possibility that the FOMC will have to move
to  a  restrictive  stance.    The  shift  in  fiscal  policy  toward  stimulus  is  somewhat  challenging
because of its timing—it is unusual to move fiscal policy sharply in a stimulative direction at a
mature  stage  of  a  business  cycle—and  because  the  shift  puts  the  nation’s  fiscal  path  on  an
unsustainable  trajectory.    According  to  the  projections  released  earlier  this  month  from  the
Congressional  Budget  Office,  or  CBO,  the  federal  budget  deficit  is  anticipated  to  exceed  4½
percent of GDP in 2019, well above the level that would be needed to keep the federal debt-to-
GDP ratio from rising.   Moreover, the CBO expects that the pressures on the budget will be
substantial over the next decade, with deficit projections ranging between 4½ and 5½ percent of
GDP throughout the period.  Debt service costs will move sharply upward in coming years as
federal debt continues to grow and interest rates likely increase further.  Additionally, entitlement
spending is likely to increase sharply as members of the baby boom generation continue to retire
7
—myself included.  
6
The shift toward a more aggressive U.S. posture on trade also likely increases uncertainty.  On
the one hand, such a posture could lead to revised trade agreements that provide the United
States with greater access to foreign markets and better protection of intellectual property.  This
would  tend  to  raise  U.S.  productivity  and  real  GDP  growth.    On  the  other  hand,  tougher
bargaining could lead to retaliation and higher trade barriers, here and abroad.  In contrast to the
first  scenario,  this  outcome  would  be  quite  negative—leading  to  higher  inflation,  lower
productivity, and slower potential GDP growth.   Over time, how U.S. trade policy evolves will
have  important  implications  for  the  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy—and,  by  extension,  for
U.S. monetary policy.  By increasing uncertainty around the economic outlook, these shifts in
fiscal  and  trade  policy  could  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  FOMC  to  achieve  its  dual  mandate
objectives in the years ahead. 
Longer-term monetary policy issues
8
Over the longer term, the FOMC will also need to address a number of other important issues. 
These  include:  1)  Determining  the  appropriate  long-term  implementation  framework  for  U.S.
monetary  policy,  and  2)  deciding  whether  the  strategic  framework  underlying  monetary  policy
decisions  needs  to  be  adjusted  to  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  getting  pinned  at  the
9
effective lower bound for short-term interest rates.
For the first issue, I see two options: return to the “corridor”-type system that was in place prior to
the  financial  crisis,  or  remain  with  the  framework  that  has  been  in  place  since  the  crisis—
namely, a “floor” system.  In a corridor system, reserves in the banking system are scarce, and
the federal funds rate is set by adjusting the supply of reserves through open market operations
to  balance  demand  and  supply  at  the  FOMC’s  target  range.    In  contrast,  in  a  floor  system,
reserves are abundant, so that the interest rate the Federal Reserve pays on excess reserves,
or IOER, is the primary tool used to control the federal funds rate. 
In my view, the case for retaining the current floor system is very compelling for a number of
reasons.    First,  it  is  operationally  much  less  complex  than  a  corridor  system.    In  the  current
regime,  the  setting  of  IOER  is  largely  sufficient  to  maintain  the  federal  funds  rate  within  the
 3 / 7
10
BIS central bankers' speeches
FOMC’s target range, as we have seen over the past few years.
  In contrast, a corridor system
requires  forecasting  the  many  exogenous  factors  that  affect  the  amount  of  bank  reserves
outstanding, and then engaging in open market operations on a near daily basis to keep reserves
at a level consistent with the FOMC’s target range.
 This task would likely be more difficult now
because of greater fluctuation in these exogenous factors relative to when the corridor regime
was last in place. 
11
10
Second, a corridor system constrains the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide the types of lender-
of-last-resort backstops that can help support financial stability.  Prior to gaining the authority to
pay interest on reserves in the fall of 2008, Federal Reserve officials—myself included—were
faced with a question: if the take-down on a proposed liquidity facility were large, how would we
be able to drain the added reserves on a timely basis to maintain control of the federal funds
rate?  This was not just a theoretical issue during the financial crisis.  The initial auctions of the
Term Auction Facility, or TAF, were kept relatively small, in part, because of concerns that larger
programs would make it more difficult for the manager of the System Open Market Account (me,
in that particular case) to drain sufficient reserves to offset the TAF reserve additions.  Similarly,
the  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility  (TSLF)—which  involved  the  swap  of  Treasury  collateral
from  the  Federal  Reserve  against  lower-quality  collateral  held  by  primary  dealers—was
introduced in large part because collateral swaps, unlike cash loans, did not affect the amount of
reserves in the banking system.  My overall point is that broad-based, open-ended lender-of-last-
resort facilities are more difficult to accommodate in a corridor system because of the need to
drain any reserve additions to keep the federal funds rate close to the FOMC’s target. 
I  see  this  as  an  important  shortcoming  of  the  pre-crisis  corridor  regime  that  does  not  get
sufficient  attention.    Having  the  ability  to  introduce  broad  and  credible  lender-of-last-resort
backstops—well  secured  by  pledged  collateral—can  be  critical  when  confidence  falters  and
financial stability is at risk.  Private sector participants are more likely to continue to engage with
their counterparties—and to borrow and lend—when they know a central bank backstop will be
available  if  economic  and  financial  conditions  deteriorate.   A  corridor  regime  could  cause  the
Federal  Reserve  to  delay  or  avoid  providing  such  backstops,  which  could  increase  financial
stability risks by causing lenders and borrowers to disengage with one another earlier.
12
Although the FOMC has not made a final decision about a future framework for implementing
monetary policy, meeting minutes confirm that participants recognize the advantages of a floor
system.  As the November 2016 FOMC minutes note: “Meeting participants commented on the
advantages of using an approach to policy implementation in which active management of the
supply of reserves would not be required….[S]uch an approach was seen as likely to be relatively
simple  and  efficient  to  administer,  relatively  straightforward  to  communicate,  and  effective  in
enabling interest rate control across a wide range of circumstances.”
13
The  second  major  issue  facing  the  FOMC  is  whether  to  change  its  strategic  framework  to
mitigate the risk of a return to the effective lower bound for interest rates.  Once the federal funds
rate  is  close  to  zero,  the  FOMC  is  constrained  in  its  ability  to  lower  short-term  interest  rates
further, and the other available policy options to provide monetary policy stimulus may be less
effective.    If  the  FOMC  were  unable  to  provide  sufficient  stimulus,  the  economy  could  have
difficulty  recovering.    In  turn,  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  could  fall—and  thus  raise  real
interest  rates—effectively  tightening  monetary  policy  and  making  the  task  of  generating  a
sustainable recovery even more difficult. 
Some have argued that a desirable way to reduce this risk would be to raise the FOMC’s inflation
objective  from  2  percent  to  perhaps  3  or  4  percent.    Their  reasoning  is  that  if  the  inflation
objective were somewhat higher, nominal interest rates at the later stages of the business cycle
would also tend to be higher, which would provide greater scope for the FOMC to cut short-term
interest rates to stimulate the economy, if necessary. 
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
While recognizing that there is a legitimate effective lower bound risk, I do not support the option
of  raising  the  inflation  objective,  for  three  reasons.    First,  I  doubt  that  a  higher  inflation  target
would  be  viewed  as  consistent  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Congressional  mandate  to  pursue
price stability.  Our employment and inflation mandates have been established by Congress, not
by the Federal Reserve. 
Second,  the  risks  of  being  pinned  at  the  effective  lower  bound  for  interest  rates  may  be
overstated.  Only once in the postwar period have we reached the zero lower bound.  Upending
several decades of effort to anchor inflation expectations around 2 percent might be too high a
price to pay to reduce the effective lower bound risk by what might prove to be a small amount. 
In  this  vein,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  FOMC  now  has  a  more  credible  set  of  tools
available to use at the effective lower bound than it did in 2008, when those tools were largely
unproven.  Forward guidance about the path of short-term interest rates and quantitative easing
have been effective in providing monetary policy stimulus in the post-crisis period.  Because this
is now more broadly appreciated, households and businesses should be more confident that the
Federal  Reserve  has  sufficient  tools  available  at  the  effective  lower  bound  to  generate  a
sustainable  economic  recovery.    This  greater  confidence,  in  turn,  should  help  keep  inflation
expectations  from  declining—which  should  also  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  hitting  the
lower bound. 
Third, there are arguably better ways of reducing risks associated with the effective lower bound
than a higher inflation objective.  In particular, Congress could increase the size and scope of the
automatic  fiscal  stabilizers  that  support  economic  activity  and  income  during  economic
downturns.  For example, Congress could enact legislation in which employment payroll taxes
would be automatically reduced when the unemployment rate rose above a particular threshold. 
With such stabilizers in place, households and businesses would anticipate additional income
support  in  the  face  of  a  cyclical  downturn.    This  approach  would  be  more  powerful  than
discretionary fiscal actions that carry a greater degree of uncertainty.
Another option to help better anchor inflation expectations around the current objective would be
to move to a price-level targeting, or PLT, regime.  Under the current inflation targeting regime,
the FOMC follows a “bygones are bygones” policy: Misses of the inflation objective on one side
are not deliberately offset by subsequent misses on the other.  Therefore, when inflation runs
persistently below the objective, policymakers do not strive to push inflation above the objective in
the future.  Under these conditions, the risk is that inflation expectations will become unanchored
to the downside.  In contrast, under a price-level targeting regime, the FOMC would commit to
make  up  any  shortfalls  below  its  2  percent  objective  by  allowing  inflation  to  climb  above  the
objective  for  the  time  necessary  to  eliminate  the  shortfall.    This  commitment  to  offsetting  the
period  of  below-target  inflation  with  a  period  of  above-target  inflation  would,  presumably,  help
keep inflation expectations from becoming unanchored to the downside. 
However, a symmetric PLT regime—in which misses have to be made up on both sides of the
inflation  objective—has  an  important  shortcoming.    Compensating  for  inflation  overshoots  by
deliberately keeping inflation below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective would increase the risk of
getting pinned at the effective lower bound for interest rates. 
As a consequence, some—including former Chairman Ben Bernanke—have proposed adopting
an asymmetric PLT regime.  In such a system, misses below the objective would be offset by
misses above only when the effective lower bound was binding.  Under normal circumstances,
misses above the objective would not be offset.  Rather, they would be treated as “bygones,” as
is currently the case.
14
However,  I  suspect  that  establishing  a  modified  PLT  regime  would  present  some  challenges.
 First, for such a modified PLT to be effective in anchoring inflation expectations, households and
businesses  would  have  to  understand  how  the  regime  would  work,  and  view  the  Federal
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reserve’s  commitment  as  credible.    One  can  imagine  that  such  credibility  might  be  hard  to
sustain during a long spell of inflation misses to the downside.  Second, while such a regime
might be attractive in broad brush form, the devil lies in the details.  If inflation undershot for a few
years,  what  would  the  desired  overshoot  path  look  like?    How  high  would  the  FOMC  permit
inflation to go above its objective, and for how long?  What would happen if the Fed failed to fully
offset past downside misses and cumulative undershoots became sizable? 
My view is that we should further study how PLT frameworks might work in practice.
  But, it is
possible that a simpler approach of committing to keeping the average inflation rate around 2
percent over the medium term might be just as appealing.  It might be sufficient to better anchor
inflation  expectations  while  avoiding  the  communication  challenges  and  complexity  of  an
asymmetric PLT regime. 
15
In  this  vein,  I  also  would  evaluate  whether  the  inflation  goal  should  be  recast  as  a  range  of,
perhaps, 1½ to 2½ percent, from the current 2 percent objective.  A range might have several
advantages over a point target.  First, it might be viewed as more realistic given that measured
inflation will always randomly fluctuate relative to its underlying trend. That is to say, even if the
FOMC performs its job exceedingly well, very rarely will the inflation rate, as measured by the
PCE price index, be precisely at 2 percent.  Second, having a relatively narrow range would send
a  message  that  the  FOMC  is  discriminating  between  two  regimes—one  in  which  inflation  is
within the range and concerns about inflation are low, versus another in which inflation is outside
the range and concerns about inflation are more elevated.  
Even so, I would not recommend shifting to such a range currently.  I would only consider doing
so  once  the  FOMC  has  successfully  and  sustainably  pushed  inflation  back  to  its  2  percent
objective.  Making such a change now might be viewed as “moving the goal posts,” given the
persistent shortfall of inflation in recent years relative to the objective.  And, doing so now might
imply a greater tolerance for missing inflation to the low side in an asymmetric way.  That would
not be desirable at a time when inflation expectations are, if anything, too low, rather than too high
relative to the FOMC’s objective. 
To  sum  up,  the  economy  is  broadly  in  a  good  place  and  the  short-term  economic  outlook
remains favorable.  On a personal level, I am pleased that I will be leaving my current position at
a  time  when  the  FOMC  is  likely  to  be  very  close  to  its  employment  and  inflation  objectives—
recognizing, of course, the terrible damage of the financial crisis and the long time it has taken to
get here. 
Uncertainty  about  trade  policy  and  the  fact  that  we  are  now  on  an  unsustainable  fiscal  path,
however, have raised the longer-term risks.  With respect to monetary policy, there are a number
of important choices the FOMC will need to make in the years ahead.  I have outlined some of
my  preferences  today:  continuing  with  the  current  floor  system  for  the  implementation  of
monetary policy, and some of the steps that we could take to reduce the risk should interest
rates return to the effective lower bound in the future. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions. 
1
2
3
4
Gerard Dages, Jonathan McCarthy, and Paolo Pesenti assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Specifically, the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Additional Child Tax Credit. 
See, for example, Lawrence Summers, U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero
Lower Bound.
See, for example, some estimates based on the frequently-cited Laubach and Williams model. See Thomas
Laubach  and  John  C.  Williams  (2003),  “Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, v. 85, iss. 4, pp. 1063–70; Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2016), “Measuring the Natural
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Rate of Interest Redux,” Business Economics, v. 51, iss. 2, pp. 57–67; and Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach
and  John  C.  Williams  (2017),  “Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest:  International  Trends  and
Determinants,” Journal of International Economics, Supplement 1, v. 108, pp. S59–75.
See Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents under
their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, March 2018.
See Congressional Budget Office (2018), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028, April 9, 2018.
See also William C. Dudley, The Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Beyond, January 11, 2018.
For a further discussion, see William C. Dudley, Making Globalization Work, March 1, 2018.
The  costs  of  holding  cash  make  possible  the  use  of  (slightly)  negative  interest  rates—employed  by  some
countries outside the U.S. in recent years—as a result, the term “effective lower bound” is used here.
Control of the federal funds rate has also been supported by the overnight reverse repurchase agreement
facility, which accepts cash from an array of institutional investors at a rate 25 basis points below the interest
rate paid on excess reserves. 
These exogenous factors include the U.S. Treasury’s cash balance at the Federal Reserve, the foreign central
bank repo pool, the overnight reverse repo facility, and currency outstanding. 
Because the amount of reserves in a floor system is greater than in a corridor system, this also can be helpful in
easing frictions in terms of payment flows.  With large reserve balances, banks have higher cash balances at
the Fed.  As a result, they are less likely to incur daylight overdrafts and, thus, they have less need to monitor,
and, at times, delay outgoing payments. 
See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1–2, 2016.
See Ben Bernanke, Monetary Policy in a New Era, Brookings Institution, October 2, 2017.
Others  have  proposed  adopting  a  nominal  GDP  targeting  regime,  which  has  its  own  strengths  and
weaknesses, but it is not considered here for the sake of brevity. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
