 SPEECH 
BY MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS 
PER CALLESEN, DANMARKS NATIONALBANK AT 
FINANCE DENMARK'S EXECUTIVE CONFERENCE, 
3 SEPTEMBER 2018 
 
  
 
The European banking union in perspective – is there risk sharing and 
 
 
 
3 September 2018 
joint liability?  
 
 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY  
  Thank you for inviting me to speak.  
Many of us who are present today had an opportunity to focus on the 
economy at the annual meeting of the Association of Local Banks a few 
months ago. So I will provide only a brief summary – without any figures. 
Instead, my presentation will be about international cooperation and 
specifically the European banking sector and the reinforced banking co-
operation, also known as the banking union. I will not cover all aspects of 
this topic, but will focus on the issue of risk sharing, i.e. whether some 
institutions will be liable for the debts of others.  
The main conclusions will be: (1) The economy and financial stability are 
still on a steady course. (2) International rule-based cooperation is under 
pressure. That gives cause for concern and emphasises the need to pro-
tect the cooperation that exists and that we are able to participate in. (3) 
As regards the banking union and the euro area, a clear picture is emerg-
ing – so far and looking ahead – of very limited money transfers between 
member states. In other words, there is limited risk sharing and joint li-
ability. Some Europeans lament this, and there are arguments both for 
and against risk sharing, but there are good reasons why the institutions 
have been designed as they have.  
The economic and financial situation 
Four short remarks about the economic and financial situation: 
Firstly: The economic recovery has been successful until now. It has been 
carefully nurtured with reforms and what we might call macroprudential 
nudging. We have avoided a situation where government and parliament 
have lost patience. Consumers and investors are spending money earned 
Side 1 af 9 
  rather than borrowed on consumption and investment. And this time 
around, banks have been more hesitant to grant risky credits. In short, 
we have not seen a fiscal or credit expansion with a resultant boom and 
bust cycle this time. We must ensure that this continues. 
So, secondly, our imbalances are small. We also have a large current ac-
count surplus. When the economy reverses – as it will, although we do 
not know how and when – domestic factors need not trigger a deep re-
cession. But there are major external risks linked to the procyclical fiscal 
boost in the USA, something as old-fashioned as trade restrictions, as 
well as weaknesses and, perhaps, experiments in several European coun-
tries and emerging markets.  
Thirdly, we have capacity pressures, but so far without inflation. This can 
lead to loss of market shares, but we cannot produce more than our la-
bour resources permit. There are signs that this pressure is affecting 
productivity. We must take care, but the situation is not as bad as it was 
during the upswings in the mid-1980s and mid-2000s. 
Fourthly, times are also good in the financial sector, although risks are 
increasing. Far into the upswing, interest rates remain very low, there are 
a number of international risks, and there is fierce competition to provide 
loans in a low-demand market. It is time for a larger countercyclical cap-
ital buffer. We have a sound real economy with buffers, but there is limit-
ed scope for reducing interest rates and providing fiscal stimuli next time 
the economy goes into recession. When that happens, the financial sec-
tor cannot and should not be part of the problem. 
International cooperation under pressure 
Now I will turn my attention to international cooperation. We are fortu-
nate to live in an age of rule-based international organisations set up by 
a few forward-looking generations that came just before ours.  
In the field of economics, the IMF, the World Bank, the WTO, the OECD, 
the EU and the euro project should be highlighted. These institutions 
have treaties and statutes, governing bodies representing all member 
states, voting rules, tools for further development and settlement of dis-
putes, and courts of law and rulings with equal treatment. 
It ought to be self-evident why rule-based cooperation is a good idea for 
everyone, and especially for small and medium-sized countries. Unless they 
choose isolation, they would otherwise have to approach the largest and 
strongest countries one by one, on a case-by-case basis, and then adhere 
Side 2 af 9 
  to the standards set by the largest and strongest countries. Settlement of 
disputes would be dependent on the goodwill of the various large coun-
tries. 
It requires vision, outlook and a long time horizon for large countries to 
commit to rule-based cooperation, as they will have to give up some ac-
tual decision-making power. They have to argue their cases, they may 
find themselves in a minority in concrete voting situations, and in legal 
dispute resolution the rules apply, not the sizes and short-term interests 
of the parties. So why did the large countries choose not only to partici-
pate, but also to lead the way when setting up these institutions? Pre-
sumably it helped a little that binding cooperation is fair and intellectually 
satisfactory. But a much more decisive factor has probably been that, in 
economic terms, it is far more efficient for everyone, and the alternative is 
political chaos, with anarchy, shifting and random alliances and eternal 
conflicts, not least between large countries. 
Seen from our perspective, as a small country, rule-based cooperation has 
to some extent been challenged by institutions with the major powers as 
members – such as the G7, G20, FSB (Financial Stability Board) and Basel 
Committee – for they do not operate with treaty rules and equal treatment, 
and furthermore we are not invited to join them. On the other hand, they 
are more concerned with coordination and advice rather than direct deci-
sion-making. The EU and the ECB sit at the table and serve as buffers in re-
lation to implementation. And perhaps it is just as well that the largest 
countries meet up in smaller forums and have an opportunity to avoid frus-
trations they may have in the rule-based institutions where they need to 
negotiate with many other large and small countries. 
It is more serious if large countries withdraw from existing agreements, 
prevent the rule-based institutions from working efficiently or go solo 
and test the limits of or act in direct contravention of the written or un-
written rules of the institutions. Or if medium-sized and small countries 
individually get the notion that they will be able to decide more them-
selves by withdrawing from the institutions. In this case they face a diffi-
cult choice. Either they must follow the rules laid down by others – with-
out having any influence on them. Or they must accept the loss of pros-
perity and the hassle imposed on the government, businesses and citi-
zens from opting for isolation and their own rules, plus harvest possible 
windfalls that may come in the form of bilateral agreements. Unfortunate-
ly, there are topical examples of both situations, and in some countries 
there is pressure to follow suit. This also poses a risk to Danish prosperity 
and influence. It is important to keep the value of broad international co-
Side 3 af 9 
  operation in mind, also when focusing (more narrowly) on issues such as 
the banking union, and the implications if Denmark at some point de-
cides to join it. 
The development of the banking union  
The banking union is not fully developed and is not likely ever to be. There 
will always be new issues and proposals to consider. But the largest and 
most important pieces have fallen into place with the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism and the Single Resolution Board, both of which are function-
ing.  
The participants are currently discussing the collaboration under the 
heading of "risk reduction and risk sharing. The heading is not well-
chosen, as it gives an impression of a "quid pro quo" mindset. In reality, 
the "discussion" comprises a number of elements that are all well-
founded, also when viewed separately. 
The discussion has been organised, e.g. via the development of a set of 
indicators for the soundness of the banking sector. These may be of sep-
arate interest, but will also be used as criteria for the development of the 
potential European Deposit Insurance Scheme, EDIS – which I will return 
to later. 
Risk reduction 
As in this country, banks in the rest of Europe are also benefiting from the 
stronger economy and the efforts to clear up the mess left by the crisis.  
Return on equity has risen despite a slightly depressed interest margin, 
but with considerable variation between member states. The German 
banks stand out with relatively low earnings. There has been consolida-
tion within the sector, as also seen in Denmark. 
The European banks are better capitalised. This is because they hold 
more capital, but also because their risk weights have fallen. (This reflects 
an improved cyclical position and better credit management, but also the 
discontinuation of weak banks and divestment of non-performing loans.) 
Liabilities are also being issued to meet the MREL (Minimum Requirement 
for own funds and Eligible Liabilities). Observance of the MREL is to en-
sure that eligible liabilities can be written down or converted into equity 
in a reasonably orderly manner if the institution is failing and is systemic-
ally important. In that case, it must be recapitalised and continued in a 
new form. It will take some years before the MREL is fully built up. In 
Side 4 af 9 
  Denmark we have also begun to build up MREL funds, although no MREL 
requirement yet applies to mortgage banks, as you will know. 
As regards liquidity, it has been agreed to apply the two liquidity ratios, 
LCR and NSFR1, as indicators.  
The LCR has, on average, increased considerably in most member states, 
and the distance to the 100 per cent requirement is increasing. The NSFR 
requirements are also generally met. 
The spread in the share of non-performing loans has been a significant 
barrier in relation to encouraging the economically strong member states 
to engage in more risk sharing. In terms of legislation and practise, the 
ability and willingness of member states to realise the underlying assets 
and collateral pledged for non-performing loans, e.g. in the form of en-
forced sale, also differ. This is to a considerable extent politically or cul-
turally motivated. The volume of non-performing loans has fallen in most 
member states, and they have to a larger extent been taken into account 
in the banks' financial statements, e.g. in the form of impairment charges. 
All in all, the indicators show a clear improvement in the banks' sound-
ness. As regards capital adequacy and liquidity, the EU requirements are 
generally met. The situation in relation to non-performing loans is im-
proving, but further improvements are required in some member states.  
Risk sharing in perspective 
What is more important than current indicators of banks' soundness – 
which may change – is the ability to understand and interpret the institu-
tions that are already or may at some point be involved in risk sharing 
between banks and government finances across member states. An in-
surance element of this kind may be useful when handling specific crises 
as it may reduce spillover effects between banks in crisis-ridden member 
states. And it can reduce interdependence between banks and the gov-
ernments of their home countries. On the other hand, it may seem unfair 
and may even increase institutions' risk appetite if taxpayers or banks in 
other member states are liable for the consequences of decisions and 
risk-taking beyond their control.  
 1 The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (cf. the EU Capital Requirements Regulation) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (cf. 
the current proposal to amend the EU Capital Requirements Regulation, which has not yet been adopted). 
Side 5 af 9 
  Both views can be justified. But it is a fact that the decisions made within 
the union show a strong aversion to risk-sharing and to some partici-
pants – banks or sovereign states – being liable for incidents or decisions 
made in other member states. This can be illustrated from four different 
angles.  
My first example is the loan programmes for crisis-ridden member states 
from the IMF2 and the ESM3. Especially the Greek programme has been in 
focus in recent years. These loans are intergovernmental and extend far 
beyond the banks, but they are, in principle, interesting in relation to 
understanding the dominant European mindset that applies, also in the 
banking union. That is why I will elaborate a little on this issue. My point is 
that the programmes consist of loans and liquidity support, subject to spe-
cific terms and conditions. They have involved neither direct nor indirect 
fiscal transfers. Today these programmes are seen as a success, although 
the picture of a Greek recovery is still somewhat blurred, which is hardly 
surprising. After all, it took several decades before Denmark had fully re-
covered from the situation in the early 1980s, when the economic chal-
lenges in some respects resembled those faced by Greece today. 
The debts of Greece have been written down, but only for private-sector 
creditors. The interest terms have been very accommodative and Greece 
annually saves several per cent of GDP on its government interest pay-
ments. For example, Portugal's interest expenses are higher, even though 
its debt is lower. But the interest rate has not been lower than that at 
which the IMF and ESM have been able to borrow in the market. The 
principals of the loans have not been reduced. Instalments and interest 
payments have been postponed considerably, but have not been written 
down. There has been a reduction in the margin lenders add to their fi-
nancing costs, and there is a possibility that the ECB will waive its profit 
on market purchases of Greek government bonds, but again there have 
not been any fiscal transfers from other member states. 
In the international press, increased write-down of debt, also to other 
governments, has been called for. But write-down of government lending 
is a fiscal transfer, and there are good reasons why this has not taken 
place. In that situation, taxpayers in the lender states would feel that they 
were bearing the costs of decisions made in borrower states – decisions 
 2 The IMF, International Monetary Fund, established in 1944. The IMF today has 189 member countries and a 
lending capacity of around 1,000 billion dollars. 
3 The ESM, European Stability Mechanism, established by the euro area member states in 2012 as an intergov-
ernmental institution. The ESM has a lending capacity of 500 billion euro. 
Side 6 af 9 
  that they could not influence. This would provide a basis for political con-
flicts in and between member states. Taxpayers and the government of the 
borrower state would have a joint incentive to ease fiscal plans if others 
were ultimately to foot the bill. And it may be difficult to raise government 
loans for other crisis-ridden member states in future if they can subse-
quently be converted into income transfers. 
Fiscal transfers can be perceived as "taxation without representation". 
And there is a legitimate need for member states to be allowed to test 
their own policies and hence also to bear the consequences. A balance is 
struck because there is a common fiscal framework which is discussed on 
an ongoing basis. The rules are politically rather than legally binding. Can 
it be simplified? It is doubtful. Does it work? Yes, when member states use 
it as support for sound policies rather than making it a scapegoat. So it 
solves some, but not all, problems. Nor can the banking union be ex-
pected to solve all problems. 
Backstoppers are the assistance programmes that impose strict condi-
tions on the borrowers. This will always be controversial, but the re-
quirements are milder than the conditions and interest rates that a crisis-
ridden member state may obtain on market terms. 
Another example is the crisis management of individual banks in recent 
years, e.g. in Italy and Spain. It should be remembered that although the 
BRRD/SRMR4 rules apply, the build-up of MREL funds has by no means 
been completed yet. In the most controversial cases, the EU institutions 
assessed that the banks concerned were not systemically important in a 
Community context, and the further management of these banks was left 
to the national authorities. Those authorities then insisted that the banks 
had regional systemic importance and obtained the approval of the Euro-
pean Commission for measures with an element of state aid that does, to 
some extent, distort competition. If this indicates a flaw in the system, it 
lies not in the banking union but in the general EU rules on state aid, 
which might be criticised for not having been brought in line with the 
BRRD. However, there has not been any talk about using shared funds in 
connection with crisis management by e.g. the SRF. The measures taken 
have been at the expense of the relevant member state itself. 
 4 The BRRD, Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, and the corresponding rules for euro area member states, 
the SRMR, Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation, both adopted in 2014. 
Side 7 af 9 
  A third example is contributions from the SRF, the Single Resolution Fund 
financed by the banks. They are incredibly well protected. SRF funds can 
be used only after bail-in of the equivalent of 8 per cent of the liabilities 
of a failing bank. This typically corresponds to 25 per cent of the risk-
weighted assets. Calculations show that during the crisis period after 
2008 only one systemically important European bank had losses exceed-
ing this threshold. Furthermore, contributions from the SRF may not ex-
ceed 5 per cent of the bank's liabilities, and it is a receivable claim, not an 
income transfer.  
This structure is a result of a more fundamental shift (with the BRRD) in 
the approach to financial regulation after the financial crisis, to the effect 
that crisis resolution of failing banks should take place using owner and 
creditor funds. This shift may initially have been aimed at preventing the 
use of government funds, but it has also significantly reduced the oppor-
tunity to use funds collected from other banks. In other words, the cross-
border insurance element has been overtaken by a healthier crisis reso-
lution model. 
The fourth example is the EDIS, in relation to which negotiations have 
been slow. In objective terms, there is a good case for a single deposit 
insurance scheme in a banking union. The risks of national banks are con-
tinuously affected by national conditions, but with single supervisory and 
resolution mechanisms it is natural also to have a single deposit insur-
ance scheme. But supporters and opponents seem to exaggerate the re-
spective pros and cons of such a scheme.  
Possibly a single deposit insurance scheme will have a stabilising psycho-
logical effect on the depositors of potentially failing banks. But people 
tend to overlook the fact that creditor legislation has been amended so 
that deposits in general and covered deposits in particular rank first in 
the creditor hierarchy. So the Deposit Guarantee Fund can be invoked 
only after extremely large losses in a bank, including loss of all senior 
debt and uninsured deposits. Hence, the relevance of EDIS is linked to 
banks funded almost exclusively by deposits covered by a deposit guar-
antee. We should also note that the ECB in the spring published an inter-
esting analysis5 showing that even far deeper crises than the one in 2008-
09 would not be able to deplete a fully phased-in deposit insurance fund 
of 0.8 per cent of covered deposits. Underlying reasons include the credi-
 5 ECB Occasional Paper 208, April 2018: Completing the Banking Union with a European Deposit Insurance 
Scheme: Who is afraid of cross-subsidisation? 
Side 8 af 9 
  tor preference for deposits and the build-up of MREL funds. Overall, the 
system has now been structured in such a way that deposit insurance 
schemes – be they national or European – will in practice play a very limit-
ed role in the resolution of failing banks. 
Concluding remarks about the banking union 
There are a number of other, strong, arguments in favour of participating 
in the banking union, including: further development of the single market 
with more competition, for the benefit of consumers and firms at home 
and the ability of banks to operate in other member states. Stronger 
supervisory powers in terms of capacity, depth, methods and the oppor-
tunity to take a broader perspective. Better management of cross-border 
financial activities. Greater credibility in relation to the bail-in rules, and 
greater certainty that failing banks will be treated in the same way. And 
like all other international cooperation for a small country: influence on 
rules and practices that must, in effect, be observed in any case – includ-
ing having a spokesperson in institutions such as Basel and the FSB, 
where we are not invited to sit at the table ourselves. And after all, the 
vast majority of Danish banks are of a size which would place them under 
direct Danish supervision, also in a banking union. But based on the sin-
gle supervisory practice – which has its advantages.  
As you will have understood, the insurance element is not at the core of 
the banking union. An insurance element does exist for use in extreme 
situations with failing banks, but otherwise its role will be very limited. So 
the insurance element and its counterpart – fear of liability for problems 
incurred by banks in other member states – are neither key arguments for 
participating in nor remaining outside the banking union. 
I am not claiming that transfers between the EU member states do not 
and should not exist. Transfers have taken place for many years, via the 
EU budget, and the amounts are considerable. Several member states 
receive up to 3 per cent of their GDP on the basis of a number of object-
ive and structural criteria. So it would not be new or exceptional if other 
elements of the cooperation were also to include such transfers. But nei-
ther the euro project nor the banking union have involved or envisage 
transfers between member states to any substantial degree. And in prac-
tice, the institutions are systematically designed to minimise the likeli-
hood of such transfers. That will probably characterise also future devel-
opments within this area. 
 Side 9 af 9 
