John Iannis Mourmouras: Monetary policy and global markets
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, on the
occasion  of  the  launch  of  his  book  entitled  "Speeches  on  Monetary  Policy  and  Global  Capital
Markets, 2015-2017", OMFIF City Lecture, London, 6 December 2017.
 Your Excellency, Ambassador Tziras, 
Sir Christopher, Professor Pissarides, 
Distinguished panellists, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me first of all thank David Marsh and the OMFIF team for the organisation of the event and
today’s strong panel: two distinguished Governors, former President of Deutsche Bundesbank
Ernst Welteke and former Governor of the Czech Central Bank, Miroslav Singer, two renowned
Professors,  policy  makers  and  market  gurus,  Charles  Goodhart,  LSE  Professor  and  former
Monetary  Policy  Committee  Member  at  the  Bank  of  England,  and  Vittorio  Grilli,  former  Italian
Minister of Economy and Finances and Chairman of JP Morgan EMEA, for kindly accepting the
invitation and taking the time to speak today. I am truly honoured by their presence, I thank you all
and each one personally, and I am also very grateful to all of you for being here today.
I will restrict myself today to offering brief remarks on the global outlook for 2018 and the risks
ahead, as well as current developments in terms of global monetary policy and the prospects for
capital  markets,  the  latest  on  Europe,  including  my  own  country,  Greece.  There  is  evidence
which  makes  me  feel  optimistic,  after  the  8-year  Greek  saga,  and  I  would  like  to  share  my
optimism with you today. 
1. Introduction
The upswing in global economic activity has continued well into the second half of 2017, and the
upturn  has  become  more  synchronised  across  countries.  The  recovery  is  supported  by
significant  increases  in  trade,  investment  and  industrial  production,  along  with  strengthened
business  and  consumer  confidence.  The  short-term  risks  are  broadly  balanced,  but  medium-
term  risks  are  still  tilted  to  the  downside.  Furthermore,  wage  growth  has  been  disappointing,
keeping  inflation  at  low  levels. According  to  the  IMF’s  latest  forecasts,  global  GDP  growth  is
expected to accelerate to 3.6% in 2017, and reach 3.7% in 2018, while global inflation will reach
3.1% this year and 3.3% in 2018.
2. The eurozone’s current economic outlook
In  the  eurozone,  we  can  say  with  confidence  that  we  are  going  through  a  solid  economic
expansion.
Indeed, GDP has risen for 18 straight quarters. The increase in growth in 2017 mostly reflects
acceleration in exports in the context of the broader pickup in global trade and continued strength
in domestic demand growth supported by accommodative financial conditions amid diminished
political risk and policy uncertainty. Overall, growth is expected to average 2.2% in 2017 to the
highest level since 2007. The positive momentum will continue going forward mainly because the
drivers of growth are increasingly endogenous, rather than exogenous, which used to be falling
oil prices and accommodative monetary policy. Now, there are indicators that growth is “feeding
on itself”, that is, spending multipliers and endogenous propagation are once again supporting
economic activity. This is most evident in private consumption, which has remained robust even
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
as  oil  prices  have  risen  by  about  30  dollars  since  the  start  of  2016.  Consumption  is  being
supported by a virtuous circle between rising labour income and rising employment. Employment
in the euro area has reached its highest level ever, while unemployment has fallen to its lowest
rate since January 2009. As consumption has strengthened and spending multipliers have taken
hold, investment has also followed with a lag. Since 2016, investment has contributed almost
45% to annual GDP growth, compared with under 30% in the two years previously.
However, inflation developments across the euro area still remain subdued. Indeed, annual HICP
inflation decelerated to 1.4% in October 2017, down from 1.5% in September, while core inflation
fell to 0.9% in October from 1.1% in September. Two indicators are important for assessing the
durability  of  inflation.  The  first  is  the  outlook  for  growth,  since  this  helps  us  assess  whether
inflation will continue to rise. The second is underlying inflation. This assesses whether inflation
will stabilise around the ECB’s target of 2% once the effects of volatile factors, such as oil and
food price swings fade away. As I already mentioned, the growth outlook is now solidly improved
(1.8%  in  2018),  but  the  underlying  inflation  trend  remains  subdued. A  key  issue  here  is  wage
growth.  Since  the  trough  in  mid-2016,  growth  in  compensation  per  employee  has  risen,
recovering around half of the gap towards its historical average. But overall trends still remain
subdued and are not broad-based mainly because the effects of past low inflation are continuing
to weigh on wage growth while the relationship between wage growth and traditional measures of
slack  has  weakened  in  the  post-crisis  period.  Hence,  the  outlook  for  inflation  based  on
Eurosystem staff projections has been revised downward, to 1.5% for 2017 and 1.4% for 2018
and 1.6% for 2019.
In sum, the inflation target cannot be restored without the ECB’s accommodative policy and as
ECB  President  Draghi  stated  recently  “an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains
necessary” for underlying inflation pressures to build up and support headline inflation over the
medium term.
3. Global economic outlook
The largest economy in the world, the US economy, has been expanding for eight years in a row,
which is one of the longest periods on US record. Output growth is projected to reach 2.4% in
2017 and 2.1% in 2018 (1.6% in 2016), much lower than the Trump administration’s plan to get
the  economy  growing  at  3%,  while  CPI  inflation  is  projected  by  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  at
1.6% in 2017 before increasing to 1.9% in 2018.
In the United Kingdom, Brexit is having a negative effect on growth via both weaker consumption
(thanks  to  the  FX-induced  rise  in  inflation)  and  heightened  uncertainty  negatively  affecting
investment. On the inflation front, the UK is one of the few developed countries where inflation
has surprised on the upside at around 3% in the current quarter as a result of past falls in the
sterling’s value. UK growth is expected to stand around 1.5% in 2017 from 1.8% in 2016 and
1.7%  in  2018  with  downside  risks  on  the  back  of  the  slow  progress  in  Brexit  negotiations.
According to the Bank of England, inflation should remain elevated to 3% in 2017, before falling
back to 2.4% in 2018.
In Japan, real GDP growth is projected to decelerate to 1.0% in 2018 from 1.5% in 2017. As far
as inflation is concerned (as you know Japan is an outlier in terms of persistently low inflation
despite its full employment), core inflation is projected to stand at 0.8% for 2017 and 1.4% for
2018 and that is why the Bank of Japan, among all other central banks from developed countries,
is likely to maintain its quantitative easing policy for the longest period.
Finally, with Brazil and Russia exiting recession and China stabilising at growth rates above 6%,
emerging economies real GDP is projected to be expanding roughly near to 4.6% in 2017 from
4.3% in 2016 and to 4.9% in 2018. 
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Potential risks ahead
Among the major downside risks I would like to focus on the so-called “trade risk”, namely how a
shift  towards  protectionism  driven  mainly  by  the  new  US  administration  could  disrupt  global
supply chains reducing trade and cross-border investment flows harming global growth.
The decision to pull the US out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and threats to leave NAFTA are
signs of a fierce protectionist stance by one of the world’s major trading blocks that could have a
destabilising effect on the WTO and world trade relations in general.
At his speech before the United Nations General Assembly last September, US President Trump
repeatedly  argued  in  favour  of  “strong  sovereign  nations”,  attacking  globalism  and  putting
allegiance  to  the  national  state  ahead  of  international  institutions.  The  Chinese  and  US  policy
appear to converge in this regard against a “one-size-fits-all universal order”. This stance also
finds  followers  among  the  lines  of  “international  nationalists”  or  anti-globalists  also  include
leaders  such  as  Vladimir  Putin,  Viktor  Orban  in  Hungary  or  Duterte  in  the  Philippines.  The
argument goes that strong sovereign nations should be the basis of a stable, international order
that cuts back on the excesses of globalism, which is seen as elitist.
Another  risk  that  is  not  so  probable,  one  that  I  would  like  to  take  a  moment  to  mention
nonetheless: A bad revival of Reaganomics of the 1980s, for which I will simply remind you that
during President Reagan’s first administration, loose fiscal policy collided with a tight monetary
stance  by  the  Fed  under  Chairman  Paul  Volcker,  in  an  effort  to  squeeze  inflation  out.  This
combination  resulted  in  a  seriously  overvalued  dollar,  which  for  many  analysts  is  the  primary
cause  that  sunk  a  large  number  of  Latin  American  economies  into  a  decade  of  stagnation.
Underlying  vulnerabilities  remain  for  some  large  emerging  markets  still  today.  High  corporate
debt, weak balance sheets and thin policy buffers mean that these economies are exposed to
tighter global financial conditions and capital flow reversals. A closer look at the numbers may
provide some reason to be slightly apprehensive: today we are experiencing a stronger dollar
than in the strong dollar period of the eighties. Indeed, the US dollar’s annual rise over the last
two  years  was  11%  annually,  compared  with  7%  in  the  1980s  between  November  1978  and
March 1985. It would be extremely interesting if Vittorio Grilli, either with his professorial hat or in
his  current  position  as  J.P.  Morgan  Europe  Chairman,  could  share  his  views  on  whether  he
considers this dollar overvaluation is a real possibility, and more importantly, if we face it, how
long it would last. A repeat of the eighties?
Other  risks  include  exogenous  shocks  such  as  geopolitical  tensions,  political  turbulence  and
large-scale involuntary migration especially from Africa. 
5.  Central  banks’  monetary  policies:  A  cautious  transition  to  a  less  expansionary
monetary policy
European Central Bank goes for a dovish tapering in 2018
In my own turf of central banking now, at the October Governing Council, the ECB has decided
the official start of QE tapering by a combination of the following decisions:
The ECB has, on the one hand, decided to scale back its purchases of new securities (from
€60  billion  to  €30  billion  per  month)  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  extend  the  horizon  of
purchases until the end of September 2018 and beyond, if necessary. Up to now, the ECB
has bought around €2.2 trillion under the APP programme.
The ECB also decided to strengthen its forward guidance on the reinvestment of already
purchased securities “for an extended period” after the end of net QE purchases and “in any
case for as long as necessary” and will publish the monthly profile of reinvestment flows
twelve months ahead, which means a rough amount of €120 billion, or 12 billion per month.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  means  that  the  ECB’s  gross  purchases  over  the  period  until  September  2018  will
average €41 billion per month.
In this context, during the period of net asset purchases, PSPP principal redemptions will be
reinvested in the jurisdiction in which the maturing bond was issued. As regards the private
sector  programmes,  there  is  no  strict  allocation  of  the  total  volume  to  jurisdictions,  but
purchases are broadly oriented towards market capitalisation of eligible securities, while also
paying  due  consideration 
the  private  sector
programmes, the maturing amount in a jurisdiction in a specific month does not necessarily
determine the amount to be purchased in this jurisdiction during the month, leaving ECB with
flexibility and degrees of freedom to intervene in the euro area’s bond markets in case of any
absurd movements domestically.
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  tends  to  influence  long-term  yields  through  both  its  main
components:  by  compressing  the  term  premium,  and  by  anchoring  the  expected  path  of
policy rates in the future.
to  market  conditions.  Therefore, 
for 
By accumulating a portfolio of long-duration assets, the central bank can compress term premia
by extracting duration risk from private investors and thus lowers term premia and yields across
a range of financial assets.
Asset purchases do matter also for the signals they entail about the path of future policy rates:
the  so-called  “signalling  effect”.  In  the  euro  area,  this  effect  is  reinforced  by  the  sequence  in
which our instruments are ordered.
Specifically, the length of the horizon of our net asset purchases, and the forward guidance that
our policy interest rates are expected to remain at their present levels “well past” the end of those
net  purchases  (but  they  are  unrelated  to  the  time  guidance  on  reinvestments),  mechanically
affect the time of the first expected rate hike, anchoring the path of expected policy rates over the
lifespan of the APP and beyond.
The positive evidence from the ECB’s QE programme can be found in many areas, including the
growth  rate  of  loans,  the  decline  in  bank  lending  rates  including  the  growth  rate  of  loans,  the
cross-country  heterogeneity  in  bank  lending  rates,  which  implies  a  less  fragmented  banking
sector,  a  compression  of  intra-euro  area  spreads  and  a  flattening  of  yield  curves  across  all
markets.
In my keynote address in Valencia at the BBVA Annual Congress last spring (Chapter 11 of my
book),  I  tried  using  a  Taylor  rule  framework  to  provide  tentative  answers  on  a  number  of
important future ECB monetary policy issues including timing and sequencing. In addition, I then
raised and tried to answer there a number of pending issues like, for instance, should the scaling
back of a national central bank’s balance sheet be discretionary or rule-based?
It  would  be  extremely  interesting  to  hear  the  views  on  the  policy  dilemma  about  sequencing,
namely rate hikes first and then the start of tapering or vice versa, of Professor Goodhart, the
best monetary economist in Britain and continental Europe.
It is fair to say that for many years to come, bonds will remain in central banks’ balance sheets.
How  quickly  central  banks  reduce  their  bond  portfolio  will  depend  on  macroeconomic  and
financial developments over the next several years. In such expanded balance sheets, central
banks have to resolve the following growing maturity mismatch: on the asset side, one can find
long-term items like government bonds as a result of the QE programme, while central banks
liabilities have remained of very short maturity, typically bank reserves, currency and government
deposits.
Clearly,  the  fundamental  question  that  has  to  be  addressed  by  macroeconomists  and  central
bankers is how durable the existing environment of low and stable inflation and low real interest
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates will be. Let me elaborate a bit on this. With a Nobel laureate and leading macroeconomist in
the  audience,  Professor  Pissarides,  by  whom  I  had  the  privilege  to  be  taught  graduate
macroeconomics, I can’t resist the temptation to say one word on this. We all see that the link
between the economic cycle and inflation is rather weak; if you like, inflation is not behaving the
way  our  economic  models  predict  in  the  short  run.  We  don’t  see  stronger  wage  and  inflation
dynamics when the average unemployment rate falls from 9% to 6% (and the numbers are real).
Instead, we witness that inflationary pressures are largely absent and inflation expectations are
subdued because there is more slack, as some claim, in the economy? Or is it at the end of the
day, an inflation measurement issue, and that’s it? (quite convenient!) There is a large body of
academic  literature  on  both  disputed  issues  of  low  inflation  and  low  real  interest  rates,  but
unfortunately  there  is  no  strong  consensus  on  the  findings  to  the  extent  that  these  could  be
adopted straight away by monetary policy makers. More academic research is needed here as I
strongly believe that this sort of research will be useful and have a forceful impact on real-world
monetary policy making. 
US monetary policy
In terms of US monetary policy, the Fed has signalled its intention to carry out the third hike of the
year at next week’s meeting (and by the way, the Bank of England has, for the first time in a
decade, raised its base rate from 0.25% to 0.5%) and there is consensus in the market to expect
two more rate hikes in 2018 in the US. The Fed’s new Chairman, Mr. Jerome Powel, for the first
time a non-economist, is facing a number of challenges including: shrinking the Fed’s balance
sheet, the classic dilemma coming from a buoyant labour market in the US (4.1% unemployment
rate), which might warrant a faster pace of tightening, versus modest wage growth and inflation
that has been below target for 5 years, but also new ones like, for instance, how the Republicans’
tax  reform  bill  (approved  with  a  slim  majority  by  the  US  Senate  following  its  approval  by  the
House of Representatives), which could affect the projected interest rate path, particularly if it
stimulates faster economic growth. 
6. Prospects for global capital markets in 2018
A few words now on prospects for global capital markets in 2018 based on our own predictions
at the Bank of Greece.
Bond markets
Starting  with  the  bond  markets,  the  four-decades-long  bull  market  seems  to  be  coming  to  a
close, and we expect interest rates to continue rising at the short and, to a lesser extent, at long
ends,  resulting  in  a  flattening  yield  curve  (this  is  especially  true  for  the  US).  Hence,  10-year
Treasury note yields may gradually rise to 2.7% by end-2018 [today 2.3%]. In the eurozone, the
hunt for yield will remain strong, and alternatives to core government bonds, such as corporate
debt, high-yield and European  periphery  bonds,  should  remain  in  big  demand.  We  expect  the
German 10-year Bund to yield around 0.7% at the end of 2018 [today 0.33%].
Foreign exchange markets
The story of 2017 so far has been the weak US dollar versus a strong euro, as the euro area’s
economy picks up, the ECB winds down its QE programme and political risks subside. However,
US  higher  budget  deficit,  the  prospect  of  accelerating  growth  and  inflation  and  consequently
further  monetary  tightening  by  the  Fed,  would  favour  a  stronger  dollar,  most  likely  in  the  first
months  of  2018.  Nevertheless,  as  soon  as  the  ECB  probably  terminates  its  bond  purchase
programme towards the end of the year and possibly give rise to more formal talks about rate
hikes, market participants could assume that the ECB will pursue a more restrictive monetary
policy. As a result, the euro will pick up against the dollar towards 1.22 (today 0.88) by the end of
the first half of 2018.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally, an expected range for the exchange rate of the sterling pound against the US dollar is
between 1.26 and 1.36, while the euro against the sterling pound should be between 0.86 and
0.96 and against the yen could climb towards 140. 
7. The dynamics of European integration
Moving on to the situation in Europe now (Part II of my book), December 2017 marks 18 months
since the referendum on the UK’s exit from the EU and 18 years since the introduction of the
single  currency,  the  euro.  These  two  milestones  have  drastically  altered  the  dynamics  of  the
European Union. However, my belief is that eurozone membership will remain unchanged at 19
countries in the foreseeable future, as I do not see a possible entry, say, of Poland or the Czech
Republic, Governor Singer, my good friend Miroslav, I hope you agree, but there are also slim
chances today of an exit referendum in a eurozone country because the political message from
recent key elections for instance in the Netherlands and France shows a straight defeat of the
populist, anti-European political forces (I refer to Marine LePen’s defeat in France, the win of Mark
Rutte in the Netherlands, the Italian Five Star Movement has mitigated its anti-European rhetoric,
while in Spain the Catalunya issue seems to have been addressed and Prime Minister Rajoy has
come out stronger). This is not to deny an escalation of the anti-euro sentiment in Europe in the
near future triggered perhaps by another turn in the migrant crisis, which remains dormant at the
moment.
In Germany, growing euroscepticism is reflected in the unusual political instability following the
recent general elections. Probably you are aware it was indeed on a European issue – the issue
of extending the powers of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the EU’s rescue fund – that
Merkel’s coalition talks with FDP liberal leader Christian Lindner stumbled. I hope this deadlock is
resolved sooner rather than later.
The best hope for getting serious EMU reform back on the agenda is a successful conclusion for
the  talks  Christian  Democrats  and  the  Social-Democrats.  A  “Grand  Coalition”  between
Germany’s  two  largest  parties  would  be  the  most  stable  and  market-friendly  outcome,  as
opposed  to  the  other  two  scenarios:  a  minority  government  or  another  general  election  in
Germany. However, if such a “Grand Coalition” is formed, then the main opposition party at the
Bundestag will be the fiercely eurosceptic Alternative for Germany (AfD).
In  the  United  Kingdom,  and  in  particular  on  the  Brexit  front,  there  is  cautious  optimism  that  a
December  summit  breakthrough  is  still  possible,  as  the  UK  accepts  EU  financial  settlement
demands, removing one of the biggest obstacles to a Brexit divorce settlement.
In France, modernisation is at the forefront of President Macron’s agenda, who has put forward
proposals  for  reforms  that  will  reshape  the  EU.  Of  course,  Macron  needs  to  establish  his
credentials as a reformer first in his own country. An initial successful step was taken with the
reform of France’s labour law, which must now be followed by the tricky reforms of France’s
taxation and vocational training system.
In  parallel,  President  Macron  has  placed  deepening  the  European  project  at  the  heart  of  his
agenda. His address on Pnyka Hill last September, as part of his visit to Athens, his first ever
official  trip  abroad  as  France’s  President,  but  also  his  speech  at  Sorbonne  University  a  few
weeks  later  were  intended  to  send  a  clear  message  about  France’s  European  ambitions,
covering everything from common defence to harmonisation of tax policy, including a Finance
Minister for the eurozone.
As a Southern pro-European myself, I strongly believe that the urgency in Europe is not to be
complacent and leave the populists dictate the agenda. Southern European countries must stick
with reforms (including the mother of all reforms, namely the privatisation agenda), and, on the
other hand, leading eurozone countries must make sure to build the missing pieces of the EMU
incomplete  architecture,  including  a  financial  union  among  eurozone  countries  through  the
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
completion  of  the  Banking  Union  –  I  have  no  doubt  that  there  will  be  another  European
compromise on the long-mooted proposal for a European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS) –
and the Capital Markets Union. There is also the recent proposal in the field of fiscal policy from
the European Commission on a European Safe Bond (ESB), which is also the subject of a study
by a high-level group at the ECB, chaired by Bank of Ireland Governor Philip Lane. The idea is
that sovereign debt across the eurozone could be bundled into a new financial instrument, the
ESB, and sold, if you like, as a European brand, to investors. This is a different idea from pooling
national government debt issuance, known as the common Eurobond, which, I know, remains a
political  taboo  in  Germany.  And  I  want  to  assure  the  esteemed  President  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Welteke, that I make no personal value judgement on this.
As ECB President Mario Draghi rightfully said two weeks ago at the annual European Banking
Congress in Frankfurt, this is the right moment for the euro area to address the remaining gaps
in  the  institutional  architecture  of  the  EMU  and,  if  I  could  add,  that  would  help  the  benefits  of
growth  in  Europe  reach  not  only  the  countries  of  the  North,  but  also  the  countries  of  the
europeriphery.
8. Greece 
Finally the latest on my own country (Part III of my book). This is a fortunate moment for Greece.
After 8 years of economic hardship, we can say with confidence that there is light at the end of
the tunnel for the Greek economy. This is not the right place to ask what went wrong in Greece or
put  the  blame.  What  is  important  today  is  to  look  forward.  Based  on  this  year’s  economic
performance, namely a solid primary budget surplus of 2.5%, a growth rate of about 1.5%, albeit
modest  and  cyclical,  it  is  the  highest  over  the  last  10  years,  quite  necessary  to  stabilise
expectations.  The  country  also  recorded  a  current  account  surplus  of  0.4%  and  an
unprecedented 30 million tourists visited Greece this year, and, in light of the above evidence,
next year’s prospects are even more promising, with official forecasts of 2.5% economic growth
rate and a primary budget surplus of 3.8% of GDP. 
On  top  of  that,  two  more  signs  make  me  really  optimistic  about  the  future:  Firstly,  there  is
evidence of the rebalancing of the Greek economy towards the external sector: a 9% increase in
the  share  of  export  of  goods  and  services  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  (up  from  19%  to  28%).
Secondly, a tentative but successful return to international capital markets through a €3-billion
bond issue last July and a €30-billion voluntary bond swap last week aiming at building a proper
sovereign bond yield curve and providing depth into the Greek secondary bond market. The take-
up reached 86% of bondholders, with more than half of participants being international investors. 
I conclude here with one final remark about the state of Greek banks and two further points or
messages, if you like, addressed at several recipients. After three recapitalisations during the last
5 years, the financial position of the Greek banking sector is progressively stabilising. As Greek
banks are the outlier on the non-performing loans’ European map, efforts must be stepped up
beyond the existing performance targets set by the Bank of Greece. Moreover, new stress tests
as  part  of  a  pan-European  exercise  next  spring  are  widely  expected  not  to  hold  any  negative
surprises for the capital position of Greece’s systemic banks. A gradual return to normal bank
funding conditions, less dependence from the Eurosystem and a steady increase in deposits will
ultimately encourage new bank lending to healthy businesses, restoring Greek banks’ profitability,
thus  allowing  Greek  banks  to  face  the  modern-day  challenges,  together  with  their  European
counterparts, such as green financing, smart technologies, including fin-tech and cybersecurity,
etc. 
I turn now to the two messages I promised earlier. 
Message #1: Firstly, a permanent return to international capital markets and a drastic drop in the
cost  of  sovereign  borrowing,  comparable  to  that  of  Portugal  are  within  reach,  after  the  timely
completion  of  the  Third  Adjustment  Programme  in  August  next  year,  subject  to  one  or  two
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
preconditions. There is so much liquidity out there and the hunt for yield never stops. Greece can
offer right now government bonds with high yields and safety. May I also remind you that four-
fifths (4/5) of Greece’s public debt now lies in the hands of the official sector, with a very low cost
of servicing (1-1.5%), with long maturities and indeed long-deferred amortisation payments. One
such necessary, but not sufficient, precondition is the following: a cash buffer of €15 billion for the
first year after the end of the programme, which requires three new timely bond issues (with 7-,
3- and 10-year maturities) during the first half of next year, worth €6 billion in total, plus another
€9 billion from the ESM, agreed already, to be followed of course by some sort of conditionality
(others might include: entry to ECB’s QE, some further debt relief and one or two credit rating
upgrades, etc.). 
My  second  message  is  more  political  and  is  addressed  to  various  competent  stakeholders,
starting  with  the  imperative  of  political  stability  and  continuing  with  no  complacency,  no
slackening  of  effort,  and  a  requirement  to  stick  to  reforms  and  indeed  to  the  mother  of  all
reforms, namely the privatisation agenda for a slim and efficient public sector. 
The above are all prerequisites for incentivising foreign direct investment (FDI) but also domestic
investment, which are the key drivers behind sustainable growth and indeed job creation, which
should be the ultimate objective. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
