  Remarks by Lawrence Schembri  
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
Ottawa Economics Association and CFA Society Ottawa 
Ottawa, Ontario 
May 16, 2018 
 
   The (Mostly) Long and Short of  
Potential Output  
 
 
Introduction 
 
Thank you for inviting me here today.  
 
An important, if sometimes underappreciated, purpose of central bank speeches is to 
help the public understand what we are trying to achieve, and why. A greater 
understanding of our monetary policy actions helps make them more effective. And as a 
public institution, we have an obligation to highlight and demystify the concepts that 
guide our thinking in a way that all interested citizens, not just the experts in this room, 
can grasp.   
 
Few in the public likely give much thought to potential output, for example. Yet this 
somewhat abstract notion is vital to how most central banks evaluate inflationary 
pressures and conduct monetary policy. At the Bank of Canada, being able to estimate 
and project potential output has contributed notably to our strong track record of 
meeting our inflation objectives.  
 
At the same time, the dynamics of potential output are primarily shaped by slow-moving 
forces that can take time to have a material impact, such as demographic shifts, capital 
accumulation and technological change. Equally important, many of these same forces 
influence a country’s standard of living.   
 
A significant development in recent decades is that growth in potential output has been 
on a generally downward trend in most major advanced economies, including Canada, 
largely owing to the aging of our populations. This trend has important implications for 
our macroeconomic policy frameworks and for our economic prospects.  
I would like to thank Dany Brouillette for his help preparing this speech. 
 Not for publication before May 16, 2018 
12:15 p.m. Eastern Time 
 2 
 
My remarks today are organized around four separate but closely related questions: 
 
1.  What is potential output? 
2.  How do we measure it? 
3.  Why is it important for policy?  
4.  What policies have supported potential output growth in the past and could again 
in the future?  
 
The answers to these questions should help you better understand not only our policy in 
the near term, but also our thinking about policy-making over a longer horizon.  
 
What is potential output? 
 
Turning to the first question, we usually refer to “potential” in the context of individual 
achievement, as in “realizing one’s potential.” When I was much younger, for example, 
my aspirations for my own potential included growing as tall as my favourite player on 
the Dallas Cowboys, becoming a pitcher for the Toronto Blue Jays, and obtaining a 
PhD. My immigrant parents placed more value on education than sports, so they were 
quite relieved that I only managed two out of three.  
 
Central banks apply “potential” in a similar way—to assess what an entire economy, 
rather than a single person, can achieve on a sustainable basis. So “potential” can be 
viewed as a measure of aggregate, or total, supply in an economy. Essentially, it refers 
to an economy’s capacity to produce goods and services when all available productive 
resources—specifically, labour and capital—are used to their fullest.  
 
In practice, we pay close attention to the growth rate of potential output as well as to its 
level. An economy’s productive capacity is normally always growing as available 
resources and their productivity expand. But the speed at which potential output grows 
has important short- and long-run implications. In the short run, the rate of potential 
output growth indicates how quickly an economy can grow on an ongoing basis without 
stoking inflationary pressures. In the long run, potential output growth is a useful gauge 
of an economy’s prospects, namely the outlook for national income and standard of 
living, because these are largely determined by the forces of supply. 
 
Digging a little deeper, most central banks including the Bank of Canada-, interpret an 
economy’s actual output growth, its gross domestic product (GDP), as being determined 
in the short run by the forces moving aggregate demand. An economy’s potential output 
growth, meanwhile, reflects the evolution of aggregate supply over a longer horizon 
(Chart 1).i Aggregate demand growth tends to move with short-term factors—such as 
shocks to foreign demand and exports—which may trigger cyclical movements in, for 
example, inventories and consumer purchases of durable goods. Aggregate supply 
growth is affected more by the slow-moving forces that I noted earlier.  
  3 
Chart 1:
Potential output growth is less variable than actual output growth
Annual data
 6
4
2
0
-2
-4
Range of potential output growth
Output gap
Potential output growth
Real GDP growth
Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations, estimates and projections
 Last data plotted: 2021
 So, a central challenge in pinning down potential output growth is disentangling the 
short-term fluctuations in GDP caused by demand shocks from long-term fluctuations 
that are due to the underlying forces that affect aggregate supply.ii Since the forces that 
determine aggregate supply tend to change slowly, we focus on trends when thinking 
about and measuring potential.  
 
Now, it’s rarely as simple as just separating short-term phenomena from long-term. The 
Great Recession was a once-in-a-lifetime shock to aggregate demand that, because of 
its severity, also affected aggregate supply. Consequently, a decade later, this 
experience continues to have an impact on potential output in advanced economies.  
So, the disentanglement challenge is two-fold: first, identifying the trend movements, as 
opposed to temporary or cyclical ones; then, identifying the forces driving the trend 
movements, which also helps us predict how long they’ll persist.  
 
I’ll go into more detail shortly about how we measure potential output growth.  
But one way to look at it is to break it into two components:  
  the long-run growth rate of total hours worked in the economy—known as trend 
labour input (TLI); and  
the long-run growth rate of how much output is produced per hour of work—
known as trend labour productivity (TLP).  
 4 
To illustrate the TLI-TLP decomposition, Chart 2 shows each component’s respective 
contributions to Canadian potential output growth since 1992.iii The chart reflects the 
findings of the Bank’s annual reassessment of potential output growth, which we 
recently published as an appendix to our April Monetary Policy Report (MPR). 
 
Chart 2: Potential output growth has been on a downward trend since 2000, but is expected to 
remain flat in the near future
Annual data
 4
3
2
1
0
Trend labour input
Trend labour productivity
Potential output growth
Source: Bank of Canada estimates and projections
Last data plotted: 2021
  
Two observations are important. First, the chart shows a secular, or persistent, decline 
in TLI and, thus, in potential output growth. Population aging is the biggest reason, and 
it is only partly offset by immigration.iv Second, TLP’s contribution to potential output 
growth has also declined somewhat from the period before the global financial crisis. 
  
TLP growth is expected to increase modestly in the coming years. This is mainly 
because the slowdown in investment and productivity growth that followed the sharp 
decline in commodity prices in 2014–15 turned out to be less pronounced than we 
initially expected, and the economy’s adjustment from it is now mostly behind us. That is 
good news because TLP growth is expected to play a larger role in potential output 
growth over the projection and beyond. There is, however, considerable debate about 
how much we can expect productivity growth to rise in the future, even as the emerging 
digital economy promises to transform how firms operate and how they use their 
workforces.v   
 
Canada’s experience is similar to that of other advanced economies. Chart 3 shows 
that potential output growth in Japan, the United States and key countries in the euro 
area is also much lower now than it was in the 1980s, largely due to the same forces 
 5 
causing the slowdown in Canada. For Canada specifically, the Bank’s reassessment 
found that annual potential output growth from 2009 to 2021 would average 1.8 per 
cent, much lower than the 2.7 per cent average from 1982 to 2008.  
 Chart 3: Potential output growth has slowed in most advanced economies since the 1980s
Annual data
%
4
3
2
1
0
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United
Kingdom
United States
1980s
1990s
2000s
2010s
Note: The 2010s period includes estimates up to 2021.
Sources: International Monetary Fund and Bank of Canada estimates and projections
  
With all of this in mind, let’s tackle the hard question of how to measure potential output.  
 
How do we measure potential output?  
 
The main challenge in measuring potential output is that it is hypothetical, so it is not 
directly observable. We can only estimate it. Over the years, though, the Bank has put a 
lot of research effort into refining our methods for assessing this very important variable.  
 
Techniques for estimating potential output growth can be viewed as being along a 
spectrum (Chart 4). At one end are simple statistical models that aim to capture 
underlying trends in output growth by mechanically filtering out short-term fluctuations. 
The problem with these techniques is they are essentially a “black box”—the data going 
in and the estimates coming out are known, but there’s little economic explanation of 
how they are connected. At the other end of the spectrum are structural models that rely 
primarily on relationships between variables, based on economic theory, to identify and  
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
quantify the impacts of different sources of potential output growth. For example, higher 
levels of investment will cause the capital stock to rise faster, leading to more rapid TLP 
and potential output growth. However, structural models may produce inaccurate 
estimates if the economic theory on which they are based is incorrect or incomplete.  
 
To help manage the uncertainty around measuring potential output growth, the Bank 
uses a variety of models along this spectrum that combine statistical filters and theory-
based structural approaches.  
 
This is done so that we can cross-check the estimates from each model and then 
combine them to get a reasonably robust assessment.vi Chart 5, for example, displays 
estimates for potential output growth from four separate models along the spectrum that 
are part of the Bank’s staff tool box.vii   
 
Chart 5:
Estimates of potential output growth from four different models
Year-over-year percentage change
 4
3
2
1
Integrated framework
Extended multivariate filter
Multivariate state-space framework
Basic multivariate filter
Source: Bank of Canada estimates
Last observation: 2018Q1
  7 
Models that incorporate an economic structure are especially useful for projecting TLP 
growth, since TLP is based on variables and relationships that are difficult to measure 
and predict. TLI growth is comparatively easier to forecast because it is based on 
accurately observed labour market outcomes: the employment rate, the working-age 
population and average hours worked.  
 
In contrast, TLP growth depends on two variables that are less concrete and therefore 
more challenging to observe precisely. The first of these, capital deepening, is a 
measure of growth in the ratio of capital per hour worked.viii The second is a more 
elusive concept called trend total factor productivity, or TFP. While we have some 
observable measures of investment and capital stock growth, we do not have the same 
for trend TFP—which essentially includes everything affecting firms’ productivity that 
isn’t captured by capital stock growth. These “residual” factors include, for example, 
technological improvements and the impact of education and training.ix  
 
Another way that the Bank manages the uncertainty around potential output growth is 
by conducting an in-depth review of our projections on an annual basis. First, economic 
data are regularly revised, so for that reason alone an annual review makes sense. 
Also, our empirical techniques are “living” in a sense—we are continually improving 
them as we learn from experience and ongoing research.x   
 
Plus, in the annual reassessment, we further account for uncertainty by publishing 
ranges around our estimates and projections that expand with time. We also list the 
factors that could lead potential growth to be lower or higher within those ranges.xi  
 
I would like to stress that the Bank recognizes the difficulties associated with measuring 
potential and the related uncertainty, and so takes a deliberate and rigorous approach 
to managing this uncertainty. We work hard to ensure that our models evolve in line with 
prevailing best practices. And on top of using multiple techniques, we corroborate the 
models’ results against other measures of capacity and inflation, and then apply well-
informed judgment. Finally, the uncertainty around these estimates is taken into account 
in the formulation of monetary policy. This helps us ensure that our estimates and our 
policy decisions are consistent with our broader economic outlook. 
 
Now, let me expand on why potential output is important for policy.  
 
Why is potential output important for policy? 
 
The conduct of monetary policy 
 
For the conduct of monetary policy, the difference between the level of actual and 
potential output—the “output gap”—is a critical element.xii It indicates how much slack 
there is in the economy, and so it is an important determinant and useful gauge of 
 8 
underlying inflationary pressures. As an inflation-targeting central bank, the Bank of 
Canada’s assessments of both the current output gap and its projected evolution have 
direct bearing on our inflation outlook and policy decisions. Because monetary policy 
operates with a well-known lag, the Bank must be forward-looking as we set the policy 
interest rate to affect aggregate demand, close any output gap and return inflation to 
target on a sustainable basis. 
 
A higher level of potential output for a given level of GDP will mean a more “negative” 
output gap—implying (other things being equal) inflation below the 2 per cent target, 
greater economic slack and a possible need to ease the policy rate—and vice versa. 
Along with the output gap, expectations of inflation are also important in explaining 
current inflation. As inflation targets have become more credible, expectations have 
become better anchored at the target rate and, in turn, have had a larger influence on 
inflation itself.xiii  
  
To illustrate the relationship between the output gap and inflation, consider Chart 6. It 
shows that the Bank’s three measures of core inflation all increased steadily over the 
past year following, with a short lag, the narrowing of our measure of the output gap. 
This demonstrates how we use other data to corroborate our estimates of the output 
gap, which helps ensure a coherent economic outlook.   
 
Chart 6:
Measures of core inflation have risen in line with the rapid absorption of past 
excess capacity
Year-over-year percentage change, quarterly  data
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
2014
 0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
2015
2016
2017
2018
Integrated framework output gap (right scale)
CPI-trim (left scale)
CPI-median (left scale)
CPI-common (left scale)
Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada estimates
Last data plotted: 2018Q1
   9 
The higher the projected growth rate of potential output, the faster the economy can 
grow without inflation rising persistently above our target. For example, our 2018 
reassessment revised the profile for potential higher than it was in the 2017 
reassessment, both in terms of its level and growth rate. That means that, in the near 
term, we have a bit more room than we thought to support demand without sparking 
undue inflationary pressures.  
 
Challenges to the monetary policy framework 
 
Although the inflation-targeting framework has been very successful in the past, looking 
ahead, the decline in potential output growth in many advanced economies represents a 
notable challenge and has prompted central banks in those countries to revisit their 
monetary policy frameworks.xiv  
 
Let me explain. Lower potential output growth in advanced economies is one of the 
factors likely contributing to a decline in global real interest rates. For monetary policy, 
this implies that the policy rate that is considered neutral—where it will neither stimulate 
nor cool the economy because GDP is growing at its potential level, inflation is at target, 
and the effects of any shocks have faded—is lower than it would be otherwise.xv The 
lower neutral rate has important implications for monetary policy. To effectively buffer 
the economy in response to a harmful shock, it’s desirable that a central bank has 
sufficient room to lower the policy interest rate without going to zero or below, thus 
being forced to use unconventional tools such as large-scale asset purchases (i.e., 
quantitative or credit easing) or negative interest rates.xvi 
 
Our next inflation-target renewal with the Government of Canada, which represents an 
opportunity to review our monetary policy framework, is slated for 2021.xvii As part of 
that process, we will examine ways to meet this challenge and strengthen the 
framework to enhance the resilience of the Canadian economy. 
 
Lower potential output growth also has implications for fiscal policy because it implies 
less tax revenue than otherwise. Less revenue could limit governments’ abilities to 
implement countercyclical fiscal policy when needed, particularly as demands for public 
expenditures rise with an aging population. This aspect is important for monetary policy, 
too. The credibility and success of our inflation-targeting regime depends critically on 
the coherence of the overall macroeconomic policy framework.xviii  
 
What policies have supported potential output growth in the past  
and could again in the future? 
To maintain solid potential output growth and rising living standards in the future, what 
policy lessons can be drawn from the past? 
Historically, Canada has benefited from strong growth and rising living standards. Great 
economic opportunity has stimulated employment and investment in capital, while also 
 10 
encouraging investment in individuals through accessible, quality education and an 
inclusive social safety net. We also have benefited from robust political, legal and 
economic institutions, and from openness to trade, investment and immigration.  
Despite those advantages, developing the appropriate policies to maintain solid 
potential output growth in the face of an aging population is a formidable challenge. 
Moreover, even the most effective policies can take some time to have a meaningful 
impact. That said, I’d like to touch on three policy areas that have been successful at 
promoting potential output growth in the past:  
  education—I have benefited from the opportunity created by my own access, 
and my parents’ commitment, to good-quality education at all levels; 
  immigration—which is something I know a bit about since my parents arrived in 
Canada from Europe during the 1950s; and  
trade liberalization—which I have studied and analyzed for my entire 
professional life. 
 
Education 
 
As Alfred Marshall—a founder of neoclassical economics—emphasized more than a 
century ago, education is critical to economic progress.xix   
 
In a period of accelerating technological change, boosting skills and the flexibility of the 
labour supply may be as important for potential output growth as the size of the 
workforce.xx Improvements to education and training will help make workers more 
productive, which should in turn boost their employers’ overall productivity and lift the 
economy’s potential. In Marshall’s era, the main impediment to the quality of the labour 
force was illiteracy. This was a huge obstacle to lifelong learning and self-improvement. 
The vast majority of Canadians, of course, can read and have basic numeracy skills. 
But this wasn’t always the case. Our economy’s transition around the turn of the 20th 
century from agriculture to industry was facilitated by promoting public and private 
investment in education that provided broader access. The question today is whether 
education and training can equip a growing share of the workforce with the right skills 
for an increasingly technology-driven economy.  
 
While the challenge today may seem more daunting, it also appeared insurmountable in 
Marshall’s time. Yet, the expected private and social returns were great, so investment 
followed. History needs to be repeated. New technologies should be harnessed to 
provide broad access to the types of education and training that will help Canadians 
prosper amid rapid change. This would also help to address rising income inequality, 
much of which is due to technological change that favours those with greater skills.xxi    
 
  Immigration 
11 
Higher immigration levels offer an obvious avenue for boosting potential by increasing 
the supply of labour, given that immigration already accounts for two-thirds of the 
growth in Canada’s workforce. Canada’s immigration policy has long been considered a 
success because of its record of attracting immigrants with the necessary skills to be 
absorbed into the labour force and to make important economic contributions. This 
approach will be particularly crucial going forward as the workforce gets older. 
An important challenge, though, is whether Canada’s immigration policy can raise the 
levels accepted each year while continuing to be as successful as in the past at 
matching immigrants’ skills to the jobs that are available.xxii As Governor Poloz noted 
recently, more could be done to speed up immigrants’ integration into the workforce, 
particularly given the elevated number of job vacancies in Canada. 
 
Trade liberalization  
Given demographic constraints, the most promising remedies for lifting potential may be 
measures that stand to increase productivity.  
This speaks not only to the importance of education, as I mentioned, but also to that of 
creating a climate that encourages capital investment. This can be done through, for 
example, infrastructure spending and other efforts to ease transportation constraints.  
Perhaps most helpful in this regard, though, is trade liberalization. Our experience with 
past and existing trade arrangements demonstrates the benefits of lowering barriers, 
both external and internal, including improvements in productivity that supported growth 
in the overall earnings of workers—a direct boost to living standards. As my Governing 
Council colleague Tim Lane noted in remarks last September, expanding Canadian 
firms’ access to overseas markets spurs them to invest, innovate and increase their 
productivity.xxiii    
As in other advanced economies, there is renewed focus in Canada on ensuring that we 
help the workers who are displaced by trade agreements. Again, education and training 
can help people adjust. Still, there is no question that Canada has benefited from being 
one of the world’s most diversified, trade-driven economies. Even as uncertainty about 
US trade policy currently weighs on business investment and export growth, Canada’s 
recent agreements with the European Union and with countries in the Pacific region, in 
addition to efforts at the interprovincial level, are helping reduce barriers and create 
opportunities for Canadian companies. xxiv Our history tells us that our firm commitment 
to trade liberalization will remain important for supporting solid potential growth in the 
future.  
  12 
Conclusion 
 
Allow me to conclude with three key messages.  
First, potential output is an indispensable input into the formulation of monetary policy, 
because the output gap is important in determining inflationary pressures in the 
economy. Using the output gap as our guide has helped underpin the success of the 
Bank of Canada’s inflation-targeting regime, which has, on average, delivered inflation 
roughly at the 2 per cent target on a consistent basis for more than a quarter-century.  
Second, the Bank’s multifaceted approach to measuring and using potential output—
drawing on diverse tools and on different sources of information—helps to manage 
uncertainty and ensure reasonably robust estimates. This deliberate and regularly 
updated approach has also contributed to our success. 
Third, like other advanced economies, Canada faces important challenges to our policy 
frameworks and to our economic prospects from lower rates of potential output growth. 
Nonetheless, we have a rich history of generating economic opportunity and supporting 
growth, and we should draw from past successes in developing future policies.     
In closing, I mentioned earlier that although potential is mostly a function of longer-term, 
slow-moving forces, the Great Recession had a severe and protracted impact on 
potential output. With the economy now operating close to potential, solid demand 
growth is spawning business investment, firm entry and improved labour-market 
conditions—all of which are helping to repair that damage. 
As noted in recent policy statements, we are closely monitoring this expansion in 
economic capacity. It will help guide us in achieving our goal of low, stable and 
predictable inflation, which is the best contribution monetary policy can make to support 
sustainable growth and rising living standards in Canada. 
         13 
                                                           
i The concept of output being largely determined by aggregate demand in the short run was a critical insight of  
J.M. Keynes in his book The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (London: Macmillan, 1936) and is 
incorporated in most macroeconomic models employed by central banks.  
ii This identification strategy has been proposed by O. J. Blanchard and D. Quah, “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate 
Demand and Supply Disturbances,” The American Economic Review 79, no. 4 (1989): 655–673. Demand shocks are 
neutral for GDP in the long run, while supply shocks have permanent effects on GDP in the long run. 
iii See A. Agopsowicz, D. Brouillette, B. Gueye, J. McDonald-Guimond, J. Mollins and Y. Park, “Potential Output in 
Canada: 2018 Reassessment,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2018-10 (April 2018). 
iv The fact that some workers are staying in the labour force longer is also partially offsetting the impact of an aging 
workforce, although this effect is limited because older workers have lower employment rates than prime-age 
workers and usually work fewer hours per week. Another factor suppressing TLI is the rising share of workers 
employed in the services sector, where average hours worked tend to be fewer than in goods-producing sectors. 
v Some economists argue that the low-hanging fruit has already been picked, so productivity growth will remain 
tepid despite advances such as automation and artificial intelligence. Others say because such technologies are 
starting to be adopted more widely, large gains could be coming, and soon. See D. E. Sichel, “Two Books for the 
Price of One: Review Article of The Rise and Fall of American Growth by Robert J. Gordon,” International 
Productivity Monitor 31 (fall 2016): 57–62; B. van Ark, “Total Factor Productivity: Lessons from the Past and 
Directions for the Future,”  National Bank of Belgium Working Paper Research No. 271 (October 2014); B. van Ark,  
“The Productivity Paradox of the New Digital Economy,” International Productivity Monitor 31 (fall 2016): 3–18; 
and R. J. Gordon “Comments on Daniel E. Sichel’s Review Article on The Rise and Fall of American Growth,” 
International Productivity Monitor 31 (fall 2016): 63–67. 
vi In a similar vein, the Bank also looks to multiple gauges for measuring underlying (or “core”) inflation. See 
L. Schembri, “Getting to the Core of Inflation” (remarks to the Department of Economics, Western University, 
London, Ontario, February 9, 2017).  
vii Since the late 1990s, Bank staff have used a model called the extended multivariate filter (EMVF), which filters 
out short-term business cycle movements to capture trends without offering an in-depth economic explanation for 
them. A few years ago, staff developed an additional methodology called the integrated framework (IF), which 
explicitly accounts for more long-term structural changes in the economy; notably, capital formation and 
population aging. The IF, though, is limited in that one of its key inputs is the level of the country’s capital stock, 
which makes its projections sensitive to short-term fluctuations in investment. To further validate our estimates, 
we recently adapted and employed two more models: the basic multivariate filter (BMVF), proposed by Blagrave 
et al. in 2015, and the multivariate state-space framework (MSSF). The latter is an enhanced version of the BMVF 
that is sufficiently flexible to incorporate a range of assumptions about economic relationships. See P. Blagrave, 
R. Garcia-Saltos, D. Laxton and F. Zhang, “A Simple Multivariate Filter for Estimating Potential Output,” 
International Monetary Fund Working Paper, WP/15/79 (April 2015); L. Pichette, P. St-Amant, B. Tomlin and 
K. Anoma, “Measuring Potential Output at the Bank of Canada: The Extended Multivariate Filter and the Integrated 
Framework,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015-1 (January 2015); and L. Pichette, M. N. Robitaille, 
M. Salameh and P. St-Amant, “Dismiss the Gap? A Real-Time Assessment of the Usefulness of Canadian Output 
Gaps in Forecasting Inflation,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2018-10 (March 2018). 
viii Capital includes measures of machinery and equipment, engineering, and structures as well as three types of 
“intangible” expenditures that are currently capitalized in Statistics Canada’s national accounts data: research and 
development, software, and mineral exploration and evaluation. Other intangible investments, such as 
expenditures to build databases or to increase firm-specific human capital, are not currently capitalized and 
included in the capital stock. For more information, see J. R. Baldwin, W. Gu and R. Macdonald, “Intangible Capital 
and Productivity Growth in Canada,” Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 15-206-X, No. 029 (2012). 
ix Estimates of TFP should be interpreted with caution. They are not solely measures of economic or technological 
progress, but also include other factors such as measurement error.  
x We also do a less in-depth review for other major economies that are Canada’s biggest trading partners. As new 
data arrive between annual reassessments, especially for GDP and business investment, we regularly update the 
starting-point level of potential output and sometimes also the growth outlook for Canada. We occasionally make 
 
 14 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
similar adjustments for these other economies. Any such changes are explained in the Monetary Policy Report. For 
more detail,  see R. Beard, A.-K. Cormier, M. Francis, K. Gribbin, J.-D. Guénette, C. Hajzler, K. Hess, J. Ketcheson, 
K. Mo, L. Poirier and P. Selcuk, “Assessing Global Potential Output Growth: April 2018,” Bank of Canada Staff 
Analytical Note No. 2018-9 (April 2018). 
xi In our 2018 reassessment, we project that potential output growth will be 1.8 per cent from 2018 to 2020 before 
inching up to 1.9 per cent in 2021—while showing each year’s projection as the midpoint of a range. For 2018, the 
range is plus or minus 0.3 percentage points, while for 2021 it is plus or minus 0.6 percentage points. 
xii The output gap is normally expressed as a percentage of potential output. 
xiii This conceptual framework for the relationship between the output gap and the deviation of inflation from 
target is based on the expectations-augmented Phillips Curve, originally developed 50 years ago by Milton 
Friedman. See M. Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 58, no. 1 (March 1968):  
1–17. In practice, this relationship hinges critically on inflation expectations being well-anchored at our 2 per cent 
target, which they are. This outcome reflects our success in using this framework since 1991 to achieve our 
inflation target. As a result, the target has become very credible. See L. Schembri, “Anchoring Expectations: 
Canada’s Approach to Price Stability” (remarks to the Manitoba Association for Business Economists, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, February 15, 2018). 
xiv See L. Schembri “Anchoring Expectations: Canada’s Approach to Price Stability” (remarks to the Manitoba 
Association for Business Economists, Winnipeg, Manitoba, February 15, 2018). Also, for a discussion of 
demographic effects in particular, see S. Ambler and J. Kronik, “Faulty Transmissions: How Demographics Affect 
Monetary Policy in Canada,” C.D. Howe Institute, Commentary No. 506 (March 2018). 
xv The neutral policy rate is measured as the equilibrium real interest rate plus the 2 per cent target inflation rate. 
The policy rate has declined because of a decrease in the equilibrium real interest rate, which has occurred as 
lower potential output growth has reduced the demand for investment. For further details, see R. Mendes, “The 
Neutral Rate of Interest in Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2014-5 (September 2014).  
xvi During 2009 and 2010, when the policy rate was at 0.25 per cent, the Bank of Canada employed conditional 
forward guidance about the likely path for interest rates to provide additional monetary stimulus. Large-scale asset 
purchases were not conducted in Canada. However, central banks in many advanced economies did use such tools 
and, in the aftermath of the crisis, questions have been raised about the tools’ effectiveness, their impact on 
financial vulnerabilities and their possible implications for central-bank independence. 
xvii Such renewals are conducted every five years. The last one was in 2016. 
xviii For example, if a shock were to occur that required a substantial degree of monetary stimulus for a prolonged 
period, strong financial regulation and supervision and effective macroprudential policy would be needed to 
mitigate any resulting financial vulnerabilities and preserve financial stability. 
xix Marshall, in his Principles of Economics (8th edition, p. 179), described education as a national investment. He 
wrote: “We may then conclude that the wisdom of expending public and private funds on education is not to be 
measured by its direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment, to give the masses of the people 
much greater opportunities than they can generally avail themselves of.” 
xx That said, another example of a policy that could increase potential output would be efforts to develop 
untapped labour supply by increasing participation in the workforce of underrepresented groups such as women, 
youth, Indigenous Canadians, older workers and disabled people—a point that Governor Poloz made earlier this 
year. See S. S. Poloz, “Today’s Labour Market and the Future of Work” (remarks to the Smith School of Business, 
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, March 13, 2018).  
xxi See C. A. Wilkins, “At the Crossroads: Innovation and Inclusive Growth” (remarks to the G7 Symposium on 
Innovation and Inclusive Growth, Montebello, Quebec, February 8, 2018).  
xxii According to data from Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada, the country aims to admit 320,000 
immigrants this year, a number that rises to 340,000 in 2020. For comparison, in 2015 Canada admitted 272,000 
immigrants. Bank staff recently conducted a hypothetical exercise to estimate the impact on potential output 
growth of increasing Canada’s current level of immigration 33 per cent by 2020. Holding natural population growth 
constant, they found that this would permanently lift the labour supply by an equivalent of about 50,000 full-time 
workers—providing a 0.2 per cent boost to the level of potential output.  
 
 15 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
xxiii See L. Schembri, “Wood, Wheat, Wheels and the Web: Historical Pivots and Future Prospects for Canadian 
Exports” (remarks to the Atlantic Institute for Market Studies, Halifax, Nova Scotia, November 8, 2016); and 
T. Lane, “How Canada’s International Trade is Changing with the Times” (remarks to the Saskatoon Regional 
Economic Development Authority, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, September 18, 2017).  
xxiv Specifically, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada and the European 
Union, the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) between 11 Pacific 
nations including Canada, and the interprovincial Canadian Free Trade Agreement (CFTA). 
