24th ASSIOM FOREX Congress
 Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Verona, 10 February 2018
    Global growth strengthened considerably last year although uncertainties remain linked 
to future US trade policies and possible upward shifts in risk premiums in the financial markets. 
Monetary policy in the euro area has staved off deflation but inflation is still far from the levels 
consistent with monetary stability.  
Economic  activity  in  Italy  appears  less  dependent  on  the  expansionary  stance  of 
monetary and fiscal policies. The consolidation of the recovery requires us to proceed with the 
economic reform effort. Prudent budgetary policies will help make markets more confident in 
the reduction of the public debt-to-GDP ratio.  
Lending  to  households  and  firms  is  expanding  and  loan  quality  is  improving,  partly 
thanks  to  the  successful  handling  of  the  most  critical  situations  in  the  banking  sector.  The 
reduction  in  non-performing  loans  must  continue,  exploiting  the  favourable  economic 
conditions. Competitive pressures and a challenging regulatory environment have made it urgent 
for banks to continue to limit costs and to fully recoup profitability, including through additional 
mergers.  These  needs  are  especially  pressing  in  the  mutual  banking  sector,  where  the  2016 
reform must be implemented in toto.  
Notwithstanding  the  progress  made  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  the  institutional 
arrangements  of  the  European  Union  and  of  the  euro  area  remain  a  work  in  progress. 
Diminished  trust  among  member  states  has  led  to  a  sterile  conflict  between  calls  for  risk 
reduction  versus  those  for  risk  sharing.  These  proposals  are  instead  complementary.  Only  by 
acknowledging this can solutions be found from which all countries can benefit.  
Recent economic developments 
The economic  expansion is increasingly broad  based at  global level. According to the 
estimates of the main international institutions, in 2017 world output returned to growth at a rate 
of more than 3.5 per cent; this year it is expected to rise by almost 4 per cent. The favourable 
outlook remains vulnerable to the repercussions of possible trade restrictions and to a potentially 
abrupt increase in risk aversion in the markets.  
Domestic demand in the euro area is being sustained by rising employment and very 
accommodative  financing  conditions.  Exports  are  continuing  to  improve,  driven  by  the 
uptick  in  foreign  demand.  According  to  the  Eurosystem’s  forecasts,  this  year  output  will 
expand  by  2.3  per  cent,  a  similar  pace  to  that  recorded  in  2017.  Inflation  remains  low, 
however, reaching 1.3 per cent in January; core inflation also continues to be weak, partly 
because of the effects of wage moderation in many economies. 
Monetary policy is working. The strong cyclical momentum and ongoing reduction of 
economic  slack  have  strengthened  confidence  among  the  members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council  that  inflation  will  gradually  converge  towards  the  inflation  aim  of  a  rate  below,  but 
close  to,  2  per  cent  in  the  medium  term.  This  is  why  we  recalibrated  our  monetary  policy 
interventions  last  October,  while  maintaining  the  highly  expansionary  conditions  intended  to 
ensure  a  lasting  return  to  price  stability.  We  have  extended  the  duration  of  the  APP  until 
September of this  year,  trimming our monthly purchases to €30 billion. The Eurosystem will 
reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  APP  for  an 
extended period of time after the end of its net asset purchases, and will continue to provide 
abundant liquidity to the banking system until at least the end of 2019. The Council expects to 
keep interest rates at their present levels well past the horizon of the net asset purchases. 
Inflation, after falling slightly at the start of this year owing to the base effect associated 
with the temporary increase in energy commodity prices in 2017, is expected to rise gradually to 
levels  consistent  with  the  target  in  the  second  half  of  2020.  The  risk  of  deflation  has  been 
averted but it is proving difficult to push up inflation expectations. 
Exchange rate volatility poses one of the main risks to the inflation outlook, also given 
the  high  sensitivity  of  forex  markets  to  the  announcements  of  monetary  and  government 
authorities. The euro exchange rate is not among our objectives per se but it can have significant 
repercussions  on  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy;  disorderly  developments,  especially  if 
triggered  by  factors  unrelated  to  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  can  make  it  harder  to 
achieve price stability.  
The decisions of the ECB’s Governing Council will continue to be shaped by economic 
data  and  by  the  inflation  outlook.  We  will  be  patient  in  pursuing  the  inflation  objective  and 
perseverant on the monetary stance adopted.  
In Italy GDP rose sharply in 2017. According to initial estimates, it rose from 0.9 per 
cent in 2016 to 1.5 per cent last year. Employment continued to expand (0.8 per cent in 2017), 
while the unemployment rate fell to 10.8 per cent in December, its lowest level since August 
2012; hours worked per employee also increased moderately from the low recorded in the first 
quarter of 2015, and grew by 0.5 per cent in the first nine months of 2017. 
The expansion of productive activity is being driven by the global cyclical upswing and 
expansionary economic policies, but it is also benefiting from the reforms undertaken in recent 
years. Progress made in the labour, capital and services markets has begun to bear fruit; it has 
enabled  Italy  to  benefit  from  the  global  and  European  recovery  and  has  meant  that  the 
consolidation of growth is no longer supported by cyclical factors alone.  
Investment has increased since the summer. The effects of monetary policy, which has 
kept financing costs very low, have been flanked by those of tax incentives for the purchase of 
capital goods and digital technologies. Although uncertainty about whether these incentives will 
be maintained in 2018 may have prompted businesses to bring forward some of their investment 
to  2017,  the  outlook  remains  favourable:  our  surveys  indicate  a  further  expansion  in  capital 
accumulation for 2018, supported primarily by demand expectations.  
The vitality of Italian companies is evident in the sharp increase in innovative start-ups 
entered  in  the  companies  register  (currently  over  8,000,  a  more  than  fourfold  increase  from 
2014), the healthy performance of exports, which are estimated to have risen by more than 5 per 
cent last year, and the current account surplus on the balance of payments, which in 2017 rose to 
almost 3 per cent of GDP. Positive developments in the external account are helping to improve 
our country’s net debtor position, which in the space of just over three years has gone from 25 
per cent to less than 8 per cent of GDP, its lowest level since 2002. 
This year GDP is expected to grow at a rate of about 1.5 per cent and should remain 
above 1 per cent in the next two years as well. The virtuous circle of supply and demand is 
gaining momentum: the rise in households’ disposable income and the decline in firms’ spare 
capacity mean that the improved outlook is increasingly translating into higher consumption 
and investment. 
This  scenario  assumes  that  financial  conditions  will  remain  accommodative.  When 
the improvement in GDP and inflation in the euro area reaches a level that justifies raising 
interest  rates,  our  economy  will not  suffer provided  that  domestic  economic  policies have 
been  able  to  consolidate  the  current  recovery,  leaving  investors  in  no  doubt  as  to  the 
Government’s  commitment  to  following  a  prudent  fiscal  policy  without  straying  from  the 
reforms undertaken in the last few years. This path must be pursued with determination in 
order  to  improve  public  services,  increase  competition  in  the  private  sector  and  stimulate 
greater investment in human capital.  
At  the  current  projected  rate  of  growth,  the  low  level  of  household  debt  and  the 
significant  decrease  in  firms’  indebtedness  make  increases  in  the  cost  of  borrowing,  even 
considerable ones, sustainable. Banks and insurance companies in turn face little exposure to 
the  effects  of  a  rate  hike.  Public  debt  is  still  too  high  in  relation  to  GDP  but  its  average 
residual maturity of more than seven years ensures that the rate increase will pass through to 
the average cost of debt very gradually.  
Aside from the primary surplus, developments in the debt-to-GDP ratio will depend on 
the differential between the average cost of debt and nominal GDP growth; therefore, the lower 
the sovereign spreads on Italian government securities and the more our economy is in line with 
that of the rest of the eurozone, the lower will be the impact of a rate increase. We should not be 
concerned  about  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy,  but  rather  with  the  credibility  and 
effectiveness of the reforms and the process of reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Banks 
Lending to the private sector in  Italy is expanding again.  Loans to households remain 
brisk while those to firms are gaining pace in the manufacturing segment and expanding slightly 
again  in  services;  the  decline  in  lending  to  the  construction  sector  is  still  pronounced,  but  is 
abating. Credit supply conditions are favourable overall; demand by firms has been limited by 
the ample availability of internal funds and greater recourse to non-bank financing. 
The ratio of new non-performing loans to total outstanding loans has fallen to below 
pre-crisis  levels;  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year  it  came  to  1.7  per  cent  (1.2  per  cent  for 
households, 2.6 for firms). For two years now, the stock of NPLs has been falling, with an 
acceleration owing to major sales of bad loans completed last year. The total stock of NPLs, 
net of loan loss provisions, has fallen from a peak of €200 billion in 2015 to €140 billion 
(equal to 7.8 per cent of total loans), with bad loans alone decreasing from €86 billion to  
€60 billion (3.5 per cent).  
The economic environment is helping banks continue to strengthen their balance sheets 
and reduce their NPLs, actions which, since 2012, have been the focus of our recommendations 
and supervisory interventions. There is still ample room to improve the efficiency of the bad 
loan management and recovery process, specifically by making information on the status of the 
recovery  proceedings  more  readily  available.  The  banks  that  are  most  effective  in  doing  this 
obtain  recovery  rates  that  are  much  higher  than  the  industry  average.  More  pro-active 
management can also lead to a large portion of unlikely-to-pay loans (which make up about half 
of all net NPLs) being classified as performing again. 
In the coming weeks the European Commission and the Single Supervisory Mechanism will 
finalize their proposals for writing down non-performing loans over time (calendar provisioning). In 
its proposal the Commission suggests introducing minimum, or Pillar 1, requirements that all EU 
banks  will  have  to  meet.  That  put  forward  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  instead,  sets 
supervisors’ expectations for the NPL coverage ratio under a Pillar 2 approach. A reduction in NPLs 
is necessary to lower banks’ risks and funding costs. This should be pursued through measures that 
take into account the starting conditions, are sustainable, and do not have potentially destabilizing 
procyclical  effects.  They  should  also  ensure  a  level  playing  field  to  banks  operating  in  different 
environments, especially in terms of a swift and efficient civil justice system, something Italy still 
needs to improve on.  
The  European  Commission  will  also  submit  a  proposal  to  establish  national  asset 
management companies, which may or may not be publicly sponsored, and which would specialize 
in the management of NPLs. These companies would be able to achieve economies of scale in their 
debt  recovery  activities  and  enjoy  greater  bargaining  power  when  selling  NPLs  in  the  market, 
including through securitization. To attain these objectives, adequate incentives must be put in place 
to encourage banks’ voluntary participation in the asset transfer scheme under conditions that do not 
make it excessively rigid and in reality impracticable. 
A new EU-wide stress test was launched a couple of days ago with the publication of the 
methodology and the macroeconomic scenarios that will be used in the exercise. The results will 
be released in early November. The test will cover 48 banks, of which 33 euro-area significant 
banking groups, four of them Italian. At the same time, the Single Supervisory Mechanism will 
carry out an analogous exercise on the other significant banks, taking into account their smaller 
size and lower degree of complexity.  
Compared with the ones utilized in previous exercises, the methodology for this year’s 
stress test incorporates the new IFRS 9 accounting principle. The move to the new standard, in 
force since the beginning of this year, will help to enhance transparency and prudence in banks’ 
valuation of loans. This is a good opportunity to increase write-downs and spur the development 
of a market in non-performing assets. At the same time, the incorporation of the new standard 
makes the methodology used for the stress test more complex; this will have to be taken into 
account when interpreting and assessing the results of this year’s exercise, also with respect to 
previous years. As in 2016, no pass-fail threshold has been set. Supervisors will use the results 
to carry out their supervisory review and evaluation process.  
While  still  low,  the  profitability  of  Italy’s  leading  banks  improved  in  the  first  nine 
months of last year. Return on equity was 4.4 per cent, compared with 1.4 per cent in the same 
period of 2016. According to banks’ expectations, profitability over the coming years should be 
sustained by a reduction in loan loss provisions, an increase in asset management fees, and a 
decrease in operating expenses. 
But  an  in-depth  review  of  banks’  business  models  is  inevitable  in  Italy,  as  it  is 
throughout  the  EU.  Some  important  factors  that  could  dampen  profitability  must  not  be 
underestimated. Regulatory changes as well as any additional write-downs made in connection 
with  the  sale  of  NPLs  could  affect  loan-loss  provisioning.  Competition  in  the  asset 
management market is bound to grow, as is the scale of operations necessary to be profitable. 
The costs for banks, which are burdened by persistently high staff expenses, will be affected 
by investments in new digital technologies, which have been limited so far but can no longer 
be  delayed.  Moreover,  the  entry  into  force  of  new  EU  rules  on  the  required  loss-absorbing 
capacity in a crisis and on the provision of investment and payment services is expected to 
push up wholesale funding costs, competition for certain services, compliance costs and those 
related to ensuring that customers are fully protected. 
Banks  must  therefore  take  action  on  several  fronts  to  recover  profitability  and 
competitiveness. This means cutting expenses further, merging or entering into consortiums to 
exploit  cost  and  revenue  synergies,  and  investing  in  order  to  respond  effectively  to  the 
challenges and opportunities brought about by the development of the Fintech sector. Increasing 
transparency  towards  customers  must  be  viewed  not  as  a  legal  or  regulatory  requirement  but 
rather as essential to becoming more competitive. The provision of new products and services 
must ensure that customers fully understand the information essential for accurately assessing 
the potential risks and returns. 
The  recent  agreement  on  the  completion  of  Basel  III  reforms,  which  will  start  to  be 
applied in 2022 and enter into full effect in 2027, marks the culmination of the responses to the 
shortcomings in the regulatory framework that were highlighted by the global financial crisis. 
Without  raising  the  overall  capital  requirements  significantly,  it  contributes  to  reducing 
regulatory uncertainty in the banking system. An important objective of the agreement is to limit 
excessive variability in banks’ risk-weighted assets, as this can impede comparability of capital 
ratios  and  undermine  investors’  trust  in  the  calculation  methods  used  by  banks  to  compute 
capital requirements.  
While mutual banks’ (banche di credito cooperativo, BCCs) solvency ratios continue to 
be higher than the system average, the gap has been narrowing given the squeeze on profits and 
the impossibility of raising equity on the market. The measures taken to cope with the serious 
deterioration in loan quality have proved less effective than those adopted by other banks. The 
BCCs are now facing an NPL ratio that is more than 2 percentage points above the average and 
substantially  lower  coverage  ratios.  The  implementation  of  the  reform  of  the  sector,  and  the 
creation of cooperative banking groups, must be swiftly carried out if the BCCs are to overcome 
the disadvantages of their small size and continue to support the local economy while upholding 
the values of cooperation and mutual benefit. 
The groundwork for the establishment of cooperative banking groups must be laid more 
rapidly, with the affiliated institutions fully supporting their future parent companies. Business 
plans should be tailored to ensure that the objectives of the reform are achieved forthwith; these 
include  openness  to  the  capital  market,  robust  corporate  governance  and  internal  audit 
arrangements,  allocative  and  operational  efficiency,  and  a  reduction  in  NPLs.  Any  delay  or 
resistance to change would eventually endanger the success of the reform. 
Banca d’Italia is examining the application by Cassa Centrale Raiffeisen to set up a local 
banking group, and discussions are currently under way with Iccrea and Cassa Centrale Banca 
on their applications to establish the two significant groups that will be placed under European 
supervision.  Before  this  happens,  both  will  undergo  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  their 
balance sheets. The parent banks must draw up suitable capital strengthening plans to be put into 
effect as and when necessary.  
Europe 
The tools and reforms introduced in recent  years in unfavourable economic conditions 
have  enhanced the euro  area’s  ability to  withstand macroeconomic and  financial shocks. The 
European  Stability  Mechanism  has  been  launched  to  provide  financial  assistance  for  EU 
countries  in  difficulty,  budget  rules  have  been  tightened,  the  ECB  has  introduced  outright 
monetary  transactions,  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism, the first two pillars of banking union, have been set up. This progress would have 
been unthinkable only a few years ago: in a short space of time we have overcome formidable 
political, legal, economic and organizational difficulties. 
Today the European reform process is still struggling to make headway. Although the 
debate is ongoing and the key problems have been identified, there is a deadlock between those 
who  would  prioritize  action  to  reduce  macroeconomic  and  financial  risks  in  the  individual 
member states and those who are calling for the rapid adoption of common safeguards against 
the consequences of such risks, given the absence or paucity of national tools. 
This deceptive dichotomy, however, rooted in misunderstandings and scant mutual trust, 
has come to condition the drafting of European rules for managing bank crises and to impede 
the completion of banking union. The result is a system without a safety net, one that lacks the 
new  European  financial  backstops  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  the  deposit  insurance 
scheme, while the national tools and procedures used by many countries for the management of 
bank crises, even in recent years, are now out of bounds. In a context such as this, stricter rules 
and  common  supervisory  and  resolution  mechanisms  cannot  prevent  the  outbreak  of  crises  
–  even  just  of  liquidity  –  nor  can  they  adequately  limit  the  consequences.  This  needs  to  be 
acknowledged  and  the  necessary  adjustments  devised.  The  experience  of  recent  years  has 
demonstrated how important it is to leave an opening that will allow situations with the potential 
to disrupt financial stability to be successfully managed. 
Risk reduction and risk sharing are complementary first and foremost in relation to public 
finance.  A  high  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  a  source  of  vulnerability:  it  discourages  investment  and 
impedes growth; it exposes countries to a loss of market confidence and financial contagion. Budget 
flexibility  is  essential  in  a  cyclical  downturn,  but  further  progress,  i.e.  strong  lasting  growth  of 
output, is impossible with a large deficit. Italy cannot delay setting in motion a steady and tangible 
reduction  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  The  reduction  of  the  time  needed  to  achieve  this  requires 
budgetary discipline above all else. Structural reforms to increase the economy’s growth potential 
are essential.  
We  should  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  in  the  absence  of  adequate  safeguards,  a 
country’s recovery efforts can be rapidly thwarted by negative shocks. To avoid this happening, 
risk-sharing measures could be considered in order to reduce the sensitivity of national budgets 
to macroeconomic conditions, thereby avoiding the rapid accumulation of debt during adverse 
economic cycles and the adoption of procyclical policies in an attempt to limit it. 
This lower sensitivity can be achieved by shifting some important automatic stabilizers 
to the European level and handing over responsibility for adopting the necessary discretionary 
measures,  for  example  with  programmes  for  large  infrastructure  projects,  for  managing 
immigration  or  for  common  defence.  It  is  technically  possible  to  introduce  this  ‘common 
budget’ without it becoming, as some countries fear, a source of permanent transfers towards 
more structurally indebted countries. This would help greatly in reducing the asymmetry of a 
situation in which there is a single monetary policy but a fragmented fiscal policy. 
Measures geared to repurchasing outstanding securities can help to reduce the public 
debt-to-GDP  ratio  more  rapidly.  National  initiatives  of  this  kind,  funded  by  privatization 
programmes for example, can encounter both operational and quantitative constraints. A faster 
reduction  of  public  debts  in  euro-area  countries  than  that  guaranteed  by  prudent  budget 
policies could be achieved by issuing European debt securities to remove a portion of those 
issued  by  member  states  from  the  market,  with  clearly  defined  procedures  and  without 
transferring  resources  from  one  country  to  another,  giving  form  to  a  fiscal  union  to  be 
accompanied by binding rules and powers of control and intervention. As I have recalled on 
other  occasions,  various  concrete  proposals  have  been  made  in  this  direction.  The  new 
common  debt  instrument  could  serve  as  the  kind  of  safe  asset  typically  found  in  advanced 
countries  with  a  national  currency;  the  reduction  of  member  states’  national  debts  would 
eliminate potential sources of financial instability; the greater scrutiny of public accounts that 
would accompany this measure would shelter the euro area from the risk of new increases in 
public debt at the national level.  
Some of the proposals put forward in the European debate seem to rely on the possibility 
of proceeding sequentially, putting risk reduction before risk sharing. These proposals identify 
the  main  source  of  vulnerability  in  the  euro  area  as  the  ‘doom  loop’  between  banks  and 
sovereign debtors and suggest breaking it by discouraging banks from investing in government 
securities and by setting up orderly procedures to restructure public debts deemed unsustainable. 
This is a simplified vision of the origins and management of financial crises, which in any case 
does not pay sufficient attention to the risks that could ensue from rapid and broad movements 
of capital within the market for European government securities.  
limits),  particularly 
if  badly  designed  or  wrongly  calibrated, 
This  question  should  be  dealt  with  pragmatically.  Changes  in  the  prudential  treatment  of 
government  securities  held  by  financial  intermediaries  (such  as  risk-weighting  or  introducing 
quantitative 
risk  being 
counterproductive. Especially at times of system-wide tensions, they can end up by generating the 
very  crises  they  were  supposed  to  prevent,  triggering  episodes  of  financial  contagion  or  fuelling 
speculation. In any case the link between banks and sovereign debtors is not limited to financial 
relationships but is channelled, above all, through the effects that both sides exercise on economic 
activity. It is unrealistic to think that the restructuring of a large public debt, however orderly, could 
be achieved without serious consequences for the national economy and for the European economy 
as a whole.  
 The difficulty of straddling the paths of risk reduction and risk sharing is evident. There 
are  sizeable  obstacles  to  overcome,  both  in  reaching  a  consensus  and  in  the  practical 
implementation of reforms destined to profoundly change our European identity.  
It is often claimed that the time is not yet ripe for political union. Yet with foresight, we 
can take important steps in this direction. Italy is called on to make an authoritative contribution 
to the current European debate. The more steadfast and credible its commitment to improving 
Italy’s growth potential and ensuring financial stability, the stronger its position will be.  
Banca  d’Italia’s  supervisory  work,  including  in  the  realm  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism, will continue to push the banks to make the most of the opportunities offered by the 
current  economic  climate  and  to  proceed  decisively  with  strengthening  their  balance  sheets, 
reducing  NPL  stocks,  and  increasing  profitability.  This  is  necessitated  by  the  spread  of  new 
technology, growing competition on the financial markets, and increasingly prudent rules. 
To  strengthen  growth  in  the  medium  term,  further  steps  must  be  taken  towards 
structural reforms, improving public services, and rationalizing and stabilizing the tax laws. 
This  is  not  a  question  of  European  rules,  this  is  about  the  balanced  development  of  our 
economy, its inherent strength. An increase in the public deficit is no substitute for reform and 
could prove counterproductive, since the problem of the national debt cannot be sidestepped. 
Even without the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact, the need remains for us to make 
responsible choices. 
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
