Harvard Law School Bicentennial
Annual Reunion of the Harvard Law School Association of Europe
Fintech and banking: today and tomorrow
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Fabio Panetta
Rome, 12 May 2018
  1. Introduction  
Technology  and  digital  transformation  are  radically  changing  people’s  habits  and  firms’ 
activities.  They  are  changing  the  ways  in  which  people  produce,  buy  goods  and  services,  and 
interact with each other.  
Our daily activities increasingly depend on connectivity. In 2016, about 95 per cent of 
businesses in OECD countries had a broadband Internet connection and more than 75 per cent 
had  a  web  presence.  Half  of  the  adult  population  had  purchased  goods  or  services  online, 
compared to 36 per cent in 2010.  
Innovation has had a remarkable effect on mobile devices. The smartphones in our pockets 
have  a  computing  capacity  far  greater  than  that  of  a  1960’s  supercomputer,  they  are  a  hundred 
thousand  times  lighter  and  ten  thousand  times  less  expensive.  Last  year  1.5  billion  smartphones 
were sold globally – that’s one fifth of the world’s population. Mobile technology and services are 
estimated to have contributed $3.6 trillion or 4.5 percent to global GDP in 2017.1  
The new technologies are “virtualizing” our everyday tasks, from economic to interpersonal 
relationships, to the purchasing of  goods and services.  In the digital era financial,  economic and 
even social inclusion depend on technological inclusion. 
The effects of digital transformation have not fully emerged yet. It is still hard, at this stage, 
to foresee all the consequences of the application of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, 
and  Big  Data.  This  transformation  is  replacing  intellectual  activities,  and  might  do  to  human 
thinking  what  the  technological  revolutions  of  the  18th  and  19th  centuries  did  to  human  physical 
labour.2  
                                                           
1   IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2018. 
2   In  the  last  three  centuries,  four  phases  of  industrial  revolution  resulted  in  unprecedented  economic  and  social 
progress. The first phase (between 1750 and 1830) was characterized by the invention of steam engines, cotton 
spinning  machinery  and  the  railways.  The  second  was  triggered  by  the  invention,  between  1879  and  1900,  of 
electricity, the internal combustion engine and the provision of running water. The third phase encompassed the 
computer  and  the  Internet  revolution,  beginning  in  the  1960s  and  peaking  in  the  1990s.  The  fourth  industrial 
revolution  is  the  current  digital  revolution  (see  R.  Gordon  (2012),  “Is  U.S.  Economic  Growth  Over?  Faltering 
Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds”, NBER, Working Paper No. 18315, August 2012. 
 The  financial  industry  has  always  been  an  early  adopter  of  new  technology.  The  first 
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) in history was installed in 1967 at a branch of Barclays Bank in 
London, to allow clients to get cash outside normal working hours. Since then, many  automated 
services such as second generation ATMs, POS systems, debit and credit cards, online trading and 
online banking services3 have been offered in response to customers’ demand for immediacy. Thus, 
the widespread adoption of digital technology in financial markets in recent years should not come 
as a surprise.  
The use of digital financial services is set to soar, boosted by rising customer expectation, 
the spread of Internet, smartphones and tablets, by the steady fall in data storage cost and by the 
improvement in the processing capacity of computer systems, including via cloud computing.4 The 
progress recorded in the last few years is astonishing: for example, the amount of data exchanged 
internationally  is  now  45  times  greater  than  in  2005,  while  the  cost  of  storing  information  is  
10 times lower than in 2010.5 It is against this backdrop that fintech comes into the equation. 
2. Fintech  
What  do  we  mean  exactly  by  fintech?  The  Financial  Stability  Board  defines  it  as 
“technologically  enabled  financial  innovation  that  could  result  in  new  business  models, 
applications,  processes  or  products  with  an  associated  material  effect  on  financial  markets  and 
institutions  and  the  provision  of  financial  services.”  According  to  this  definition,  fintech 
encompasses a wide range of services and activities. 
An  example  may  help  clarify  this.  In  addition  to  using  banknotes,  cheques,  or  Internet 
banking,  today  I  can  use  my  mobile  phone  to  transfer  money  to  a  friend.  All  I  have  to  do  is  to 
download the appropriate app, type a simple text message and select my friend’s name from my 
contacts  list.  My  friend  would  receive  the  money  in  a  few  seconds,  and  could  even  reuse  it 
immediately for his own payments.  
The evolution of financial advisory services provides another example. In the past, when  
I needed financial advice, I contacted my advisor. In most cases he would not remember my name 
or my financial situation (although in some cases he would pretend he did!). He would ask for my 
                                                           
3   ATMs are electronic instruments that make it possible to carry out current account operations (cash withdrawals or 
deposits)  without  needing  a  bank  clerk  to  intervene.  Point  of  Sale  (POS)  systems  use  electronic  terminals  that 
accept non-cash payment instruments, such as debit and credit cards. 
4   Cloud computing uses a remote server accessed via the Internet to provide IT software and hardware resources 
such as the storage, processing or transmission of data. 
5   See McKinsey (2016), ‘Digital globalization: The new era of global flows’.  
 account number to check the composition of my portfolio and key information such as my age, 
income, risk aversion and investment objectives. He would then provide his advice, possibly after 
one  or  more  face-to-face  meetings.  Today  some  fintech  companies  and  banks  can  offer  such 
advice  much  more  quickly  and  efficiently  through  their  ‘robo-advice’  services.  I  only  need  to 
provide  my  code  number  to  a  computer  which,  using  artificial  intelligence,  will  select  the 
investment programme best suited to my profile and risk appetite. 
Financial services  are still predominantly  distributed through traditional  channels.  Fintech 
only  plays  a  significant  role  in  certain  segments  of  the  financial  sector,  such  as  retail  payments, 
asset management and small loans. But it is rapidly expanding into sectors such as lending-based 
crowdfunding  and  chatbox  customer  relations  services.  The  use  of  technologies  such  as  AI,  Big 
Data and distributed ledgers (DLT)6 is also on the rise.  
Competition from fintech companies is starting to erode the margins of traditional banking. 
It is estimated that over the next ten years, as fintech firms expand into all market segments, they 
could erode 60 per cent of the profits that banks generate from retail services.7  
The  success  of  some  fintech  companies  –  think  for  example  of  the  multinational 
TransferWise8  –  is  driving  many  banks  to  deepen  their  commitment  to  the  new  technologies. 
Numerous large banks are expanding their range of digital services by increasing their investment in 
them  and  by  entering  into  agreements  with  fintech  companies.  In  some  cases,  integration  is 
achieved when a bank acquires a fintech firm.9 
In  the  countries  where  online  retail  trade  is  most  developed,  the  leading  fintech  players 
include tech giants such as Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook in the United States, and Alibaba 
and  Tencent  in  China.  For  example,  Apple  and  Google  have  developed  solutions  that  allow 
payment instruments to be used in cooperation with banks. Amazon grants loans to small businesses 
for a total amount that has now exceeded $3 billion. Facebook allows users in the U.S. to make 
payments to others in their contacts list and is beginning to lend to small businesses. Alibaba makes 
payment  services  available  through  its  affiliate  company  Ant  Financial.  Tencent  offers  a  broad 
range of financial services through its social media app, WeChat.  
                                                           
6   DLT is the technology underlying virtual asset transactions. It is based on a decentralized system with the direct 
exchange  of  messages  between  nodes  in  a  network  and  the  recording  of  transactions  in  a  synchronized  ledger 
distributed  across  the  nodes  (see  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Distributed  ledger technology  in  payment, 
clearing and settlement - An analytical framework, February 2017; https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d157.pdf). 
7   See McKinsey (2017) Retail Banking Insights, April.  
8   TransferWise, founded in 2011, is an e-money institution  that  makes it possible to transfer  money to and from 
Europe, Asia, the Americas, Oceania and Africa.  
9   An example is J.P. Morgan’s recent acquisition of the start-up WePay.  
  These developments have been facilitated by the complementarity between online platforms, 
the demand for services by consumers and firms on the platform, and the use of digital payment 
instruments.  Indeed,  platforms  can  be  a  single  point  of  contact  where  firms,  households  and 
providers of financial services can interact more efficiently, and could become the most effective 
and widely used means of providing financial services in the future.  
3. The outlook for banks in the fintech era 
The digital revolution raises a number of questions as regards the outlook for the banking 
sector. A crucial issue is what the future relationship between banks and fintechs will be, and what 
this will imply for the supply of banking services and for banks’ profitability and market power. 
The answer to these questions depends on the kind of fintechs we are thinking of. As  
I mentioned before, the new actors are not just small fintech start-ups, but also the global Big-Techs 
such as Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, Alibaba. The challenges for banks arising from these 
two groups of competitors are fundamentally different.  
While  fintech  start-ups  are  gaining  market  shares  in  specific  business  lines  thanks  to 
aggressive pricing policies, many banks have either established strategic partnerships with them or 
have taken them over. This way, banks are integrating fintech services into their value chains in 
order to support their digital plans.  
The  Big-Tech  companies  represent  a  much  bigger  threat  for  banks,  due  to  their 
competitive  advantages.  First,  by  using  their  platforms  –  Amazon  is  an  example  –  they  have 
access to unique real time information on the products, sales, and customer satisfaction levels of 
firms using their platform; they can observe revenues and market structure, estimating the firms’ 
profit-generating  capability.  They  also  hold  information  that  they  can  use  to  infer  consumers’ 
preferences  and  living  standards.  Such  information  can  be  exploited  to  screen  firms  and 
customers  and  assess  their  credit  risk  –  a  function  that  is  at  the  core  of  traditional  banking. 
Second,  the  Big-Techs  have  a  very  large  customer  base,  and  thanks  to  their  customer-centric 
business models, they can exploit customer-specific information much more efficiently than banks, 
that are typically focused on products (deposits, mortgages, etc.). Third, large technological firms are 
more skilled in managing large volumes of data – especially unstructured data – than banks. Fourth, 
the Big-Techs have enormous financial strength, and this is apparent in the ample liquidity they have 
accumulated in the course of their activities and record market capitalizations – not far off $1 trillion 
in some cases. They can use these resources to expand their financial intermediation business.  
  What will be the impact of the interaction between banks and the new players? On the one 
hand, digital transformation and recourse to technologies such as AI and Big Data allow banks to 
cut costs and to improve the quality of the services provided. On the other hand, technology breaks 
down  the  traditional  barriers  to  entry  in  the  credit  and  financial  services  markets,  fostering 
competition: already today fintech firms are offering technology-intensive low-cost services.  
It  is  therefore  hard  to  predict  what  will  be  the  ultimate  effect  on  the  supply  structure  of 
financial  services  and  banks’  profitability.  I  believe,  however,  that  there  are  already  two  clear 
implications. First, banks will have to invest heavily in technology to compete with one another and 
with new entrants: this is necessary for their very survival. Second, the structure of the financial 
systems will change radically in the next ten years with the entry of new non-bank operators.  
Banks  need  to  use  technology  more  efficiently  than  in  the  past,  when  it  was  used  to 
duplicate  traditional  activities.  They  must  use  remote  digital  services  to  replace,  rather  than 
flank, the traditional distribution channels, although bank branches will not disappear entirely, 
because I can’t see many customers getting a mortgage online.  
Overall,  I do not expect independent fintech firms to be able to replace banks. The value 
chain of banks includes bundled services like deposits, payments, and lending. Fintechs generally 
carry  out  one  or  more  of  these  activities  in  an  unbundled  way.  Yet,  bundling  provides  powerful 
economies of scope. If fintechs wish to expand their businesses to exploit such economies of scope, 
then they will probably have to transform themselves into banks. 
4. Role of the authorities: cyber risk and regulation 
As  with  all  opportunities  for  progress,  the  technological  revolution  raises  new  issues  and 
may  expose  customers  to  little  known  risks.  Two  issues  deserve  close  scrutiny  by  the  public 
authorities: cyber risk and regulation. In this section I will briefly address them in turn.  
4.1 Cyber risk 
Cyber risk can cause enormous damages. In 2017, the spread of two pieces of malicious 
software called WannaCry and NotPetya led to losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars for 
their high-profile victims, which include the British National Health Service and shipping giant 
Moller-Maersk of Denmark. Attacks  through the interbank messaging service SWIFT resulted in 
large-scale theft from customers, including central banks, between 2016 and 2017. Illegal access to 
confidential emails was a key issue in the U.S. presidential campaign of 2016.  
  The consequences of these events, while serious, are still benign compared with what would 
happen in the event of a truly systemic cyber crisis: the British insurer Lloyd’s and the American 
Big Data firm Cyence have estimated that a massive disruption to cloud computing services could 
cost the global economy more than $50bn.10  
The  financial  sector  is  highly  exposed  to  cyber  attacks  because  it  makes  intensive  use  of 
ICT, and because it is highly interconnected at the global level. It is attractive not only to digital 
thieves  but  also  to  politically  motivated  actors  who  want  to  disrupt  the  functioning  of  our 
economies. For these reasons, it was one of the first civilian sectors to enforce strict cybersecurity 
standards,  and  perhaps  the  only  one  that  has  achieved  significant  results  in  broad-based 
international cooperation.11  
Central  banks  and  other  financial  authorities  are  working  to  supplement  the  traditional 
regulatory and supervisory approaches with the development of public-private cooperation and the 
adoption of new tools to address cyber risks. A milestone of such an approach was the publication 
in  2016  by  the  G7  countries  of  a  set  of  non-binding  principles,  addressed  to  both  markets  and 
authorities,  to  strengthen  the  security  of  the  financial  sector  at  the  international  level.12 
Cybersecurity was recognized as a strategic priority, to be tackled at the highest policy level. 
Various  initiatives  have  been  launched  at  both  European  and  national  level.  In  2016  the 
Eurosystem  launched  the  Cyber  Resilience  Strategy  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructure. 
Consistently with G7 principles, the CPMI-IOSCO guidance and recent European legislation,13 the 
ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  will  focus  on  three  key  areas:  first,  strengthening  the  cyber 
resilience  of  individual  financial  market  infrastructures,  including  payment  systems;  second, 
increasing  the  cyber  resilience  of  the  entire  financial  sector;  and  third,  promoting  public-private 
cooperation on cybersecurity for the financial sector at the European level.  
In  Italy,  to  ensure  a  comprehensive  strategic  vision  and  the  alignment  of  internal  and 
institutional policies, a high-level task force on cybersecurity has been set up within Banca d’Italia. 
In this regard, the Banca d’Italia’s three-year strategic plan envisages two specific lines of action. 
One focuses on protecting the Bank’s critical assets by reorganizing security functions within the IT 
Directorate General. The other focuses on enhancing the cyber resilience of Italy’s financial sector. 
                                                           
10   Lloyd’s (2017), “Counting the cost: Cyber exposure decoded”. 
11   The CPMI-IOSCO guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures is a key example. 
12   See  “Fundamental  Elements  of  Cybersecurity  for  the  Financial  Sector”,  followed  in  2017  by  the  “Fundamental 
Elements for Effective Assessment of Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector”. 
13   Directive (EU) 2016/1148 on the Security of Network and Information Services (the so-called “NIS Directive”). 
  On  the  subject  of  public-private  cooperation,  the  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  Italian  Banking 
Association have created the Financial Sector Computer Emergency Response Team (CERTFin), 
which coordinates the sharing of information and cyber threat intelligence among banks, financial 
market infrastructures, insurance companies, markets and trading venues and outsourcers. Since its 
foundation, in January 2017, CERTFin has analysed and circulated information about 1,000 cyber 
events; and it has sent more than 200 warnings to individual financial firms about potential attacks, 
while continuously monitoring vulnerable areas. 
Lastly,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  actions  taken  by  financial-sector  authorities  must  be 
integrated with national cyber security strategies and frameworks. In Italy, this link is ensured via 
constant  dialogue  with  appropriate  government  institutions,  including  but  not  limited  to  national 
intelligence and law enforcement agencies. 
4.2 Basic principles of regulation  
The  regulation  of  fintech  activity  is  still  in  its  infancy,  and  the  regulatory  framework 
differs from country to country. A review of the choices made in each jurisdiction would require 
an  in-depth  analysis,  and  is  well  beyond  the  scope  of  my  comments  today.  Here  I  will  limit 
myself  to  examining  the  basic  principles  that  in  my  view  should  inspire  regulation  in  a  sector 
characterized by the presence of many different kinds of providers – banks, fintech start-ups and 
the Big-Techs – and the fast pace of innovation.  
In this context, the main challenge for the authorities is to strike the right balance between 
the overriding objectives of promoting innovation and competition on the one hand, and those of 
preserving the integrity of the financial markets and guaranteeing consumer protection on the other. 
Regulation should be designed in order to achieve such objectives.  
First,  it  should  guarantee  a  level  playing  field,  in  order  to  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage  and 
distortions. Regulation should remain tech-neutral, treating the intermediaries that deliver the same 
services in the same way, focusing on the products offered and not on the technology or business 
model used to provide them.  
Second,  given  the  rapid  change  that  will  affect  the  fintech  sector  in  the  future  as  well, 
regulation  and  supervision  should be  flexible,  in  order  to  encourage  innovative  projects  and  to 
avoid any obstacles to the changes that are also likely to affect the supply of technology-intensive 
services in the future. The strategies adopted to guarantee an “agile” regulatory environment for 
fintech  start-ups  differ  across  countries.  In  some  countries  (such  as  the  United  Kingdom) 
innovative start-ups can benefit for a limited time period from regulatory waivers while they test 
  the  provision  of  their  services  (this  is  the  “sandbox”  approach).  In  other  countries,  such  as 
Singapore,  the  authorities  may  cooperate  with  fintech  firms  to  develop  specific  services  
– possibly through partnerships –  in what are commonly called “incubators”. Lastly, in other 
countries – including Italy – the strategies are based on “innovation hubs”, where the authorities 
start interacting with the market players (banks, financial companies, innovative start-ups) on 
fintech-related issues at an early stage, indeed often at the planning stage, in order to provide 
them with the necessary support for the regulatory and compliance issues. The Banca d’Italia 
launched in November last  year its innovation hub  (Canale Fintech), a dedicated space on its 
web site where operators propose financial projects with innovative features; the aim is to open 
up a channel of dialogue with operators and to support innovation processes.14 Each approach 
has its pros and cons that must be carefully weighed up.15  
Third,  a  true  level  playing  field  would  require  financial  sector  authorities  within  each 
country – such as bank and insurance supervisors, market authorities, etc. – to cooperate with one 
another and with regulators in other fields such as data protection, cyber risk, and antitrust. In Italy 
the Ministry of Finance has recently established a committee for the coordination of fintech-related 
activities  which  includes  the  Banca  d’Italia  and  other  national  (financial  and  non-financial) 
competent authorities.  
More broadly, given the increasingly international nature of technology and the market for 
financial  services,  regulation  should  have  an  international  dimension:  it  would  be  unwise  to 
introduce national rules  which could create regulatory barriers across jurisdictions, hampering or 
even impeding cross-border competition. 
5. Conclusions 
In  conclusion,  technological  innovation  is  an  exceptional  tool  for  making  progress.  The 
adoption of digital technologies and a more intensive use of the enormous volume of data available 
today will enable banks and other intermediaries to reduce their costs and improve the quality of 
their  services.  There  are  huge  potential  advantages  for  consumers,  firms  and  for  the  whole 
economy.  
Technology  is  breaking  down  the  barriers  to  entry  in  the  credit  and  financial  services 
markets, and a less efficient player may not be able to survive the ensuing increase in competition. 
                                                           
14   https://www.bancaditalia.it/compiti/sispaga-mercati/fintech/index.html?com.dotmarketing.htmlpage.language=1 
15   For  example,  regulatory  sandboxes  face  the  challenge  of  striking  the  right  balance  between  two  objectives: 
encouraging innovation and protecting consumers. 
  I expect the structure of banking and financial markets ten years from now to be very different 
from what it is now; non-bank operators will probably play a much bigger role.  
But the spread of these new technologies and the availability of ever more comprehensive 
information on individuals raises broader and more fundamental questions that I have not addressed 
in my talk today.  
Technology is creating the “technological unemployment” that had been foreseen by Keynes 
already in 193016 and is  one of the factors further  exacerbating income  and wealth inequality in 
both  advanced  countries  and  emerging  market  economies.  It  also  raises  the  issue  of  how  to 
guarantee confidentiality in relation to Big Data, how to use it within the limits imposed both by the 
rules and by the will of our citizens, whose right to privacy must in any case be upheld. We must 
better define both the legal and ethical limits on the use of Big Data. Recent events in connection 
with Cambridge Analytica and Facebook have sounded the alarm. 
We  need  to  think  carefully,  as  of  now,  about  how  to  make  these  developments  fully 
compatible  with  the  rights  of  individuals  and  about  how  to  square  the  increasing  availability  of 
information on the private lives of each one of us in relation to our political views, state of health, 
or sexual orientation, with the protection of our personal freedom and with the rules that govern the 
functioning of a modern liberal democracy.  
                                                           
16 J. M. Keynes (1930) “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren”, freely available online. 
  by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
