Peter  Praet:  Creating  an  enabling  environment  for  pan-European
banks in the Banking Union
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Eurofi Financial Forum 2018, Vienna, 5 September 2018.
 In  recent  years,  the  European  Union  has  achieved  major  progress  towards  financial
integration. We now have a single supervisor and a single resolution authority, and banks are
subject  to  the  same  European  rulebook.  The  Banking  Union  contributes  to  providing  effective
mechanisms  for  cross-border  risk-sharing  and  broadening  the  sources  of  funding  within  a
country, thereby promoting macroeconomic stability and growth.
However, we still observe a number of obstacles that hinder the fungibility of capital and
liquidity of banking groups. Very often, these obstacles relate to regulatory fragmentation and
ring-fencing  of  national  markets.  Further  harmonisation  would  help  to  address  many  of  the
issues, while appropriate prudential safeguards can be put in place to address possible financial
stability concerns by national authorities.
First, a number of national options and discretions are hindering the practical application
of cross-border liquidity waivers within the Union. While such waivers are explicitly allowed
by the CRR, and already contain prudential safeguards, so far the ECB has received almost no
application  for  their  use  from  the  banks  it  supervises.  An  important  reason  for  this  lack  of
applications is the existence of national large exposure limits on intragroup exposures in several
European countries. These limits prevent institutions in these countries from transferring liquidity
within the group in a flexible manner and thus represent practical obstacles to the use of liquidity
waivers. Effectively, they are hindering the free flow of liquidity in the Banking Union and should
be harmonised further.
Second, the proposal to have cross-border capital waivers within the EU was not taken
forward in the on-going review of the CRR, which is a missed opportunity. Such waivers
would  be  consistent  with  the  establishment  of  the  SSM  and  the  Banking  Union  and  help  to
support  the  free  flow  of  capital  across  the  Union.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  understandable  that
some national authorities are concerned about the possible financial stability implications of the
proposal. On the other hand, such concerns could be addressed by making the waivers subject
to additional prudential safeguards, and by putting in place appropriate transition arrangements
that account for the planned further progress on the Banking Union.
Third, the major progress we have made in our Banking Union needs to be recognised
also in the international regulatory framework. For example, the G-SIB framework currently
penalises cross-border transactions within the Banking Union by attaching a higher systemic risk
score  to  banks  with  more  of  such  transactions.  This  goes  against  the  very  rationale  of  the
Banking Union, as it reduces the incentives for cross-border transactions and risk diversification.
The international regulatory framework should recognise the progress that has been made in the
Banking Union and exclude intra Banking Union positions from the cross-jurisdictional indicators
in the G-SIB methodology.
Fourth,  there  are  also  some  resolution  related  aspects  that  warrant  further
consideration. In  particular,  the  allocation  of  internal  MREL  has  turned  out  to  be  an  area  of
tension between national jurisdictions. Jurisdictions with a foreign bank subsidiary prefer to have
a  high  pre-positioning  of  internal  MREL  to  ensure  an  orderly  resolution  of  its  local  subsidiary.
However, this implies a certain degree of ring-fencing to the detriment of the foreign parent bank.
The compromise reached by Member States in the Council only allows that internal MREL is
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
waived  if  the  resolution  entity  and  the  subsidiary  are  located  in  the  same  Member  State,
neglecting the fact that we have achieved so much in terms of joint supervision and resolution
among euro area countries. To account for this progress, internal MREL waivers on a cross-
border  basis  in  the  Banking  Union  should  be  allowed  as  this  would  contribute  to  continuous
cross-border  banking,  e.g.  by  generating  efficiency  gains  and  promoting  further  integration.
Therefore, it should also be possible to use guarantees to replace internal MREL and allow for
more  flexibility  in  the  allocation  of  resources  within  the  Banking  Union.  Of  course,  to  install
confidence it will be important to have adequate safeguards in place, including that there is no
legal  or  practical  impediments  to  the  provision  of  support  by  the  parent  to  the  subsidiary,  in
particular when the resolution action is taken.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
