Guy Debelle: The outlook for the Australian economy
Opening keynote speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia,
at the CFO Forum, Sydney, 15 May 2018.
 Thanks to Lynne Cockerell for her help in preparing this speech.
Today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  the  economy.  We  published  this  in
the Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  (SMP)  earlier  this  month.   This  set  of  forecasts  was  little
changed from the previous set of forecasts we released three months earlier. This is because
the  economy,  both  domestically  and  globally,  has  been  evolving  generally  in  line  with  our
expectations.
1
When  reading  through  the  Bank’s  forecasts,  I  think  it  is  useful  to  avoid  false  precision.  An
important  question  to  ask  is:  are  these  revisions  to  the  Bank’s  outlook  consequential  for  the
monetary  policy  decision?  Similarly  you  can  ask,  do  I  think  these  changes  affect  my  own
decisions about my household or my business? A tenth or two of a percentage point here or
there on the outlook for GDP or inflation is unlikely to matter that much for any of those decisions.
Often,  these  revisions  reflect  the  new  information  that  has  come  to  hand  over  the  previous
quarter. This leads us to reassess the starting point for our forecasts of where the economy is
then likely to go. In making this assessment, we ask whether the incoming data have been view-
changing  or  view-validating.  Over  the  previous  three  months  (and,  indeed,  the  three  months
before that too), the data have generally been view-validating.
The  forecasts  that  are  published  can  best  be  characterised  as  the  modal  forecast  for  the
economy. That is, they are the path for the economy which we think is most likely to occur. But
there are a number of risks to that outlook. The SMP talks about some of those uncertainties too.
2
Today I will also spend some time drawing out some of the issues around those uncertainties.
The central forecast
As I just said, the forecasts we have just published are little changed from those we published in
February. Table 1 shows the Bank’s outlook for GDP growth, the unemployment rate and inflation
until June 2020. This is generally the time horizon that is relevant for the Board’s deliberations on
monetary policy.
The  forecasts  embody  a  number  of  technical  assumptions.  These  include  that  the  cash  rate
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
evolves broadly in line with the market expectations. Currently the market assumes that the cash
rate is likely to remain unchanged for at least the next 12 months, and then rise only very slowly
beyond that. The forecasts also assume that the exchange rate and oil prices remain at their
current levels. Historically, we have found that assuming those variables remain constant is at
least as good as any other forecast, while recognising that they are highly likely to change. In
saying that, it is worth noting that the exchange rate has moved within a fairly narrow range over
the  past  two  years.  These  small  variations  have  probably  not  been  a  major  factor  in  your
decision-making as CFOs. In contrast, I would expect that the 20 per cent depreciation of the
Australian dollar in 2014–2015 did have a material impact on decision-making at any business
with an export or import-competing focus.
Other  developments  in  financial  conditions  can  affect  the  forecasts  too.  One  example  is
developments in money market rates. In the SMP, we document the recent rise in money market
interest rates in the US, particularly LIBOR (Graph 1). There are a number of explanations for the
rise, including a large increase in bill issuance by the US Treasury and the effect of various tax
changes on investment decisions by CFOs at some US companies with large cash pools.  This
rise in LIBOR in the US has been reflected in rises in money market rates in a number of other
countries, including here in Australia. This is because the Australian banks raise some of their
short-term funding in the US market to fund their $A lending, so the rise in price there has led to a
similar rise in the cost of short-term funding for the banks here; that is, a rise in BBSW.  This
increases the wholesale funding costs for the Australian banks, as well as increasing the costs
for borrowers whose lending rates are priced off BBSW, which includes many corporates.
3
4
However, the effect to date has not been that large in terms of the overall impact on bank funding
costs. Thus far, it has not been a consequential development from a forecasting point of view. It
is not clear how much of the rise in LIBOR (and hence BBSW) is due to structural changes in
money markets and how much is temporary. In the last couple of weeks, these money market
rates have declined noticeably from their peaks. We will continue to monitor how this unfolds in
the period ahead.
The outlook for the economy in 2018 and 2019 is expected to be a little stronger than occurred in
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
2017. GDP growth is expected to pick up from around 2½ per cent currently to be around 3¼
over the next couple of years.
What is driving that pick-up in growth?
One part of the answer is that the global conjuncture is constructive. We have been witnessing
the most synchronised pick-up in the global economy for quite some time. The US economy is
doing well. Europe is doing better than it has been for the past decade. The Japanese economy
has  recorded  its  longest  period  of  quarterly  growth  in  almost  three  decades.  The  global
conjuncture  has  been  reflected  in  a  pick-up  in  global  industrial  production  and  trade  that  is
particularly beneficial to the east Asian region, which is leveraged to the global cycle.
China stands a little in contrast to these developments, though. Growth in China has moderated
somewhat,  in  part  because  the  authorities  are  pursuing  other  policy  objectives  to  address
pollution and financial stability risks. But the easing in growth has been small. It remains to be
seen just how much tolerance the Chinese authorities would have to any significant slowing in
growth.
One interesting point about the global conjuncture is that while the recovery is synchronised, to
date  we  haven’t  seen  it  accelerate  in  any  meaningful  way.  Historically,  synchronised  growth
cycles  have  tended  to  be  self-reinforcing,  leading  to  a  continuing  pick-up  in  growth.  Today,
growth in most economies is good, often a little above trend. But no economy is growing that
much  above  trend.  Forecasts  for  global  growth  in  2018  and  2019  are  below  the  outcome  for
2017, notwithstanding some upward revisions to those forecasts (Graph 2).
Why aren’t we seeing a further pick-up in global growth? I think part of the explanation is that the
global financial crisis has left long-lasting scars. For a number of years, risks to the outlook have
generally  been  characterised  as  being  on  the  downside  by  both  policy-makers  and  business
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
people. In contrast, in previous synchronised global upswings, the risks have generally had an
optimistic slant to them. Even though we have seen a pick-up in business sentiment right around
the world, a sizeable degree of caution and scepticism has accompanied that improvement in
sentiment. We may be close to a tipping point where we see that tendency for pessimism swing
to optimism.
That pessimism filter has been reflected in the focus on restraint in investment decisions in the
decade after the financial crisis. It is also evident in the focus on cost-cutting and contributes to
the subdued outcomes for wages and prices we have seen in many countries.
The  current,  more  positive,  pace  of  global  growth  is  predicated  on  the  stimulatory  settings  of
monetary policy in place in most countries. That is, these policy settings have been necessary to
deliver these growth outcomes. They have countered the headwinds that have been present in
the global economy over the past decade. The headwinds have abated but it is not clear they
have yet switched to be tailwinds.
One potential exception to this is the US. The fiscal stimulus that is in train this year and next is
being  delivered  in  an  economy  with  limited  spare  capacity.  Historically,  such  as  in  the  late
1960s/early 1970s, such episodes have generally led to stronger growth but also higher inflation.
I will come back to that in my discussions of some of the uncertainties around the outlook in a
few minutes.
This  constructive  global  outlook  provides  a  solid  backdrop  for  domestic  developments.  It  is
underpinning growth in our exports. Exports have also been bolstered by the additional capacity
coming on stream in LNG. We expect that the additions to capacity in our main resource exports
– iron ore, LNG and coal – will be largely complete by the end of the year.
That also means that we are close to the end of the decline in mining investment. That has been
a major drag on economic growth over the past several years (Graph 3). The absence of that
negative  is  a  positive,  particularly  when  one  factors  in  the  associated  export  growth  that  has
resulted from the investment.
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  decline  in  mining  investment  also  has  had  negative  spillovers  to  the  non-mining  sector,
particularly in the resource-intensive states.  That now is largely past. Moreover, the increase in
public  infrastructure  spending  is  creating  positive  spillovers.   And  importantly,  the  rise  in
business sentiment globally is also evident in Australia. All of these factors are reflected in the
pick-up in investment in the non-mining sector we have seen over the past four years.
5
6
Turning to consumption, we have had more validation of our outlook with recent data revisions.
We had been concerned that our forecast may have been a little optimistic, but are now more
confident in it. In statistical terms, the weight on the modal forecast has risen. But uncertainties
remain around the outlook for consumption, which I will discuss shortly.
It is worth noting that domestic demand growth has outstripped growth in GDP, running at around
3¼ per cent. This gives us confidence in our forecast of GDP growth a little above trend over the
next couple of years. That is, that GDP growth is likely to have a 3 in front of it. The surveys of
business conditions very much support that assessment with conditions in many parts of the
economy assessed to be well above average (Graph 4).
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
That pace of growth, should it transpire, will eat gradually into the spare capacity in the economy.
Hence we expect the unemployment rate to gradually decline from here. The unemployment rate
declined by a ¼ percentage point over the past year; we are expecting something similar over
the year ahead.
The reduction in the unemployment rate has stalled for some months. I find the unemployment
rate  is  the  most  useful  single  statistic  to  assess  the  state  of  the  labour  market.  The
unemployment rate has remained steady in an environment where employment growth has been
measured  to  be  particularly  strong.  Labour  supply  has  risen  strongly  alongside  it.  Part  of  the
explanation  for  this  is  an  increase  in  female  participation  and  older  workers  remaining  in
employment  longer  than  previously.   The  strong  employment  growth  has  reduced  unused
capacity, which is a positive development, but not in a way that has lowered the unemployment
rate.
7
Forward indicators in terms of vacancies and hiring intentions remain positive. GDP growth is
expected  to  pick  up.  This  gives  me  reasonable  confidence  that  the  unemployment  rate  will
resume its gradual downward trend (Graph 5).
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The gradual decline in spare capacity is expected to lead to a gradual pick-up in wages growth. A
critical question is: when will wages start to rise in a meaningful way?
Recent data on wages provides some assurance that wages growth has troughed. The majority
of firms surveyed in the Bank’s liaison program expect wages growth to remain broadly stable
over the period ahead. Over the past year, there has been a pick-up in firms expecting higher
wage growth outcomes. Some part of that is the effect of the Fair Work Commission’s decision
to raise award and minimum wages by 3.3 per cent. Talking to businesses, such as yourselves,
suggests  that  there  are  pockets  where  wage  pressures  are  more  acute.  But,  while  those
pockets are increasing gradually, they remain fairly contained at this point (Graph 6).
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  most  recent  inflation  data  were  also  consistent  with  our  forecasts.  The  data  show  that
inflation  remains  low  but  stable.  Domestic  price  pressures  remain  subdued.  Inflation  is  very
close to 2 per cent: 1.9 per cent on a CPI basis, marginally below the bottom of our inflation
target. We expect upward pressure on prices over the next couple of years, but again this is
expected to be quite a gradual process (Graph 7).
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
As you might have gathered by now, the key word in this discussion of the outlook is gradual.
Further progress on both inflation and unemployment is expected over the period ahead, but it is
expected  to  be  only  gradual.  For  some  time  the  Reserve  Bank  Board’s  view  has  been  that
holding the cash rate steady at 1½ per cent would assist that progress, with steady monetary
policy promoting stability and confidence. If the economy continues to evolve as expected, higher
interest rates are likely to be appropriate at some point. Notwithstanding this, the Board does not
currently see a strong case for a near-term adjustment in the cash rate.
Having talked about the central forecast, I will now talk about some of the uncertainties around
this central forecast.
Uncertainties
One uncertainty relates to the global inflation outlook. We have experienced low inflation globally
for a long period of time. There are signs of inflation starting to pick up. The global economy is
close to full capacity, particularly in the advanced economies. The US fiscal stimulus is still to
have its full effect in an economy that, as I said earlier, is very close to full capacity. This is a
similar situation to that in the late 1960s and could lead to more inflation in the US than currently
anticipated. In turn, that could lead to more tightening in monetary policy than currently expected.
While markets expect some tightening, they don’t expect too much more at this point. Moreover,
in such circumstances, you might also expect the neutral policy rate to rise, albeit gradually.
Such a rise in growth and inflation offshore could lead to a depreciation of the Australian dollar,
given  that  the Australian  economy  appears  currently  to  have  more  spare  capacity  than  some
other advanced economies. If this were to occur, we would expect it to boost domestic output
and lead to a faster rise in inflation than currently assumed, but somewhat later than in other
economies.
There  is  also  a  significant  risk  to  the  global  economy  from  the  current  tensions  around  trade
policy. While the effect of the measures announced thus far has been modest, there is clearly
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
the potential for this to escalate. Australia has benefited from an open, inclusive and rules-based
international system. We have as much at stake as any other country in the continuation of this
system.
The SMP has for some time highlighted the uncertainties around the outlook for China. I won’t
discuss them today, as the Governor will talk about them in depth in a speech next week.
Turning  to  uncertainties  around  the  domestic  outlook,  one  important  uncertainty  relates  to
household  balance  sheets. Australian  households  have  a  relatively  large  amount  of  mortgage
debt.  This  means  that  they  are  more  likely  to  be  sensitive  to  changes  in  income  and  interest
rates.  This  poses  risks  to  the  outlook  for  the  largest  component  of  spending,  household
consumption.
One reason why I think debt remains high relative to income has been because income growth
has  been  unexpectedly  low.  In  past  decades,  one  of  the  easiest  ways  to  pay  down  your
mortgage  was  through  inflation.  Higher  inflation  was  accompanied  by  higher  wages  growth.
Because the mortgage is fixed in nominal terms, the debt level declined quite rapidly relative to a
household’s income when incomes were growing quickly. Household income growth has been
subdued for a number of years, which means that a number of households may be carrying a
larger  mortgage  for  longer  than  they  expected  when  they  took  out  the  loan.  While  they  can
service the mortgage, it has consumed a larger share of their income for longer than they might
have intended.
Over  recent  years,  a  number  of  steps  have  been  taken  by  regulators  that  have  helped  to
strengthen  resilience  in  household  balance  sheets.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  lending
standards have been tightened for a number of years now. From 2014, APRA and ASIC have
strengthened  their  focus  on  lending  practices.  This  has  included  ensuring  that  lenders’
serviceability tests for new borrowers must use an interest rate of at least 7 per cent. That is,
households should be able to afford a mortgage rate well more than 2 per cent higher than it is
currently (and remember, many households took out their loans when rates were higher than
today). More recently, APRA has also been focused on ensuring that lenders assess borrowers’
income appropriately. While the Royal Commission has highlighted a number of cases where
this has not been the case, an important consideration from a macroeconomic perspective is
how widespread this has been, and whether it is consequential for the ability of most households
to afford to service their loans.
I take some comfort from the fact that arrears rates on mortgages remain low. Even in Western
Australia, where there has been a marked rise in unemployment and where house prices have
fallen by around 10 per cent, arrears rates have risen to around 1½ per cent, which is not all that
high compared with what we have seen in other countries in similar circumstances and earlier
episodes in Australia’s history.
We have provided some information in the latest SMP on interest rate resets on interest-only
loans. These can see the required mortgage payments rise by nearly 30–40 per cent for some
borrowers. There are a number of these loans whose interest-only periods expire this year. It is
worth  noting  that  there  were  about  the  same  number  of  loans  resetting  last  year  too.  Our
assessment is that there are quite a few mitigants which will allow these borrowers to cope with
this increase in required payments, including the prevalence of offset accounts and the ability to
refinance to a principal and interest loan with a lower interest rate. While some borrowers will
clearly struggle with this, our expectation is that most will be able to handle the adjustment so
8
that the overall effect on the economy should be small.
This switch away from interest-only loans should see a shift towards a higher share of scheduled
principal repayments relative to unscheduled repayments for a time. We are seeing that in the
data (Graph 8). It also implies faster debt amortisation, which may have implications for credit
growth.
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is a risk of a further tightening in lending standards in the period ahead. This may have its
largest effect on the amount of funds an individual household can borrow, more than the effect on
the number of households that are eligible for a loan. This, in turn, means that credit growth may
be slower than otherwise for a time. To me, that has more of an implication for house prices,
than it does for the outlook for consumption.
Finally, in thinking about the resiliency of household balance sheets to higher interest rates, it is
important  to  think  about  the  environment  in  which  interest  rates  would  be  rising.  That
environment is highly likely to be one where wages and household incomes are also growing
faster than currently, improving the ability of households to afford higher mortgage repayments.
One final risk that I would like to touch on is the related risk stemming from low wages growth.
How much longer is wages growth going to remain at its current low rates? The experience of
other countries with labour markets closer to full capacity than Australia’s is that wages growth
may remain lower than historical experience would suggest. In Australia, 2 per cent seems to
have become the focal point for wage outcomes, compared with 3–4 per cent in the past.  Work
done at the Bank shows the shift of the distribution of wages growth to the left and a bunching of
wage outcomes around 2 per cent over the past five years or so (Graph 9). As I said earlier,
while there are signs of wage pressure emerging, they remain localised for now. There is a risk
that it may take a lower unemployment rate than we currently expect to generate a sustained
move higher than the 2 per cent focal point evident in many wage outcomes today.
9
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  are  some  of  the  uncertainties  that  the  Board  discusses  in  its  monetary  policy
deliberations. They are not the central case, but they are some of the risks around it. Should
these risks come to pass, then they are likely to have a material effect on the Bank’s outlook for
the  economy.  In  turn,  it  is  quite  possible  that  such  revisions  would  be  consequential  for  the
Board’s  assessment  of  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy.  But  it  is  important  to
remember to think about the context in which these risks materialise. As is often the case, they
may not materialise in isolation. Some of them may materialise at the same time or the actual
manifestation of them may be different from the form I have discussed here.
Conclusion
Monetary  policymaking,  just  like  the  business  decisions  that  you  make  as  CFOs,  is  about
decision-making  under  uncertainty.  I  have  highlighted  some  of  these  uncertainties  around  the
Bank’s central forecast for the economy.
That central forecast is for the economy to grow a little faster in 2018 and 2019 than in 2017.
That should see the unemployment rate resume its gradual decline. It should also see wages
growth and inflation gradually pick up. In time, should that central forecast come to pass, higher
interest rates are likely to be appropriate. But the Board does not see a strong case for a near-
term adjustment in the cash rate and holds the view that by holding the cash rate steady, it can
best assist the achievement of the desired economic outcomes.
1
2
3
4
RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2018), Statement on Monetary Policy, May.
I spoke about uncertainties in forecasting at the 7th Warren Hogan Memorial Lecture last year. See Debelle G
(2017), ‘Uncertainty’, 7th Warren Hogan Memorial Lecture, Sydney, 26 October.
Note that the rise is not attributable to increased concerns about the global banking system as was the case in
2008 and 2009.
The rise in LIBOR has also resulted in higher money market rates in Hong Kong, New Zealand and the UK. But
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
there  has  been  less  of  an  effect  on  European  or  Japanese  rates.  This  is  because  while  European  and
Japanese banks also raise funds in the US money markets, they do so to fund $US assets, rather than assets
in their own currencies.
Debelle  G  (2017),  ‘Business  Investment  in  Australia’,  Speech  at  UBS  Australasia  Conference,  Sydney,
13 November.
See RBA (2018), ‘Box C: Spillovers from Public Investment’, Statement on Monetary Policy, February, pp 40–42.
See RBA (2018), ‘Box B: The Recent Increase in Labour Force Participation’, Statement on Monetary Policy, May,
pp 33–34.
See RBA (2018), ‘Box C: The Expiry of Interest-only Loan Terms’, Statement on Monetary Policy, May, pp 45–
48. Also Kent C (2018), ‘The  Limits  of  Interest-only  Lending’, Address  to  the  Housing  Industry Association
Breakfast, Sydney, 24 April.
Bishop J and N Cassidy (2017), ‘Insights into Low Wage Growth in Australia’, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 13–20.
5
6
7
8
9
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
