Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts
Welcome address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Joint  IFRS  Foundation  &amp;  MASB  Regional
Workshop “IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts”, Kuala Lumpur, 17 May 2018.
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen and welcome to today’s Regional Workshop on IFRS 17
Standards for Insurance Contracts, jointly organised by the IFRS Foundation and the Malaysian
Accounting Standards Board (MASB).
Allow  me  first  of  all  to  congratulate  the  IFRS  Foundation  and  MASB  for  putting  this  workshop
together, with an impressive line-up of experts and practitioners to share their knowledge and
insights on IFRS 17. We are especially privileged to have with us today two senior members of
the IASB Board Mr. Darrel Scott and Mr. Amaro Gomez, both of whom have been with the IASB
for  more  than  10  years.  The  strong  interest  in  IFRS  17  and  its  importance  both  to  financial
systems and businesses are clear from the turnout today, with more than 250 participants from
over  15  countries,  representing  industry  players,  accounting  firms,  national  standard  setting
bodies and financial regulators.
It is an honour for me to offer some brief remarks this morning to kick off today’s workshop. On
my way here, I recalled a joke in which a lady was once told by her doctor that she would only
have six months to live. Understandably very distraught, she asks the doctor for advice on what
she  should  do.  The  doctor  suggested  that  she  should  marry  a  CPA.  “Will  that  make  me  live
longer?” the lady asks hopefully. “No,” the doctor replies. “But it will seem longer”.
Well, I promise to keep my remarks short, although since this is an accounting workshop, you
will forgive me if they might seem long.
As you know, IFRS 17 was finalised and issued in 2017. Today, the  17th of May, also marks 17
years since the International Accounting Standards Board took on the job to develop a globally
accepted accounting standard for insurance contracts. What a remarkable coincidence indeed!
The final IFRS 17 standards represent a historic milestone – for the first time, insurers in over
120  countries,  with  assets  worth  at  least  USD13  trillion,  will  be  reporting  financial  statements
based on a common set of standards when IFRS 17 comes into effect in January 2021.
Almost  two  decades  ago,  standard  setters  embarked  on  a  Herculean  mission  to  develop  a
globally accepted accounting standard for the measurement of insurance contracts which did not
exist  before.  In  the  time  that  it  took  to  finalise  IFRS  17,  we  have  witnessed  significant
developments  in  the  accounting  world,  including  the  transformation  of  the  International
Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) into today’s IASB, the formation of the Monitoring Board
to  enhance  public  accountability  of  the  IFRS  Foundation,  and  sweeping  reforms  to  key
accounting standards to address the deficiencies which were believed to have amplified the 2008
global financial crisis. 
The  development  of  IFRS  17  itself  saw  the  issuance  of  IFRS  4  as  an  interim  standard,  one
discussion  paper  and  two  exposure  drafts.  Its  finalisation  was  achieved  after  more  than  900
meetings, 600 comment letters and 4 rounds of fieldwork and testing!  I am told it is among the
longest in duration, largest in scale and most complex project ever undertaken by an international
standard setter – making it a tremendous feat and a testament to the intellectual capacity and
perseverance exemplified by the IASB.
  1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even then, this 17 year journey remains incomplete as the final stretch begins with the passing of
the baton from the standard setter to those involved in preparations for implementation – that is
the industry. As the clock counts down to the global implementation date in January 2021, the
most important implications of IFRS 17 lie ahead of us. 
1.  First, it will have an important impact in strengthening market discipline.
2.  Second,  it  will  improve  alignment  between  business  units  and  financial  management  and
reporting.  This in turn will provide more robust foundations for the growth and development
of the insurance sector in this region.
3.  And third, it will raise important issues around governance to ensure the integrity of financial
reporting by insurers and other market participants.
 
Strengthening market discipline
For a long period, the absence of a common uniting standard to account for the measurement of
insurance contracts has resulted in a wide range of approaches being applied by insurers across
the  world.  Take  for  example  the  measurement  of  present  value  of  future  cashflows  from
insurance contracts. While some insurers update the discount rates to reflect current economic
conditions, others opt to retain the use of historical discount rates when these contracts were
originally underwritten, ignoring recent and future developments that could affect the value of the
contracts.  This  means  that  similar  contracts  are  being  measured  very  differently,  resulting  in
contrasting representations of the true performance and strength of an insurer. Such variations in
measurement approaches significantly complicate comparability between insurers.  This in turn
weakens market discipline.
The  harmonisation  of  insurance  contract  measurement  approaches  across  the  globe  brought
about by IFRS 17 is therefore timely, if not long overdue.
The measurement of insurance liabilities using current market prices will bring about a closer
alignment between the assets and liabilities on an insurer’s balance sheet. And with a clearer
demarcation between underwriting and investment profits and the recognition of profits over the
lifetime of a contract rather than at a single point in time, IFRS 17 will also paint a more accurate
picture of an insurer’s performance.
These improvements will increase the relevance and utility of financial information provided to
investors,  financial  advisers,  insurance  risk  managers,  businesses  and  individuals  to  inform
investment and purchasing decisions. As a result, markets should work better to reward prudent
and  profitable  performance,  and  appropriately  penalise  risky  and  poor  performance.  This  is
positive both for financial stability and the efficient allocation of economic resources.
 
Improving alignment between business units and financial management
Bank Negara Malaysia also expects IFRS 17 to be a key catalyst for insurers to review, if not
overhaul,  business  processes  across  the  organisation.  This  will  be  driven  by  at  least  three
factors.
First, the need for business units to capture broader and more granular information required for
financial  reporting.  Second,  changes  in  the  way  performance  is  measured  under  the  new
standard. And third, increased opportunities for institutions to differentiate themselves from the
competition, helped by a more integrated view of performance. These considerations will have
wide implications for insurers’ organisation structures, data capture, infrastructure and systems,
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
risk management, and product design and development.
At  present,  many  insurers  are  operating  on  multiple,  fragmented  legacy  systems  –  including
largely separate systems supporting the finance, investment and actuarial functions.  Systems
for regulatory reporting and compliance are also often separate in a number of institutions. As
insurers begin to prepare for the reporting of insurance liabilities under the new regime, IFRS 17
will create both a need and the opportunity for insurers to strategically re-think information flows
across  the  organisation  –  not  only  to  improve  efficiencies  in  financial  reporting  and  mitigate
operational  risks,  but  also  to  capture  synergies  that  will  improve  business  and  compliance
outcomes.  This  includes  leveraging  on  data  analytics  to  support  more  refined  pricing,  elevate
investment and treasury operations, and achieve greater capital efficiency. 
Risks  will  also  shift  into  sharper  focus. As  IASB  chairman  Hans  Hoogervorst  puts  it,  “proper
accounting  shines  light  on  risks  that  might  otherwise  go  unnoticed”.  The  financial  reporting
changes  brought  about  by  IFRS  17  will  support  profitability  analyses  at  the  level  of  individual
business  units  and  products,  thereby  increasing  the  visibility  of  risks  and  performance
associated with specific business strategies and operational models. 
 
Governance considerations
IFRS 17 will also have important implications for governance. 
One  of  the  most  problematic  issues  with  the  adoption  of  IFRS  has  been  around  the  more
extensive use of management judgement and discretion in financial reporting. For example, in
the  context  of  IFRS  17,  calculating  the  contractual  service  margin  component,  an  insurer’s
choice of assumptions can have a significant impact on its forecast of future profits. While this is
consistent with the view that financial reporting should reflect management decisions, the scope
for abuse is also higher. This has also been a particular concern for regulators, resulting in dual
reporting  standards  for  general  purpose  and  regulatory  compliance  which  continue  to  be
maintained in some jurisdictions today. 
Such concerns are not entirely unfounded. Past studies have suggested that strong associations
exist  between  accounting  discretion  and  opportunistic  behaviour  by  firm  managers  where
governance  is  weak.  In  other  words,  in  the  absence  of  strong  governance,  managers  have
strong incentives to exploit accounting latitude in order to achieve certain short-run performance
goals that are linked to rewards.
This raises a number of important issues for governance. For one, insurers will need to consider
the adequacy of existing internal controls and accountability frameworks to ensure the integrity of
financial  reporting.  For  example,  where  actuarial  models  are  used,  to  what  extent  are  these
models  and  the  assumptions  underpinning  them  subject  to  sufficiently  robust  validations?
Insurers will also need to consider the depth of knowledge and expertise required at the audit
committee level to enable the effective oversight and monitoring of management discretion. Part
of this oversight includes the rigor applied by boards and audit committees in the appointment of
external  auditors  to  ensure  their  ability  to  act  as  an  independent  check  on  management
discretion.
It is also essential for insurers to develop strategies for improving communications with users of
financial statements. A key risk will be that users fail to make sense of reported results which
can  lead  to  irrational  behavior  and  unintended  consequences.  Equipping  board  members  and
senior management to communicate results effectively will be particularly important. 
These  are  also  the  issues  that  supervisors  will  be  concerned  with.  Given  the  potential  for
heightened risks and uncertainty, the Bank will examine the need for regulatory prescriptions or
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
guidance  –  particularly  in  the  early  phases  of  implementation.  Over  time,  we  expect  stronger
governance within insurers to reinforce associations between financial reporting and fundamental
economic factors, as intended by IFRS.  
In  Malaysia,  the  finalisation  of  IFRS  17  is  indeed  timely  in  the  light  of  current  reforms  being
undertaken by Bank Negara Malaysia to further develop the domestic insurance market. This will
see greater competition and complexity in the insurance sector, alongside a renewed impetus for
growth through channel diversification and digitalisation. In this environment, the implementation
of  IFRS  17  will  have  an  important  role  in  improving  the  quality  of  information  provided  to  the
market on how these developments impact the performance of insurers, and in strengthening
foundations for sound governance and risk management. This in turn will promote the effective
functioning of insurance markets to serve the economy.  
 
Early preparation is key
So  then,  where  do  we  stand  today?  With  less  than  two  and  a  half  years  before  the
implementation date sets in, how prepared are insurers to implement IFRS 17?
The answer is not encouraging. A recent survey published in January this year by a software firm
covering some 240 insurance companies spread around the world, found that a startling 92% of
insurers had yet to start putting solutions in place. Among those that have started, a vast majority
are still only in the initial stages of planning.
While there is still some time before the first reporting period under IFRS 17, it would be a grave
mistake to leave things too late given the scope and enormity of the issues that that need to be
addressed. This is compounded by the prospect that insurers that are late to the game are likely
to face an acute skills shortage as first movers draw down a limited pool of qualified actuaries, IT
specialists, software and systems vendors and technical consultants. 
In  Malaysia,  early  steps  have  been  taken  by  Bank  Negara  to  engage  the  industry  on  the
development  of  broad  implementation  plans.  That  said,  the  granularity  of  the  plans  and
implementation progress remains uneven across insurers and takaful operators.
Recognising the complexity and wide-ranging implications of the new standards, several industry
technical  working  groups  have  been  established  in  coordination  with  the Actuarial  Society  of
Malaysia to examine key issues and provide recommendations on the implementation of IFRS
17. We have also conducted a first preliminary round of quantitative testing, which was intended
to  help  insurance  companies  gauge  the  potential  impact  of  the  new  standards  on  their
resources,  systems  and  reported  performance.  A  second,  more  comprehensive  quantitative
testing exercise has also been planned for the third quarter of this year. Going forward, the Bank
will be intensifying our monitoring and engagements with insurers and takaful operators on their
preparations in the run up to 2021.
 
Conclusion
Looking  ahead,  a  more  optimistic  outlook  for  the  global  economy  will  support  favourable
conditions for a smooth transition to IFRS 17. But the work must start now, and it must start right
by taking a broader and integrated approach to implementation. Today’s workshop aims to bring
some  of  the  most  important  issues  in  implementation  to  light,  and  provide  you  with  valuable
insights  from  our  distinguished  speakers  and  subject  matter  experts.  With  greater  clarity  and
knowledge  to  inform  careful  preparations,  insurers  can  be  confident  of  not  just  achieving  a
smooth transition to IFRS 17, but of laying strong foundations for long term growth and success.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
That is the ultimate goal.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
