Chuchi G Fonacier: Opening remarks - PESONet Media Forum
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Chuchi  G  Fonacier,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas
(BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the PESONet Media Forum, Manila, 7 August 2018.
 PPMI  Chairman  Justo  Ortiz,  our  partners  from  E-PESO  headed  by  Chief  of  Party  Mamerto
Tangonan, Deputy Governor Chuchi Fonacier and fellow BSP colleagues, representatives from
the  participating  financial  institutions,  with  their  pilot  corporate  users,  friends  from  the  media,
guests, ladies and gentlemen. Good afternoon and welcome to the PESONet media forum. 
Three years ago, we had a vision:  for every Filipino to have easy access to accounts to safely
make  payments  and  receive  or  transfer  funds  to  other  accounts  anytime,  anywhere,  at  a
reasonable price, from any digital device.   Thus, the National Retail Payment System or NRPS
was  envisioned  to  create  an  interoperable  payment  ecosystem  that  is  safe,  efficient,  and
affordable.   
Through  collaborative  efforts  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  and  the  industry,  we  have  achieved
significant  progress.    In  November  2017,  we  have  transitioned  batch  interbank  fund  transfer
service of the Philippine Clearinghouse Corporation (PCHC) into PESONet, allowing funds to be
received  by  the  beneficiaries,  in  full  amount,  within  the  day.  Tagged  as  a  viable  electronic
payment  alternative  to  paper-based  checks,  PESONet  is  one  of  the  ACHs  prioritized  for
implementation by the Bangko Sentral. 
PESONet holds a lot of promise, given its potential to be an efficient channel for collections and
disbursements by government and corporate users.  With PESONet, we can achieve lower cost,
better  liquidity  management  and  increased  economic  activity  through  immediate  availability  of
funds. For corporates, in particular, some use cases are supplier payments, payroll and loan and
dividend payouts.
Since the launch of PESONet, the BSP has turned over the reins to the industry through the
Philippine  Payments  Management  Inc.  or  PPMI,  which  includes  the  PESONet  Steering
Committee.  In support, the Bangko Sentral now provides active oversight and guidance through
a regulatory environment that promotes the growth of electronic payments and, ultimately, the
development of a safe and efficient national payment system. 
In today’s forum, we shall have the opportunity to listen to progress updates from the industry
and  learn  from  the  stories  of  pilot  PESONet  users,  concrete  testimonials  about  the
transformative power of embracing change.
Recognizing  the  intended  gains  we  have  achieved  thus  far,  we  acknowledge  that  there  is,
however, still a lot of ground to cover.  Based on the 2017 Financial Inclusion Survey, only 18% of
Filipino  adults  with  an  account  used  this  for  payments  and  64%  cited  a  preference  for  cash
payments.  A significant 20% are not even aware of the electronic payment option. The foregoing
statistics reveal where business, as well as financial inclusion opportunities, lie. 
Our  goal  is  to  democratize  access  to  a  transaction  account,  and  make  every  transaction
account useful not only as a store of value but also as a convenient and affordable means to pay,
remit  and  receive  funds.      In  this  regard,  we  provide  an  enabling  regulatory  environment  that
encourages  increased  use  of  affordable  digital  channels  for  payments,  fund  transfers  and
remittances.    This  include  allowing  the  participation  of  convenient  and  non-intimidating  third
parties like grocery stores, pharmacies and other retail outlets as banks’ cash agents.
Just yesterday, we have yet witnessed another milestone that can exponentially push forward our
financial inclusion digitalization agenda. The Philippine ID System (Philsys) Act was signed into
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
law by the President. Republic Act 11055 establishes a biometric based, foundational national
identification system that aims to provide every Filipino and even foreign residents with a trusted
and  verifiable  digital  identity.  Philsys,  therefore,  addresses  the  key  barriers  to  opening  a  bank
account,  particularly  the  cost  of  on-boarding  as  well  as  the  lack  of  acceptable  identification
particularly for low-income and vulnerable sectors of our society. Access to this account is an
essential  requirement  to  fully  participate  in  and  benefit  from  the  digital  finance  ecosystem
envisioned under the NRPS. It can also remove friction points and catalyze key use-cases for
digital  payments  such  as  government  cash  transfers.  Down  the  road,  it  can  make  possible
convenient fund transfer using an individual’s Philsys number as the identifier.
Ladies and gentlemen, we often hear the saying that “Change is the only constant”.  Change is
certainly inevitable as we witnessed and continue to witness evolving trends in technology and
digital innovations.  Ultimately, these developments cascade to business models and processes,
including  a  consumer’s  payment  process  and  behavior,  whether  that  consumer  be  a
government, corporate or individual.
Dear  friends  from  the  media,  we  hope  that  you  can  be  our  partners  in  communicating  how
PESONet, as well as other ACHs under the NRPS, can be a powerful engine for every Juan and
Maria towards a cash-lite Philippines.  With your help, we can create more awareness about
electronic  options  in  their  payments,  fund  transfers,  and  remittance  transactions  so  that
consumers can make better informed decisions.
I am truly excited about the prospects of PESONet and I look forward to a rich discussion in this
afternoon’s session.  On behalf of the Monetary Board, I welcome you all to the PESONet media
forum. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
