Gent Sejko: Bank of Albania’s engagement in financial education
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the
Money Week 12-18 March 2018, Tirana, 12 March 2018.
Dear Mr Pedrazzi,
Dear students, teachers and friends of the Global Week,
 Like  in  previous  years,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  welcome  you  today  to  our  central  building,  and
thank you for your participation in the Money Week 2018.
This  is  a  special  year  as  it  marks  a  decade  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  engagement  in  financial
education,  which  meaningfully  started  with  a  Memorandum  of  Cooperation  signed  with  the
Ministry of Education.
Over these years, financial education and financial inclusion have increasingly held a significant
place in our work, in designing and implementing numerous educational projects.
They are dedicated to different age groups, and consist of a variety of initiatives ranging from
training and brochures to the high school elective module “Personal Finance in Your Hands”, the
educational package for the elementary schools and the Albanian Money app.
Moreover, the Museum of the Bank of Albania, our utmost effort in this regard, offers/provides a
multifunctional  space,  where  visitors  may  not  only  learn  more  about  the  monetary  history  in
Albania and the central bank, but also deepen their financial literacy and expand their financial
awareness.
As a result of all these valuable experiences, we have been able to participate with dignity in the
Money Week, which, in 2018, is celebrated in more than 135 countries.
The week of 12–18 March 2018 is internationally known as the Money Week. Initiated by Child
and Youth Finance International, with the support of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), and adopted by more than 23.000 organisations across the globe,
the Money Week is an annual financial awareness campaign built to inspire children and young
people to learn about money matters, livelihoods and entrepreneurship.
The  celebration  of  this  Week  aims  at  raising  the  awareness  of  the  younger  generation  to  be
responsible future citizens and capable of making well-informed financial decisions
Following  the  tradition  from  the  previous  years,  the  Bank  of Albania,  in  cooperation  with  the
Albanian Association of Banks, with the support of the Ministry of Education, Sports, and Youth,
like  many  other  institutions  worldwide,  will  organize  various  activities  to  involve  children  and
young  people,  teaching  them  how  to  manage  money,  to  save  money,  to  think  financially,  to
understand  the  changes  in  the  economic  systems  where  they  live,  to  earn  income  through
entrepreneurship, and set the foundations for their future through financial literacy. In the light of
these  objectives,  during  the  Week,  a  number  of  activities  will  be  organised  such  as  lectures,
contests, and visits to commercial banks and the Museum, aimed at including as many students
as possible.
This year’s motto “Money: You reap what you sow” highlights the importance of money matters
as a necessary means to achieve and maintain welfare. The activities that will take place during
this  Week  seek  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  children  and  young  people  to  the  significance  of
personal finance and the impact of well-informed decisions on the personal success of each one
of us individually, and of the whole society.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Like in any other educational activity of the Bank of Albania, beyond the message that we want to
convey,  we  consider  that  the  inspiration,  originality  and  pro-active  thinking  are  determinant
elements for an effective comprehension of a complex, at the same time practical, topic such as
finances.
We  may  proudly  say  that  all  the  submissions  for  the  contests  are  characterised  by  these
elements,  thus  demonstrating  that,  though  challenging,  the  financial  education  of  children  and
young people may be and is possible. Moreover, their work and commitment is an incentive to us
to introduce more ambitious projects and expand this activity, geographically, each year.
The contests for students from nine-year schools and high schools have been welcomed and
the number of participants has been higher each year. This year, around 55 nine-year schools,
14 high schools, 8 universities and over 1000 pupils and students in 14 cities were involved. This
success  is  also  owed  to  the  teachers  and  professors,  whose  passion  has  contributed  to
materialising all these efforts.
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  the  insofar  cooperation  and  avail  myself  of  the
opportunity to invite all the participating institutions to continue and intensify the cooperation in the
future, in the commitment to contribute to the future generations and the Albanian society.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
