Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Changes  less  intuitive  and  the  digital
challenge
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the BAIPHIL's Induction of Directors and Officers and First General
Membership Meeting, Makati, 13 July 2018.
 BAIPHIL President Domingo Gavino, Jr., BAIPHIL members, Bank Presidents, Country Heads,
industry partners, esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen: Good afternoon!
364  days  ago,  on  the  14th  of  July  2017  precisely,  I  had  the  honor,  as  newly  appointed  BSP
Governor,  to  induct  BAIPHIL’s  set  of  board  members  and  officers  -  Ms.  Irene Arroyo  and  her
team.
Today,  I  again  have  the  privilege  of  inducting  BAIPHIL’s  new  officers,  directors,  committee
chairpersons  and  advisers!  Congratulations  Irene  on  excellently  leading  BAIPHIL  for  the  past
year.  On behalf of my colleagues in the BSP, Assistant Governor Resty Cruz who is here with
me  today,  and  other  senior  officers  of  the  BSP,  I  warmly  congratulate  BAIPHIL’s  new
leadership.   We look forward to working with you in the continued pursuit of professional growth
and excellence in the banking system.
Last year, BAIPHIL’s theme was “Scaling New Heights in Banking Excellence.” I recall making
reference to Mt. Everest with the qualification that in the banking industry, the heights we scale
are not static - they are ever changing.
Indeed,  this  is  the  reality  we  face.    Among  other  shifts,  continuing  advancements  in  digital
technology  are  redefining  the  way  we  do  things.    Technological  developments  account  for  a
growing demand for new and more sophisticated financial products and for faster and almost
near real-time, same-day service delivery. 
I  find  it  encouraging  that  again,  the  BSP  and  BAIPHIL  are  on  the  same  page.    Your  theme,
“Fostering Stewardship amidst Financial Innovations”, runs parallel to our own 25th Anniversary
theme,  “Navigating  the  Future,”  with  focus  on  traversing  the  digital  frontier  and  the  ever-
transforming economic and financial landscape.
Stewardship with Changes Less Obvious
 But before I dive into the topic of digital change – a change that is evident to many - allow me to
share my views on an area that is also fast-changing, but with changes perhaps less obvious,
because we are very focused on the head winds.
This  is  the  area  of  monetary  policy  design  and  how  market-based  approaches  must  be
developed  and  adopted  to  skillfully  conduct  it.      For  me,  it  is  a  matter  of  urgency  given  the
necessity to stay relevant and ahead of the times.
Now,  more  than  ever,  I  find  it  compelling  to  talk  about  how  the  BSP  has  always  been,  and
remains  to  be,  committed  to  its  price  and  financial  stability  mandate  in  the  face  of
transformations in the financial system.   Monetary policy is evolving in the context of a financial
system that is becoming more and more sophisticated.  Thus, all our present reform actions -
reducing our reliance on the reserve requirement to control money supply - our liberalization of
the FX market - our efforts to deepen the capital market. All our macro- and micro-prudential
measures are not diversions from the goals of price and financial stability.  They are deliberately
pursued with the recognition that they are all linked, and form a coherent strategic purpose.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For instance, let’s take the move to reduce the reserve requirement ratio - the goal is to bring it
down to a single-digit level before the end of my term, five years from now.  Do not look at this in
isolation.  Instead, may I urge you to allow deeper analysis.
It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  RR  cuts  result  in  injecting  liquidity  into  the  system  at  a  time  when
inflation  seems  to  be  on  the  rise.  This  is  a  simplistic  view.  But  I  dare  say,  we  will  not  allow
ourselves to be so limited in our evaluation. One, it cannot be denied that the economy is growing
fast.  Thus, more banking intermediation is needed to sustain it.  I hope it would become clear
that the RR cuts are intended to promote efficient financial intermediation.  These reductions will
help  curb  shadow  banking,  given  the  rising  challenge  of  alternatives  posed  by  developments
such as fintech.  Foresight is essential.
Second, the RRR cuts are not without compensating action as the IRC framework is in place to
absorb excess liquidity.  As such it is intended to be policy neutral operational adjustment.  In
fact, the liquidity releasing impact of the two previous RR cuts that we’ve done so far this year, is
actually less than the liquidity draining impact of open market operations and our significant FX
operations to manage excessive peso volatility in the face of external uncertainties.  This has
resulted in tighter financial conditions as evidenced by rising market interest rates.
We will continue to rely on changes in the policy rate as our key signalling mechanism of our
intended monetary stance.  Rest assured, the BSP is focused on managing overall domestic
liquidity as influenced by multiple factors through effective open market operations.  We are, in
this area of less obvious but real changes, exercising stewardship, never losing our focus.
Stewardship in the Digital Age
Coming to your theme - on the need for accountability and proactive leadership to respond to a
rapidly evolving financial environment - the BSP is, and has always been committed to providing
an enabling regulatory environment to allow innovations to flourish while guarding against risks
attendant to technological changes.
The BSP espouses a flexible “test-and-learn” approach to financial innovation.  Others call this
the “regulatory sandbox”. Essentially, we provide a testing ground for new business models to
guide us in assessing potential risks. The ultimate objective is to be aware of the risks, to employ
mitigating actions as needed, but also to allow room for market players to leverage on these new
technologies.    Guided  by  this  approach,  the  BSP  ensures  that  the  intensity  and  content  of
supervision  is  calibrated  according  to  the  magnitude  of  risks  identified  in  a  new  activity.  We
believe that this is the only way that we can allow innovation to happen.
We  also  encourage  dialogue  and  multi-stakeholder  collaboration  among  new  and  incumbent
players  and  relevant  financial  regulators  to  achieve  a  “whole-of-government  approach.”  This
ensures  policy  consistency  and  prevents  regulatory  arbitrage.  We  are  currently  working  with
other financial regulators in creating a new multilateral FinTech Committee under the Financial
Sector Forum (FSF) which I chair.   We are also closely coordinating with the National Privacy
Commission and the Anti-Money Laundering Council.
The  BSP  has  also  further  refined  existing  regulations  to  effectively  respond  to  digitalization  of
banking  services,  fintech  developments,  and  the  emergence  of  technology-related  risks  while
remaining supportive of financial innovation.
We  have  rationalized  the  regulatory  framework  relative  to  the  operations  of  money  service
businesses or MSBs. Specifically, we enhanced the customer due diligence expectations to re-
balance  the  objectives  of  financial  integrity  and  financial  inclusion.  Under  the  amended  anti-
money laundering (AML) rules, customer due diligence/ Know-Your-Client (KYC) requirements
are relaxed for low-risk customers/accounts/transactions under certain conditions.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  have  established  a  framework  for  regulating  virtual  currency  (VC)  exchanges  and  similar
entities operating in the Philippines. Under the new framework, VC exchanges are classified as
Remittance and Transfer Companies (RTCs) and are subject to registration, minimum capital
requirements,  internal  controls,  regulatory  reporting  and  compliance  with  the  anti-money
laundering rules and regulations.
We  are  also  collaborating  with  other  regulators  for  a  harmonized  regulatory  approach  to  new
things such as Initial Coin Offerings and VC trading activities. We are working closely with our
supervised  institutions  on  their  respective  plans  to  launch  private  digital  currencies  and  other
pioneering VC technologies. Presently, we are looking into the issue of central bank-issued digital
currencies and what it means for the supply of credit and the impact on the financial system. So
many things are happening on the ground today.
 Parallel to this, we implemented a cash agent model to provide an innovative service delivery
channel  through  the  combination  of  e-banking  self-service  online  facility,  and  real-time
transaction capabilities, together with cash in, cash out (CICO) system provided by third-party
cash agents.
We take note of the rise of blockchain or distributed ledger technology (DLT).  Presently, we are
working closely with market innovators and industry players to explore viable but safe tie-ups of
correspondent banks with DLT providers. These partnerships are seen to further enhance the
synergy between banks and fintech players.
To date, we have already approved a project under the test-and-learn approach that will facilitate
the  creation  of  a  real-time  domestic  and  overseas  remittance  corridor  without  the  need  to
establish a central operator. This will be beneficial to remittance businesses which rely heavily on
correspondent banking for the safe and efficient settlement of remittance transactions particularly
inflows from Overseas Filipinos to their family beneficiaries.
There is also an on-going project, probably many of you know about, it being spearheaded by the
Bankers Association of the Philippines (BAP) to develop digital identification (IDs) powered by a
block chain technology. The BAP has partnered with a technology and consulting company and
with several domestic banks to employ a “self-sovereign” type of identity management, granting
customers full control and management in the sharing of personal and sensitive information.
Amidst all these digital transformations and financial innovations, the BSP also recognizes the
fundamental need to create a secure, reliable and efficient digital financial ecosystem where all
these innovations can come together to achieve the greatest synergy.
In 2015, three years ago, we launched the National Retail Payments System (NRPS).  It provides
a policy and regulatory framework for establishing a safe, efficient, affordable, interoperable, and
reliable retail payments system in the country. The payment ecosystem envisioned to arise from
this  is  positioned  to  be  a  platform  for  financial  innovations.  Industry  players  can  utilize  fintech
solutions  and  provide  services  within  an  organized,  commercially-viable,  and  efficient  retail
payments system. 
We  have  already  achieved  critical  milestones  since  the  launch  of  NRPS.  These  include  the
transitioning  of  the  batch  interbank  fund  transfer  service  of  the  Philippine  Clearinghouse
Corporation (PCHC) into PESO Net, and the launch of InstaPay which allows the 24/7 low-value
electronic  fund  transfers  among  participating  member  financial  institutions  anywhere  in  the
country.
The  BSP  is  also  currently  exploring  RegTech  solutions  to  streamline  its  own  supervisory
functions,  particularly  in  terms  of  addressing  regulatory  compliance  and  reporting  of  its
supervised financial institutions. Our two pilots are about chat bots and APIs.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lastly,  we  are  enhancing  our  cross-border  presence  through  multi-sectoral  and  regional
collaborative  engagements.  Last  November,  the  BSP  entered  into  a  Fintech  Cooperation
Agreement  with  the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS).  We  are  working  on  other  similar
agreements with other central banks and we hope to sign some of them in the coming months.
Closing Remarks:  Shared Stewardship
From this brief update, I hope I have been able to assure you of the BSP’s commitment to the
banking industry in taking a shared responsibility for successfully navigating the challenges of the
digital frontier.
Digital  technology  will  continue  to  play  a  decisive  role  in  the  future  of  banking.  Its  potential  to
transform core business models and the financial services industry will ultimately depend on our
readiness to respond to evolving trends. Together and with increased collaboration, we will be
able  to  anticipate  change,  identify  technological  trends  across  different  sectors,  and  fully
maximize the potential of digital innovations to provide more convenient, and efficient financial
services.
As co-stewards, I encourage BAIPHIL too, to allow fintech innovations to ultimately work for the
benefit of our public particularly the unbanked and underbanked.   We see a lot of potential in
digitalization as a tool to further promote a broad-based and inclusive growth. We need to ensure
though that the design and deployment of digital financial solutions meet the highest standards of
transparency, product suitability, security, and confidentiality.  These must ultimately serve the
interest of your customers.
With  our  sustained  collaboration,  we  can  definitely  ride  the  waves  of  technology,  reap  the
rewards of digital transformation, and pursue financial inclusion.  What an exciting prospect!  But
we cannot deal with these changes applying the same constructs that we have been so used to
for the last decade. We cannot look at the same problems with the same framework using our
old technologies, even though we have invested heavily on those. It’s time to move forward.  We
look forward to working with BAIPHIL more closely in these endeavors and trust that its current
leadership will continue to support the BSP’s initiatives to improve the overall competitiveness
and relevance of our financial system in an era of digital transformation. I listened carefully to the
plans of Dom and they are rightly so bold and brave. I strongly encourage you to move forward
with these plans. Don’t be timid. Change is upon us. We must deal with change by the horns of
the bull. Thank you very much.  Maraming salamat po sa inyo.  Good afternoon!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
