Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  What  it  means  –  the  BSP's  mandates  and
impact on Filipino lives
Keynote  speech,  as  prepared  for  the  presentation  of  Mr  Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr,  Governor  of
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  Philippine  Economic
Forum, National Press Club of the Philippines, Intramuros, 17 August 2018.
 Good morning.  It is my pleasure and privilege to speak on the mission of the BSP and its role in
the Philippine economy.  I thank the National Press Club, Laurelmedia Company and DWIZ’s “In
the Heart of Business”, for this opportunity. 
I realize that to most of the public, the BSP’s mandates are not known.  When we first conducted
our Public Perception Survey on the role of the BSP, most respondents indicated awareness of
our function as issuer of currency.  Some identified BSP as the supervisor of banks. Also, to
many  minds,  the  BSP’s  primary  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  was,  (and  still  is)  largely
unknown.  It is, maybe, even too abstract and technical.
In fact, in conversations with the BSP Press Corps and its “graduates”, invariably, there would be
fond  recollection  of  early  days  struggling  with  economic  data  and  concepts  such  as  Core
Inflation, Gross International Reserves, Balance of Payments and the like. Some of you with such
memories are here today.
And  those  of  you  here  would  agree  that  eventually  once  past  the  initial  challenge  of  data
appreciation and economic analysis is achieved, some passion for the BSP’s goals follows.
Why?  How does one come to such a conversion – of esoteric wondering at the BSP’s role to an
active  advocacy  for  its  success?  I  believe  this  happens  when  one  realizes  that  the  BSP’s
success  translates  to  people’s  lives  actually  being  improved…to  inclusive  and  broad-based
growth… to stability and to tangible economic development. 
In this context, allow me to discuss our mandates.
Price Stability: What it Means
Under  Section  3  of  Republic Act  (RA)  7653,  the  BSP  is  primarily  mandated  to  maintain  price
stability conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy.  
What  does  managed  and  stable  inflation  mean  for  the  Philippines?    Price  stability  supports
economic  growth  as  it  allows  households  and  businesses  to  plan  ahead  and  make  informed
consumption, investment, saving, and production decisions. Uncertainty is lowered.  Managed
inflation  also  protects  the  purchasing  power  of  the  poor,  which  is  important  as  the  poor  are
vulnerable without adequate assets to hedge against high inflation.
Also, the country’s strong economic fundamentals indicated (among others) by stable inflation,
results in positive differentiation by global investors encouraging investments into the country. 
In  2002,  the  BSP  adopted  the  inflation  targeting  (IT)  framework  for  monetary  policy.    The
framework requires monetary policy decisions to be forward looking.  It considers the widest set
of  available  and  relevant  information  about  the  economy.    It  promotes  transparency  through
announcement of targets and the reporting of measures that the BSP will adopt to attain these
targets, as well as the reasons for and outcomes of its policy decisions, increasing accountability
on the part of the BSP.
In 2016, the BSP adopted the interest rate corridor (IRC) system to further enhance monetary
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy effectiveness.  The IRC system guides short-term market rates towards the BSP policy
interest  rate,  enhancing  the  link  between  the  BSP’s  monetary  policy  stance  and  financial
markets.  This impacts the real economy.
For six consecutive years from 2009–2014, the inflation target has been met. During episodes
when  inflation  was  above  or  below  target,  there  were  external  or  supply-side  developments
beyond the ambit of monetary policy.
As  an  inflation-targeting  central  bank,  we  are  guided  by  data-dependent  and  forward-looking
assessment.  This disciplined and structured approach means that we refrain from reacting to
short-term fluctuations or commentaries.  Our focus is obtaining comprehensive information and
making  decisions  based  on  inflation  forecasts  over  a  given  policy  horizon.    Further,  the  BSP
follows  the  standard  approach  of  not  reacting  to  supply  shock  episodes  as  these  tend  to  be
transitory or short-lived in nature, but monitor conditions for signs of second-round effects.
This  was  the  case  early  this  year  when  data  indicate  the  inflation  environment  was  driven  by
supply-side  factors  and  our  forecast  continued  to  show  inflation  upticks  as  transitory  and
moderating within the target in 2019.  Thus, adjustment in policy rate was not yet warranted. 
Starting in Q2 2018, however, we note that forecasts have shifted higher over the policy horizon.
Upside  risks  also  continue  to  dominate  the  inflation  outlook.  Meanwhile,  inflation  expectations
remain elevated. We also recognize that sustained pressures on the peso could adversely affect
inflation expectations.  Therefore, in response to dynamic economic and market conditions, the
Monetary Board raised the policy interest rate by 25 basis points each in May and June 2018 and
by 50 basis points effective 10 August 2018.
The strong policy actions recently taken by the BSP are meant to rein in inflation expectations
and  prevent  sustained  supply-side  price  pressures  from  driving  further  second-round  effects. 
We expect inflation to revert to target over the policy horizon.
We enjoy resilient economic growth. While the latest GDP outturn shows a lower figure relative
to last year’s and last quarter’s growth figures, we still remain above the long-term average trend
of 5.3 percent (for 2000–2017 relative to 6.0 percent for Q2 2018).  The economy has achieved
uninterrupted growth for the past 78 consecutive quarters even in the midst of the global financial
crisis in 2008–2009.
We  have  sustained  fiscal  discipline.    The  fiscal  deficit  is  expected  to  be  contained  within  3
percent  of  GDP  (2.3  percent  of  GDP  as  of  the  1st  half  of  2018).    This  supports  effective
government spending and sustainability to meet debt obligations. 
Our external position is strong.  Our gross international reserves (GIR) remains an ample buffer. 
As of end-July 2018, our GIR of US$76.9 billion is equivalent to 7.4 months’ worth of imports of
goods,  and  payments  of  services  and  primary  income.  It  is  also  equivalent  to  4.1  times  the
country’s external debt maturing in the short term. 
Likewise,  the  economy’s  key  external  debt  indicators  are  favorable.   As  of  Q1  2018,  external
debt-to-GDP ratio was just 23.0 percent. Moreover, the country’s external debt remained largely
medium-  to  long-term  in  nature  (80.5  percent  of  total  external  debt).    This  means  that  FX
requirements for debt payments are well spread out and, thus, more manageable. 
We are committed to maintaining a flexible and market-determined exchange rate which allows
us  to  conduct  independent  monetary  policy  focused  on  assessment  of  domestic  conditions. 
This likewise promotes our resilience against external shocks.
Recent depreciation of the peso is attributed to both fundamental and non-fundamental factors.
Fundamental factors include: (i) higher demand for imports of capital goods, raw materials and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediate  products  in  support  of  our  growing  economy;  and  (ii)  dollar  debt  repayments,
prepayments,  and  outward  investments.  Meanwhile,  non-fundamental  factors  reflect  various
market sentiments over domestic and external developments adding more pressure on the peso.
We remain confident that the Philippine economy’s solid fundamentals will lend support to our
flexible peso. 
Our  solid  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  growth  prospects  are  attested  to  by  continued
favorable  investor  sentiment.    Foreign  direct  investments  (FDI)  continue  to  grow.    Sovereign
credit ratings remain favorable.  In particular, FDI-to-GDP ratio improved from 1.6 percent in 2005
to 3.2 percent in 2017.  For the first five months of 2018, FDI registered growth of 49.0 percent
from the comparable period in 2017.  
Notwithstanding  global  and  domestic  challenges,  the  Philippine  economy  has  cemented  its
resilience and has built buffers over the years. 
Financial Stability:  What it Means
As mentioned earlier, the public is aware that the BSP is supervisor and regulator of banks.  The
limited notion though is that we exist merely to regulate, to police…  Of course, sound rules and
regulations implemented by the BSP are expected to be followed to protect the public interest.
But more than this, our regulations and policies exist for a higher purpose.  The idea is that a
well-functioning  financial  system  supports  productive  expansionary  business  activities  and
consumption spending, hence, is crucial to promoting economic growth.   Our pursuit of banking
and  financial  reforms  in  the  areas  of  supervisory  policy,  banking  supervision,  financial
surveillance  and  systemic  risk,  stabilizes  and  strengthens  the  domestic  financial  system  and
helps grow financial institutions into regionally competitive and economically viable players.  
The  BSP’s  role  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  able  to  perform  its  financial
intermediation role despite economic shocks.  Likewise, we are cognizant that financial stability
is essential for monetary policy to be effective since the fragility of the financial sector can affect
the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. 
Because of long-term structural reforms, the Philippine financial system, with the banking sector
at its core, continues to be a source of strength and stability for our economy. As of end-June
2018,  the  asset  base  of  the  banking  industry  reached  over  Php  15.7  trillion,  higher  by  10.3
percent  a  year  ago. Asset  quality  remains  satisfactory.    There  is  also  continuing  build-up  in
capitalization.    The  risk-based  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  of  U/KBs  as  of  end-March  2018
stood at 14.48 percent on a solo basis and 15.07 percent on a consolidated basis.
We  also  ensure  that  appropriate  financial  products  and  services  are  accessible  to  a  greater
majority.  Our regulatory framework recognizes that there are the deeply ingrained barriers to
financial  access  such  as  cost,  geography,  information  asymmetry  and  lack  of  infrastructure,
among others.  As such, market-based solutions, innovations and use of technology to address
market frictions are encouraged.  This approach has allowed the range of products and services
to widen with expanded physical and virtual reach, liberalized consumer on-boarding and greater
consumer protection. 
Efficient Payments and Settlements System:  What it Means
While we have utilized technological progress to advance financial inclusion, we recognize its
great potential to also enhance the efficiency of the country’s payments and settlements system.
An  efficient,  secure  and  reliable  payment  system  reduces  the  cost  of  exchanging  goods  and
services.  It is also an essential tool for the effective implementation of monetary policy and the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
smooth functioning of the financial system. 
Under  the  National  Retail  Payments  System  (NRPS),  launched  in  2015,  we  leveraged  on
financial  technology  to  bring  about  an  inter-operable,  safe,  affordable,  and  efficient  real-time
digital payments system.  In 2017, we launched the PESONet to provide an electronic alternative
to  the  still  widely  used  paper-based  check  system  and  to  provide  an  efficient  channel  for
government and private business collections and disbursement.
Just  this  April,  we  launched  InstaPay,  which  allows  for  safe  and  affordable  retail  electronic
payments in real time.  Moving forward, we are expecting other automated clearing houses to be
transitioned into NRPS system.  We are also working on adopting a national QR code standard
aligned with global standards, which can accelerate the digitalization of merchants.
These  initiatives  should  facilitate  the  shift  from  being  a  cash-heavy  to  a  cash-lite  economy,  a
trend we observe happening across the globe.
We  are  encouraged  by  the  much-awaited  passage  of  R.A.  No.  11055  or  the  Philippine
Identification System Act (Philsys).  This is a significant legislation that will boost our digitalization
efforts  and  financial  inclusion  agenda.  With  its  goal  of  providing  every  Filipino  a  trusted  and
verifiable digital identity, PhilSys can be a powerful tool for on-boarding millions of Filipinos into
the formal financial system and providing them access to meaningful financial services.
The power of PhilSys lies in its singular function. It only aims to do one thing: to establish and
verify a person’s identity, to prove that you are who you say you are whether online of offline.
Accordingly, PhilSys only captures very basic demographic information and biometrics sufficient
to establish an individual’s unique identity. 
Focus on our third mandate of an efficient payments and settlements system aims to transform
the economy.  We recognize that such will bring efficiency to business transactions.  Substantial
savings  will  likewise  be  generated  from  a  shift  from  paper-based  to  digital  instruments.   An
efficient  payments  settlements  system  benefits  consumers  and  businesses  in  terms  of
affordability, convenience and speed of services, promoting financial inclusion.
Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  have  shared,  while  the  BSP’s  mandates  are  highly  technical,  our
goals  address  the  betterment  of  Filipino  lives.    We  function  to  provide  a  macroeconomic
environment conducive to economic growth.  We guard against erratic and uncontrolled inflation
and work vigilantly to promote confidence in the safety, soundness and strength of our banking
and financial system.  We are committed too to delivering an efficient payments and settlements
system that promotes interoperability of payments, financial inclusion and which will allow us to
transition from a cash-heavy to cash-lite economy.
At the BSP, we are foremost, public servants, committed to our mandates for the furtherance of
the national and public interest.  This, is what our work means. 
It was my distinct pleasure to speak about our role and share our initiatives with all of you.
Maraming salamat.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
