  26.06.2018 
 Taking up of office by the Governor of the Banco de España  
 
 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Honourable Ministers and Authorities, ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues and friends, I 
believe today calls, above all, for a round of gratitude. 
First, I wish to thank Ministers Calviño and Montero for their presence here today.  
May they rest assured I am firmly committed to maintaining the close and loyal collaboration 
traditionally offered by the Banco de España to the Ministries for the Economy and Finance.  
I  also  wish  to  thank  the  previous  minister,  Román  Escolano,  for  his  presence  at  this 
ceremony, and for his proposal and defence of my appointment before the Parliamentary 
Committee for the Economy and Competitiveness.  
And my gratitude extends to the representatives of the Committee accompanying us today.  
I undertake to make every effort to improve the capacity of the Banco de España to face 
the challenges addressed during the Parliamentary Committee hearing.    
Ministers, as I am surrounded above all by colleagues, I trust you will allow me to continue 
in a more informal tone. 
As  you know,  including  a  three-year  tour  at  the  European Central  Bank,  I now  have two 
decades  behind  me  at  the  Banco  de  España.  Professionally  speaking,  this  is,  then,  my 
home.  
It is a real honour for me to have been appointed governor. But, above all, I feel a great 
responsibility  at  having  inherited  the  enormous  legacy  of  an  institution  with  the  history, 
functions and position in the Spanish economy of the Banco de España. 
I wish to begin this new stage thanking those people who have steered my career over the 
years. I have learnt from all of them and their teachings have been a source of wealth for 
me. My sincere thanks to all of them.  
Thanks, of course, to José Luis Malo de Molina, under whose leadership of the Research 
Department I have pursued most of my career, and, among others, Eloísa Ortega and José 
María Bonilla. They were most forthcoming with their trust and have, at different times, been 
a major source of guidance and support for me. 
Thanks  also  to  Fernando  Restoy,  above  all  for  being  a  point  of  reference  in  terms  of 
competence and dedication to public service.  
Thanks especially to José Manuel González Páramo, who oversaw my Ph.D. and took me 
to  Frankfurt.  That  experience  gave  me,  early  on,  a  first-hand  view  of  the  work  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  and  of  the  Banco  España’s  potential  as  a  member  of  the 
Eurosystem.  
Naturally,  my  greatest  gratitude  is  to  Governor  Luis  María  Linde  for  naming  me  Director 
General for Economics, Statistics and Research almost two and a half years ago. That was, 
unquestionably, the necessary step for taking me to where I am today.  
 3/5 
 Thank you, Governor, for your constant support over this period. I hope to be up to the task 
of the legacy you are leaving us.  
My  thanks,  too,  to  the  members  of  the  Bank’s  Executive  Commission  and  Governing 
Council and, most particularly, to the Deputy Governor, Javier Alonso. 
Javier, your help and far-reaching knowledge of the Bank are making these first weeks in 
the job easier for me.  
But, above all, I should like to thank my colleagues over the course of the years. It would be 
impossible to list them all; many are here today.  
The career of a Banco España employee can only fully be understood through the prism of 
the numerous interactions and discussions between us, which are the bedrock on which we 
build  our  knowledge  and  our  particular  human  capital.  It  is  a  privilege  to  be  part  of  this 
environment and to participate in such an enriching process.  
Finally, the most singular thanks are for my family. Without them none of this would have 
been possible.  
Let me seize this opportunity to refer briefly to what should, in my view, be the two main 
objectives of the Banco de España at this juncture and which are related to our relevance 
and reputation.  
The first has to do with our insertion into the Eurosystem and into the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism.  Some  think  this  means  that  the  Banco  de  España  has  an  increasingly 
diminished role, given that the main functions linked to monetary policy and supervision of 
the financial system are decided in that framework.  
However, I believe all of us who have experienced this environment have emerged with a 
very different lesson learnt.  
Indeed, we cannot overstate the extraordinary potential this setting offers to an institution 
such as ours which has always valued, and legitimately so, the soundness of its judgement.  
With  that  conviction,  we  should  devote  most  of  our  efforts  to  forging  closer  insertion, 
collaboration and coordination-based links with our European partners with an essential aim 
in mind: to reinforce our weight and ability to influence decision-making.  
This is a challenge and it is also an opportunity, but it is above all a responsibility to support, 
from the vantage of the Banco de España, the project for European construction.  
The  second  objective  has  to  do  with  our  contribution  to  financial  and  macroeconomic 
stability.  
After an unprecedented financial crisis, the reputation of economic policymakers, of central 
banks in particular and, indeed, of the economics profession as a whole was enormously 
dented.  
4/5 
  Testifying to this were the regulatory and institutional changes set in train to prevent similar 
situations from recurring.  
However, the real test, where we place our social prestige and credibility on the line, will 
involve us truly being able to identify risks and vulnerabilities in due time, being able to issue 
warnings  about  them  and,  within  our  remit,  being  able  to  act  to  mitigate  them  or  to 
contribute decisively to other players acting when they must.  
All this must be attained in a setting in which new developments and circumstances will be 
emerging – and they are in fact appearing already – to make our analytical and supervisory 
tasks more demanding. In any event, enjoying society’s trust and recognition will involve 
being able to respond successfully to this challenge.  
To be able to accomplish our mission and reach both objectives, the Banco de España is 
going to have to adapt. But such adaptation must also stand on sound pillars.  
The first of these pillars is our independence. 
Independence is a necessary condition for achieving the aforementioned objectives and it 
is independence alone that can offer us the best guarantees of success.  
Secondly, the exercise of independence should be underpinned by analysis and decisions 
based on the utmost intellectual rigour. This is also the best base from which to address the 
necessary accountability and transparency to society.  
Thirdly, we can only properly perform our dual role of members of the Eurosystem and public 
servants by the pursuit of excellence in our work and by promoting the excellence of our 
staff. Such excellence has been and is, no doubt, one of the hallmarks of this institution. It 
is my firm commitment to maintain and enhance the Bank’s human capital.  
To conclude, I shall adhere to the tradition launched by Governor Linde when he took office 
and end, as he did, with a quote.  
In tribute to the Governor, as I know that Fernando Pessoa is one of his favourite poets, I'd 
like to quote his “Odes by Ricardo Reis”, in which he reminds us of the importance of being 
truly committed to our work.  
  “To be great, be whole: don’t exaggerate 
Or leave out any part of you. 
Be complete in each thing. Put all you are 
Into the least of your acts." 
Thank you all for being here. 
 5/5 
