Peter Praet: Economic developments in the euro area
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Swiss Financial Analysts Association (SFAA), Geneva, 7 May 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
 I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his support in preparing this speech.
After several quarters of higher than expected growth, the latest euro area data point towards
some moderation, but remain consistent with a solid and broad-based economic expansion.
I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his support in preparing this speech.
Monetary  policy  measures  introduced  since  2014  have  been  central  in  supporting  euro  area
growth and paving the way for a return of euro area inflation to a rate below, but close to, 2% over
the medium term. Inflation developments, however, remain subdued. Overall, an ample degree of
monetary stimulus remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up
and support headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Real GDP in the euro area has expanded for 20 consecutive quarters, growing by 0.4% quarter
on  quarter  during  the  first  quarter  of  2018,  according  to  preliminary  data.  While  the  pace  of
economic  expansion  has  moderated  compared  with  the  previous  quarters,  the  underlying
strength of the euro area economy is expected to persist.
The moderation in the pace of economic growth indicated by the flow of recent economic data
and survey results in part reflects some pull-back from the strong growth of last year and may
also  be  due  to  some  temporary  factors.  We  will  need  to  monitor  whether,  and  if  so  to  what
extent,  these  developments  also  reflect  a  more  durable  softening  in  demand.  The  composite
output Purchasing Managers’ Index – which is closely correlated with growth in the euro area –
still remains above its long-term average and is close to a 12-year high. While risks to growth
remain  broadly  balanced,  those  related  to  global  factors,  including  the  threat  of  increased
protectionism, have become more prominent.
A deceleration from the exceptionally high growth rates observed in the second half of 2017 had
been  expected.  However,  the  slowdown  has  come  sooner  than  anticipated.  The  downward
surprise in incoming information has been broad-based, as it can be observed in both hard data
and survey indicators across most sectors and countries.
Transitory factors are likely to have played a role in the overall slowdown in recent economic
indicators. These exceptional factors include the cold weather conditions, influenza, the timing of
Easter and school holidays, and industrial strikes in some countries. These developments may
have been particularly relevant for the retail and construction sector. In addition, concerns about
trade protectionism may also have dampened business sentiment and expectations.
Nevertheless,  the  recent  slowdown  could  also  be  a  sign  that  supply-side  constraints  are
becoming increasingly binding, albeit only in some sectors and in some countries. For instance,
in the capital goods sector, capacity utilisation and backlogs/supply delivery times stand at all-
time highs. Whereas in the construction sector, an increasing number of firms are indicating that
a shortage of labour is limiting their production.
There is so far no evidence that the moderation in the pace of economic expansion reflects a
durable  softening  in  demand.  Recent  information  remains  consistent  with  a  solid  and  broad-
based expansion in domestic demand. Sentiment indicators remain in expansionary territory and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
are still well above long-term averages for most sectors and countries. Moreover, the underlying
momentum  is  still  supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  a  robust  labour  market  and
steady income and profit growth.
The ongoing expansion has led to strong employment gains. The number of people employed in
the euro area has increased by more than 7.8 million since the trough in mid-2013. This implies
that all of the job losses recorded during the crisis have been recovered. The unemployment rate
is at its lowest level since December 2008, despite an increase in the labour force of more than
2%.
Consumer  spending  is  being  driven  by  steady  growth  in  households’  real  disposable  income,
favourable  bank  lending  conditions  and  the  notable  progress  achieved  in  deleveraging.  Since
2016 employment growth, together with the gradual increase in compensation per employee, has
become the main driver of households’ real disposable income. The contribution of taxes and
transfers,  by  contrast,  has  become  more  negative,  as  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  act  to
somewhat dampen the growth of real disposable income in times of economic expansion. These
developments  contrast  with  the  early  years  of  the  recovery  (2014–15),  when  real  disposable
income was still strongly supported by improvements in the terms of trade as a result of the fall
in oil prices.
The  investment  outlook  continues  to  strengthen  and  is  supported  by  an  ongoing  need  to
modernise the capital stock after years of subdued investment, as well as by very favourable
financing  conditions,  an  improvement  in  profitability  and  solid  demand.  The  European
Commission’s biannual investment survey, which was released on 27 April, shows expectations
of a strong increase in real industrial investment of 7% in 2018.
Finally, signs that the past euro appreciation is dampening export growth remain limited. Extra-
euro area export growth slowed down in the first two months of the year, albeit from very high
levels.  Moreover,  over  the  same  period,  extra-euro  area  industrial  new  orders  continued  to
expand. At the same time, the sharp decline in some sentiment indicators relating to the export
sector is a source of concern.
Since  we  announced  our  policy  measures  in  June  2014,  financial  conditions  have  eased
considerably. In particular, bank lending rates for euro area non-financial corporations have fallen
by around 120 basis points, and for households by around 110 basis points. Rates on very small
loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),
have declined by around 200 basis points. The significant improvement in funding conditions for
SMEs is especially encouraging as these companies provide two-thirds of total private sector
employment  in  the  euro  area.  Heterogeneity  of  lending  rates  across  countries  has  also  fallen
sharply.  For  example,  the  difference  between  the  average  lending  rate  for  firms  in  countries
which  were  severely  affected  by  the  crisis,  and  the  average  lending  rate  for  firms  in  other
countries,  has  narrowed  by  more  than  110  basis  points  since  we  announced  our  policy
measures. The pass-through of our monetary policy has become more even.
Banks are also passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers as a result of our
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  which  further  supports  these
1
positive developments.
For  more  details,  see  the  box  entitled  “The  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations:  an
overview  of  the  take-up  and  their  impact  on  bank  intermediation”,  Economic  Bulletin,  Issue  3,
ECB, 2017.
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding.
According to the euro area bank lending survey for the first quarter of 2018, credit standards have
eased  considerably  for  loans  to  firms  and  loans  for  house  purchases,  with  loan  demand
increasing  across  all  categories.  Banks  also  reported  that  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
programme has led to an easing of lending conditions and has had a positive effect on lending
volumes  across  all  loan  categories.  Market-based  funding  conditions  have  also  improved
significantly  in  response  to  the  corporate  sector  purchase  programme  we  launched  in  June
2016.
Against  the  backdrop  of  this  substantial  easing  of  financing  conditions,  domestic  demand  is
expected to remain the key driver of growth. Meanwhile, real GDP growth is projected to remain
above  potential  in  the  coming  years.  Nonetheless,  inflation  continues  to  be  lacklustre.  After
lingering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional dips into negative territory, euro
area headline inflation increased towards the end of 2016 and has fluctuated, for the most part,
between 1.3% and 1.5% since May last year. According to the flash estimate, annual euro area
headline inflation stood at 1.2% in April, while HICP inflation excluding food and energy declined to
0.7%, slightly lower than expected. This negative surprise in core inflation is mainly attributable to
a decrease in services inflation, which is likely to be related to developments in volatile items,
also reflecting the timing of Easter this year. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, inflation
is likely to hover around 1.5% in the coming months.
Looking  beyond  some  short-term  volatility,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  have  moved
sideways in recent months and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Wages continue to edge higher, which is an encouraging sign as overall muted wage dynamics
have  been  an  important  element  keeping  a  lid  on  underlying  price  pressures.  There  is  much
discussion about the Phillips curve having become flatter in recent years, suggesting that the
relationship between economic slack and inflation has weakened. But it is difficult to determine
empirically whether changes in the Phillips curve stem from a mismeasurement of slack or from
parallel shifts in the curve. In other words, a flattening of the Phillips curve could be confused with
a mismeasurement of slack or a parallel shift of the complete curve.
Indeed,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy.  One
reason for this is that productive capacities may have been positively affected by labour market
reforms. In this regard, non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) estimates have
been continuously revised downwards. When looking at slack over the past few years, it is also
worth  considering  alternative  measures  of  unemployment.  The  U6  measure,  for  example,
captures  unemployment,  underemployment  (meaning  workers  who  would  like  to  work  more
hours) and marginal attachment, namely those workers who are not competing very actively in
2
the labour market, for example because they are not available to start a new job at short notice.  
See the box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
Parallel shifts of the Phillips curve could arise from the impacts of cost-push shocks or from a
de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  with  different  implications  for  monetary  policy.  External
and domestic cost-push shocks could have led to a downward shift in the Phillips curve of the
euro area. Indeed, over recent years the global economy has experienced negative price shocks
in energy markets, which have tended to push up output while containing inflation in the euro
area. As cost-push shocks tend to be temporary, they are less meaningful for the medium-term
orientation of monetary policy.
If, however, shifts in the Phillips curve are the result of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations,
they raise significant concerns over the ability of the central bank to achieve its inflation objective
in the longer run. While there were signs of de-anchoring in 2014, our monetary policy measures
have been successful in stabilising inflation expectations and making deflation risks vanish. Our
primary task as a central bank is to ensure that the traditional relationship between the real and
the nominal sides of the economy reasserts itself at a steady-state rate of inflation that is below,
but close to, 2%.
In summary, as slack in the economy continues to be absorbed, price pressures will gradually
build up and the traditional Phillips curve relationship between inflation and the business cycle
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
should eventually reassert itself.
Another  type  of  disconnect  that  policymakers  have  to  contend  with  relates  to  the  substantial
easing  of  financing  conditions  prompted  by  our  policy  measures,  which  could  have  been
expected  to  boost  inflation  more  forcefully.  Across  advanced  economies  we  have  indeed
witnessed a ubiquitous downward trend in real interest rates. In the euro area they have lately
been around –1.5% at short maturities and around –0.5% in the ten-year maturity segment. Both
figures are around 1.5 percentage points lower than their corresponding averages over the first
ten  years  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  fact  that  inflation  dynamics  have  been  tepid
indicates that historical averages may not be an appropriate benchmark for today’s policy stance
and that corresponding benchmark levels must have fallen.
Policymakers need to be wary of these trends. They are probably rooted in receding growth rates
in  potential  output  and  the  legacy  of  financial  factors  that  have  emerged  in  the  wake  of  the
financial  crisis  –  such  as  risk  aversion  and  deleveraging  pressures.  The  degree  of  monetary
policy accommodation, based on various real return measures, needs to be assessed relative to
these benchmark trends in real yields.
Certainly, if these slow-moving trends in real yields are also taken into account, the current level
of real interest rates provides an ample degree of policy accommodation. But interpreting their
present  levels  against  the  background  of  their  protracted  downtrend  and  persistently  subdued
inflation underpins our stance that we have to be prudent, patient and persistent in calibrating our
policy, as inflation will probably converge only gradually towards our objective.
Looking  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  evolve  in  a  data-dependent  and  time-consistent  manner.
Once  the  Governing  Council  judges  that  the  three  criteria  for  sustained  adjustment  –
convergence, confidence and resilience – have been met, net asset purchases will expire, in line
with  our  guidance.  From  that  point  in  time,  inflation  developments  will  remain  conditional  on
reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time and on policy rates remaining at their
present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases. The stock of long-duration assets
held in our portfolio will continue to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates well
beyond the end of our net purchases. Policy rates remaining at their present levels well past the
end of our net purchases will contribute to holding the short to intermediate portions of the yield
curve  in  check  for  as  long  as  necessary,  thereby  ensuring  that  financial  conditions  remain
consistent with a sustained adjustment of inflation
1
2
For more details, see the box entitled “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-
up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
See the box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
