SUERF/BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Conference
‘Do we need central bank digital currencies?  
Economics, technology and psychology’
21st century cash: Central banking,  
technological innovation and digital currencies
Keynote address by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Fabio Panetta
Bocconi University
Milan, 7 June 2018
   1. 
Introduction1 
It is a great pleasure to be here. The topic of this conference speaks to the heart of some of the 
most  challenging  questions  for  central  banks  today:  how  is  the  digital  revolution  affecting  the 
financial system? What is the impact on consumers, the economy and on central banks themselves? 
These are complex questions, related to the consequences of the fourth industrial revolution in our 
society,2  within  which  central  bank  digital  currencies  (CBDC  in  short)  might  one  day  play  an 
important part.  
I  will  not  attempt  to  provide  comprehensive  answers  to  all  of  these  questions.  Rather,  I  will 
focus on some general issues related to the digital transformation of our society, the pros and cons of 
digital cash (as a means of payment and store of value) and, before concluding, recall some of the 
open issues regarding CBDCs. 
2.  The digital transformation of society 
Technological progress is fostering the digital representation of many of our daily activities. For 
example, the use of physical letters and postcards has been dwarfed by emails and digital photos, with 
the estimated number of letter-like items sent worldwide in one year roughly equal to the number of 
emails sent in a single day.3 Instant messaging apps such as QQ and WhatsApp allow their estimated 
three billion users to have digital conversations across the globe.4 The process of digitization reflects 
increasing demand for immediacy by individuals, and is transforming our behaviour, our culture and 
the structure of the economy.  
                                                           
1   I wish to thank Nicola Branzoli and Marcello Miccoli for their valuable help during the preparation of this speech.  
2   See Schwab K. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, New York: Crown Publishing Group, (2017) and Gordon R. (2012), 
‘Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds’, NBER, Working Paper 18315, 
August 2012.  
3   Source: based on data from Universal Postal Union and Radicati Group.  
4   Source: Radicati Group.  
Digitization has also been prominent in the financial system. For example, the dematerialization 
of  financial  assets  has  been  instrumental  in  the  emergence  of  electronic  trading  platforms.  Online 
banking, the digital representation of brick-and-mortar bank branches, has gained in popularity since 
its introduction in the 1990s . The advent of digitization is particularly evident in the payment system. 
Until not long ago retail payments could only be made with cash or cheques. But these days who uses 
cheques anymore? Digital innovation in payments has gone even further, with payment tools available 
directly through an app on a smartphone or even by simply using a smartwatch. 
The  issuance  of  CBDCs  –  a  digital  version  of  cash  –  could  accordingly  be  seen  as  a  natural 
consequence of the broader process of digitization of the financial system. In a world where securities 
and  contracts  are  dematerialized  and  traded  electronically,  where  payments  are  made  with 
smartphones and investment advice is provided by computers, why should cash be only physical? Is 
the central bank missing out on the benefits of innovation by not issuing a CBDC? 
Crypto-assets (or virtual currencies as they were called before it was realized that they cannot 
perform the functions of money) are sometimes associated with digital currency. Let me emphasize, 
though it is redundant for this audience, that CBDCs have nothing to do with crypto-assets such as 
Bitcoin. In fact – just like banknotes – a CBDC would be a liability of the central bank and would be 
backed by its assets. It would be supported by the credibility of the central bank and, ultimately, by 
the rule of law. Crypto-assets, on the other hand, are a liability belonging to nobody: there is no asset 
that backs them up and no clear governance structure that can guarantee trust. For these reasons, the 
value of a CBDC would not suffer from the excessive volatility that affects crypto-assets. 
3.  The pros and cons of digital cash 
But let’s go back to the main question of today’s conference: should central banks issue a digital 
currency?  One  way  to  address  this  issue  is  from  the  perspective  of  an  agent  (the  central  bank)  in 
charge of supplying cash on behalf of the State, with the ultimate goal of maximizing social welfare. 
In  this  respect  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the  possible  role  of  the  digital  currency  as  a 
means of payment and as a store of value.5  
                                                           
5   These are two of the three functions of money. The third one, money as a unit of account, is not relevant here, since a 
digital currency issued by the central banks would be denominated in the same unit as existing banknotes. 
 CBDCs as a means of payment 
As a means of payment, a CBDC would add to the available digital payment services, thus 
increasing  the  degree  of  competition  in  this  sector.  But  the  set  of  tools  that  permit  almost 
frictionless and instantaneous payments is already large: today we can make a digital payment by 
wire  transfer  (through  online  banking),  with  credit  or  debit  cards,  using  Paypal  or  Apple  pay  (to 
name just a few); we can do it via computers, smartphones or smartwatches, by simply putting our 
wrist close to a point of sale. Competition in the supply of payment services is already high, and the 
efficiency  of  the  system  will  increase  with  the  introduction  in  many  jurisdictions  of  instant 
payments – yet another alternative to cash.6 From this vantage point the advantages of a CBDC are 
at  best  unclear:  its  potential  benefits  in  terms  of  improving  the  ease  of  transactions  are  probably 
insufficient to justify the involvement of central banks in an activity that is well served by private 
suppliers.  
A  CBDC  could  nonetheless  improve  access  to  digital  payments  for  specific  groups  of 
consumers. In fact, some consumers do not have a bank account – a precondition for using existing 
digital payment tools. A CBDC could offer them access to these tools at minimum or zero cost. In the 
United States, the United Kingdom, France and Spain, to name a few high-income countries where 
one might easily think that financial inclusion is almost universal, the share of the population without 
a bank account is between 4 and 7 per cent.7  
In  Italy  the  proportion  of  unbanked  households  is  similar  (7  per  cent,  or  1.8  million 
households).8  Survey  evidence  suggests  that  account  maintenance  costs  and  physical  distance 
from a bank are among the reasons for not having a bank account. However, a closer look at the 
socio-demographic characteristics of unbanked consumers shows that they have low income but 
also low education: 90 per cent of the unbanked households are in the bottom half of the income 
                                                           
6   Instant payments (IPs) allow consumers to transfer funds in almost real time. The Eurosystem entered into IPs with the 
TIPS project, which will offer settlement facilities in central bank money to IPs schemes starting from November 2018. 
The extent to which IPs will succeed as substitutes for cash is an open question. The experience of the countries where 
IPs were first introduced is mixed. For example in the UK, where IPs were introduced ten years ago, the average value 
of IPs is £800, more than an ordinary cash payment and similar to a traditional credit transfer. 
7   Demirgüç, A., Klapper, L., Singer, D., Ansar, S., and Hess, J. The global Findex database 2017: Measuring Financial 
Inclusion and the FinTech revolution, World Bank Group, 2018. 
8   Source: Survey on Household Income and Wealth, Banca d’Italia. 
 distribution and have little or no formal education. To the extent that consumers have no access to 
bank accounts – and thus to digital payment tools – for reasons other than cost, the introduction of 
a  CBDC  would  not  improve  the  situation.  Again,  at this  stage  the  available  evidence  is  at  best 
insufficient  to  justify  introducing  a CBDC, in spite  of the importance  of  the  goal  of improving 
financial inclusion.9  
The introduction of a digital means of payment could be justified by the objective of reducing 
the cost of cash i.e. outlays for its production, transportation, disposal, etc. Recent estimates suggest 
that these costs amount to about half of a percentage point of GDP in the European Union every 
year,10 or to around €76 billion. By way of comparison, this figure amounts to almost half of the 
annual EU budget. These estimates are a lower bound of the actual costs, since they do not include 
households’  costs,  such  as  the  time  it  takes  to  obtain  banknotes  (shoe-leather  costs),  which  are 
difficult  to  estimate.  However,  they  are  shrouded  in  uncertainty;  moreover,  central  banks, 
commercial banks and all those who handle cash are constantly striving to improve efficiency.  
Would the cost of providing a CBDC be lower than that of cash? The costs of managing cash 
are due to its physical nature and in a digital world they would disappear. Non-monetary costs, such as 
households’  shoe-leather  costs  of  finding  a  cash  provider,  would  also  disappear  if  cash  were 
accessible via the smartphone in our pocket. Hardware and software costs would, instead, increase. 
However, digital technology already plays a crucial role in the financial sector. It is used to transfer 
commercial  bank  money,  to  buy  and  sell  securities,  and  to  process  information.  It  is  continuously 
tested and updated and protected against risks, first and foremost cyber risk. The technology needed to 
transfer digital cash would likely have strong complementarities with the existing digital networks and 
infrastructure. This suggests that the overall costs of providing a means of payment may well decrease 
with  the  introduction  of  a  CBDC.  The  potential  efficiency  gains  promised  by  new  technological 
solutions such as Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), though still unclear, could also help lower 
the cost of managing CBDCs.  
                                                           
9   Here I ignore the fact that it is disputable, likely suboptimal and undesirable to assign the goal of improving financial 
inclusion to central banks.  
10   Schmiedel,  H.,  Kostova,  G.,  and  Ruttenberg,  W.  ‘The  social  and  private  costs  of  retail  payment  instruments:  
a European perspective’, European Central Bank Occasional Paper 137, 2017. 
 CBDCs as a store of value 
Another important function of money is as a store of value. The cost of storing cash, a key factor 
in its use as a store of value, has been estimated at between 0.5 and 1 per cent of the value stored.11 
Since it would be completely dematerialized, a CBDC would have very few or no storage costs and 
would be a convenient way for households and firms to keep liquid wealth. Mattresses could be freed 
from their role of vaults! 
In addition to being superior to cash as a store of value, a CBDC would be an asset with unique 
characteristics, free of credit and liquidity risk. It might be preferred to other instruments commonly 
used to store wealth, such as bank deposits. The consequences of this have caused concerns: a switch 
from bank deposits to a CBDC could lead to a funding shortfall in the banking system, with potential 
adverse  effects  on  the  supply  and  cost  of  lending  to  the  real  economy.  In  extreme  conditions  the 
availability of a CBDC could even increase the risk of a digital bank run. The potential consequences 
of having a large portion of wealth structurally transferred from bank deposits into a CBDC could be 
significant  for  our  financial  system.  Currently  in  the  euro  area  overnight  deposits  of  non-financial 
private entities amount to around €6.5 trillion,  20 per cent of the balance sheet of the banking system. 
I am not convinced, however, that the effects would necessarily be disruptive for banks. First, 
only some categories of deposits might migrate to the central bank (most likely sight deposits, that 
pay little or no interest). Second, banks can compete by offering services that CBDCs cannot, such as 
access  to  credit  and  payment  services.  Third,  banks  could  increase  their  recourse  to  wholesale 
funding.  
But  banks’  business  model  would  be  affected.  The  decrease  in  callable  liabilities  could 
ultimately push towards a ‘narrow’ banking system,12 that is an operational framework in which banks 
have little or no maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities. The debate about the benefits of 
narrow banking goes back centuries,13 with no easy answer; economists will likely have to examine 
the issue anew.  
                                                           
11   See, for instance, Witmer, J. and Yang, J. “Estimating Canada’s Effective Lower Bound”, Bank of Canada Review, 
Spring 2016 or “Banks look for cheap way to store cash piles as rates go negative”, Financial Times, August 16, 2016. 
12   See Broadbent, B. “Central banks and digital currencies”, speech at the London School of Economics, March 2016. 
13   See Pennacchi, G. (2012), ‘Narrow Banking’, Annual Review of Financial Economics, vol. 4, issue 1, pp. 141-159. 
 The magnitude of these effects will depend on the demand for CBDCs by the public, which in 
turn will vary according to the currency’s specific, yet still uncertain, characteristics – such as whether 
it would be remunerated or whether it would be account based or token based.  
Balancing the risks and benefits 
The risks and benefits of CBDCs are two sides of the same (digital) coin, related to the role of money 
as a means of payment and a store of value. Recourse to a CBDC as a means of payment may well have 
benefits, but their precise nature is uncertain and they may still be too small to justify the introduction of a 
digital currency. Moreover, the issuance of a CBDC may become less positive on balance if we take into 
account the potential effects on the demand for commercial bank deposits. The risks and benefits would be 
affected by the characteristics of the CBDC, but in any event the risks would not disappear altogether.  
The business case for introducing CBDCs remains at best unclear. However, like all issues related to 
technological innovation, the costs, benefits and risks of digital currencies are likely to change rapidly in the 
future.  This  suggests  that  central  banks  should  continue  to  examine  the  potential  effects  of  digital 
currencies. Indeed, many of them are currently engaged in research and technical experimentation with a 
CBDC. The Riksbank, Bank of England, and Bank of Canada, to name a few, are actively analyzing the 
issue. Some have gone even further, such as the Central Bank of Uruguay, which has launched a pilot 
project.14 At Banca d’Italia, we are also studying how a CBDC would impact our financial system and 
monetary policy, and we are working within the Eurosystem on trials using DLT, which might prove useful 
for a digital currency. Researchers are also actively reflecting on CBDCs. Today’s conference is a notable 
example.  
4. 
Some open issues 
As  mentioned  above,  the  risks  and  benefits  of  CBDCs,  together  with  their  impact  on  the 
financial system, the real economy and on society, closely depend on their characteristics.15  
                                                           
14   The Danmarks Nationalbank is sceptical about whether the benefits of a CBDC can really prevail over its costs. See 
Gürtler, S., and Rasmussen, S. Central bank digital currency in Denmark?, December 2017. 
15   See Bank for International Settlements, ”Central bank digital currencies”, March 2018. 
 Probably the most important issue is whether the digital currency should be traceable or whether 
it  should  be  designed  to  guarantee,  to  the  extent  possible,  anonymity.  Cash  has  always  been  an 
incredible instrument: it allows for third-party anonymity in transactions and leaves no trace. While 
this implies that it is an effective means of payment for illicit activities such as money laundering, the 
financing of terrorism or tax evasion, it also ensures privacy for its users.  
The  possibility  of  tracing  our  digital  transactions  may  have  important  economic  and  ethical 
implications. Imagine for a moment that payments data suggested that spending on alcohol and the 
probability of defaulting on a loan are positively correlated. Based on such evidence, a bank might 
decide  to  reject  a  loan  demand  by  an  applicant  with  high  expenditure  on  alcohol,  even  though  the 
correlation does not reflect any ex-ante causal relationship between these two variables but could be 
simply  due,  for  example,  to  an  ex-post  common  psychological  factor.16  Though  it  may  be  over 
simplified,  this  example  emphasizes  that  we  need  to  address  carefully  the  privacy  issues  that  may 
stem from digitization, and in particular from the introduction of a CBDC. Today these risks are still 
limited, as in most countries retail transactions are concluded mainly with cash, and the record of our 
electronic payments represents an imprecise screening device.17 This is changing rapidly, however. 
Just who should decide on the degree of anonymity associated with the use of a CBDC? Clearly, 
this is more than just a technical issue, and as such, the choice does not belong to central banks alone 
but  also  to  the  political  sphere.  We  need  to  think  carefully,  right  now,  about  how  to  make  the 
introduction of a CBDC fully compatible with the rights of individuals and about how to square the 
increasing availability of information on the private lives of each one of us in relation to our political 
views, state of health, or sexual orientation, with the protection of our personal freedom and with the 
rules that govern the functioning of a modern liberal democracy.  
Another key issue is whether a CBDC should be remunerated or, as in the case of cash, should 
pay no interest. This choice would have far-reaching consequences for the core activities of the central 
                                                           
16   The introduction of the General Data Protection Regulation might limit the application of profiling but does not make 
it  illegal  (see  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rights-citizens/my-rights/can-i-be-subject-
automated-individual-decision-making-including-profiling_en). 
17   For example, in the EU cash payments represent 65 per cent of total retail transactions. See Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G. 
and Ruttenberg, W. “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments: a European perspective”, European 
Central Bank Occasional Paper, no. 137, 2017.  
 bank, from financial stability to monetary policy, but they would also affect other issues, such as the 
volume and allocation of seigniorage. 
For example, interest payments would make a CBDC a closer substitute of bank deposits.18 This 
would  increase  the  volatility  of  deposits  and,  in  extreme  conditions,  could  even  facilitate  a  digital 
bank run (whose probability is increased by the very existence of a CBDC): in bad times, depositors 
could switch rapidly and at no cost from their bank account to the CBDC. The central bank could limit 
such risks – for example by setting a ceiling on the amount of CBDC that each individual investor can 
hold, or by bringing the remuneration to zero for holdings of CBDCs above a certain threshold – but 
this would raise a number of technical issues.19 At the same time, an interest-earning CBDC would 
reinforce the transmission of monetary impulses to banks, households and businesses.20 In downturns, 
by  lowering  the  remuneration  of  the  digital  currency  the  central  bank  could  spur  banks  to  reduce 
deposit  rates;  it  could  push  them  below  zero  (assuming  that  cash  would  no  longer  be  available), 
improving its capacity to stimulate the economy in extreme conditions without necessarily resorting to 
unconventional measures.21 A symmetrical mechanism would be at work in upturns, when an increase 
in the remuneration of the CBDC (which would represent the floor of market rates) would force banks 
to take swift action to also increase the remuneration of their deposits.  
A shift from interest-free cash to an interest-bearing CBDC would affect seigniorage in multiple 
ways: in addition to the direct effect on interest payments by the central bank (which would have a 
negative impact on seigniorage), it would have indirect effects by reducing the costs of supplying cash 
(positive  impact)  and  by  increasing  the  demand  for  central  bank  liabilities  (positive  impact).  The 
overall  effect  is  ambiguous,  but  it  could  be  non-negligible  and  have  non-trivial  distributional 
consequences: central bank profits, transferred to the State and used as the State sees fit, could change 
                                                           
18   On the contrary, a CBDC without interest would be comparable to cash.  
19  For example, a ceiling on individual holdings of CBDC could limit the number or size of payments, as the recipients’ 
holdings  of  CBDC  would  have  to  be  known  in  order  to  finalize  the  payment.  See  Gürtler,  S.,  and  Rasmussen,  S. 
Central bank digital currency in Denmark?, December 2017. 
20   See Bank for International Settlements, ”Central bank digital currencies”, March 2018, and Coeuré, B.”The future of 
central bank money”, speech at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, May 2018. 
21   If central banks pushed interest rates into negative territory in a world with a non-remunerated CBDC, banks would 
effectively avoid the negative rates by substituting reserves with digital currency. Banks could adopt this same strategy 
in a world with physical cash, but the high cost of storing it makes this option less attractive, inducing banks to accept 
moderately negative interest rates.  
 significantly  once  currency  holders  are  remunerated.  The  political  economy  consequences  of  this 
should not be underestimated. 
Turning  now  to  the  specifics  of  CBDC  implementation,  central  banks  should  decide  whether 
CBDCs  should  be  token-based  –  whereby  each  token  represents  a  particular  denomination  of  the 
currency,  like  banknotes  –  or,  like  bank  deposits,  account-based,  whereby  holdings  are  accounting 
records. Again, this choice would have important consequences for a number of key issues such as 
anonymity (a token-based CBDC would imply a better protection of privacy)22 or the organization of 
the central bank. In particular, managing an account-based system with millions of account balances, 
each  potentially  changing  every  day,  would  require  an  incredible  effort  by  the  central  bank.  The 
implementation of a token-based system, instead, would be easier and could be delegated to a private 
party. In both cases the security and resilience of the CBDC to cyber-attacks must be assured, in order 
to preserve trust in the currency. Digital hacking of the currency can reap very large rewards, in all 
likelihood larger than counterfeiting banknotes – the recent attack on the central bank of Bangladesh 
comes  to  mind.23  Undoubtedly  hackers  everywhere  are  dreaming  about  how  to  violate  the  digital 
currency system! 
The number of questions related to CBDCs is enormous and the public debate about them is 
only in its infancy. I cannot address all the issues today. But I do wish to emphasize one last point 
before concluding my remarks. If central banks decided to make an asset – the CBDC – free of credit 
and liquidity risk, possibly remunerated, and available to anybody at no cost, their role in the economy 
would fundamentally change. The size of their balance sheets would likely increase, and with it their 
footprint  in  the  economy.  If  the  CBDC  were  account-based,  central  banks  would  start  to  interact 
directly with the private non-financial sector. Are central banks ready to play this new role and to deal 
with the attendant complexities? In the short term my answer is no. Beyond the short term, greater 
investment  in  new  technologies  and  human  capital  would  be  necessary  to  address  the  challenges 
associated with issuing a CBDC. 
                                                            
22   See  for  example  Mersch,  Y.  “Digital  Base  Money:  an  assessment  from  the  ECB’s  perspective”,  speech  at  Suomen 
Pankki, January 2017.  
23   For instance, a malware installed on the Bangladesh central bank’s computer successfully diverted around $80 million 
from its accounts.  
 5.  Conclusions 
The technological revolution is pushing us towards a digital representation of many objects in 
our daily lives. Banknotes might be next in line. However, there are still many uncertainties on that 
front.  Some  of  them  are  economic  in  nature,  such  as  the  efficiency  of  the  payment  system  and 
financial stability. Others are related to individual rights, such as the right to privacy.  
Society as a whole would do well to decide on how to tackle the latter before the central bank 
steps in. Other issues, which I have not had time to touch on today, but are no less important, are of a 
legal nature. Can a central bank issue a new form of currency without explicit authorization by the 
government?  If  the  CBDC  is  legal  tender,  does  this  mean  that  everybody  will  need  to  have  the 
technical means to accept it? In many countries new laws may be required before any concrete steps 
towards a CBDC are taken. For a central bank, issuing a digital currency is like travelling in a new 
land: the path to take will be chosen at the same time as the map is drawn. The many uncertainties 
involved  will  undoubtedly  make  the  journey  exciting  and  full  of  discoveries,  though  a  substantial 
amount of prudence and wisdom will still be required. All in all, this is hardly going to be a purely 
technical decision. Society as a whole, through its political bodies, will need to be involved. 
Whether central banks should issue digital currencies – and with what characteristics – remains 
an  open  question  and  I  look  forward  to  hearing  the  views  that  will  be  presented  today.  I  remain 
convinced that physical cash will continue for quite some time to be part of the payment system. It is 
hard to dispute that money is probably one of the most important and useful social constructs, one that 
has been with us for around 3,000 years24 and is still very much in use. Cash is by far the dominant 
means of payment, both in the euro area25 and elsewhere,26 and demand for it has been on the rise in 
most  advanced  economies  in  the  last  decade.  Currency  in  circulation  in  the  euro  area  amounts  to 
around €1.1 trillion, and has recorded steady growth rates in recent years. Coins and banknotes have 
proven to be a resilient technology, it may be too early to call for their complete retirement.  
                                                           
24   See, for instance, Robert A. Mundell, ‘The birth of coinage’, Columbia University, mimeo, 2002. 
25   Esselink Henk and Lola Hernández (2017), ‘The use of cash by households in the euro area,’ ECB Occasional Paper 
series 201/2017. Available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op201.en.pdf. 
26   Bech, Morten Linnemann, Umar Faruqui, Frederik Ougaard and Cristina Picillo (2018), ‘Payments are a-changin' but 
cash still rules’. BIS Quarterly Review, March 2018. Available at https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1803g.pdf. 
 While  the  jury  is  still  out  on  whether  we  will  have  a  CBDC,  the  debate  is  already  bringing 
benefits. Many central banks, including Banca d’Italia, are experimenting with new technologies such 
as DLT and Artificial Intelligence, studying how they work and how they can be put to productive 
use. This research contributes to the advancement of the technological frontier, and helps make the 
financial  system  more  resilient  to  technological  and  cyber  risks.  These  benefits  are  here  to  stay, 
independently of whether one day we will live in a world with digital cash. 
 by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
