Marzunisham  Omar:  Takaful  agents  -  striving  for  excellence  in  a
disruptive world
Speech by Mr Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the 1st National Takaful Annual Convention 2018 "Takaful Agents: Striving
for Excellence in a Disruptive World", Kuala Lumpur, 14 April 2018.
 ingin  mengucapkan 
terima  kasih  kepada  pihak  penganjur  atas 
Saya 
jemputan  untuk
menyampaikan  ucaptama  di  Konvensyen  Takaful  Tahunan  Kebangsaan  yang  pertama  ini.
Tahniah diucapkan kepada NAMLIFA atas inisiatif untuk menganjurkan program khusus bagi para
ejen takaful buat julung kalinya. Forum seumpama ini penting bagi menyediakan platform untuk
pertukaran idea, pengalaman dan pandangan antara pakar-pakar industri dan agen takaful.
The future seems to be a favourite theme at various forums nowadays. Today’s is no exception,
and rightly so. In a time of rapid, successive change, it is crucial that we seek to understand the
underlying currents shaping our future. Just as important is where we see ourselves in that same
future.
There is a quote from Soren Kierkegaard, a Danish philosopher, that offers a practical advice on
this matter: “Life can only be understood backwards, but it must be lived forwards.”
 Therefore, while we contemplate the forces of change and challenges of today, this must be
coupled by action and determination to change for tomorrow. We need to be prepared for the
future. Otherwise, we may become irrelevant.
While  agents  are  a  formidable  force  in  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry  today,  there  is  no
certainty that this will be the case going forward. Already the industry has undergone substantial
transformation in recent years. Products, distribution channels, customer sophistication, and risk
types, all look vastly different from how they used to a decade ago. I have no doubt that this trend
will accelerate moving forward.
A key source of change are regulatory initiatives. While these are primarily intended to enable
easier and cheaper access to products by a much wider market, it also means a lower degree of
reliance  on  agents.  Examples  include  the  liberalisation  of  fire  and  motor  tariffs,  and  the
requirement  under  the  LIFE  Framework  for  companies  to  offer  pure  protection  term  products
through direct and online channels since July 2017, and starting in July 2018, to extend this to
pure protection critical illness and pure protection medical and health products.
At the same time, the regulatory expectations on the conduct of agents have also intensified. It is
the aim of Bank Negara Malaysia to continuously strengthen the professionalism of insurance
and takaful agents.
This is not to speak of the impact of technology. In the case of agents and intermediaries more
generally,  the  information  revolution  can  be  a  particular  source  of  anxiety.  In  an  age  of  apps,
aggregators  and  “Ask  me  anything”  chatbots,  suppliers  and  consumers  are  closer  than  ever
before, potentially bypassing the agents or intermediaries altogether.
With  the  emergence  of  fintech  and  insurtech,  insurers  in  other  countries  are  starting  to
experiment with chatbots capable of independently maneuvering sales and servicing processes.
Product  aggregators  are  also  fast  growing  in  prominence. An Accenture  survey  revealed  that
aggregators account for 70% of new business premiums in the UK private automobile insurance
market.  Indeed,  two  product  aggregators  platforms  are  already  operating  within  Bank  Negara
Malaysia’s Regulatory Sandbox. The Bank is reviewing the regulatory framework to enable the
aggregators to operate by the end of this year.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
These are headwinds that the industry has to tackle head-on, and like it or not, they will further
intensify. While we cannot stop these changes, we can certainly choose how we respond to it.
With challenges are opportunities. These can only be reaped through a combination of traits –
greater proactiveness, a willingness to adapt and clear strategic thinking.
I do not doubt that this is much harder than it sounds, but I believe a good place to start would be
focusing on three priorities. Allow me to elaborate on each in turn.
Technology that matters
The vision for the life insurance and family takaful industry is to achieve a penetration rate of 75%
of the Malaysian population. Within this, the takaful industry has set a 25% target to be achieved
by 2020. For this to happen, it is crucial that the industry gets to grips with the shift in market
demographics, especially where interactions with technological platforms are concerned.
It is imperative that agents embrace technology. A 2017 study  by Bain & Company indicates
that  nearly  60%  of  insurance  customers  in  Malaysia  are  digitally  active.  This  is  not  surprising
given that 40–50% of our workforce are made up of technology-savvy millennials. Any industry
player seriously looking to achieve long-term sustainability will need to master the integration of
technology within their operating models beyond just setting up websites or establishing a social
media presence.
1
2
Instead, consider the interesting reality that customers use multiple channels before deciding to
purchase protection. In the United States, half of the insurance customers that responded to a
survey  preferred to purchase life insurance in person with agents or advisors, as compared to
purchasing online. Similarly, in the same Bain & Company study from earlier, it was found that in-
person  interactions  still  generate  higher  loyalty  scores  than  other  channels  in  most  European
countries.
The fact is that customers employ a mix of on- and offline channels. Many of us already do this in
other parts of our lives. We search for something online, then make the purchase at a bricks-
and-mortar  outlet. And  sometimes  the  other  way  round.  The  key  takeaway  here  is  that  often,
3
customers use digital channels to complement, not replace, traditional channels .
This bodes well for agents going forward – but only if the right conditions are in place. Agents and
takaful operators need to work hand in hand to develop a comprehensive ecosystem catering to
all segments of customers, whether online or off-line – or in marketing speak, an “omnichannel”
approach.  While  it  is  imperative  that  takaful  operators  seek  to  provide  as  seamless  an
experience as possible in terms of online content for consumers, this does not have to lead to
the substitution of agents.
On the contrary. Agents can in fact enrich the process by being trained and equipped with useful
tools to guide and advise potential customers. Agents should also work with aggregators as a
means  to  develop  an  online  presence,  in  the  same  way  real  estate  agents  are  featured  on
property websites.
It is important to note, however, that technology is only a platform, a tool. Without strategy or
purpose, the adoption of tech alone cannot spur change. What is needed to complement this is a
fresh  approach  to  business.  This  means  broadening  one’s  horizons  beyond  given  market
conventions, and being courageous to compete in new, unexplored strategic areas.
Compete better – and more broadly
To  truly  capture  the  market  of  the  future,  agents  will  need  to  sharpen  their  competitive  edge.
There are many ways to go about this, but I’d like to talk about two in particular: Doing what you
already do better, and doing it for a much broader market.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Akio Morita, the co-founder of Sony, once said about his company’s products – “We don’t ask
consumers what they want… We focus on what they need, what they will want and make sure
we’re there, ready.”
I  find  this  relevant  to  the  role  of  agents  today.  Most  people  who  need  insurance  and  takaful
products may not have the time or access to information to even know that it’s there for them.
Agents  create  that  awareness.  For  many,  their  first  contact  with  insurance  would  have  been
through an agent-initiated meeting. For this reason, customers tend to rely on agents to a large
degree for information to help them make the right decisions, quite often ones involving lifelong
commitments.
While competition will only intensifies moving forward, agents who will excel are those that are
knowledgeable, diligent and trustworthy. However, findings from the Bank’s recent supervisory
reviews are rather disappointing – three in four agents were found to have failed to complete a
comprehensive  fact-finding  process  for  more  than  80%  of  their  customers.  This  may  be  a
symptom  of  a  product-pushing  mentality  at  the  expense  of  customer  welfare.  The  lack  of
objectivity  increases  the  risk  of  unsuitable  products  being  sold  to  customers,  and  could  well
permanently taint the industry’s reputation in the long-run.
Things  can,  and  must  be  done  better.  With  the  new  Balanced  Scorecard  developed  in
consultation with the industry – including NAMLIFA, the incentive structure has been improved so
that  agents  work  more  effectively  and  objectively  in  the  best  interest  of  their  customers.  The
Scorecard also reinforces our vision for agents to move towards higher value-add activities that
involve advice, sales and customer support for more complex products.
Another  aspect  that  takaful  agents  must  recognise  is  that  takaful  products  embody  universal
value propositions that would appeal to all market segments, whether Muslim or not.
One of the more distinct features of takaful is the distribution of surplus to takaful participants,
reflecting the principles of solidarity, risk-sharing and mutuality among takaful participants. The
outcome  of  this  are  not  just  socially  meaningful  products,  but  also  commercially  competitive
ones. Take a motor takaful product as an example: In addition to the ‘No Claim Bonus’ feature
that  is  common  in  conventional  motor  insurance,  takaful  participants  could  receive  additional
financial benefits when the takaful fund performs well through the sharing of surplus.
Often,  the  advantages  of  the  takaful  products  are  not  sufficiently  highlighted,  potentially
hampering the competitiveness of takaful products The key is to continuously espouse the value
propositions of takaful products. This is an aspect that agents could certainly help to address.
The market potential for takaful products is so much larger than what is realised today. Let me
offer  you  two  key  information. As  at  end-2016,  insurance  and  takaful  penetration  in  the  B40
segment of working age stood at 30.3%, compared with the overall penetration rate of 46.8%.
Second, the global Halal industry is worth USD2 trillion annually and Malaysia has a large and
growing Halal industry. The question is to what extent the takaful industry fulfills the insurance
needs of the Halal businesses.
Takaful  agents  can  play  a  key  role  in  reaching  out  to  this  broader  market,  particularly  by
understanding  the  takaful  products,  and  being  able  to  explain  them  simply  without  diluting  the
distinct value propositions of takaful. Part of this will require greater acumen and empathy on the
part of agents for the diverse needs and preferences of customers from all walks of life.
  But  it  is  also  about  developing  long-term  strategic  value:  By  being  well-versed  in  both  fields,
agents stand to position themselves as an authoritative voice in advising both takaful operators
and insurance firms in relation to the changing trends in the demands and needs of consumers
and product features that would better cater to these.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Embody what you sell
I’ve  spoken  at  length  about  the  tools  and  methods  that  can  help  sharpen  the  niche  of  takaful
agents as they enter a new, potentially disruptive phase in the industry’s development. But my
final point makes a recourse back to unchanging core of this profession: In particular, the values
embodied  by  takaful.  The  very  existence  of  this  industry  rests  on  the  ultimate  objective  of
attaining the well-being of mankind as called for in Islam. Takaful agents, being an essential part
of this ecosystem, must embody their role as ‘wakeel’ of takaful to the highest standards.
Trust, honesty and fairness are values that I am sure everyone in this room seeks to exemplify in
all their dealings with customers. In a few months’ time, the Bank will be issuing an Exposure
Draft  on  Fair  Treatment  of  Financial  Consumers  which  will  set  out  heightened  regulatory
expectations for all players. Agents will need to exercise greater care, skill and diligence in their
dealing with customers.
But rules and regulations are in themselves not sufficient to create a pool of agents trusted by
customers: That would require all-round, holistic professionalism – an agent who is technically
qualified, fully committed and uncompromising on ethical standards. To me, it is this integrity and
calibre that will ultimately guarantee the continued success of agents into the next decade, more
so than any other factor.
Faced with a more demanding and complex business environment, agents must continuously
develop and equip themselves with skills and knowledge that are relevant, and that will continue
to remain relevant well into the future. There are plenty of formal programmes available to help
agents  progress  in  their  technical  competencies.  There  is  also  a  whole  host  of  open  online
courses  which  can  be  accessed  anytime,  anywhere,  with  the  desire  to  learn  is  the  only
prerequisite.
It  is  encouraging  that  various  professional  training  courses  are  already  being  offered  through
NAMLIFA’s Financial and Life Practitioners Council, and that one of the programmes has been
accredited by the Financial Accreditation Agency (FAA).
Going  forward,  I  hope  that  we  will  see  more  industry-driven  standards  and  protocols  that  will
assure  customers  that  they  can  only  expect  consistent,  top-notch  quality  service  from  their
agents – putting to rest any public doubts that may have been caused by the few “bad apples” in
the sector.
Conclusion
The three areas that I have just described will require, at its core, a strong willingness to learn
and adapt. The uncertainties of the future may appear to loom large over the horizon. But if we
take the time to consider the lessons of our past and circumstances of our present – which I am
sure will be robustly discussed today – we are likely to be surprised by how much we already
know of what we need and ought to do.
In  this  regard,  NAMLIFA  is  well-positioned  to  play  a  proactive  role  in  facilitating  ongoing,
constructive  dialogues  on  important  industry  issues  that  will  certainly  demand  a  concerted
response by all parties. New skills and capabilities must be developed, processes need to be
redesigned, and assumptions need to be revisited. Would the industry be better served were it to
move away from the existing “tied agent” model? How should entry requirements and training
offerings for agents evolve going forward? Should all agents be full-time agents? To what extent
can, and should, insurance agents be allowed to sell takaful products, and vice versa? These are
just some of the questions that could potentially revolutionise the way agents do business.
I’d like to conclude with another quote on the future, this time from Nelson Mandela, more than
150 years after Kierkegaard: “A bright future beckons. The onus is on us, through hard work,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
honesty and integrity, to reach for the stars.” I have every confidence that today’s agents have
what it takes to thrive in the future, but the hard work of laying the necessary foundations must
begin today.
With that, I thank you for your time, and wish all of you a productive day ahead.
1
2
3
Customer 
www.bain.com/publications/articles/customer-behavior-loyalty-in-insurance-global-2017.aspx
Insurance: 
Behavior 
Loyalty 
Global 
and 
in 
Edition 
2017.
Insurance Barometer Study survey in 2016 by the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education (LIFE) and
LIMRA
Customer 
www.bain.com/publications/articles/customer-behavior-loyalty-in-insurance-global-2017.aspx
Insurance: 
Behavior 
Loyalty 
Global 
and 
in 
Edition 
2017.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
