Sabine Lautenschläger: Europe - past, present and future
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at a meeting with
students at Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, 14 May 2018.
 It’s  always  nice  to  visit  universities.  They  are  special  places,  meant  for  the  free  exchange  of
ideas – places where bold thinking is encouraged and the orthodoxy challenged.
So today I’m going to step back from the technical aspects of my day-to-day work. I’m going to
take  some  time  to  reflect  instead  on  the  big  picture.  I  will  first  talk  about  some  of  the  EU’s
historical milestones. After that, I will tell you a bit about my work. And once I’ve finished my brief
remarks, I look forward to answering your questions – and to asking you some of my own!
Looking back to look forward
As students of economics, many of you will, I’m sure, have read articles and books about the
future of European Economic and Monetary Union. Some of you may even have read about the
new system for banking supervision and resolution – the banking union. I hope you have enjoyed
learning about these topics.
But I also think it’s important for students to look beyond technical policy debates. From time to
time,  it’s  good  practice  to  go  back  to  the  fundamental  questions.  Things  like:  what  has  the
European Union achieved in the past 60 years? And what would we like it to achieve in the next
60?  We  insiders  would  also  benefit  from  this  kind  of  reflection.  In  the  humdrum  of  meetings,
papers,  non-papers  and  briefings,  I  feel  that  we  do  not  take  enough  time  to  reflect  on  the
achievements  of  the  past.  Nor,  perhaps,  do  we  think  enough  about  the  strategic,  long-term
perspective. So today I hope that, together, we can do just that.
Let us start by travelling back in time. Let’s try to put ourselves in the shoes of a European citizen
in 1945. Whether we imagine this person living in Paris, Berlin, Rome or Copenhagen, we know
they are living in a country scarred by war.
Now, if this person were able to see what the future would hold from 1945 to 2018, they would
find it in many ways almost miraculous. For one thing, anyone over the age of 27 in 1945 had
lived  through  two  world  wars.  So,  they  would  be  happy  to  discover  their  countries  would  see
more than seventy consecutive years of peace. I believe the European Union has played a large
role in ensuring such long-lasting peace. It seems that Robert Schuman was right to predict that
the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  would  make  war  both  unthinkable  and  materially
impossible.
And  peace  on  the  European  continent  has  also  meant  the  spread  of  democracy.  When  the
Treaty of Rome was signed, only 12 of the current EU Member States were democracies. Today
all 28 of them are.
And with democracy came freedom. With the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the EU enshrined
all personal, civic, political, economic and social rights within one document. The Charter also
established the right to data protection, guarantees on bioethics and transparent administration. I
am  sure  you  recognise  how  topical  these  issues  are  today.  And  I  hope  you  appreciate  the
unprecedented protections that EU citizens enjoy.
Peace, democracy and freedom in turn brought prosperity. Of course, we still face challenges on
this front. Some EU countries today face difficult economic conditions, largely a legacy of the
Great Recession. Employment levels still vary significantly across the Union. And high levels of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
inequality exist within countries too. OECD data show that in many European countries, a small
minority owns a disproportionately large share of the wealth. Income inequality is also higher than
it was a generation ago.
But let us not forget the shared economic benefits of the Union. The average GDP per capita of
EU countries has almost doubled in the past 20 years alone.
And our future prosperity is also a function of today’s education, research and innovation. Some
of  the  best  universities  in  the  world  are  located  in  the  EU.  Over  the  past  30  years,  around  9
million  people  have  benefited  from  the  Erasmus  programme.  The  EU  also  supports  research
across the Union. Horizon 2020 is the largest multinational research programme in existence,
providing around €77 billion in funding over seven years.
All of these historic steps have been achieved in the spirit of unity in diversity. But there is no
denying the fact that such unity is hard to manage. Resolving the challenges ahead will involve
negotiations between all Member States. And each of them has slightly different priorities and
views. Moving forward will take time and effort.
But if we want this effort to be meaningful, we must reflect on the long-term goals. As far as I am
concerned, one goal should be to strengthen Economic and Monetary Union. To do so, we must
be willing to accept meaningful changes to the institutional framework. As I have said in the past,
a good starting point would be to assign powers to a European finance minister. In keeping with
the  spirit  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  finance  minister  could  coordinate  national  economic
policies in a different way. He or she could ensure that national fiscal policy is conducted with a
view to contributing to the achievement of the EU’s objectives.
The  trouble  for  politicians  is  that  voters  may  feel  that  granting  greater  scope  at  the  EU  level
means taking away from national interests. But then there are the 70 years of peace; there’s free
movement across nearly an entire continent; and there’s the world’s second largest economy. All
this shows us that what we sometimes feel may be taking away our national sovereignty is in
fact adding meaningful value to our lives.
And this is why we should take more time to reflect on the achievements of the past. What’s
more,  politicians  are  not  the  only  ones  with  a  role  to  play.  European  unity  starts  with  each
individual; it starts with you. You can each reflect on how you could promote Europe as citizens,
as students and as future leaders.
The EU’s crisis response and the banking union
Dear students, having asked you to reflect on your role within the Union, it is only fair to tell you
about how I do my part. A large portion of my professional life since 2012 has been devoted to
the creation of the European banking union.
To understand how the banking union came about, we have to go back to the financial crisis. In
the EU, it began as a crisis of the banking system and turned quickly from a financial crisis into
the  Great  Recession.  And  many  of  the  troubled  banks  held  large  amounts  of  their  own
governments’ debt. This, together with the fact that some countries were already highly indebted,
created a vicious circle. And so the sovereign debt crisis emerged.
In June 2012, European leaders announced their intention to create a European banking union.
But you may ask: why would a Union change things? Well, for a number of reasons.
First,  if  we  want  to  foster  a  healthy  European  banking  market  that  can  also  serve  the  real
economy in a downturn, we should make sure banks are all subject to the same rules. And to the
same  unbiased,  intrusive  supervision  and  resolution  practices.  In  2009,  the  EU  had  already
started working on common rules for the banking sector. These became what is known as the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
single rulebook – a single framework for financial institutions in all 28 EU countries.
But  writing  the  rules  was  not  enough.  So,  the  second  step  was  to  build  European  banking
supervision. And  so  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  or  SSM  for  short,  was  created.  It  is
made up of the ECB and the national supervisors of the 19 euro area countries. The ECB directly
supervises the largest banks in the euro area. Smaller banks are still supervised at the national
level, but in close cooperation with the ECB.
Our  job  is  to  contribute  to  a  healthy  and  resilient  banking  system.  We  make  sure  each  bank
respects  the  rules  it  is  subject  to  and  is  supervised  according  to  the  same  approach.  This
creates a level-playing field for all banks across the euro area and avoids supervisory arbitrage
and national bias.
The next step was to create a European system to deal with bank failures: the Single Resolution
Mechanism. This step represented a larger paradigm shift. Banks should no longer be rescued
using taxpayers’ money. Those who have reaped the benefits, that is the investors and creditors,
should pay first if things go wrong. This helps to keep incentives healthy.
But let’s go back to the institutional architecture. The Single Resolution Board, or SRB for short,
is at the centre of the Single Resolution Mechanism. The SSM and the SRB cooperate closely
when a bank is in trouble. The decision to declare that a bank is failing or likely to fail is made by
us as supervisors. At that point, when a bank fails, the SRB takes over. It decides whether a
bank should be resolved at the European level, or wound up under national legislation.
The details of this process are complex, and I’m happy to tell you more if you are interested. But
the bottom line is simple. The mechanism aims to minimise both the impact of bank failures on
financial stability and their cost to taxpayers.
But resolution is not the final piece of the puzzle. Nor is it the final pillar of the banking union. It
was  envisaged  that  the  banking  union  would  be  supported  by  three  pillars.  European  banking
supervision and resolution are the first two.
The  third  pillar  is  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme.  It  is  still  in  the  making,  but  its
importance is clear. For there to be a true banking union, depositors in all countries need to have
the same level of confidence in their banks. This is especially important as the banking union
currently has the same member countries as the euro area. And in a monetary union, people
must be certain that their money is equally safe, wherever it is. A euro must be a euro, no matter
whether it is deposited in a German bank, an Irish bank or a Spanish bank.
Conclusion: let’s talk
Dear students, I have talked for quite a long time now. I have talked about  some  of  the  EU’s
historic achievements over the past 60 years. And I have talked about what has been achieved in
the last six years, with the banking union.
But as I said earlier, universities are places to exchange ideas. So now I would like to hear your
thoughts.  For  one  thing,  I  would  like  to  know  whether  you  ever  feel  something  important  is
missing from the policy debates about the Union. Is there a Danish perspective you wish was
more central at the EU level? Or a European perspective you think is missing from the Danish
policy debate?
Thank you for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
