Sabine Lautenschläger: Banking regulation and supervision – you
can't have one without the other
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the 9th Annual
EFR Stakeholder Round Table on &quot;Financial Fragmentation or Integration&quot;, Brussels,
22 March 2018.
 The financial crisis showed what can happen when banks are not safe and sound. So the goal is
to make banks safe and sound, and avoid future crises.
To that end, we have revamped regulation, and we have strengthened supervision. It’s indeed
vital  to  work  on  both  fronts.  Without  supervisors,  rules  would  have  little  effect;  without  rules,
supervisors would have no job – or at least no firm basis for doing their job. You can’t have one
without the other: regulation and supervision need to be aligned.
But are they? Let us take a look at the euro area. In 2014, banking supervision was transferred
from national to European level. And since then, we’ve achieved a lot. However, we could do
more, and that brings me to regulation. How European is regulation? Well, it’s true, of course,
that there is a single rulebook. But by and large, regulation in Europe remains fragmented to a
degree that makes it hard to reap the full benefits of European banking supervision.
And  the  problem  starts  with  the  scope  of  that  supervision.  Large  investment  firms  and  third-
country  branches  are  still  not  covered  by  it.  This  situation  should  be  changed  to  restrict
regulatory  and  supervisory  arbitrage.  Then  there  are  the  options  and  national  discretions
contained in European regulation. Some of them are still exercised differently across the euro
area. It’s up to legislators to harmonise them. The same is true for fit and proper assessments.
The rules here are also very diverse. And finally there are the tools for crisis management. We
still have no common approach to such things as insolvency laws and moratoriums. This too
needs to change. Likewise, the rules for early intervention measures need to be streamlined.
All this begs the question: is the banking union living up to its full potential? I would say: it’s not, at
least not yet. But it could if the rules were further harmonised.
Now  let’s  turn  to  the  global  level.  With  Basel  III  finalised,  we  have  a  global  set  of  regulatory
standards. As standards, they are not always detailed and they are not binding, of course. So
they still need to be transposed into hard law. And this is crucial; the banking sector is global in
scope, and the rules that govern it need to reflect that – at least so far as the big banks are
concerned.
But as I said just now, rules can only work together with supervision. How effective global rules
are  also  depends  on  how  supervisors  apply  them.  Supervisors  must  faithfully  apply  the  rules
which transpose the Basel standards. To do so, they need adequate resources and they must
be shielded from political interference.
And there’s more. There is also a strong case for supervisors from around the world to exchange
information,  to  cooperate  and  to  coordinate.  This  would  help  to  facilitate  strong  and  effective
banking supervision worldwide.
We have done a lot to make banks safer and sounder, both at European and global level. The
important thing is that we keep working together – within Europe and around the world.
Thank you for your attention.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
