Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Figaro
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Le Figaro, conducted by Mr Fabrice Nodé-Langlois and published on 25 June 2018.
 At the summit on Thursday France and Germany are to present their joint roadmap for
European reform. At a time when many citizens are calling Europe into question, why
should it be reinforced?
We are living in a confusing, dangerous world which is evolving very fast and not always in the
right direction. Europe is once again in rough waters and it is its duty to protect its citizens. If a
boat is caught in a storm, the crew needs to cooperate closely, not work at cross purposes.
Europe will not be able to establish a joint defence capability or improve border control unless it
has a robust economy. That is why we urgently need to strengthen the euro area. We cannot
afford to have another ten years of crisis. Existential discussions on the single currency are a
waste of time. Surveys show that the vast majority of European citizens are in favour of the euro.
Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel propose creating a budget for the euro area. What
is that budget for?
The Meseberg agreement is an important contribution to the reform of the euro area. The euro
area budget is a useful idea. In the first instance, the common budget can help to accelerate
convergence  among  Member  States. At  the  time  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  it  was  somewhat
naively thought, in France especially, that Monetary Union was going to bring about convergence
by and of itself. That was not the case. With time, it could help a country hit by a recession that it
could not tackle alone, even if its public finances were in order. Look at Ireland, which in 2008
was hit by a severe financial crisis, followed by a recession, despite having a sound budget. It
was not able to manage on its own. The budget is also a political symbol for the shared interest
of  euro  area  countries.  The  euro  area  should  be  about  more  than  individual  interests  in  a
currency managed by the ECB.
How can this convergence be improved in practice?
We  can  invest  in  infrastructure  or  in  facilitating  reforms  that  strengthen  the  euro  area.  I  am
thinking for example of the Greek land registry, which is still not in place and which could have
been financed by this budgetary capacity if it had existed.
The  roadmap  does  not  mention  any  figure  for  this  budget.  Do  you  find  that
disappointing?
Let’s wait to see the amount, which can build up over several years. The budget should be large
enough to deal with an economic shock in a euro area country.
What do you see as the priorities for improving the euro area?
First,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  single  market,  complete  the  banking  union  and  the  capital
markets  union.  These  are  very  technical  projects  but  they  can  boost  growth  and  stimulate
investment and innovation.
Next, the euro area countries should be able to absorb shocks without things going badly wrong,
as happened in Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Cyprus. How do we get to that point? In
France people still think the solution lies in new taxes or in more European spending. There may
well  be  a  place  for  such  measures,  as  discussed,  but  the  first  line  of  defence  is  that  each
country should make its economy more resistant and restore the fiscal room to manoeuvre that
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
has  now  disappeared.  Yet  we  have  to  admit  that  our  budgetary  rules  have  not  attained  their
objective. At present, virtually the only country with fiscal buffer is Germany. France needs to
keep reducing its deficit to below 3% of GDP in order to restore its resilience to shocks.
And what else is needed?
The  ECB  needs  a  well-functioning  political  framework,  which  requires  coordination  and  trust
between the member countries. One has to rebuild this trust, which has been damaged by ten
years  of  crisis.  It  is  of  vital  importance  to  the  ECB  that  the  different  countries  have  a  shared
vision of their future and are able to work together. It’s not up to us to steer euro area politics.
What  about  the  euro  area  Minister  of  Finance?  The  Franco-German  roadmap  doesn’t
mention this at all…
Let’s not put the cart before the horse. A euro area Finance Minister would imply the existence of
a common political area, which I think is essential, but we aren’t there yet. The starting point is
the Eurogroup, with its toolbox, including the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the European
rescue fund. Germany and France are proposing to strengthen it by enabling it to intervene fast in
the event of a banking crisis or to help a state before it’s too late, and that’s a good thing. By the
way,  at  the  ECB  we  don’t  much  like  the  term  “European  Monetary  Fund”,  which  creates
confusion both with the IMF, a very different institution, and the ECB.
“Fast”? So you mean without necessarily waiting for a vote in the German Bundestag to
save, for example, an Italian bank?
In fact, it’s vital for the euro area to be able to take decisions fast. The ECB can do this. The 25
members of our Governing Council may have their differences, but we analyse, we debate, we
try to build a consensus and, finally, we take a decision on which nobody has a veto. By contrast,
the crisis management system in the euro area is essentially intergovernmental. This method
carries a high economic cost because it’s a procrastination machine. Look at the Greek crisis,
which is finally coming to an end after eight years! And it turns every decision into a zero-sum
game. The challenge for the European Council, at the end of this week, will be to move from a
Europe  of  horse-trading  to  a  Europe  that  builds  its  own  future.  Europe  has  to  show  that  it  is
taking its destiny into its own hands.
Last Thursday you took part in the Eurogroup meeting on Greece. Are you satisfied with
the agreement? Will the debt relief granted be enough?
This  is  a  turning  point  for  Greece  and  for  Europe.  Greece  can  now  free  itself  from  European
stewardship. The sacrifices made by Greek society, supported by European solidarity, have paid
off. For those who have doubts about this solidarity, I would like to point out that Europe provided
Greece with funding of €245 billion! I particularly admire the determination and courage of the
Greek Finance Minister, Euclid Tsakalotos.
Greece will also get a clear boost from the debt relief that was promised a long time ago by the
European governments. The ECB was clearly in favour of this. The measures decided upon by
the Eurogroup go in the right direction, because in the medium term they will make Greece’s debt
more sustainable and in the long term the ministers declared their willingness to take additional
measures should the need arise. But let’s not be naive: Greece will move from a dialogue with
the  European  institutions  and  the  IMF  to  a  dialogue  with  the  financial  markets,  which  will  be
neither easier nor more pleasant. To maximise its chances, the country must continue with its
reforms and stick to a prudent budgetary policy.
Greece failed to leave the euro area in 2015 and has been through a deep recession. If
you could go back in time, would you support Greece in a different way?
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
If we want to take a long, hard look at ourselves, we should go back further than the Greek crisis,
to the beginnings of the euro area. Between 1999 and 2010, we allowed budgetary situations and
wage  costs  to  diverge  between  countries,  which  led  to  the  crisis.  That  was  the  first  lesson.
Faced with the crisis, we had to support Greece – it was a question of solidarity. We also had to
involve the IMF which, unlike Europe, had experience in supporting countries through crises. And
it  was  essential  to  reduce  public  expenditure,  because  Greece  was  clearly  living  beyond  its
means. The mistake, from my point of view, was in reducing it too drastically, which made the
recession worse. We should have been more realistic about the sustainability of Greece’s debt
and insisted on competitiveness and combatting rent-seeking from the start, instead of leaving
taxpayers  and  workers  to  foot  the  bill  for  the  adjustment.  I  might  add  that  Europe  lacks  a
budgetary  instrument  to  support  social  adjustment  in  crisis  countries,  which  could  have
prevented dramatic situations – schools without heating and hospitals without medicine – such
as we saw in Greece.
On 14 June the ECB announced, as expected, the end of its policy of asset purchases,
referred to as quantitative easing or QE. In contrast, the first rise in interest rates is
going  to  come  later  than  expected.  Does  that  reflect  your  concerns  about  the
robustness of growth?
Growth is still robust throughout the euro area, despite the moderation in the first quarter, and
even in the second quarter in certain countries. But there is increasing uncertainty arising from
tensions  in  world  trade  as  well  as  the  risk  of  volatility  in  the  financial  markets  and  in  certain
emerging economies, and we have to take all that into account. Hence the unanimous decision
by  the  Governing  Council:  on  the  one  hand,  due  to  the  robust  growth  we  are  confident  that
inflation will return to close to 2% and we anticipate our net asset purchase programme to end in
December;  on  the  other  hand,  we  recognise  the  need  to  maintain  a  very  accommodative
monetary  policy.  We  expect  our  policy  rates  to  remain  unchanged  until  at  least  through  the
summer  of  2019.  and  we  will  continue  to  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities in our portfolio, or around €15 billion per month, in 2019.
That’s what surprised most observers, and the markets…
Yes, for the first time, we are communicating about future policy rates with a date, even if it’s still
only  indicative.  In  our  jargon,  we  call  this  “enhanced  forward  guidance”.  Now  that  we  have
decided  to  end  the  net  asset  purchases,  this  enhanced  guidance  is  necessary  to  anchor
expectations.
In the end, what will these three years of QE have achieved?
Don’t forget that these measures were decided on in autumn 2014, in the face of a slowdown in
growth and a heightened risk of deflation. We needed to react very strongly. QE has considerably
improved the financing conditions of households and firms, restarted growth and eliminated the
risk of deflation. A Spanish SME can now borrow at the same interest rate as a German SME.
QE has been criticised for benefiting those most well off…
I disagree. First, our monetary policy has helped the millions of unemployed who lost their job
during the recession. The unemployment rate in the euro area is falling steadily, to a large extent
thanks to monetary policy.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
