Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Bankers without borders
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Report Launch for East Asia and Pacific Region - Global
Financial  Development  Report  2017/2018:  Bankers  without  Borders,  Kuala  Lumpur,  12  April
2018.
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at the launch of this very important report.
The  issue  of  globalisation  has  featured  very  prominently  in  the  headlines,  especially  in  recent
times.  In  fact,  it  has  been  very  trendy  over  the  past  decade  to  herald  the  end  of  financial
globalisation and international banking. However, the fact that this topic keeps recurring, to me, is
a testament that various issues remain unresolved. As such, I am pleased that we are able to
have an informed discussion on this issue today. For my brief remarks, I will focus on the theme
of the report “bankers without borders”.
Finance and globalisation have been an important part of the ASEAN story
The title of the report, lends to a very specific definition of the word borders, the conception of
finance unrestricted by national boundaries. Conventional economic theory posits that capital will
flow from capital rich to capital poor countries to fulfil the productive needs of the economy. This
implies that any form of boundary is not only undesirable but may hinder growth.
In fact, when we consider a broader view of economic history, the past few decades have seen
one of the greatest reduction in poverty, and a major driver of this is the breaking down of borders
between countries, that is, globalisation. This mirrors the experience of Malaysia and the ASEAN
region.  Openness  to  trade  and  finance  has  been  proven  to  be  key  in  the  development  of  our
economies. ASEAN’s openness, as measured by its share in world trade has reached almost
10% in 2016. Since 1990, ASEAN intra-regional trade has grown from 18% to 23% of its total
trade in 2016, while intra-regional investment activities have increased tremendously since 2000,
from  4%  to  25%  of  its  total  investment  in  2016.  The  strong  commitment  towards  greater
openness is also enshrined in the move to realise the ASEAN Economic Community. Moving to
the  future,  continued  openness,  integration  and  cooperation  will  be  key  for  the  regional
economies to meet the challenges of the future.
Hence, the theme bankers without borders fits well within the ASEAN perspective given the fact
that the banking sector is one of the key drivers in the financial sector. This is further motivated
by the approach of the ‘ASEAN Way’, which is premised on the region’s belief and recognition of
strength  in  diversity.  Important  regional  agreements  such  as  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration
Framework have encapsulated the principles of inclusiveness, attainment of mutual benefits and
individual country readiness in supporting the regionalisation of ASEAN banks.
However,  an  important  point  that  should  not  be  forgotten  is  that  the  financial  sector
encompasses  a  wider  scope  than  just  banks.  In  fact,  policymakers  in  ASEAN  have  been
successful in enlarging the borders of our financial markets by developing more diverse sources
of funding for the economy. This is best reflected in the building of deeper and more liquid bond
markets arising from the experience of the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. We are also seeing a
shift in the financial landscape through the usage of technology, something that I will elaborate
more  on  later.  Thus,  the  term  bankers  without  borders,  should  perhaps,  be  expanded  to  be
finance without borders.
Yet, despite the positive outcomes from these and the continued strong need for openness, the
conviction  for  globalisation  and  international  banking  seems  to  be  waning.  For  one,  post  the
global financial crisis, we have seen the rationalisation of operations by many international banks.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  read  regularly  on  the  prospects  of  trade  protectionism,  how  globalisation  has  created
widening inequality and how globalisation is like a train running out of control. No doubt, a key
driver  of  the  2007/2008  financial  crisis  was  indeed  financial  liberalisation  going  too  far.
Interestingly, some, including economists at the Bank of England have also begin to consider the
theory  of  “peak  finance”  –  that  global  finance  has  peaked  and  financial  de-globalisation  has
begun, while others at the BIS have argued otherwise.
International banking and finance – a new model for a new era
While  this  debate  will  surely  continue  to  unfold  over  the  coming  years,  perhaps  the  more
pertinent question is how we can evolve the model of international banking such that it becomes
more desirable and beneficial for the needs of the future.
It is worth considering a new model – one that is inherently more sustainable and inclusive. If I
may postulate, the starting point is perhaps an honest appraisal that international banking ought
to be much more than just a commercial decision. Beyond considerations of revenue, margins
and returns, international banking should fundamentally be more attuned to and invested in the
developmental journey of the host country. Existing and traditional considerations on profitability,
while important, should not become a border that limits the potential of transforming international
banking for the benefit of the future.
Here,  the  mindset  is  not  one  of  a  “winner  takes  all”,  but  rather  one  where  the  benefits  of
development  are  equitably  “shared  by  all”.  This,  again,  resonates  with  the  ‘ASEAN  Way’  of
greater shared prosperity and is perhaps a useful reference.
There are at least three ways in which international banking can further this new model. Firstly,
by actively identifying the economic needs of the host country and working to serve these needs.
These include, for example, national infrastructure development needs, financing gaps for certain
segments of society as well as adoption of productivity-enhancing technology by firms.
Second,  is  to  bring  in  successful  innovation  and  expertise  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  With
operations  in  multiple  economies,  international  banking  is  uniquely  placed  to  realise  this
aspiration.  However,  it  has  yet  to  be  utilised  fully. All  too  often,  while  international  banks  have
been genuinely innovative in some advanced countries, such innovation and expertise are not
dynamically translated to the operations in developing economies, despite being part of the same
bank. It is equally important that such innovation is accompanied by appropriate safeguards on
the part of national authorities to preserve financial stability.
Third  –  and  this  is  where  I  would  like  to  push  the  borders  of  conventional  thinking  –  a  new
international banking model should also be one that intertwines itself into the very fabric of the
local community, seeking to address social issues that concern the nation and its people. This
should come as no surprise. In this way, international banking is no longer an outsider or an aloof
bystander, but an integral part of the socio-economy in the country.
One  can  imagine  the  strength  and  ethos  of  a  banking  sector  that  promotes  issues  of  home
ownership,  urban  poverty,  social  inequality,  financial  literacy  and  resilience  of  households  to
financial shocks. This would truly be “banking without borders”.
This is a critical point given the increased expectations globally on multinational companies. The
recent example of the Facebook data scandal, where personal data of up to 87 million people
was improperly shared, strongly illustrates the point that there are social repercussions to the
actions of multinational companies beyond just the bottom line. In my view, international banking
is no different. Beyond the traditional goal of providing financial capital, there is a very compelling
case for international banking to also develop socialcapital. In this way, finance, often thought to
be destructive, can be a very transformative force as well.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regionalisation and digitalisation are changing the rules of the game
So where does this leave us? As highlighted, the future of international banking is not necessarily
bleak. With further calibration and evolution, it can continue to have a prominent role in serving
global interests. The good news is this evolution is already taking place. Previously dominated by
the elite few, in this case large global banks, international banking is now increasingly open to a
larger group of market participants. On one hand, the circle of banks is expanding, from large
global banks to smaller regional banks.
This is an important point that is also highlighted in the Global Financial Development Report,
reflecting the growing extent of banking relationships between developing countries, particularly in
this region. 
On another front, digitalisation is ushering in a new era, expanding the borders of international
banking  to  now  include  non-bank  fintech  players.  These  players  have  the  distinct  potential  of
transforming global banking as we know it today. Around USD13 billion was invested by venture
capital players in fintech startups in 2017, the third highest annual total this decade.
Among these, the most impressive transformation is perhaps in cross-border payments. Allow
me to share an anecdote highlighting the magnitude of the change that is happening. Earlier this
year,  eight  Chinese  tourists  went  on  a  six-day  trip  to  Finland  courtesy  of  a  Chinese  online
payment  platform  company.  This  trip  was  significant  for  two  reasons.  First,  payments  for  the
entire  journey  was  cashless  and  performed  through  a  mobile  app,  from  the  payment  of  flight
tickets to food, ground transportation and other retail purchases. Secondly, Finland, located as
far as 6,000 km away from China, became the first country where this Chinese app can be used
to make virtually all payments. This is just the beginning. As fintech companies expand to other
markets and enable seamless cross-border payments for other users, one can already imagine
a future where one can travel the world with just a smartphone in hand. Not only that, another
related consequence of such a future is that essentially all we know of “international banking”
today could be performed without an actual bank.
Naturally,  we  ask  ourselves  what  are  the  implications  of  these  changing  boundaries  of
international finance? For financial customers, it means adapting to a new banking paradigm. A
more  regional  and  digital  banking  ecosystem  could 
localisation,
personalisation  and  efficiency  of  financial  products  and  services.  While  these  are  welcome
developments, they have to be accompanied with the necessary financial education to enable
safe and effective participation in the financial sector. From the regulators perspective, it means
ensuring the regulatory and supervisory system is robust enough to cater to the evolving needs
of the financial system, whilst at the same time safeguarding financial and economic stability.
Conclusion
increasing 
lead 
to 
Allow me to conclude with an analogy of the nine-dot puzzle. The puzzle, which appeared as
early as 1914, proposes an intellectual challenge of connecting nine dots by drawing four straight
lines without lifting the pencil. As many may know, the solution is simple, but can only be found
by  drawing  lines  outside  the  imaginary  box  formed  by  the  dots,  thus  popularising  the  term
“thinking outside the box”. The heart of the challenge lies in overcoming the imaginary boundary
or border we perceive.
The potential for international banking remains vast, if utilised appropriately. As the world ponders
on  how  best  to connect  our  economies  together  and  the  role  of  international  banking  in  this
aspiration, 
to  search  beyond
traditional borders  –  real  or  imaginary.  Only  then,  can  we  truly  realise  the  benefits  of  an
international banking model that is sustainable, inclusive and without borders.
to  consider  new  perspectives, 
let  us  not  be  afraid 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
