Gent Sejko: Modernisation of retail payment systems in Albania
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Conference on the
"Modernisation of retail payment systems in Albania", Tirana, 21 June 2018.
 Dear Deputy Prime Minister
Dear media representatives,
Dear participants and colleagues,
Welcome  to  this  conference,  whose  topic,  I  would  say,  is  a  challenge  and  promotes  the
modernisation of the retail payments in Albania.
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  constantly  noted  in  its  communications  that  the  safe  and  efficient
development  of  payment  systems  is  a  key  objective  not  only  to  support  monetary  policy
implementation  and  safeguard  financial  stability,  but  also  to  serve  as  an  important  tool  for
formalised and sustainable economic development.
In  addition  to  the  focus  on  payment  systems  –  as  a  fundamental  pillar  for  the  functioning  of
financial markets and the economy in general – the Bank of Albania is paying increasingly more
attention to their development from the perspective of financial inclusion. The main goal in this
regard is the broad use of payment instruments in the everyday life of citizens.  
This new way of development aims to identify and satisfy the needs of the smallest component
of the economy – households and enterprises. Taking into account the conditions of the Albanian
market, with a low level of financial inclusion and education, and the relatively high costs for the
provided services, our goal is to urge the banking system to offer citizens easily-accessible and
cost-effective services, supporting thus the objective for broader financial inclusion.
Therefore, it is both necessary and challenging to intervene in this aspect, especially as we are
experiencing rapid and comprehensive developments in technology. Most of the aspects in our
everyday  life  are  becoming  subject  to  digitalisation  and  automated  processes  and  the
modernisation of payment systems, in turn, is becoming increasingly important.
The research and analyses carried out by the Bank of Albania with the assistance of the World
Bank  clearly  show  that  the  promotion  of  digitalisation  and  innovation  in  the  payment  market
contributes considerably to the reduction of costs of these instruments, providing services that
are easily accessible and affordable by everyone. 
In Albania this development is considerably lagging behind other countries, with which we aim to
approximate  in  the  framework  of  European  Union  integration  process;  hence,  its  promotion
becomes  even  more  important  both  in  the  framework  of  this  integration,  and  in  the  broader
context of international markets. 
The  modernisation  of  these  systems  through  digitalisation  will  be  achieved  through  a  well-
regulated  development  and  clearly-set  goals  in  the  medium-term  strategy,  which  will  be
presented later today during the Conference.
The transposition of European Union Directive (PSD), which is considered as one of the most
avant-garde pieces of legislation in this field, is a concrete initiative in this regard. The Bank of
Albania, in collaboration with the experts of the World Bank and Bank of Italy, has prepared a
draft-law, which will be subject to public discussions very soon. 
To  support  these  initiatives,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  analysing  the  possibility  of  innovative
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
developments  in  the  systems  we  operate,  such  as: instant payment,  which,  based  also  on
international experience, would reform the payment markets from the digitalisation point of view. 
Dear participants,
 Given its very nature, this new dimension of payment systems development requires certainly
broader cooperation by all the stakeholders. In this regard, the inter-institutional cooperation has
resulted  as  very  effective  through  the  organisation  and  functioning  of  the  National  Payment
Systems Committee. The Committee is a collegial advisory body, chaired by the Bank of Albania,
and is making important steps forward toward reformation and modernisation of retail payment
systems.
Its vision for the future is “creating a contemporary and all-inclusive retail payments market,
supported  by  safe  and  efficient  infrastructure,  and  a  broad  range  of  instruments  and
services that satisfy the needs of the users”.
The realisation of this vision requires legal, regulatory and infrastructural developments. It must
be noted that the above-cited initiatives, formalised in the relevant national strategy, have been
substantially  supported  by  renowned  international  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank,  the
European Central Bank, and central banks from EU countries. Hence, let me now extend my
sincere  appreciation  to  these  institutions  for  their  support,  and  to  their  distinguished
representatives  who  will  share  with  you  today  their  experience  in  the  development  of  retail
payment systems market.
From the perspective of communication and cooperation, the regional cooperation and sharing of
experiences is deemed as very important and fruitful. As a result of market development and
cultural  characteristics  and  financial  education  level  in  the  countries  of  our  region,  experience
sharing assumes particular importance, as it may contribute significantly to achieving the goals
more effectively. 
Last but not least, another development is the joint initiative of the Bank of Albania, Ministry of
Finance  and  Economy,  and  Minister  of  State  for  Diaspora  for  a  higher  attention  related  to
attracting and effectively using remittances, as a component of retail payments.
At the international level, remittances make a significant contribution to the economy and welfare
of the people, and are considered as accelerators to financial inclusion. The Bank of Albania,
therefore, in addition to the aimed developments in the national strategy for reforming the retail
payment systems, is engaged in preparing an annual publication on remittances. This publication
aims to enhance the knowledge and information about remittances in the Albanian market, and to
convey messages in the context of needs for intervention and the potential of remittances for
various actors in the economy.
For  all  the  issues  addressed  above,  especially  related  with  the  commitment  of  various
stakeholders  in  the  modernisation  of  payment  systems  in  Albania,  I  invite  you  to  actively
participate and contribute to this conference. 
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  wish  you  fruitful  conference  proceedings  and  thank  you  for  your
participation and attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
