Luís Máximo dos Santos: Time for reform
Speech  by  Mr  Luís  Máximo  dos  Santos,  Vice-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  2nd
International Conference of the Economic Chamber of Greece, Athens, 31 May 2018.
 The  conference  had  the  central  theme  of  “The  Greek  Economy  after  the  closing  of  the  3rd
adjustment programme”,  and took place in Athens on 31 May with the high patronage of the
President  of  the  Hellenic  Republic,  who  also  addressed  the  conference.  Vice-Governor  Luís
Máximo dos Santos was invited to speak by the President of the Economic Chamber of Greece
and  the  Vice-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  John  (Iannis)  Mourmouras.  His  address  took
place during the first panel session, taking as its theme: “The experience from countries that
have implemented adjustment programmes”.
 
1. I would  like to start by extend a greeting to the distinguished members of the panel and thank
the  Economic  Chamber  of  Greece,  namely  its  President,  Konstantinos  Kollias,  and  Deputy
Governor Iannis Mourmouras, for their kind invitation to be part of this magnificent Conference. It
is a great pleasure to be in the mythical and unique city of Athens and to be able to address such
an illustrious audience, sharing with you a few thoughts on the experience of the countries that
have implemented adjustment programmes. 
The timing of this conference could not have been more appropriate against the background of
the  conclusion  of  the  third  adjustment  programme  for  Greece  and  the  ongoing  debate  on  the
future of the European Union, in particular concerning the reform of the Economic and Monetary
Union. 
Obviously, the experience gained from the adjustment programmes does not concern only the
Member  States  that  have  implemented  them.    In  a  union  with  the  level  of  integration  of  the
European  Union  and,  even  more,  when  we  speak  of  the  Eurozone,  a  severe  crisis  in  one
Member State poses a risk to the other Members and also for that should be a common concern.
The soundness of the whole is dependent on the soundness of each Member State.  
Furthermore, as Professor Joseph Weiller rightly said, the European Union was created to be a
“community of destiny”. If this is forgotten, its problems will only tend to worsen.  
 
2. Following the global financial crisis, from 2010 to 2013, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus
were  subject  to  adjustment  programmes.  Spain  also  benefited,  in  2012,  from  considerable
financial support to its banking sector. 
All of these programmes have long since been concluded and the third Greek programme is well
on  its  way.  However,  they  gave  rise  to  consequences  so  intense  in  the  economic,  social,
financial and political domains and in the mutual trust among Member States that their effects
have not yet dissipated. 
In the spring of 2011, Portugal lost access to the markets at sustainable interest rates and had to
request external assistance. Consecutive years of economic stagnation or low growth, a severe
imbalance  in  public  finances,  a  high  external  deficit,  a  banking  system  with  imbalances,  all
amplified by the effects of the international financial crisis, made this scenario unavoidable.  
The Economic and Financial Assistance Programme to Portugal was implemented from 17 May
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2011 to 30 June 2014. A post-programme surveillance phase is currently in place. 
The purpose of my presentation is not to conduct a detailed analysis of the programme. There is
considerable  institutional  and  academic  literature  on  the  subject  and  the  opinions  and
assessments are widely different.  
It  is  a  fact  that  from  2011  to  2013  Portugal  experienced  an  economic  recession  without
precedent in its recent history. The unemployment rate grew abruptly, reaching 16.2% in 2013,
with severe social consequences.  
However, at the end of the programme, Portugal regained access to the markets. The financing
rates  of  the  Republic  fell  significantly  and  the  confidence  of  economic  agents  was  gradually
restored. We all know that the non-standard monetary policy measures, introduced courageously
by the European Central Bank, were decisive to this. But there were also other very important
factors both at Portuguese and European level. 
Growth returned, still very timidly, from 2014 onwards. But in 2017, domestic product grew by
2.7% in real terms, the highest rate since 2000. The main sectors of activity made a positive
contribution to this momentum, with manufacturing recording its largest growth since 2010.
Exports  and  investment  were  the  drivers  of  the  Portuguese  economy’s  acceleration  in  2017,
which will be important for correcting some of the structural problems. 
These results must be seen in the context of the euro area’s positive business cycle and more
contingent factors such as a very dynamic tourism sector.
The  good  performance  of  Portuguese  exports  was  chiefly  due  to  external  demand  for
Portuguese  goods  and  services,  in  particular  from  euro  area  partners.  However,  Portuguese
exports also increased their share in external markets. 
The construction sector was one of the major drivers of an increase in investment, boosted by a
rise  in  demand  by  non-residents  and  the  strong  growth  of  tourism  and  related  real  estate
activities. 
In this environment, the unemployment rate started to follow a clear downward trend, reaching
8.9% in 2017 and according to the latest data in 2018, at less than 8%. Employment rose by
3.3%, which was the highest annual growth since Portugal’s participation in the euro, especially
in the youngest and oldest age groups. 
The  public  accounts  have  been  showing  fairly  positive  developments,  in  line  with  the
consolidation targets agreed at European level. 
In terms of the external accounts, the current and capital account surplus was 1.4% of GDP in
2017, similar to the surplus recorded since 2014. 
In parallel, a set of policies designed to eliminate some measures applied under the adjustment
programme  were  put  in  place  from  2016.  The  purpose  of  these  policies  was  to  improve  the
social  environment  and  contribute  to  better  living  conditions  for  some  of  the  lower  income
segments of the population, but also to certain parts of the middle class.   
The  Portuguese  banking  sector  also  strengthened  its  position.  It  is  today  more  stable  and
capitalised, with higher profitability levels, undergoing restructuring to face the various challenges
from regulation to the rise of the digital economy. The resolution measure applied in August 2014
to Banco Espírito Santo – at that date the third largest bank in the Portuguese financial system –
was completed in October 2017 with the sale of the resulting bridge bank. The non-performing
loans (NPL) portfolio has been considerably reduced, although it still remains high.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
3. To strengthen and sustain these positive economic developments, past mistakes must not be
repeated at national and European level. 
And  it  is  crucial  that  growth is  also  inclusive,  not  only  in  individual  Member  States  but  in  the
European Union as a whole. Adjustment programmes did not include explicit social objectives
nor monitoring requirements on the social impact. However, they could have and should have
done so. 
Article  3,  number  1,  of  the  Treaty  on  the  European  Union  states  that,  together  with  the
advancement of peace and its values, the Union’s aim is to promote the well-being of its peoples.
Likewise, number 3 establishes  that  the  Union  “shall  work  for  the  sustainable  development  of
Europe  based  on  balanced  economic  growth  and  price  stability,  a  highly  competitive  social
market  economy,  aiming  at  full  employment  and  social  progress”  stating  also  that  the  Union
promotes “economic, social and territorial cohesion, and solidarity among Member States.” 
The  Union’s  policies  should  be  globally  consistent,  given  that  the  rules  established  by  the
Treaties are all equally binding. 
 
4.  In  the  beginning  of  January  2019  we  will  celebrate  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  European
Monetary Union although euro banknotes and coins only began to circulate in 2002. Portugal was
among its eleven founding Member States. For millions of young European citizens the euro is
the only national currency they know.  
It is common knowledge that the establishment of the Economic and Monetary Union was the
most far-reaching political step in the history of European integration. Likewise, we have always
known that the architecture set up in Maastricht was incomplete and risk-inducing, particularly
due  to  the  absence  of  mechanisms  to  cope  with  asymmetric  shocks.  Its  architects  implicitly
admitted  that  the  missing  components  would  sooner  or  later  be  added,  as  a  result  of  the
integrationist  momentum.  However,  History  has  repeatedly  proven  that  determinism  can  be  a
mistake... 
Up until the onset of the financial crisis, we lived under a kind of ‘spell’. In many countries, the
decrease in interest rates boosted indebtedness, while there were illusory improvements in living
conditions. Neither the economic agents nor the authorities managed to clearly perceive that the
monetary union would necessarily entail a new economic regime: the centralisation of monetary
and  foreign  exchange  policies  warranted  a  completely  different  policy  mix.  Fiscal  and  income
policies  acquired  greater  importance,  but,  in  fact,  fiscal  policy  was  also  subject  to  heavy
constraints.
When  the  international  financial  crisis  broke  out,  it  progressed  rapidly,  quickly  exposing  and
enhancing the accumulated imbalances within the Union. 
The response to the crisis focused on strengthening the coordination between fiscal policies, the
development of new financing mechanisms, and the establishment of the banking union and, of
course, non-standard monetary policy measures. This was far from insignificant, but, in some
cases, it was perhaps a little late and surely was not enough.  In many ways, we were entering a
new territory as it was with the implementation of adjustment programmes, which pose unique
challenges in countries within a monetary union. 
We need to drive the Economic and Monetary Union reform forward. It is indeed time for reform.
Part of this reform merely consists in finalising the previous cycle of reforms by completing the
banking union with the implementation of its third pillar and by endowing the Single Resolution
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fund with the adequate financial resources to fully accomplish its mission. No debate is more
sterile than the one on whether to reduce or to share risks. In truth, we must do both. And, in
some ways, we have been doing just that. 
As  many  contend,  it  is  human  nature  to  only  make  important  decisions  when  faced  with
necessity, during critical situations. Let us hope that it is possible to dispel that perception, by
taking full advantage of the existing proposals and ongoing debate – which should be open and
inclusive – to adopt the necessary measures to improve the working of the European Union and,
in particular, the Economic and Monetary Union. In fact, we should avoid doing so under pressure
from a new crisis. 
Only the future will show if we are able and willing to make the necessary decisions so that the
European  Union  will  be  the  “community  of  destiny”  as  Joseph  Weiller  put  so  well,  and  as  its
founders intended. 
Thank you for your kind attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
