Ravi Menon: Emerging Asia - short-term outlook and risks
Pointers for panel remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the 5th Milken Institute Asia Summit, Singapore, 13 September 2018.
 Global growth has shown remarkable resilience despite mounting uncertainties.
Growth this year is likely to be as strong as last year’s.  And last  year’s  growth  was  the
strongest since the global financial crisis.
And Emerging Asian economies have been doing well.
But the going will get tougher in the months ahead and going into 2019. 
Some slowdown in momentum is to be expected, following 12–18 months of strong growth
What  bears  close  watching  are  two  headwinds  emanating  from  the  US  and  sweeping
across the world, including Emerging Asia.
The first headwind is rising trade tensions. 
The second is tightening global financial conditions.
First, growing trade disputes. 
The impact of the trade tariffs announced to-date has been limited. 
If  the  threats  of  further  tariffs  are  carried  out,  trade  volumes  will  come  down  and  some
reduction in growth is to be expected – the US by about 0.5% points and China by about the
same amount.
This will have implications down the supply chain and production networks across Emerging
Asia, shaving off growth in most economies.
2019 will most likely not be as good a year as 2018. 
But the effects will not be devastating – we are not looking at a recession.
This is not a global trade conflict.  This is centred on the US.
The US is of course the biggest export market in the world but total US imports account for
only 3% of global GDP.
Many other countries – especially in Emerging Asia – are trading among themselves without
a nexus to the US.
These trading linkages will grow over time as demand in these economies grows with a
rising middle class, urbanisation, and investment in infrastructure.
All the same, a prolonged period of trade tensions is not good for the global economy.
The more serious casualty is perhaps not trade but investment.  Corporates may scale back
investment amidst uncertainty.
This will reduce the productive capacity for future growth, delay technological upgrading, and
compromise productivity growth.
This is why the best response to unilateral trade restrictions is to push ahead with further trade
liberalisation among other willing parties instead of retaliation and escalation.
If countries do not retaliate against tariffs imposed by the US, the cost to their own
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies is likely to be contained.
And a mutually damaging trade war would be averted.
And this is what Emerging Asia is doing – liberalising trade within the region and with others.
TPP-11  or  Comprehensive  and  Progressive  Agreement  for  Trans-Pacific  Partnership
(CPTPP)
This will reduce barriers across economies with a GDP of US$10 trillion, roughly 13.5%
of the world economy.
It  is  expected  to  be  ratified  early  next  year.    And  five  to  six  more  countries  have
expressed interest in joining the CPTPP.
ASEAN+6 or Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
This FTA builds on the existing five ASEAN Plus One FTAs.
Negotiations have been going on for some time but the pace has picked up recently as
rising  trade  tensions  have  underscored  the  importance  of  enhancing  economic
integration to build resilience
When it is signed, RCEP will be the world’s largest trading bloc in terms of population,
covering nearly 3.5 billion people, and accounting for a third of the world’s GDP.
Second headwind – tightening global financial conditions.
As the Fed continues to raise interest rates and unwind its balance sheet, global liquidity
conditions will tighten and financial market valuations will come under further pressure.
Asset  revaluations  will  be  keenly  felt  in  EMEs,  which  have  benefited  from  large  investor
inflows driven in part by investors’ search-for-yield in the post-GFC period.
In Emerging Asia, some economies will face higher financing costs, rising external debt burdens,
short-term capital outflows, and heightened currency volatility.
We have already seen some signs of these pressures.
They are to be expected – as part of the normal adjustment to the normalisation of global
financial conditions.
ASEAN is well placed to deal with these pressures as well as contagion effects from EMEs in
other parts of the world
First, economic fundamentals in ASEAN are stronger.
Growth is good – it is close to or above potential across the ASEAN-4 (Malaysia, Indonesia,
Thailand, Philippines).
Inflation has been subdued.
Current accounts are in surplus or only a small deficit.
Buffers  to  withstand  shocks  are  strong  –  be  it  central  banks’  reserves  or  banks’  capital
adequacy.
Second, ASEAN policymakers have demonstrated that they are able and willing to adjust policies
to deal with external and internal stresses.
They have raised interest rates pre-emptively.
They have allowed their exchange rates to depreciate in an orderly manner, intervening in
the FX markets only to moderate excessive movements.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
And they have room to use fiscal policy to support growth, as debt positions are generally
healthy.
Take  Indonesia  for  example.  The  currency  has  come  under  some  pressure  but  the
macroeconomic fundamentals are essentially sound.
The economy is growing at a respectable 5%.
Inflation is under control, at about 3.5% – an achievement compared to the past.
The fiscal deficit has come down and is now about 2% of GDP – not an alarming number.  
Total debt-to-GDP ratio is 30% – a respectable number by any international comparison. 
The current account deficit has slipped somewhat but, at 3% of GDP, is not unduly large.  
And  it  is  not  unusual  for  a  developing  country  to  run  a  current  account  deficit  to  finance
investment for future growth.
And  Indonesia’s  policy  responses  to-date  have  demonstrated  a  willingness  to  take  tough
measures to build up resilience
The central bank has hiked interest rates.
The government has been re-evaluating import-intensive infrastructure spending.
Markets can sometimes over-react and investors sell down EME assets in a general knee-jerk
risk-off mood. 
But as investors understand better that Emerging Asian economies are on a strong footing,
they are becoming more discerning. 
And contagion effects from other EMEs will then reduce over time.
More importantly, the ASEAN growth story remains intact.
ASEAN  is  poised  for  continued  healthy  growth  over  the  medium  term,  on  the  back  of
macroeconomic stability.
The ASEAN-5 economies – Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand and Singapore– are
expected to grow at close to 5% per annum over the next 5 years.
This is higher compared to Latin America (2.8%) and Eastern Europe (3.3%).
ASEAN’s  resilience  stems  from  fundamental  drivers  that  support  the  region’s  growth  in  a
mutually reinforcing fashion
Rising Middle Class:  Rising affluence of the middle class will spur consumption, including a
range  of  modern  services  –  especially  finance  and  insurance,  professional  services,
tourism, healthcare and education. 
Urbanisation: Rural-urban migration and the expansion of cities will spur sizeable demand
for infrastructure. 
Integration:  ASEAN’s  growing  integration  –  increasingly  powered  by  technology  and  e-
commerce – will allow the region to reap complementarities and synergies to sustain growth
over the long term.
The ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) Blueprint 2025 lays the pathway for a highly integrated
region,  well  connected  to  other  parts  of  a  dynamic  Asia.    More  than  short-term  volatilities,
ASEAN’s prospects will depend on how well it executes closer integration and structural reforms
to increase efficiency and productivity.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
