Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian:  Generating  new  solutions 
remittances in Malaysia
Remarks by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at
the Launch of Project Greenback 2.0 Kota Kinabalu, Kota Kinabalu, 4 March 2018.
for
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  for  the  launch  of  the  Greenback  2.0  Project  in  Kota
Kinabalu.
First  of  all,  on  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I  would  like  to  thank  Dewan  Bandaraya  Kota
Kinabalu  for  agreeing  to  host  this  Project.  We  are  sincerely  honoured  by  the  presence  of  YB
Datuk  Hajah  Jainab  at  today’s  launch  event. And  of  course,  the  World  Bank  has  been  a  truly
committed and equal partner in this project with Bank Negara Malaysia, and as we concluded our
collaboration in Johor Bahru last year, we are excited to begin another chapter in this journey
together with the World Bank.
Kota Kinabalu is Malaysia’s second remittance champion city and only the third champion city for
the Greenback Project in Asia. Through the project, our aim is to help more people living and
working in Sabah remit moneys whether for business or personal purposes, safely and at lower
costs. To achieve this, we want to provide people in Sabah with information, with access and
with the confidence to  use  remittance  services. And  we  want  to  encourage  more  competitive
remittance services in Sabah that will better serve the community.
You may ask what is the significance of being a champion city?
The selection of a champion city recognises the enormous potential of cities across Malaysia,
where three quarters of our population live, to be the engines of innovation. In our work at Bank
Negara on a range of issues – whether it is to improve access to financing, promote financial
inclusion or lift economic efficiency through migration to electronic payments – our collaboration
with  cities  and  their  leaders  has  been  the  source  of  many  solutions  and  breakthroughs  in
addressing  the  challenges  that  we  face.  This  reflects  the  close  and  vibrant  communities  and
networks  within  cities  that  can  be  drawn  upon  much  more  quickly  and  effectively  to  deliver
solutions that will benefit the community.
As  a  champion  city  for  remittances,  Kota  Kinabalu  will  similarly  be  able  to  show  the  way  in
generating  new  solutions  for  remittances.  There  are  many  valuable  lessons  that  we  can  take
from our recent experience with the Greenback project in Johor Bahru. But it will be important for
us to receive your ideas and your input to ensure that we are addressing the specific needs and
circumstances of people and businesses in Kota Kinabalu.
Kota Kinabalu has a sizeable population of foreign workers who contribute to the state of Sabah,
while supporting and improving the livelihoods of their families back home. This, coupled with the
higher remittance cost of 4.5% in Kota Kinabalu compared to other parts of Malaysia presents a
unique opportunity to leverage on the Greenback project, to support the financial needs and goals
of  foreign  workers  here  in  Sabah;  to  increase  the  development  impact  of  remittances  to  our
neighbouring  countries;  and  importantly,  to  make  remittances  generally  more  efficient  for
businesses and the population of Sabah itself.
Even though this is the second champion city in Malaysia, we are not only looking to replicate our
experience in Johor Bahru. Indeed, we acknowledge the different challenges and opportunities
presented in Sabah, which is why an important and distinct focus for Greenback Kota Kinabalu
will be the wider use of technology to deliver remittance solutions in Sabah.
Here in Sabah, people still often need to travel a great distance to send money home. This is
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
costly, cumbersome and at times, risky – made even more challenging by Sabah’s geography
and  remoteness  of  some  parts  of  the  state.  Technology  offers  new  possibilities  to  overcome
these difficulties, while significantly improving user convenience.
Although  remittances  through  electronic  channels  is  not  new,  the  take-up  rate  of  electronic
remittances has been relatively slow. In 2017, the share of electronic remittances accounted for
only 12% of total remittances. This in turn has limited the potential to make remittance services
much more efficient and accessible to our communities, including here in Sabah.
We are therefore determined to double up our efforts to increase the use of electronic channels
to send money.
In  November  last  year,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  amended  existing  regulations  to  allow  money
services  companies  to  complete  customer  verifications  electronically,  without  the  need  for
customers  to  visit  a  money  services  business  premise.  This  is  an  important  change  that
removed  an  existing  hurdle  for  companies  to  support  an  end-to-end  electronic  process  for
performing remittance transactions.
We  expect  this  change  to  create  significant  momentum  for  further  growth  in  electronic
remittances,  in  particular  among  foreign  workers.  Today,  foreign  workers  in  several  parts  of
Malaysia may still face difficulties getting to a MSB office to complete the customer due diligence
process. Yet, nine in ten foreign workers have smartphones and use them to access the internet.
With technology, we can tap into these alternative access channels to enable e-remittances.
Two other important development are also coming together to encourage the use of electronic
remittances. The first is the initiative by the Government to require employers of foreign workers
to pay their salaries into bank accounts. This removes the need to deliver cash to remittance
service providers. The second is the development of an interactive mobile application by the MSB
industry  that  allows  users  to  identify  licensed  MSB  providers,  compare  services  and
communicate directly with MSB companies. The mobile app serves as a powerful tool to further
promote  transparency  and  competition  in  the  money  services  business  industry,  by  providing
consumers  with  the  information  and  facilities  that  will  help  them  make  smarter  remittance
choices.
Kota Kinabalu will be an important testbed for these initiatives, serving as a model for envisioning
an end-to-end digital remittance landscape in Malaysia. Given Sabah’s aspirations to develop a
digital ecosystem, we could not have picked a better city or time to launch our next Greenback
journey.
As we look forward to the journey ahead, I cannot help but recall how far the MSB industry has
come.  In  2017,  the  MSB  industry  facilitated  RM20  billion  in  worker  remittances  and  a  further
RM400 million in business remittances. This represents a 43% and 300% increase respectively
over  values  transacted  in  2013  when  significant  reforms  were  introduced  to  strengthen
standards and shore up trust and confidence in the industry.
Today, an industry represented by progressive and credible principal MSB companies and a wide
network  of  agents  has  not  only  improved  access  to  services,  but  also  raised  the  quality  of
service.  With  better  knowledge,  tools  and  resources,  the  industry  has  also  worked  hard  to
strengthen  safeguards  against  its  use  for  criminal  and  other  illicit  activities.  The  industry  is
already leading the way in the financial sector by certifying all compliance officers to equip them
to be more effective in implementing AML/CFT measures.
This is important because our collective efforts here today to improve overall welfare by providing
more people and businesses with efficient access to remittance services will be severely set
back if trust and confidence in the industry are eroded. When this happens, rules often have to
be  rewritten,  the  costs  of  compliance  will  increase,  and  the  public  is  saddled  with  reduced
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
access  and  other  burdens  that  result  from  the  actions  that  have  to  be  taken  to  protect  the
integrity of the system and manage risks to consumers.
We must avoid this path, which will come at a heavy cost to communities and countries that
depend on remittances. We have seen this in recent times with de-risking measures taken by
financial institutions, and we still continue to see their effects in parts of the world. We must not
expose our system to the same effects.
In  Kota  Kinabalu,  we  also  hope  to  build  on  Greenback  activities  to  achieve  greater  financial
inclusion of migrant workers and small businesses. For example, beyond remittances, suitable
savings,  payment  and  insurance  products  can  help  migrant  workers  make  their  earnings  go
further, facilitate access to goods and services, and provide protection for their families against
financial hardship as a result of unforeseen events. For small businesses, electronic remittances
can  be  harnessed  to  build  transactional  histories  which  can  help  improve  their  overall
creditworthiness. This needs to be supported by a strong focus on financial education.
As you can see, we have great expectations for Project Greenback Kota Kinabalu. But we are
also equally confident of meeting, if not exceeding, those expectations. This is in no small part
due to the tremendous cooperation that has already been extended to the project by the city of
Kota Kinabalu, including its police force. I also know for a fact that the MSB industry here in Kota
Kinabalu has thrown its full support behind the project, working closely and tirelessly with the
Malaysian Association of Money Services Business, to identify and plan activities for the coming
year.  And  we  will  leverage  on  an  expanded  network  of  partners,  including  non-government
organisations,  other  financial  service  providers  and  our  counterparts  in  the  Philippines,  to
increase the financial inclusion impact of Project Greenback.
With that, let me once again thank YB Datuk Hajah Jainab and the city of Kota Kinabalu for the
opportunity to collaborate on this very important initiative to build inclusive communities where no
one is left to suffer in abject poverty.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
