Stephen  S  Poloz:  Opening  statement  before  the  Standing  Senate
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 25 April 2018.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are pleased to be back before you today to discuss the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
which we published last week.
When  we  were  last  here  at  the  beginning  of  November,  we  saw  signs  that  the  Canadian
economy  was  moderating  after  an  exceptionally  strong  first  half  of  the  year.  That  moderation
turned out to be greater and to last a bit longer than we expected. Still, it is important to recognize
that inflation is on target and the economy is operating close to potential. That statement alone
underscores the considerable progress seen in the economy over the past year.
The slower-than-expected growth in the first quarter reflected two main issues. First, housing
markets reacted to announcements of new mortgage guidelines and other policy measures by
pulling forward some transactions into the fourth quarter of last year. That led to a slowdown in
the  first  quarter  that  should  naturally  reverse.  Second,  we  saw  weaker-than-expected  exports
during  the  quarter.  This  weakness  was  caused  in  large  part  by  various  transportation
bottlenecks. Some of this export weakness should also reverse as the year goes on. 
So, after a lacklustre start to 2018, we project a strong rebound in the second quarter. All told, we
expect that the economy will grow by 2 per cent this year, and at a rate slightly above its potential
over the next three years, supported by both monetary and fiscal policies. The composition of
growth should shift over the period, with a decline in the contribution from household spending
and a larger contribution from business investment and exports.
Inflation should remain somewhat above the 2 per cent target this year, boosted by temporary
factors.  These  factors  include  higher  gasoline  prices  and  increases  to  the  minimum  wage  in
some provinces. Their impact should naturally unwind over time, returning inflation to 2 per cent
in 2019.
Of course, this outlook is subject to several important risks, and a number of key uncertainties
continue to cloud the future, as was the case in November.
In terms of risks to the outlook, the most important remains the prospect of a large shift toward
protectionist trade polices around the globe. I should be clear that our forecast already includes
the  negative  effect  of  increased  uncertainty  on  companies’  export  and  investment  plans.
Otherwise,  it  assumes  that  the  trade  agreements  now  in  place  will  continue.  The  range  of
possible outcomes is far too wide to incorporate into an economic projection.
The four main uncertainties around the outlook for inflation are the same as six months ago, but
good  progress  has  been  made  on  some  of  them.  First,  in  terms  of  economic  potential,  our
annual  review  led  us  to  conclude  that  the  economy  currently  has  more  capacity  than  we
previously  thought. As  well,  this  capacity  is  growing  at  a  faster  pace  than  we  expected.  This
means we have a little more room for economic demand to grow before inflationary pressures
start to build. That said, some firms, particularly exporters, are operating at their capacity limits
but  are  hesitating  to  invest.  This  hesitation  may  be  due  to  trade  uncertainty,  transportation
bottlenecks, shortages of skilled workers or other reasons. Regardless, it is limiting growth of our
exports and economic capacity.
The second source of  uncertainty  concerns  the  dynamics  of  inflation.  Here,  recent  data  have
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
been reassuring. Inflation measures, including our various core measures, have been behaving
very much as forecast and are consistent with an economy that is operating with very little slack.
This gives us increased confidence that our inflation models are working well.
The third area of uncertainty is about wages, and data here are also encouraging. Wage growth
has picked up significantly over the past 18 months, approaching the 3 per cent growth rate one
would expect from an economy that is running at capacity. However, the most recent figures are
being boosted temporarily by the minimum wage increases in some provinces.
The fourth source of uncertainty is the increased sensitivity of the economy to higher interest
rates,  given  elevated  levels  of  household  debt.  The  concern  is  that  as  interest  rates  rise,  the
share of household income going to service debt will also rise, leaving less to spend on other
goods and services, and putting downward pressure on inflation. It will take more time to assess
this  issue,  particularly  because  new  mortgage  guidelines  are  currently  affecting  the  housing
market and mortgage lending. However, the growth of household borrowing is slowing, which is
consistent with the idea that consumers are starting to adjust to higher interest rates and new
mortgage rules.
So,  as  you  can  see,  there  has  been  some  progress  on  these  four  key  areas  of  uncertainty,
particularly the dynamics of inflation and wage growth. This progress reinforces our view that
higher  interest  rates  will  be  warranted  over  time,  although  some  degree  of  monetary  policy
accommodation will likely still be needed to keep inflation on target. The Bank will continue to
monitor  the  economy’s  sensitivity  to  interest  rate  movements  and  the  evolution  of  economic
capacity.  In  this  context,  Governing  Council  will  remain  cautious  with  respect  to  future  policy
adjustments, guided by incoming data.
With  that,  Mr.  Chairman,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  would  be  happy  to  answer
questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
