Benoît Cœuré: The consequences of protectionism
Panel contribution by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  29th  edition  of  the  workshop  "The  Outlook  for  the  Economy  and  Finance",  "Villa
d'Este", Cernobbio, 6 April 2018.
 In the two decades before the financial crisis, trade growth was a major contributor to higher
living standards worldwide, with world imports growing at roughly twice the rate of output. The
integration of many emerging economies into global trade, notably through participation in global
value chains, boosted incomes and lifted millions of people out of poverty.
Since the crisis, however, trade has provided noticeably less support to economic growth. Trade
growth has barely kept pace with output growth, and has even lagged behind it in a number of
years. As a result, the current economic expansion in the euro area has been driven largely by
domestic demand, supported by substantial monetary policy accommodation.
More recently, world trade has shown tentative signs of renewed vigour. Last year, world goods
trade grew by more than 5%, the strongest rate for seven years, against less than 4% for world
GDP.  Yet,  the  nascent  recovery  in  trade  is  at  risk  of  being  derailed  by  the  introduction  of
impediments to global economic integration. There are signs that the anti-globalisation sentiment
that has become more pervasive since the crisis has begun to be translated into actual policy
measures.
Many  commentators  have  expressed  concerns  that  the  tariffs  recently  announced  by  the  US
administration  represent  the  first  step  towards  a  “trade  war”,  potentially  leading  to  a  broader
reversal  of  globalisation.  Retaliatory  measures  have  already  been  announced  by  some
economies.
These steps are taken despite the benefit of trade for aggregate welfare being one of the rare
points of consensus for economists. In a recent poll in which economists were asked whether
the  announced  tariffs  would  improve Americans’  welfare,  the  respondents  were  split  between
1
disagree and strongly disagree.
See  University  of  Chicago,  IGM  Economic  Experts  Panel: www.igmchicago.org/surveys/steel-
and-aluminum-tariffs?
utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+igmforum+%28IGM+Forum%29
At the same time, the benefits of globalisation have not been spread evenly, neither across nor
within  countries,  something  that  economists  have  not  given  sufficient  consideration  for  a  long
time. While textbook economics suggests that lump sum transfers from the winners of trade can
ensure that all are better off, such transfers – or adequate training and educational measures –
have not happened in sufficient scale to compensate everyone. According to a separate survey,
2
only 40% of people in the United States think globalisation is a force for good for the world.
See  World  Economic  Forum:  www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/11/what-your-country-thinks-of-
globalization.
Protectionism  is  not  the  right  answer  to  these  challenges,  however.  It  is  unlikely  to  solve  the
distributional consequences of globalisation while it is certain to reduce aggregate global living
standards. There are no winners in trade wars, just different degrees of losers.
But  to  defend  openness  by  listing  its  aggregate  benefits  is  no  longer  fully  convincing.  The
question of the distribution of those benefits and the disruptive effects that come with them has to
be  answered.  Economists  and  policymakers  therefore  have  a  responsibility  to  propose  and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
design policies that help those not benefiting directly from globalisation. I have previously spoken
3
about the need to make globalisation efficient, enduring and equitable.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2017),  “Sustainable  Globalisation:  Lessons  from  Europe”, Revue  d’économie
financière, 125, April.
Today I would like to share a central banker’s perspective on potential structural changes to the
current global trade regime – one where restrictions to trade are managed through multilateral
agreements.
I would like to flag two main implications should impediments to the free movement of goods and
services increase significantly. The first is the effects higher tariffs would have on growth and
inflation  in  the  near  to  medium  term.  There  are  a  number  of  important  channels  to  consider,
including the direct impact of tariffs on prices and growth, changes to financial conditions and
effects on expectations and confidence. The second main implication is the possible impact on
long-run potential output growth, and how that may influence the conduct of monetary policy.
Implications for the short to medium term
Let me first look at the channels through which increases in tariffs may affect output and inflation
in the short to medium term.
For illustration, I will use the results of simulations carried out by ECB staff using both the ECB’s
global model and the IMF’s multi-country model. As with all models, the uncertainties involved
mean precise estimates from these scenarios should be treated with caution, but they are useful
to explain the different channels at work.
To illustrate the potential effects of rising protectionism, I do not want to dwell on the specifics of
the tariffs currently being discussed. This would miss the bigger picture. I rather want to consider
a  hypothetical  scenario  where  the  United  States  raises  tariffs  on  all  imports  of  goods  by  10
percentage points, and its trading partners impose the equivalent on US exports.
According to our model simulations, such a scenario would have significant adverse effects on
the global economy, including, and in particular, on the economy that raises tariffs in the first
place. Specifically, real economic activity in the United States could be up to 2½% lower than in
the baseline in the first year alone. The reasons are essentially threefold:
First, if domestic and imported goods cannot be easily and readily substituted, higher import
prices increase firms’ production costs and reduce households’ purchasing power. These
effects weigh on consumption, investment and employment, resulting in a material overall
negative impact on GDP.
Second,  in  addition  to  the  direct  adverse  price  effects,  the  uncertainty  about  growth
prospects is likely to cause consumers to delay expenditure and businesses to postpone
4
investment.
See e.g. Bloom, N. (2009), “The impact of uncertainty shocks”, Econometrica, 77(3): 623–
685.
Much will depend on how consumers and businesses react, but ECB simulations suggest
that  such  uncertainty  and  confidence  effects  could  account  for  around  one-third  of  the
overall effect in the first year. In addition, financial investors react to uncertainty by selling
equities, reducing credit and demanding higher compensation for risk. This in turn reduces
wealth, increases the cost of investing and further discourages demand.
And third, economic activity declines as US exports are hit by the tariffs abroad, which is
only partially offset by lower imports.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In short, even though one may argue about the relative contributions of each of these channels,
and  the  overall  effect  on  economic  activity,  qualitatively  the  results  are  unambiguous:  an
economy imposing a tariff which is retaliated by other countries would clearly be worse off. Its
living standards would fall and jobs would be lost.
The effects on other economies would primarily depend on their size, trade openness and how
much they trade with the tariff-imposing country. Naturally, the economies that have the closest
trade relations with that country would be the most negatively affected.
But  the  effects  could  also  be  material  for  those  economies  that,  despite  having  a  less  direct
exposure, are particularly integrated into global value chains. For example, one estimate puts the
share  of  global  value  chain-related  trade  at  more  than  half  of  exports  from  many  South  East
5
Asian economies.
See WTO (2017), Global Value Chain Development Report 2017.
The  erection  of  trade  barriers  threatens  this  integration,  with  potentially  serious  negative
consequences for those countries and probably for the global economy as a whole. Only a few
open  economies  with  little  exposure  to  the  tariff-imposing  country  may  gain  as  a  result  of
increased competitiveness in third markets.
In other words, the overall scenario is clearly a net negative for the world economy as a whole.
According to ECB staff simulations, world trade in goods could fall by up to 3% already in the first
year after the change in tariffs and world GDP by up to 1%. Euro area GDP would also decline,
but by less than in the US.
These developments would ultimately also weigh on prices and wages. Although import prices
would likely rise as a result of the increase in tariffs – with the sign and scope depending on the
exchange  rate  reaction  as  well  as  the  choices  made  by  foreign  exporters  about  their  profit
margins – consumer price inflation and wage growth are likely to decelerate as the effects of
lower aggregate demand and higher unemployment can be expected to prevail, both in the United
States and globally.
Perceptions  of  a  measurable  deterioration  in  current  trade  relationships  could  therefore
potentially dent the confidence and animal spirits that are currently driving the strong economic
momentum – and that policymakers worldwide have succeeded in restoring after many years of
actively counteracting the effects of the crisis.
The impact could be even worse if the deterioration in trade relationships would be compounded
with a weakening of the international financial regulatory agreements that were reinforced in the
6
wake of the global financial crisis and have made the global financial system safer.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The perils of isolation”, speech at the Council of Foreign Relations, New
York, 19 April.
These  are  not  just  theoretical  considerations.  While  the  effects  of  any  tariffs  on  output  and
inflation may take time to materialise, falls in equity prices in response to the US announcement
to  impose  a  tariff  on  steel  and  aluminium,  and  prevailing  uncertainty  on  the  scope  of  any
retaliatory measures, have already contributed to tighter financial conditions.
The S&P 500 index fell by more than 1% on the day of the US announcement of its intention to
impose  steel  and  aluminium  tariffs.  Equity  market  prices  fell  more  markedly  in  countries  with
large current account surpluses. In Germany and Japan, for example, the major stock market
indices were down by more than 4% on the day after the announcement. The US decision on 22
March  of  further  tariffs  on  Chinese  imports  exacerbated  market  concerns,  with  the  S&P  500
down by nearly 5% on the day after the announcement. Industrial sectors directly affected by the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
tariffs were amongst the biggest losers.
Such movements appear more pronounced than would be consistent with the direct economic
effects of the measures announced to date. They seem to anticipate the effects of retaliatory
measures and price in some chance that the scenario I described earlier may occur. And by
fuelling uncertainty among market participants, fears of a “trade war” have added to the volatility
already  witnessed  earlier  this  year  in  equity  markets.  None  of  this  supports  growth  and
employment.
Longer-term influences
Besides  short-term  cyclical  factors  arising  from  a  potential  transition  to  a  more  protectionist
regime, there are likely to be longer-term effects on the economy too. Trade openness supports
growth in productivity and hence the long-run potential output of our economies.
Competition  from  trade,  and  the  benefits  offered  by  larger  markets,  can  encourage  a  more
efficient  allocation  of  labour  and  capital  across  sectors  and  across  firms.  This  improved
allocation supports innovation and hence productivity. This is why the EU Single Market is at the
heart of the European integration process.
These effects are also borne out by the data. According to one estimate, EU GDP per capita
7
would be as much as a fifth lower in the absence of the integration since 1950.
See Badinger, H. (2005), “Growth effects of economic integration: evidence from the EU Member
States”, Review of World Economics, 141(1): 50–78.
This  is  supported  at  the  microeconomic  level  as  well.  Data  collected  by  the  Competitiveness
Research Network confirms that European firms that export are more productive and pay higher
wages  than  non-exporting  firms  in  the  same  sector.  Moreover,  this  is  not  simply  because
exporting  firms  are  more  productive  in  the  first  place,  but  also  because  firms  become  more
productive through exporting. Firms in their first year of exporting post greater productivity gains
8
than similar businesses that do not export.
See ECB (2017), “Firm heterogeneity and competitiveness in the European Union”, Economic
Bulletin, Issue 2/2017.
Barriers to trade would undermine this virtuous process and thereby cause both productivity and
potential output to decline. The potential growth rate of advanced economies has already slowed
9
over recent decades, reflecting a number of factors, including the ageing population,
See Nerlich, C. and J. Schroth (2018), “The economic impact of population ageing and pension
reforms”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2018.
as well as declining productivity growth.
So to sum up, why does protectionism matter for central banks? First, because a “trade war”
scenario would add to global uncertainty at a time when some central banks have only just begun
the process of unwinding the unconventional policy measures put in place following the global
financial crisis. And second, because a further adverse structural shock to productivity may lead
us  to  be  more  often  constrained  in  the  longer  term  by  the  effective  lower  bound  on  nominal
interest rates and to increase the need to resort to unconventional policy measures.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greater global economic integration has boosted living standards worldwide and lifted millions
out  of  poverty.  Yet,  its  distributional  impacts  both  across  and  within  countries  have  not  been
adequately addressed, a fact that ultimately provides the political motivation for the protectionist
moves we observe.
Winding  back  globalisation  is  the  wrong  solution  to  address  these  concerns.  A  retreat  from
openness  will  only  fuel  more  inequality  as  import  prices  rise,  goods  become  dearer  and  real
incomes  fall.  It  would  deprive  people  of  the  undisputed  economic  advantages  that  trade  and
integration  bring  and  thereby  exacerbate  economic  hardship  for  the  poorest  in  society. And  it
would breed distrust among nations, making for a more unstable international order.
The distributional and social effects of greater economic integration should rather be addressed
by targeted policies that achieve fairer outcomes. This requires a strong political and institutional
landscape which can ensure that the geographical scope of policy action and political debates
coincide  with  the  scope  of  market  integration.  This  is  a  landscape  which  in  Europe  is  best
provided by the European Union.
By  allowing  Member  States  to  recover  some  of  the  state  functions  that  have  been  eroded  by
globalisation, the European Union is a vehicle that brings the benefits of economic openness to
the greatest number of its citizens while protecting them against untrammelled global forces. It
represents  the  most  progressive  model  we  have  for  taking  back  control  of  globalisation  by
addressing people’s concerns over open markets and fair competition – doubts that individual
countries on their own cannot dispel.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See  University  of  Chicago,  IGM  Economic  Experts  Panel: www.igmchicago.org/surveys/steel-and-aluminum-
tariffs?
utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+igmforum+%28IGM+Forum%29.
See World Economic Forum: www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/11/what-your-country-thinks-of-globalization.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Sustainable Globalisation: Lessons from Europe”, Revue d’économie financière, 125,
April.
See e.g. Bloom, N. (2009), “The impact of uncertainty shocks”, Econometrica, 77(3): 623–685.
See WTO (2017), Global Value Chain Development Report 2017.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The perils of isolation”, speech at the Council of Foreign Relations, New York, 19 April.
See Badinger, H. (2005), “Growth effects of economic integration: evidence from the EU Member States”, Review
of World Economics, 141(1): 50–78.
See ECB (2017), “Firm heterogeneity and competitiveness in the European Union”, Economic Bulletin, Issue
2/2017.
See  Nerlich,  C.  and  J.  Schroth  (2018),  “The  economic  impact  of  population  ageing  and  pension  reforms”,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
