Sabine Lautenschläger: European banking supervision - towards a
common culture
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Eurofi Financial Forum 2018, Vienna, 6 September 2018.
 Since 2014, we have made huge steps towards establishing a truly European system of banking
supervision and embracing a common supervisory culture.
Does this mean nothing more needs to be done? Not quite. For a fully-fledged common culture
you need to have three things:
First, you need a truly unified legal basis. You simply cannot build a comprehensive common
supervisory culture if you have to apply a different set of rules in each of the 19 countries.
Just think how we need to treat fit and proper assessments differently from one country to
the next.
Second,  you  need  harmonised  administrative  practices.  And  here,  we  have  made  good
progress in the last four years – wherever the legislator granted us scope. We established
practices for all the major areas of supervision, such as the SREP, the treatment of NPLs,
stress tests, the ICAAP, the ILAAP, and so on.
Third, you need time and cooperation. After all, staff from 19 countries and 26 authorities
have to be persuaded to leave their cultural comfort zone and align how they think, assess
and act.
I  measure  how  far  we  have  come  by  the  frequency  with  which  banks  ask  about  changes  in
supervisory actions.
In  other  words:  how  often  do  banks  complain  about  changes  in  the  way  they  are  being
supervised? They complain a great deal, I can tell you.
And we keep pushing forward. Let me give you just a few examples:
We strive to increase the number of cross-border on-site missions, with even more on-site
supervisors working on banks outside their home country. The success of this initiative will
largely depend on the number of on-site supervisors the national authorities are willing to
send.
We have established a rotation scheme for members of our Joint Supervisory Teams. This
too will help to spread a common culture. At the same time, it helps to avoid supervisory
capture.
We  foster  exchange  between  supervisors  from  across  the  euro  area.  We  bring  them
together  in  many  different  working  groups  to  devise  training  manuals  and  supervisory
guidance.
But the ECB cannot create a common supervisory culture by itself. The national authorities can
and should contribute, too. I understand, of course, that it is difficult to let go of traditions that
have been honed over decades. Culture is a sticky thing.
But  national  authorities  should  embrace  the  European  idea.  And  they  should  seize  the
opportunity to contribute to a new, common supervisory culture. They should let more of their
staff come to the ECB, for a while at least. Let them work in a European environment and carry
this culture back to their home countries.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
And the idea of a European supervisory culture should be reflected in how we deal with banks.
For example, national reporting requirements should be dropped; instead, we should aim for a
single European reporting framework.
To  sum  up:  a  common  supervisory  culture  is  emerging,  but  it  still  needs  to  be  nurtured  and
nudged.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
