   22 January 2018 
Address to the Club Siglo XXI 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking the Chairman of the Club Siglo XXI, and my good friend, Chencho 
Arias, and the management of the Club for their kind invitation to me to join you today. Over 
the years this Club has seen debate on all  – or practically all – matters, and naturally on 
economics too, which will be our subject today. 
My address will focus on the European and Spanish economic situation. 
Situation of the European economy  
With a decade now having elapsed since the international financial crisis began, we can say 
that the euro area is finally in a phase of sound and vigorous economic expansion.  
GDP growth is expected to have posted a growth rate of around 2.5% in 2017, a figure not 
seen  since  the  early  years  of  the  monetary  union.  The  favourable  economic  situation 
extends, moreover, to all corners of the area, including the economy that has undergone 
the greatest difficulties, namely Greece. It is expected that in the coming months Greece 
may successfully conclude its third financial assistance programme.  
Further evidence of the soundness of the recovery is the dynamism of business investment 
following years in which the expansion of household demand, acting as the sole engine of 
growth, appeared to be decoupled from the need for firms to increase their capital.  
Reflecting  the  strength  of  the  expansion  has  been  a  notable  reduction  in  unemployment 
rates, which are generally standing at pre-crisis levels. However, substantial cross-country 
differences  persist  in  this  area,  with  unemployment  levels  ranging  from  below  4%  in 
Germany to 20% in Greece.  
The  favourable  financing  conditions  associated  with  the  extraordinary  monetary  policy 
measures  implemented  by  the  Eurosystem  have  no  doubt  been  one  of  the  essential 
determinants  behind  the  economic  recovery  transforming  into  a  vigorous  expansion.  To 
illustrate this, the estimates made by the Banco de España suggest that the monetary policy 
measures contribute to accounting for practically half the euro area economy’s observed 
nominal growth since mid-2014.  
Adding  to  this  is  the  greater  buoyancy  of  world  trade,  which  recouped  growth  rates  not 
observed in the five previous years. This result reflects the favourable cyclical juncture at 
which many advanced and emerging economies now stand, but also a true recovery in the 
sensitivity of trade to global growth, despite the protectionist threats that have emerged and 
that may put a brake on this fundamental engine for economies as open as the European 
ones  are.  The  strength  of  exports  has  contributed  notably  to  sustaining  the  greater 
buoyancy of the aforementioned investment.  
Another  factor  contributing  to  the  expansion  has  been  the  headway  in  the  ongoing 
deleveraging that households and firms have had to undertake. Currently, in the area as a 
whole, household and corporate debt is drawing closer to observed pre-crisis levels, with a 
greater  correction  in  the  more  vulnerable  countries  being  discernible.  Fiscal  policy,  too, 
retains at present a more neutral stance, following the public finances consolidation process 
pursued.  
 3/6 
 Against this background, household and business confidence has reached levels at an all-
time  high  since  the  creation  of  the  monetary  union,  suggesting  that  growth  will  be 
maintained in the coming quarters. Most analysts have revised their GDP growth forecasts 
upwards, placing them for this year at around 2.3%.  
The  economic  expansion  has  not  yet  or  hardly  been  reflected  in  prices.  Core  inflation  
– which excludes the most volatile components – has remained anchored at around 1% for 
several  years  now.  Behind  this  lies  the  moderation  that  wage  growth  continues  to  show 
across the board, despite the fact that in some economies unemployment levels are low in 
historical terms.  
Highly  diverse  factors  contribute  to  explaining  the  phenomenon  of  wage  moderation.  Of 
note,  in  my  view,  is  the  role  played  by  the  low  productivity  growth  in  the  European 
economies and the greater importance that may have been accorded to indexing to past 
inflation  when  negotiating  wages  in  the  context  of  persistently  very  low  inflation  rates  in 
recent  years.  The  significance  of  part-time  employment  in  the  current  recovery  and  the 
inflow  of  immigrants  are  also  factors  that  may  have  checked  wage  growth  in  some 
economies.  
The fact that wage restraint is not a development exclusive to the euro area suggests that 
factors of a more global nature may also be playing some part. Among these the greater 
interrelatedness  of  economies,  which  has  been  conducive  to  global  value  chains  being 
extended,  may  have  led  to  the  international  determinants  of  price-  and  wage-setting 
increasing in significance, at the expense of the traditional determinants. Other explanations 
highlight  the  influence  that  the  automation  of  productive  processes,  the  digitalisation  of 
economic relations and the development of electronic trade may be exerting.  
Beyond the macroeconomic area, the expansion opens a window of opportunity to continue 
entrenching the foundations of the monetary union project, completing the banking union 
and taking the first steps towards a fiscal union that enables adjustment costs to be reduced 
when  the  economy  faces  an  adverse  situation.  Further,  the  negotiations  in  the  coming 
months on trading and financial arrangements with the United Kingdom also pose another 
major challenge to the functioning of the single market.  
Situation of the Spanish economy  
Let me now move on to the Spanish economy. 
The  strength  of  the  recovery  is  proving  notable.  On  the  latest  estimates,  our  GDP  is 
estimated to have grown by around 3.1% in 2017, that is to say, similar growth to that in 
2015 and 2016; for the third year running, the growth of our economy is expected to have 
clearly exceeded that observed for the euro area as a whole. Indeed, last year we regained 
the level, in real terms, of our pre-crisis GDP.  
There are two key features of this recovery. Firstly, it is proving to be most job creation-
intensive. However, we are still far from attaining the employment levels prior to 2008. The 
second  notable  feature  is  that  our  recovery,  which  has  been  intense  and  prolonged,  is 
proving compatible with the correction of the imbalances that emerged in the years running 
up to the crisis; in particular, it is proving compatible with the maintenance of a substantially 
positive external balance.  
4/6 
 In 2017 we posted a current account balance of around 2% of GDP, a figure not far removed 
from that observed in the four preceding years. Admittedly, transitory or temporary factors 
– such as low oil prices and low interest rates, for instance – have exerted an influence on 
this  surplus;  but  largely  it  is  due  to  gains  in  external  competitiveness  and  also  to  the 
reduction  in  the  economy’s  financing  costs,  a  development  in  which  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy has played a crucial role, as have the structural reforms made since 2011.  
 Outlook  
On the latest Banco de España projections, which we published last December, the current 
upturn  may  be  prolonged  over  the  coming  years  with  significant  growth  in  activity  and 
employment, albeit at lower rates than those observed in the last three years.  
This  moderation  in  the  increase  in  activity  would  be  firstly  attributable  to  the  lesser 
momentum of demand-side policies. Specifically, we expect the impulse derived from fiscal 
and monetary policy to be lower, as well as lower growth of private consumption compared 
with that in recent years.  
As regards gross capital formation, investment in housing will be spurred by the generation 
of  employment  and  the  availability  of  low-cost  financing.  This  latter  factor  will  also  be 
conducive to business investment, further to the far-reaching clean-up of corporate balance 
sheets in recent years.  
With respect to external demand, exports may be expected to continue outgrowing the rate 
of expansion of the very markets on which they are targeted, which reflects the gains  in 
competitiveness  I  referred  to  earlier.  But  I  believe  mention  should  also  be  made  of  a 
structural change, namely the most notable growth in the number of Spanish companies 
permanently – not just occasionally – orienting their activity towards foreign markets, without 
forgetting the gains in market share in their domestic markets, as gains in competitiveness 
enable firms to compete better not only abroad but also, obviously, in the domestic market 
against imports. 
Risks  
The  Spanish  economy  has  moved  into  2018  on  the  back,  we  may  say,  of  significant 
expansionary inertia.  
On the external front, and in Europe as a whole, we do not yet know and it is not easy to 
estimate the impact that the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union may have, the 
impulses that the protectionist policies in various countries are prompting and the effects 
that may stem from the re-balancing of the Chinese economy. In the financial domain, the 
valuations of certain assets in some jurisdictions and segments of the capital markets have 
increased most markedly, suggesting that there has been an increase in the risk of there 
being corrections in the coming years potentially affecting financial stability.  
I would also like to refer to the economic risks posed by the political situation in Catalonia.  
In  our  Financial  Stability  Report,  published  early  last  November,  the  Banco  de  España 
estimated a range for the economic impact of the tensions in Catalonia drawing basically 
on assumptions about their duration and intensity. The conjunctural information for the final 
 5/6 
 quarter of 2017 indicates that economic activity is expected to have slowed in Catalonia in 
the closing months of the year to a greater extent than in the other main regions with the 
greater  GDP;  at  the  same  time,  it  seems  clear  that  the  application  of  Article  155  of  the 
Constitution  has  contributed  to  easing  economic  tensions,  as  shown  by  recent 
developments  on  financial  markets,  where  a  correction  has  been  observed  in  the  higher 
volatility and more negative dynamics that stock markets and the Spanish sovereign debt 
risk premium had experienced in the opening weeks of October. Indeed, the risk premium 
stood today below 85 basis points relative to the German benchmark, the lowest level since 
2010, following the upgrade announced by a rating agency.  
If  in  the  coming  months  we  achieve  normalisation,  understanding  by  normalisation  a 
situation in which political agents act with a real observance of our entire legal framework 
to the letter, and I would stress real observance, that would very likely lead to a better growth 
scenario than that considered in our latest projections and to an ultimately moderate impact.  
If, on the contrary, such normalisation does not come about, that may affect consumption 
and  investment  more  markedly.  A  further  loss  of  confidence  may  prompt  households  to 
increase their precautionary saving and to postpone their consumer-durables and house 
purchase decisions. And, above all, it may affect business investment in Catalonia, given 
that the climate of uncertainty would delay the undertaking of new investment projects and 
set  back  hiring  decisions.  Moreover,  these  effects  on  investment  and  consumption 
decisions  might  extend  to  both  resident  and  non-resident  agents,  adversely  affecting 
variables such as tourism and foreign investment. The outcome would be a greater adverse 
impact on activity both in Catalonia and in the Spanish economy as a whole. 
Conclusions 
Allow me to conclude. 
In addition to the risks I have highlighted, we are facing other problems, chief among which, 
owing to its far-reaching and numerous consequences in the medium and long term, is the 
ageing of our population, which is expected to continue and even intensify in the near future. 
This process involves various adverse effects, including most notably, as we all know, the 
challenge that a progressively longevous population poses to the public pensions system. 
The reforms in recent years have been appropriate and have contributed to shoring up the 
system’s financial sustainability; but adverse demographic developments require measures 
whose application should not be delayed. 
Population ageing gives rise to a reduction in the proportion of the total population making 
up  the  workforce,  which  negatively  affects  productivity  and  our  economy’s  ability  to 
innovate and incorporate new technologies. Given that it is impossible or very difficult to 
change demographic trends, even in the medium term, it will be important to persevere in 
enhancing the education system and pursuing the institutional and regulatory reforms that 
contribute  to  improving  productivity,  promoting  or  enabling  greater  competition  and 
innovation.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
 6/6 
 