    
 
Staying Connected  
 
 Speech given by 
Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England 
   Markets Forum 2018, Bloomberg Headquarters 
Thursday 24 May 2018 
  I am grateful to Alice Carr, Ankita Mehta and Tim Taylor for their assistance in preparing these 
remarks. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
Thank you Peter (Grauer) for that introduction and for hosting the inaugural Markets Forum. 
This incredible Fosters + Partners building connects the Roman Temple of Mithras in its foundations to the 
glories of St. Paul’s in its vista, while pushing the boundaries of sustainable office design. 
It is a node in a global network that spins data, information, and capital instantaneously across the planet. 
We have been reminded in recent years that networks have the power to divide, as well as connect.  And we 
are here today to continue the process of reconnecting financial markets to the real economy. 
Three years ago, in the wake of a series of scandals ranging from mis-selling to manipulation, and following 
a period when markets had become ever more connected to each other but disconnected from those they 
serve, the Bank of England, the Financial Conduct Authority and HM Treasury published the 
recommendations of the Fair and Effective Markets Review (FEMR).1 
FEMR was ground-breaking and ambitious in its recommendations to restore trust in the markets on which 
we all depend. 
At today’s event, policymakers and market participants will take stock of the progress in building fair and 
effective markets.  And we will consider how to maintain focus as memories fade and the temptation to turn 
inwards returns. 
We are doing so because we know that everyone has a shared interest in real markets.   
Real markets are professional and open.  
They are resilient, fair and effective, and they maintain their social license. 
Real markets are not ends in themselves but serve the interests of end-users. 
Real markets don’t just happen.  They depend on private actors and public initiatives to ensure the quality of 
market infrastructure. 
That includes ‘hard’ infrastructure, the plumbing of markets that determines the mechanics of markets; and 
‘soft’ infrastructure, like standards and codes that define how market participants should behave. 
Since the crisis, the UK has played a leading role in addressing misconduct in domestic and global markets. 
                                                      
1 See Fair and Effective Markets Review Final Report, HM Treasury, Bank of England and FCA (June 2015). At: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2015/fair-and-effective-markets-review---final-report 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
We know that the City has a particular responsibility given London’s position as the pre-eminent global 
financial centre.2 
What has been achieved? 
So what has been done to re-build the necessary market infrastructures for real markets to thrive?3 
In the UK, laws and regulations have been strengthened by, for example, introducing a criminal regime for 
manipulating benchmarks. 
Public authorities know they cannot and should not try to legislate for every circumstance, monitor every 
transaction, or anticipate every market innovation.  As FEMR recognised, while fines and sanctions have 
roles in deterring misconduct, they will not, on their own, bring about the cultural change needed. 
We must move from an excessive reliance on punitive ex post fines of firms to greater emphasis on more 
compelling ex ante incentives for individuals, and ultimately a more solid grounding in improved firm culture.  
This starts with reducing opportunities for bad behaviour, for example, by overhauling the regulation of key 
benchmarks in FICC markets.  
It requires compensation rules that align risk and reward.  In the UK, a significant proportion of variable 
compensation now must be deferred for a period of seven years.   
To address the ‘rolling bad apples’ problem, mechanisms are now in place here to ensure that when 
individuals move on their history will be known to those who consider hiring them.  Firms will be required to 
share information on breaches of individual conduct rules, their fitness and propriety assessments and 
outcomes around subsequent disciplinary proceedings.  
These measures are all very constructive but they are not yet sufficient.  That’s why the Bank of England 
supports initiatives that ensure firms and their employees take greater responsibility – individually and 
collectively – for their own conduct.  
UK authorities have used their convening powers to encourage market participants to establish standards of 
market practice that are well understood, widely followed and, crucially, that keep pace with market 
developments.  
Industry has responded.  The Banking Standards Board is promoting higher standards of conduct and 
competence across the UK banking system.  The global FICC Market Standards Board (FMSB) is 
                                                      
2 The UK accounts for 40% of both global FX volumes and trades in OTC interest rate derivatives, and two-thirds of trading in 
international bonds.  More international banking activity is booked in London than anywhere else. And finance is one of the largest 
sectors of the UK economy.  Around 400,000 people are employed in financial services in London alone, 1.1 million across the country 
as whole.  Their enterprise contributes £115 billion to our national income, £80 billion to our exports and £70 billion to the Exchequer, 
equivalent to two-thirds of the NHS budget. 
3 This is set out in more detail in the FEMR Progress Report being published today at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/fair-
and-effective-markets 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
establishing readily understood standards for their markets.  And the global FX Committees have published 
the FX Global Code, the first globally consistent code of conduct for FX markets. 
But codes are of little use if nobody reads, follows or enforces them.   
This is where the UK’s Senior Managers Regime (SMR) comes in.4  
Senior Managers Regime 
The SMR gives teeth to voluntary codes by incentivising firms to develop, adopt and embed them.  It is very 
welcome that the FCA is currently consulting on proposals to recognise industry codes publicly under the 
SMR. 
By requiring identification of the most senior decision-makers, the SMR re-establishes the link between 
seniority and accountability, strengthens individual accountability, and reinforces collective responsibility. 
As the SMR starts to bed in, there are encouraging signs that it is making a difference. 
For firms, the SMR is clarifying and improving governance, accountability and decision-making.  For 
supervisors, the regime is helping identify weaknesses in governance and accountability, and it is helping 
them to encourage the necessary changes.  
Adoption is spreading.  Some international firms are voluntarily adopting elements of the SMR’s certification 
requirements to strengthen their global operations.  A number of jurisdictions are applying the principles and 
features of the SMR.5   And elements of the regime are included as examples in the FSB’s recently published 
toolkit on governance frameworks.6 
While we cannot eliminate misconduct, these measures should reduce its scale and frequency, and they will 
broaden the sanctions for bad behaviour.  All of this will help restore trust in financial markets so that they 
can work as effectively and efficiently as possible to serve the real economy.  
Markets Forum 2018 
Today marks an inflection point, when we can celebrate what has been achieved but then look ahead to 
future challenges.  
The spirit and intention behind FEMR is that continual focus is required because markets continually evolve.  
                                                      
4 The Government has legislated to extend the SM&CR to all other FSMA authorised financial services firms. As a first step, the 
Government will extend the Regime to insurance firms from 10 December 2018 and will confirm when the Regime will be extended to 
firms regulated solely by the FCA in due course. 
5 The Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission implemented a Manager in Charge Regime (MICR); the Australian Parliament has 
recently passed legislation establishing a Bank Executive Accountability Regime (BEAR); and the Monetary Authority of Singapore has 
published Proposed Guidelines on Individual Accountability and Conduct 
6 The FSB Report on Strengthening Governance Frameworks to Mitigate Misconduct Risk can be found here:  http://www.fsb.org/wp-
content/uploads/P200418.pdf 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
That’s why the Bank and the FCA are taking a proactive, forward-looking approach to identifying 
vulnerabilities in hard and soft market infrastructure.  We see this as core to our institutional responsibilities.  
Indeed, the Bank has made catalysing structural reforms in financial markets, such as the new risk-free 
benchmarks that I’ll turn to in a moment, one of its core strategic goals. 
But the authorities cannot future-proof alone.  We rely on industry to help us scan the landscape for 
emerging risks and to help determine ways to mitigate them.   
We are encouraged by your efforts.  In particular, the FMSB is undertaking horizon scanning for future 
misconduct risks through its innovative behaviour cluster analysis; and the Global Foreign Exchange 
Committee, which is responsible for keeping the FX Global Code ‘alive’, has already identified areas of 
further work on spot FX market practices.7 
With the leaders of the industry here, we hope that today’s discussions will identify emerging risks and 
challenges, and explore how we can all work together to address potential vulnerabilities as we continue to 
build real markets for the good the people of the UK and beyond.  
In this spirit, before concluding, I want to briefly touch on one of the biggest challenges facing us right now – 
the transition to Risk Free Rates.  
The move to new Risk Free Rates  
Libor is a prime example of critical hard (market) infrastructure that has not kept up with market 
developments.  Libor is meant to measure the short-term unsecured funding costs of banks.  But the reality 
is that, since the financial crisis, Libor really has become the rate at which banks don’t lend to each other.  
Bank funding markets have changed enormously.  Banks no longer take sufficient short-term wholesale 
deposits to form the basis for a robust transaction-based Libor benchmark.  
As a result Libor is overly reliant on expert judgement rather than actual transactions.  And global markets 
remain overly reliant on Libor, a benchmark that may not exist beyond 2021.  That reliance is neither 
desirable nor sustainable.   
That’s why authorities internationally have worked with market participants to identify alternative benchmarks 
based on actual transactions.  These are overnight rates – a relatively pure read on risk-free rates in each 
economy.   
In sterling, the market has chosen SONIA, a benchmark now administered by the Bank of England.  In April 
we implemented reforms to SONIA that boosted the volume of transactions captured by a factor of three to 
£50bn per day.   
                                                      
7 These areas are: the role that ‘cover and deal’ and similar trading models play in the FX market; how market participants adjust their 
pricing on E-Trading Platforms and when trading by voice; and, disclosures regarding last look practices. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
The focus now is on transition.  Market participants in every sector and market that use Libor now need to 
come together to identify and resolve issues, change business practices, and adopt alternative benchmarks.  
In sterling, over 90 institutions, including banks, law firms, corporates, asset managers, trade associations 
and infrastructure firms, are directly involved in this effort supported by the Bank and FCA. 
Transition to SONIA will bring a number of benefits. 
Market participants can have the confidence that SONIA faithfully represents conditions in a deep underlying 
market.   
They can also be assured that SONIA’s design is robust to future changes in money markets because, if 
necessary, SONIA’s data inputs can evolve. 
Near risk-free rates like SONIA are a better reflection of the general level of interest rates than Libor – which 
is affected by fluctuations in the perceived credit quality of banks (as well as other technical factors as seen 
recently).  Interest payments for benchmark users should be less volatile as a result, especially in times of 
stress, and products referencing SONIA should provide a better hedge for duration risk. 
Over time the private sector will develop a wider range of products referencing SONIA.  Futures contracts 
have already been created.  We can expect Floating Rate Notes and loans referencing SONIA to follow.  The 
end point should be an ecosystem for interest rate markets which has an altogether healthier foundation than 
at present.   
Developing the infrastructure around the near risk-free benchmarks globally, and assisting market 
participants in dealing with legacy Libor portfolios, is a significant opportunity for innovation.  Firms here in 
London are well placed to take advantage.   
As mentioned, international authorities are working closely together, and I know Bill Dudley is going to pick 
up the baton and talk more about the transition to risk-free rates from a US perspective. 
It is an immense pleasure to introduce Bill. 
It is an honour that he is here at this Markets Forum to give his last keynote speech as President of the New 
York Federal Reserve.  And it is appropriate given his deep commitment to fighting misconduct and 
improving standards of behaviour in the institutions we regulate and supervise.  Bill had the wisdom to 
appreciate quickly how cultural and ethical issues lay at the heart of the global financial crisis, and he has 
been a consistent and strong voice in arguing for what needs to be done to improve individual behaviour, 
firm culture, and industry ethics. 
On behalf everyone, I would like to thank you Bill for your many, invaluable contributions throughout this 
exceptional period for financial markets and the global economy.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
On a personal note, I will greatly miss your deep technical expertise, open-mindedness, wisdom, good 
humour and friendship.  Today isn’t really goodbye but au revoir. 
Because, whether it is the financial system or as colleagues, we know the future will be better if we stay 
connected. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
 