   Ap r il  1 6 ,  2 01 8 
Bank  of  Japan 
Central Banking in the Digital Age 
Closing Remarks at the IMF-JFSA-BOJ Conference on FinTech 
Masayoshi Amamiya 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  all  the  participants.  It  was  a  great 
pleasure for us, the International Monetary Fund, the Financial Services Agency, and the 
Bank of Japan, to hold such a large conference on financial innovation in Asia. Indeed, 
this conference symbolizes how the world has changed in this decade. 
IT innovation and Changes in Finance and Economy 
Looking back on 2008,  a decade  ago, the biggest challenge to the  IMF  and financial 
authorities all over the world was how to tackle the global financial crisis. Smartphones 
were still in their very early stage. Crypto-currencies had not yet appeared. 
Since  then  the  world  economic  landscape  has  dramatically  changed.  The  global 
economy has overcome the crisis and regained its growth momentum. With the rapid 
innovation  of  information  technologies,  the  movement  described  as  the  "information 
revolution"  or  "data  revolution"  has  developed  globally,  bringing  new  growth 
opportunities for financial services and economic activities. Asia has been particularly 
influenced by such IT innovation. 
Let me pick up the issue of "financial inclusion" for example. This was a global social 
issue already as early as 2008. Since then the number of smartphones has skyrocketed, 
and many people, including those in emerging economies in Asia, have become able to 
access  financial  services  via  smartphones.  IT  innovation  has  promoted  "financial 
inclusion"  in  a  way  which  was  not  expected  a  decade  ago.  Such  wider  access  to 
financial services is also stimulating various new economic activities. 
Smartphones  also  produce  a  gigantic  amount  of  data  as  people  use  smartphones 
everywhere in their daily lives. Such "big data" are becoming more and more important 
as  intangible  assets  in  a  broad  range  of  economic  activities.  Global  "data-giant" 
companies,  which  have  grown  rapidly  in  recent  years,  often  provide  various  services 
including financial ones free of charge, while utilizing big data gathered through these 
services  for  multiple  purposes.  Moreover,  IT  innovation  has  created  new  business 
 1 
models, such as "the sharing economy."   
New policy challenges 
IT  innovation  also  raises  various  new  challenges  to  financial  authorities,  including 
central banks. Among them, let me point out four issues. 
(i) Impacts on Financial Markets 
First, high-frequency trading, or HFT, utilizing algorithms and AI has recently increased 
its role in various financial markets. Financial authorities need to carefully examine how 
such trading strategies influence price formation, market volatility and liquidity, since 
they may have important implications in terms of market stability and the transmission 
mechanisms of monetary policy. Also in this context, the new role of central banks as 
"market makers of last resort" moves into the spotlight. 
(ii) Impacts on Real Economy and Prices 
Second, we should try to understand the impacts of IT innovation as well as IT-oriented 
new  business  activities,  such  as  e-commerce  and  the  sharing  economy,  on  the  real 
economy and price developments. Such issues are deep-rooted and wide-ranging, and 
not limited to the issue of statistics, such as the difficulty in measuring the growth of 
e-commerce and the overall retail sales due to the limited coverage of existing statistics.   
Let  me  raise  one  of  the  fundamental  challenges.  Nowadays  data-giant  companies 
provide various free services because they use these services also for collecting data and 
utilize those data for their business. From the users' viewpoint, they actually give their 
own  data  to  those  companies  in  exchange  for  using  these  services,  instead  of  paying 
fees. It is becoming more and more difficult to grasp such new economic activities by 
traditional  analytical  tools,  such  as  demand  and  supply  curves  on  price-quantity 
dimension.   
  2 
(iii) Importance of Cyber Security and Data Protection 
Third,  in  accordance  with  IT  innovation,  cyber-security  and  data-protection  are 
becoming  more  important  for  maintaining  financial  stability.  Recently,  data-giant 
companies  have  entered  into  financial  services,  and  the  utilization  of  big  data  has 
become more pronounced in financial businesses. In addition, various new instruments, 
including the internet and smartphones, are used for access to financial services. All of 
these developments emphasize the importance of cyber-security and data-protection. 
(iv) Impacts on Currency, Payments and Settlements 
Lastly, we should carefully examine the impacts of IT innovation on currency, payments 
and  settlements.  "Crypto-currencies"  and  "central  bank  digital  currencies"  are  now 
gathering great attention all over the world. Moreover, these issues also stimulate global 
discussions on to what extent central banks should provide their payment and settlement 
infrastructures to society. I would like to elaborate on these issues further. 
Innovation and Currency System 
Looking  back  in  history,  many  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  were 
established  to  overcome  the  turmoil  caused  by  the  issuance  of  multiple  payment 
instruments in a disorderly manner, so as to restore stability of the monetary system. In 
order  to  fulfill  such  a  mission,  central  banks  were  exclusively  assigned  the  role  of 
issuing "central bank money" with finality, namely, banknotes and central bank deposits. 
The  modern  currency  system,  which  consists  of  a  central  bank  and  private  banks,  is 
characterized as "a two-tiered system." 
In  this  two-tiered  system,  the  central  bank  specializes  in  supplying  banknotes  and 
central bank deposits, while private banks perform the function of credit creation and 
provide  deposit  currencies  as  broader  money.  Through  such  activities,  private  banks 
provide payment services to the general public and allocate financial resources to the 
economy as loans and credits. 
 3 
From the perspective of information processing, the emergence of central banks allowed 
people  to  get  rid  of  the  burden  of  evaluating  the  credibility  of  many  payment 
instruments.  The  creation  of  central  banks  has  substantially  reduced  the  costs  of 
information processing in payments and settlements. At the same time,  private banks 
have contributed to efficient allocation of financial resources through their function of 
information processing. The modern two-tiered structure reflects the wisdom of human 
beings in history to achieve both efficiency and stability in the currency system. 
In this regard, the issuance of central bank digital currencies for general use could be 
analogous  to  allowing  households  and  firms  to  directly  have  accounts  in  the  central 
bank. This may have a large impact on the aforementioned two-tiered currency system 
and private banks' financial intermediation. 
Under the current system, the central bank allows direct access to its accounts only to a 
limited number of entities such as private banks. From the viewpoint of the usage of 
information,  the  central  bank  leaves  the  private  sector  the  opportunities  to  utilize 
detailed data such as "who buys what" attached to daily transactions. At the same time, 
the  central  bank  can  obtain  the  information  necessary  to  maintain  the  stability  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  through  operating  its  wholesale  settlement  systems. 
The  issuance  of  central  bank  digital  currencies  could  also  affect  such  a  role-sharing 
structure for utilizing information. 
To sum up, IT innovation raises many fundamental questions and challenges related to 
the  currency  system,  the  design  of  central  bank  infrastructure  and  the  utilization  of 
information attached to economic activities. I sincerely hope our understanding of these 
issues will be further deepened in the future. 
Initiatives Taken by the Bank of Japan 
To  tackle  these  new  challenges,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  recently  been  taking  various 
initiatives  in  the  fields  of  innovation  and  FinTech.  In  2016  the  Bank  established  its 
"FinTech  Center."  The  Bank  has  also  been  conducting  a  joint  research  project  called 
"Project  Stella"  with  the  European  Central  Bank  to  study  the  potential  of  distributed 
 4 
ledger technology. Although the Bank of Japan does not have a plan to issue its own 
digital currency at this juncture, the Bank fully acknowledges the importance of deeply 
understanding  innovative  technologies  not  only  for  maintaining  financial  stability  but 
also  for  seeking  the  possibility  of  applying  them  to  central  bank  infrastructure  in  the 
future. Central banks should always be attentive to on-going innovation, and continue 
making  efforts  to  provide  the  best  infrastructure  to  society  in  accordance  with  the 
development of technologies. 
I  believe  that  this  conference  was  very  informative  and  fruitful  for  all  participants.  I 
sincerely  hope  that  discussions  on  these  issues  will  continue  in  various  international 
forums, in order for innovations to contribute to the development of financial services 
and economic activities. At the end of my remarks, I wish each of you a safe journey 
home. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 5 
