Yves Mersch: The limits of central bank financing in resolution
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  (IMFS)  Distinguished  Lecture  Series,  Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, 30 January 2018.
1. Introduction
 My talk today will focus on the provision of central bank liquidity to entities that are close to or in
resolution – a topic that has attracted much public interest.
This  discussion  is  taking  place  in  the  broader  context  of  the  completion  of  Europe’s  banking
union.  But  a  single  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS),  alongside  an  effective,
common backstop for bank resolution, remains one of the missing pieces.
While  we  are  not  there  yet  with  respect  to  EDIS  and  indeed  common  backstops,  the  need
remains for banks to be able to plan ahead and obtain liquidity, even if determined as failing or
likely to fail or once the resolution process is activated.
The question is whether and to what extent this liquidity should be provided by central banks.
The ECB’s position on the matter has been constant: the provision of central bank liquidity – be it
through  monetary  policy  credit  operations  or  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  should  not  be
automatically  assumed  in  resolution  planning.  Resolution  measures  should  be  financed  by
contributions from shareholders and creditors of the bank, or by the State or at Union level, but
not by central banks.
This  obviously  does  not  mean  that  an  entity  otherwise  in  compliance  with  central  bank
requirements for the provision of liquidity cannot access such liquidity.
2. Guiding principles and different objectives behind the provision of liquidity
Before  going  into  the  specifics,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the actorsproviding  the
liquidity; the objectives for which the liquidity is provided; and the beneficiaries of the liquidity.
Starting with the actors, they can be grouped into two categories: on the one hand, the central
banks,  in  the  performance  of  both  Eurosystem  and  national  tasks;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
governmental entities and supranational authorities.
If  we  now  look  at  the  first  group  of  actors,  the  central  banks,  they  have  been  granted
independence from the political instruction of the government. This means that they cannot be
instructed  to  provide  liquidity  –  the  provision  of  liquidity  must  be  their  free  and  independent
decision. This applies regardless of whether the central bank provides liquidity in order to pursue
the objectives assigned to it by primary law or under domestic legislation to fulfil its lender of last
resort function.
Moving on to the objectives, liquidity can be provided to serve the primary objective of maintaining
price  stability.  This  is  without  prejudice  to  supporting  national  central  bank  objectives  or  to
ensuring financial stability to which the European System of Central Banks (or the ESCB) only
contributes. But it can also be provided as part of other economic or fiscal policies. While the first
set of objectives are the responsibilities of Eurosystem central banks, economic and fiscal policy
objectives are firmly within the remit of governmental entities. Central banks can exercise powers
only within their mandate and therefore provide liquidity for an objective that has been assigned to
them by law.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Concerning  the beneficiaries,  liquidity  can  be  provided  to  a  solvent  institution  (this  is  a  typical
central banking function and therefore of a temporary nature) or to an insolvent institution, also for
a  longer  period  (this,  by  contrast,  is  a  government  task)  under  the  scrutiny  of  competition
authorities.
Having said this, I will focus first on liquidity provided by central banks.
There  are  two  main  sources  of  overnight  central  bank  liquidity  generally  available  to  credit
institutions. One is in the form of Eurosystem monetary policy operations. The other is in the
form of emergency liquidity assistance or “ELA”. These two sources of liquidity meet different
objectives and are provided under different legal frameworks.
Our  constitutional  mandate  requests  that  we  at  all  times  to  pursue  the  Eurosystem’s
price stability objective in line with a functioning open market economy. The corollary is the
provision  of  liquidity  must  ultimately  serve  the  functioning  of  the  real  economy.  Eurosystem
monetary  policy  has  to  be  provided  to  an  entity  that  participates  in  the  monetary  policy
transmission  mechanism.  Participating  in  monetary  policy  transmission  means  in  principle
channelling liquidity to the real economy. Extending life-lines to institutions outside the monetary
policy transmission mechanism is structural or economic policy or financial stability. But if there
are  financial  stability  considerations  the  central  bank  can  only  support  or  participate  within  its
mandate.
the  prohibition  of  monetary 
In addition, the provision  of  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  liquidity  must  also  comply  with  other
requirements  set  down  by  primary  law,  notably  with  the  requirement  that  lending  is  based  on
adequate  collateral  and 
financing.The  Eurosystem  should
be adequately protected against any risks associated with its lending activity. I will come back
to this point later. And as I have said, central bank independence also plays an important role in
the sense that a central bank cannot be instructed to provide liquidity, even in a crisis. It has to
assess the situation of each entity and decide independently.
I will make a few remarks on the monetary financing prohibition – an important requirement
flowing from the Treaty with which the provision of central bank liquidity (including in resolution)
has to comply. Any assessment of liquidity provision against the prohibition of monetary financing
requires a careful case-by-case analysis.
The  ECB  has  repeatedly  stated  in  its  –  publicly  available  –  Convergence  Reports  and  in  its
opinions  that  financing  by  central  banks,  even  when  granted  independently  and  at  their  full
discretion,  of  credit  institutions  other  than  in  connection  with  their  central  banking  tasks,  in
particular the support of insolvent credit and/or other financial institutions, is incompatible with
the monetary financing prohibition.  Financing  insolvent  institutions  is  a  government  task  –
indeed  the  ECB  has  identified  criteria  to  distinguish  between  government  tasks  and  central
banking tasks. The ECB has also repeatedly clarified that while central banks may be involved in
administering resolution measures, they should not finance them. National central banks could
also administer resolution measures on a genuine agency basis on behalf and for the account
of a third party, that is, the government or one of its entities. In this case, however, the central
bank would not itself provide liquidity, but simply carry out these tasks like an agent.
It is a primary law requirement that lending can only take place against “adequate collateral”. On
the basis of this fundamental requirement, the Eurosystem defines the rules and conditions for
collateral to be acceptable, or “adequate”, for monetary policy purposes. This framework is set
down  by  means  of  various  ECB  legal  acts  and  instruments  (in  particular  in  the  General
Documentation guideline). Adequate collateral for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework
means, first, that collateral must fully protect the central bank against losses in credit operations
as  these  losses  are  in  principle,  shared.  Consequently  the  Eurosystem  is  required,  under
primary law, to act as a secured creditor. In concrete terms this is ensured through pledge or
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
repurchase  agreements  adequately  secured  by  an  asset  capable  of  being  appropriated,
transferred and/or sold at first notice. A key point here is that a standalone guarantee has never
been recognised as adequate collateral under our framework. Guarantees can only play a limited
role, namely to make up for the lesser credit quality of a given collateral provided by a financially
sound  counterparty. In no circumstances would a guarantee “cure” the lack of financial
soundness of a given counterparty, or the lack of collateral or a combination of the two,
which is often the case in a resolution scenario.
If a public guarantee can prevent insolvency, it is only after having tested its value in the markets.
If a public guarantee serves to cut out the markets and replace them with central bank liquidity it
would contravene the principle of an open market economy with free competition and could be
seen as a circumvention of the monetary financing prohibition.
Indeed it is already questionable to what extent the counterparty is able to fulfil the criterion of
financial soundness. Finally, as I just mentioned, it is an important requirement in our framework
that collateral can be freely realised and sold at a market price. In the case of a mere guarantee
this is not obvious and thereby offers a standard of protection which is legally not comparable to
appropriable  collateral.  If  all  prudential  and  regulatory  shortcomings  could  be  replaced  by  a
guarantee, it would undermine the whole framework of prudential and monetary intervention and,
in the case of public guarantees, the competition principles underlying an open market economy.
This  is  particularly  true  if  a  guarantee  in  rem  would  be  replaced  by  a  blanket  guarantee  ad
personam  to  a  bank.  Why  then  not  allow  a  guarantee  for  all  the  banks  to  maintain  financial
stability. A cure all guarantee that a central bank must accept is a handover of money creation to
the Government at EU or national level. The acceptance of own used government-guaranteed
bank bonds in the past was therefore rapidly be curtailed by the Governing Council of the ECB.
Alongside “adequate collateral”, the second important layer of protection against the Eurosystem
suffering potential loss is the requirement to interact only with financially sound counterparties.
Without  devoting  too  much  time  to  the  technical  details,  counterparties  to  Eurosystem  credit
operations must fulfil certain eligibility criteria. In essence, an entity must not only be a licensed
credit institution or a branch but also needs to be financially sound. Article 18.1 of the Statute of
the ESCB also allows the provision of liquidity to “ credit institutions and market participants”, for
example financial market infrastructures such as central counterparty clearing houses. But I will
not reflect on this particular case if not to question that a credit institution in or close to resolution
is  still  participating  in  the  market  if  it  would  have  the  central  bank  as  sole  or  predominant
counterparty. The financial soundness of a given counterparty is assessed by the Eurosystem
on  an  ongoing  basis,  notably  taking  into  account  each  entity’s  reported  capital,  liquidity  and
leverage ratios. The specific eligibility criteria are to be found in our framework and in particular
the General Documentation guideline.
I should add at this point that, where necessary, the ECB’s Governing Council may also take
discretionary  measures  in  individual  cases.  So,  in  some  justified  instances  where  there  are
prudential concerns, it may reject certain assets as collateral or the counterparties despite their
being eligible.
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  second  source  of  central  bank  liquidity: emergency  liquidity
assistance, or ELA.
Emergency liquidity assistance can be provided by national central banks on the basis of
their national competences and to pursue national objectives, namely to preserve financial
stability when a solvent entity is facing temporary liquidity issues.
The provision of ELA must likewise be backed by sufficient collateral. It must also comply with
primary  law  requirements,  such  as  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  and  it  should  not
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
interfere with the tasks and objectives of the ESCB (in which case the Governing Council can
object to it).
I will make only a few more comments on the provision of central bank liquidity. Central
banks can only provide liquidity in the context of pursuing their objectives and to carry out the
tasks within their mandate. In addition, with regard to the monetary financing prohibition, the ECB
has repeatedly stated that the financing of resolution measures is a government task. Does this
mean  that  the  Eurosystem  would  be  prevented  from  providing  liquidity  in  the  context  of
resolution? The answer is, not necessarily, as long as the provision of liquidity complies with the
requirements  of  any  of  the  two  sources  of  central  bank  liquidity  I  just  described.  These
requirements are even more strict in the case of monetary policy liquidity than for emergency
liquidity  assistance.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  asset  separation  tool,  liquidity  can  be
provided to the solvent part of the bank that is participating in monetary policy transmission and
not  in  order  to  finance  the  separation  itself.  Liquidity  can  be  provided  under  the  generally
applicable monetary policy rules and respecting the limits set out in the Treaty and any Governing
Council  decisions. Yet, whilst the provision of central bank liquidity should not be ruled
out in resolution, it should not be assumed either.
This  is  precisely  the  reason  why  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  was  established:  financing  of
resolution (setting aside the case of recent national insolvency proceedings) should no longer
come from the taxpayers, but from the banks themselves. The provision of liquidity by the Single
Resolution Fund is of key importance in the euro area. But since, for the time being, this source
of  liquidity  is  yet  to  be  fully  operationalised,  the  question  is  where  should  the  backstop  come
from? I argue that this source cannot come from the central banks, as resolution financing is a
government task.
This is nothing new, as the idea that central bank liquidity should not be assumed nor
ruled out is laid down in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and has
1
also been underlined by the ECB on a number of occasions.
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  second  group  of  actors  providing  liquidity  in  resolution  –
governmental entities and supranational authorities – and the liquidity provided by the
Single Resolution Fund on which I will be relatively brief.
The SRF ensures uniform practice in the financing of resolutions within the Single Resolution
Mechanism  (SRM).  It  also  ensures  that  the  financial  industry,  as  a  whole,  finances  the
stabilisation of the financial system, as it pools contributions raised at national level from entities
within the Single Resolution Board’s remit in each of the 19 Member States in the banking union.
SRF support may take the form of guarantees or loans if certain conditions are met and to the
extent necessary to ensure the effective application of the resolution tools, within the resolution
scheme.
But, as you may know, the SRF is not yet fully funded. It will be gradually built up during its first
eight years of existence and should reach the target level of at least 1% of the amount of covered
deposits of all credit institutions within the banking union by the end of 2023. So it does not have
sufficient funding at this stage to provide liquidity on a large scale.
On the other hand, there is the question whether the fund will be sufficient, even in the final stage,
in the event of a very big and widespread financial crisis. And if not, where would the backstop
come from? Currently the Fund also lacks a common fiscal backstop as there are still dissenting
views  concerning  an  eventual  mutualisation  of  recapitalisation  needs  resulting  from  so-called
“legacy  assets”.  In  this  context,  one  of  my  key  messages  is  that  the  monetary  financing
prohibition would prevent such fiscal mutualisation through the backdoor of the Eurosystem.
Of course, there might be situations where a “funding gap” could arise. How to fill that funding
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
gap  will  have  to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  also  looking  at  the  responsibilities  of
governments which are the other source of financial support in resolution through State aid.
But it is not my intention to reflect on how such future situations could be dealt with; I have come
here to discuss the limits of central bank funding in resolution. In this respect, it is important to
repeat that, ultimately, resolution planning should not assume that central bank liquidity
will fill the gaps.
3. Concrete examples
Let me now give you some concrete examples. We should clearly distinguish between two types
of  cases  depending  on  where  we  are  in  the  resolution  process:  at  the  time  the  bank  is
determined as failing or likely to fail, or when it is put into resolution.
At the time the entity is determined as failing or likely to fail
As a precondition for a resolution action to be taken the entity needs to be determined as failing
or likely to fail. This is one of the three cumulative conditions for triggering resolution. The other
two  are:  No  private  funding  in  the  market  and  public  interest,  in  the  sense  that  resolution  is
necessary to achieve its objectives (art 31 BRRD and 14 SRMR).
At that stage though, it will be too early to know whether there is a reasonable prospect of an
alternative private sector solution or supervisory intervention and indeed whether resolution is in
the public interest. Nonetheless, it is inescapable that the entity’s risk profile will be worsened by
the very fact of the “failing or likely to fail” determination.
Since with “failing or likely to fail” the supervisor hands over to resolution, how can it be financially
sound  since  the  respect  of  prudential  criteria  is  by  definition  controlled  by  a  microprudential
authority?
In  principle,  such  an  entity  could  still  have  recourse  to  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  liquidity
provided that it complies with the counterparty eligibility criteria, in particular that it is financially
sound  and  has  sufficient  eligible  collateral.  However,  to  address  the  uncertainty  and  the
associated risk in the Eurosystem’s counterparty framework, our rules provide that the entity’s
access to Eurosystem monetary policy credit instruments is frozen at the level prevailing at the
time it is determined as failing or likely to fail. And this decision can obviously only be revisited
through a new decision once it is assessed that all conditions for an unlimited access have been
restored.
Moreover,  if  necessary,  the  Governing  Council  can  also  impose  further  restrictions  on  the
grounds of prudence, including suspending access to monetary policy credit operations for an
entity with very low capital ratios. Such decisions would be taken on a case-by-case basis to
address the specific risk presented by the counterparty.
Now  let  me  elaborate  further.  Let  us  assume  that  following  the  “failing  or  likely  to  fail”
determination, the entity is facing cash outflows. Since the terms of its access to Eurosystem
monetary policy credit operations will have been frozen and perhaps even further restricted, it will
not be able to meet its increased liquidity needs through this means.
What will the bank do? It is likely to seek recourse to ELA from its national central bank in order to
meet these additional liquidity needs. So if the entity is assessed as “solvent” by the competent
supervisory authority and it has sufficient clearly identified eligible collateral it will most probably
receive ELA from its national central bank.
Let me pause a moment on these two concepts. The microprudential authorities’ assessment of
“solvency”  under  the  current  ELA  agreement  is  based  on  a  number  of  backward-looking
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicators,  such  as  the  reported  Common  Equity  Tier  1,  Tier  1  and  total  capital  ratios  with  a
possible  grace  period  in  the  case  of  a  credible  prospect  of  recapitalisation  within  a  limited
timeframe.  We  will  probably  change  these  indicators  in  the  future  in  order  to  take  account  of
forward-looking  elements,  in  line  with  the  evolution  of  supervisory  practices,  so  as  to  have  a
more accurate picture about the solvency of the bank and the appropriateness of continuing to
provide ELA, and in view of the fact that FOLTF means a handover to resolution authorities.
What constitutes sufficient collateral for the purposes of ELA is currently for the different national
central  banks  (NCBs)  to  define.  It  is,  however,  essential  that  sufficient  information  on  such
collateral  is  made  available  to  the  relevant  NCB  and,  in  turn,  to  the  Eurosystem.  If  there  isn’t
enough information, higher haircuts will need to be applied to make up for the increased risk until
the necessary details are provided.
But ultimately, the provision of emergency liquidity assistance depends on each central bank’s
national framework, since ELA is carried out as a national function which national central banks
may  perform  unless  the  Governing  Council  finds  with  a  2/3  majority  that  it  interferes  with  the
objectives and tasks of the ESCB.
Since the provision of ELA can interfere with implementation of the single monetary policy (as it
is a parallel source of liquidity to the single monetary policy), the Governing Council needs to be
informed  of  the  ELA  operation  in  a  timely  manner.  It  will  assess  the  situation  and,  if  an
interference  with  Eurosystem  tasks  is  indeed  established,  object  to  the  granting  of  ELA.  The
specific  form  of  an  eventual  objection  is  at  the  discretion  of  the  Governing  Council.  The
Governing Council could, for instance, set certain limits or conditions on the provision of ELA, like
the preservation of the financial independence of the NCB.
So central bank liquidity could be rolled over within the limits of the entity’s frozen access and
through ELA, but this is clearly not warranted in all scenarios for an entity determined as failing or
likely to fail.
At the time the entity is put into resolution
I’ve talked about central banking funding at the time the bank is determined as failing or likely to
fail. Let us now examine what can happen later on in the process.
First of all, there are some clear-cut situations where no liquidity can be provided by a central
bank, be it under the monetary policy framework or ELA. This is the case for entities put into
insolvency or liquidation proceedings.
Second, let us take the example of an entity that is put in resolution following a “failing or likely
to  fail”  determination.  Let  us  assume  that  it  is  no  longer  contributing  to  monetary  policy
transmission, because it no longer channels liquidity to the real economy and is in the process of
being wound down.
Wind-down  entities,  whose  main  purpose  is  the  gradual  divestment  of  their  assets  and  the
cessation  of  their  business,  have  been  excluded  from  access  to  monetary  policy  credit
operations. This applies for asset management vehicles, too.
As regards their access to emergency liquidity assistance, the relevant central bank assesses
the situation of each entity according to that central bank’s national framework. However, in most
cases, such entities are unlikely to obtain access to ELA if there are doubts as to their solvency,
or if this would raise monetary financing concerns.
Third, let us take the situation where the application of one of the resolution tools will lead to the
credit  institution  becoming  financially  sound  again.  This  would  happen  through  the  sale  of
business tool, the bridge institution tool, the asset separation tool, or the bail-in tool.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The use of these resolution tools will give rise to a number of individual situations which I will not
detail here. I can say, though, that in situations in which the failing counterparty continues to exist,
its restored solvency will first have to be confirmed by the competent supervisory authority before
the  Governing  Council  will  decide  to  “unfreeze”  its  access  to  Eurosystem  monetary  policy
liquidity. Such confirmation of the entity’s solvency will also be needed for the provision of ELA.
The  entity  would  need  to  be  handed  back  to  the  relevant  competent  supervisory  authority  to
provide information on the required observation of ratios.
If the entity is a newly created counterparty, such as a bridge bank, it will first have to be licensed,
or  obtain  a  licence,  to  operate  as  a  credit  institution.  It  will  then  have  to  be  accepted  as  a
Eurosystem counterparty. This means it will have to fulfil all the eligibility criteria set down in our
framework, including the requirement to comply with the relevant capital, liquidity and leverage
ratios.
Therefore, if applying one of the resolution tools results in the entity’s financial soundness being
restored, or if combining its business with that of an absorbing entity results in the emergence of
a  financially  sound  entity  or  group,  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  could  resume  after  the
Eurosystem  has  made  its  assessment.  But  this  will  depend  on  the  elements  I  have  just
described.
Time and planning will be of the essence. Indeed, in this stage, the flow of information will be
crucial and the competent supervisory authority will have to provide all relevant information on
whether the counterparty is fulfilling its capital requirements, so that the necessary decisions on
access can be taken.
4. Conclusion
Let me draw to a close.
As I have already indicated, liquidity provision by central banks in the event of resolution must not
be assumed ex ante, even though the possibility is not excluded provided the specific rules and
objectives  of  the  Eurosystem  are  followed.  The  provision  of  central  bank  liquidity  will  be  the
independent  and  ad  hoc  decision  of  the  Eurosystem  under  the  respective  frameworks  for
monetary policy and potential emergency lending not interfering with monetary policy.
Resolution  financing  is  a  government  task,  now  complemented  by  the  rules  and  procedures
applied  by  the  Single  Resolution  Board  and  the  national  resolution  authorities  within  the
framework of the SRM. Central banks provide liquidity, not solvency support. And funding gaps
that cannot be addressed by the industry or through the Single Resolution Fund should be filled,
ultimately, by Member States.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Opinion CON/2012/99 on the proposal for the BRRD: “The ECB wishes to underline that this provision should not
in any way affect the competence of central banks to decide independently and at their full discretion on the
provision of central bank liquidity to solvent credit institutions, both in standard monetary policy operations as
well as emergency liquidity assistance, within the limits imposed by the monetary financing prohibition under the
Treaty”.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
