Benoît Cœuré: Central banks as risk managers
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  53rd  SEACEN  Governors'  Conference/  High-Level  Seminar  and  the  37th  Meeting  of  the
SEACEN Board of Governors, Bangkok, 16 December 2017.
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today.
 Before I comment on this panel’s topic, let me express my gratitude and satisfaction with the
strategic partnership between the ECB and SEACEN, which got off to a successful start this
year. Many cooperation activities, ranging from seminars on macroprudential analysis to central
bank governance, have already been launched and more is being planned for 2018. I look forward
to strengthening our cooperation over the coming years.
The topic of this panel deals with the implications of political risks for central banks. Given the
independence  of  central  banks  and  their  legal  separation  from  the  political  dimension,  this  is
obviously a complex issue – and one where monetary policymakers need to tread very carefully.
For this reason, I would first like to spell out how the ECB generally incorporates different kinds of
risk into its monetary policy strategy, and how this has influenced our actions over the last few
years. I will argue that every central bank is to a considerable extent a risk manager, reflecting
the forward-looking nature of monetary policy.
I will then explain why political risks cannot be addressed in the same way as economic risks.
Central banks should not prejudge political outcomes through their actions. Rather, they should
address their effects if and when they become visible in the economic and financial data that are
relevant for their price stability mandates.
Monetary policy and risk management
My starting point is that monetary policy works with long and variable lags.
In the euro area, for example, the full transmission of interest rate decisions to output has been
estimated to be between one and two years, and even longer for inflation.  So, if we were to
decide policy on the basis of past outcomes, we would always be behind the curve. Monetary
policymakers therefore have to look at the economy in a forward-looking way.
1
To do this, we produce forecasts, on a regular basis, that indicate our central expectations for
the economy – the baseline. In principle, this should be enough to form a view on how policy
should  be  designed  today.  But  we  all  know  that  this  would  be  a  bad  idea.  Policymakers  are
typically poor forecasters, and central bankers are no exception.  This is nothing to be ashamed
of. It merely testifies to the fact that the past is often a poor predictor of the future.
2
You can see this quite clearly for the euro area on my first slide. We call it the “spaghetti chart”. It
shows  the  repeated  inflation  forecast  misses  over  the  past  few  years.  On  each  and  every
occasion there were good reasons to assume the economy would go the predicted way. But on
each and every occasion unpredictable shocks hit our economy that made our central forecast
3
redundant.
The implication is that we would likely have made severe policy mistakes if we had based our
policy decisions entirely on our baseline.
And bear in mind that the economy can be more or less elastic to different types of shock. A tail
risk, if it materialises, may cause the economy to react in a non-linear and potentially disruptive
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
way – hyperinflation and deflation being typical examples of risks central banks want to avoid.
For all these reasons, central banks usually augment their forecasts with an assessment of the
risks surrounding them. This comprises a distribution of risks – the range of possible outcomes
and the likelihood of their happening – which, in turn, allows us to form a view on the balance of
risks, i.e. whether they are overall tilted to the upside or downside, and on the probability of tail
events.
Such risk assessments are not an exact science and there is no automatic link between them
and  policy  decisions.  But  we  do  at  times  apply  what Alan  Greenspan  famously  called  a  “risk
management” approach to monetary policy.  If the balance of risks is tilted very strongly in one
direction, or if the distribution of risks is especially wide, there might be a case for us to act.
4
For example, we might need to provide forward guidance, i.e. specifying how we would react to
particular  risks.  Alternatively,  we  might  need  to  change  our  policy  stance  pre-emptively,
especially in situations where tail risks are material and it becomes cost-efficient to truncate that
part of the distribution.
The ECB’s monetary policy since mid-2014 illustrates these two aspects well.
Around that time, we saw the balance of risks to the inflation outlook shift decisively downwards,
while  the  distribution  of  risks  widened  to  encompass  outright  deflation,  as  you  can  see  by
comparing the blue and red lines on my second slide. If they had materialised, those risks would
have fundamentally compromised medium-term price stability, and so our strategy required us to
respond – even though our central forecast at that time was for a low but positive rate of inflation
in the years ahead.
We responded in two main ways.
First, we clarified our reaction function to the main risks we saw and the instruments we would
use if each of those risks materialised.  This sent a clear signal to observers that we were ready
to respond in the case of adverse contingencies.
5
Then,  when  those  contingencies  arose,  we  followed  through  with  our  forward  guidance  and
introduced a set of policy measures that was designed to cover the full downside distribution of
risks  –  that  is,  a  very  accommodative  policy  stance  to  combat  disinflationary  forces,  and  an
option to be even more accommodative if the situation deteriorated into outright deflation.
Thanks  to  these  policy  interventions,  the  distribution  of  risks  has  narrowed  considerably  over
time – as you can see from the yellow line – and we no longer see a meaningful probability of
deflation. The balance of risks has also shifted upwards as the economic recovery has gathered
steam.  The  current  economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area  is  stronger  than  it  has  been  for  a
decade and broader than for two decades.
This  improving  picture  is  the  main  reason  for  our  recent  decision  to  recalibrate  our  policy  by
reducing  the  pace  of  our  monthly  asset  purchases  from  €60  billion  to  €30  billion,  starting  in
January.
Of  course,  risks  emanate  not  only  from  our  own  jurisdiction,  the  euro  area,  where  we  can
respond with our monetary policy, but also from the rest of the world. Indeed, while the ECB’s
Governing Council currently sees the risks surrounding the euro area’s growth outlook as broadly
balanced, it sees downside risks relating primarily to global factors.
But  here  too  we  can  manage  risks  effectively  by  cooperating  closely  with  other  central
banks.  This does not mean that we decide jointly on policy actions. It rather means that through
our regular bilateral contacts, and dialogues in multilateral fora such as the IMF, the BIS and the
6
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
G20, we can achieve a better understanding of global risks and their channels of propagation.
And when risks do turn into shocks, this cooperation allows us to build up readiness and have
the tools in place to react.
Perhaps  most  importantly,  since  2011,  the  ECB  has  operated  a  permanent  network  of  swap
lines with the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve and others, allowing all
participating central banks to obtain foreign currency in the event of a liquidity squeeze. In 2013,
the ECB also established a swap agreement with the People’s Bank of China in recognition of its
growing  systemic  importance  as  well  as  the  rapidly  growing  bilateral  trade  and  investment
7
between the euro area and China.
Factoring in political risks
So how do we factor political risks into our decision-making?
I would argue that central banks cannot process political risks in the same way as economic
risks, for two reasons.
The first relates to the degree of uncertainty that surrounds political risks.
Here it is useful to recall Frank Knight’s classic distinction between risk and uncertainty.  Risk is
present  when  future  events  occur  with  measurable  probability.  Uncertainty  arises  when  the
likelihood  of  future  events  is  indefinite  or  incalculable.  In  conditions  of  uncertainty,  it  is  not
possible to manage risk in the sense of quantifying a range of outcomes. Decision-making then
depends on qualitative judgement.
8
To be sure, this is sometimes the situation central banks find themselves in when surveying the
economic outlook. The economy is always characterised by both risk and uncertainty, and there
are  certain  situations  –  for  instance,  financial  crises  –  in  which  models  fail  and  uncertainty
prevails.  In  these  cases,  central  banks  still  have  to  take  decisions  and  judgement  is  the  only
basis we have.
Yet, I would venture that economic risks are, on the whole, more quantifiable than political ones,
and  hence  more  conducive  to  active  risk  management.  This  is  because  we  have  workable
models of the economy with broadly established parameters and regularities. And even when the
parameters of those models appear to change – like the Phillips curve today – they still provide
us with a framework to think about those deviations and attempt to explain what we are seeing.
For politics, however, we rarely have such tools.
We  may  be  able  to  gauge  from  opinion  polls  the  likelihood  of  a  political  change  of  course
happening. We may even be able to weigh up political parties’ manifestos and estimate some of
the economic consequences of their coming to power.
But  fundamentally,  we  know  little  about  how  consumers  and  firms  will  react  to  political
developments,  and  especially 
that  are
macroeconomically relevant. Indeed, for  such  events  to  be  considered  a  risk  they  are  usually
unprecedented.
types  of  seismic  political  change 
the 
to 
This means that if we were to engage in managing political risks ex ante, most of the time we
would  be  operating  in  uncertain  circumstances  and  making  judgement  calls.  I  would  question
whether this could really be called risk management at all. Worse still, it would project us into the
political domain on very shaky analytical foundations.
This  brings  me  to  the  second  reason  why  economic  and  political  risks  have  to  be  treated
separately, and it relates to the endogeneity between monetary policy and risks. In the economic
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
realm,  such  endogeneity  has  been  recognised  as  desirable  and  is  a  key  reason  why  central
banks have become much more transparent over the past two decades or so.
A  clear  understanding  by  the  public  of  how  the  central  bank  will  react  to  economic  risks
automatically reduces the likelihood of such risks materialising. For instance, if markets expect
central banks to react to adverse shocks by providing monetary accommodation, easier financial
conditions  will  immediately  follow.  Such  anticipation  effects  can  increase  the  effectiveness  of
monetary policy.
For political risks, however, establishing such expectations would not be desirable. If we were to
communicate  that  we  will  take  decision  “X”  in  response  to  political  outcome  “Y”,  financial
conditions  would  move  as  the  probability  of  that  outcome  rose,  and  this  would  potentially
prejudice the result. That would be controversial in the case of global political risks. For domestic
ones, it would be unacceptable.
Even if the central bank had perfect foresight of the economic consequences, such a reaction
function would be seen as undue interference in the political process and it could undermine the
effectiveness of monetary policy, instead of increasing it.
And since our assessment would be largely based on judgement not analysis – for the reasons I
mentioned – we would find ourselves being accused of political meddling. This is a position that
no independent central bank would want to be in.
So  when  it  comes  to  political  risks,  we  have  to  be  data-driven.  We  do  not  prejudge  political
outcomes. And we do not try to risk-manage their effects on the economy, since we can rarely
predict those effects accurately – and worse, we may end up influencing political developments
and thereby compromising our independence.
The only way in which we can include political risks in our policy framework is by responding to
their visible impact on economic and financial conditions. This does not mean being complacent:
we  can  and  must  plan  for  all  eventualities.  But  we  react  to  data,  not  to  political  events
themselves.
In  some  ways,  this  is  analogous  to  the  debate  about  “leaning  versus  cleaning”  of  financial
bubbles: faced with so much uncertainty about what constitutes a bubble, most of the time it is
more efficient for central banks to use macroprudential tools to prick bubbles, or to ease policy
after  they  burst,  rather  than  to  try  and  identify  bubbles  in  advance  and  deflate  them  by  hiking
rates. The risk of false positives is just too high.
Two episodes in the recent history of Europe illustrate our data-dependent reaction function: the
threat of a break-up of the euro area in 2012; and the threat of a country leaving the European
Union in 2016, namely the United Kingdom.
In the first case, we had plenty of data showing that political risks were spilling over dangerously
into the economy and financial system. Markets began pricing in redenomination risk. Financial
conditions tightened significantly in some Member States. Bank lending contracted and the euro
9
area entered a second recession. Uncertainty in the euro area, as measured by the VStoxx ,
was on the rise – as the grey shaded area on my third slide shows.
Although at this point inflation was still being buoyed up by energy prices and indirect taxes, it
was plain to see that political risks had become economic ones, and were in turn endangering
the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability.  We  therefore  responded  by  launching  a  new
monetary  policy  programme  –  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  –  which  brought  this
episode of market turmoil to an end.
We did this, however, in a way that did not pre-empt political decisions. We took stock of the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
clear commitment of European leaders to hold our monetary union together and make it more
solid  by  establishing  a  banking  union.  And  we  made  the  OMT  programme  conditional  on
countries participating in an assistance programme with the European Stability Mechanism.
In  the  case  of  the  UK’s  vote  to  leave  the  EU,  the  situation  was  different,  however.  Various
forecasts  predicted  severe  market  turbulence  and  macroeconomic  fallout,  so  we  had
contingency plans in place for a range of outcomes. But as the slide illustrates, there were few
signs of uncertainty in euro area financial markets in the run-up to the vote or after it. And, so far,
there turned out to be no economic consequences with medium-term impact.
So  our  policy  stance  remained  consistent  with  the  data:  unchanged.  And  the  same  logic,
incidentally, can be applied to the recent political crisis in Catalonia. Though we monitored the
situation very closely, we saw no changes in financial conditions or the economy that would have
warranted a monetary policy shift.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Monetary policy is a forward-looking enterprise and policymakers always have to think in terms of
risks.  On  several  occasions  in  recent  years  the  ECB  has  changed  its  monetary  policy  in
response  to  emerging  tail  risks,  even  when  our  central  forecasts  for  inflation  painted  a  less
alarming picture.
This  can  be  seen  as  applying  a  risk  management  approach  to  monetary  policy,  in  which  we
prioritised truncating the most dangerous tails of the distribution rather than targeting our policy at
the modal point. The frequent central forecast misses we experienced suggest we were right to
do so and we avoided much worse outcomes as a result.
When it comes to political risks, however, central banks cannot be risk managers, since this
would bring us too close to being political actors. We can monitor political risks, and we can put
in place plans for responding to them – but we can only act when the data justify such a step,
and in a way that does not pre-empt political decisions.
Our actions during the crisis clearly demonstrated this reaction function.
Thank you.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
ECB (2010), “Monetary policy transmission in the euro area, a decade after the introduction of the euro”, Monthly
Bulletin, May.
For  an  evaluation  of  past  Eurosystem  forecasts,  see  ECB  (2013),  “An  assessment  of  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections”, Monthly Bulletin, May.
See e.g. Draghi, M. (2014), “Monetary policy in a prolonged period of low inflation”, speech at the ECB Forum on
Central Banking, Sintra, 26 May.
See Greenspan, A. (2004), “Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy”, speech at the Meetings of the American
Economic Association, San Diego, California, 3 January.
See  Draghi,  M.  (2014),  “Monetary  policy  communication  in  turbulent  times”,  speech  at  the  Conference  De
Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: Central banking in the next two decades, Amsterdam, 24 April.
For more on the pros and cons of policy coordination among central banks, see Cœuré, B. (2014), “Policy
coordination  in  a  multipolar  world”,  speech  at  the  5th  annual  Cusco  conference  organised  by  the  Central
Reserve Bank of Peru and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee: “70 years after Bretton Woods: Managing
the interconnectedness of the world economy”, Cusco, 22 July.
See www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2013/html/pr131010.en.html.
See Knight, F. (1921), “Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit”, Mifflin, Boston, New York.
Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50 Volatility Index.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
