BANK OF UGANDA 
  Key Note Address by 
 Louis Kasekende (PhD) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 at the 7th Annual International Leadership Conference organized by 
Makerere University Business School (MUBS) 
 Topic: Governance in the Financial Sector: Is the Financial Sector Over 
Regulated? 
 Entebbe, Uganda  
 November 29, 2017 
   1 
 Heads of Regulatory bodies within Uganda’s financial sector, 
The Principal, Makerere University Business School (MUBS) 
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning.  
 I would like to begin by commending the Makerere University Business School 
for  organising  this  International  Leadership  Conference  and  by  thanking  the 
Principal  of  the  Business  School,  Prof.  Balunywa,  for  inviting  me  to  give  a 
keynote address. The theme of my address this morning is financial regulation.  
I  want  to  explore  the  objectives  and  the  economic  rationale  for  regulating  the 
financial sector. I will then address the question of whether the financial sector 
is over regulated in Uganda. 
 What is the rationale for regulation of the financial sector? 
 Throughout the world, in both developed and developing countries, the financial 
sector is one of the most heavily regulated sectors of the economy. Many types 
of  financial  institutions  are  subject  to  a  raft  of  regulations,  such  as  capital 
requirements,  restrictions  on  their  business  activities  and  financial  disclosure 
requirements which are not applied to most other types of business.  
 For  the  most  part,  non-financial  sector  businesses,  such  as  manufacturing, 
construction or agriculture, are subject to health and safety standards to protect 
their  employees  and  some  minimum  product  standards  to  protect  their 
customers. However, apart from that, the governance of their business activities 
is left to the market and is not subject to regulation by a public agency. Why is 
the financial sector different?   
 2 
There  are  two  fundamental  reasons  why  the  financial  sector  is  much  more 
highly  regulated  than  other  sectors  of  the  economy:  leverage  and  information. 
The  combination  of  high  levels  of  leverage  in  financial  institutions  and 
informational  imperfections  provide  a  prudential  rationale  for  financial  sector 
regulation which is not relevant for non-financial sector businesses.  
 Many  types  of  financial  institutions  are  highly  leveraged;  their  borrowings  – 
their  debt  liabilities  –  are  a  multiple  of  their  capital,  in  contrast  to  most  non-
financial sector businesses. The Ugandan business sector as a whole has equity 
and  reserves  which  are  almost  as  large  as  its  debt  liabilities.1  In  contrast,  the 
Ugandan  banking  industry  has  debt  liabilities  (mainly  deposits)  which  are 
almost five times larger than its equity and reserves. This means that if a bank 
fails, the consequences in terms of losses to its creditors are likely to be much 
greater  than  would  be  the  case  if  a  non-financial  business  were  to  fail. 
Furthermore,  the  creditors  of  a  bank  are  mostly  the  general  public  who  have 
deposited  their  savings  in  the  bank,  whereas  the  creditors  of  a  non-financial 
business  are  mostly  other  types  of  businesses,  including  financial  institutions. 
Hence  the  social  consequences  of  a  bank  failure  are  much  more  serious  than 
those of a non-financial business.   
 The  pioneering  research  of  economists  such  as  Joseph  Stiglitz  into  the 
economics of information has shown that financial markets are characterised by 
problems of information - what economists refer to as imperfect or asymmetric 
information – which prevent purely market determined outcomes being optimal 
for  all  participants  in  these  markets.  In  essence,  these  problems  arise  because 
financial  assets,  such  as  loans,  deposits  and  equity,  are  claims  which  will  be 
realised  at  some  point  in  the  future,  and  the  future  is  inherently  uncertain. 
Therefore, the value of financial assets is also inherently uncertain.  
                                                           
1 See the Uganda Business Inquiry, 2009/10, table 2.13, page 25. 
3 
  However, information is not equally distributed among all market participants. 
The  insiders  who  control  financial  institutions  –  their  controlling  shareholders 
and  managers  –  usually  have  access  to  better  information  about  the  factors 
which will influence the value of financial assets than do the creditors, mainly 
depositors, of these institutions. As such, there is an informational asymmetry. 
Informational  asymmetries  also  occur  in  equity  markets;  the  owners  and 
managers of firms which issue equity on stock markets have more information 
about the future financial prospects of their firm than do the investors who buy 
equity on the stock markets.    
 Asymmetric  information  offers  opportunities  for  the  owners  and  managers  of 
financial institutions to exploit  their informational  advantage  at  the expense of 
their  depositors.  High  leverage  exacerbates  the  incentives  on  financial 
institutions  to  exploit  informational  asymmetries,  because  in  highly  leveraged 
financial  institutions  the  upside  rewards  of  high  risk  investment  strategies 
accrue to the owners of these institutions, whereas the downside risk is borne by 
their creditors.  
 Consequently  an  unregulated  financial  system  will  contain  incentives  for 
excessive risk taking, at the expense of creditors such as depositors and of the 
stability of the financial system. This is not because the owners and managers of 
financial  institutions  are  inherently  crooked  or  incompetent,  but  because  their 
interests  are  not  aligned  with  those  of  the  creditors  of  their  institutions  and 
because  asymmetric  information  impedes  the  ability  of  the  creditors  to 
adequately safeguard their own interests.  
It is this which provides the primary rationale for the regulation of the financial 
system by a public agency. This regulation is prudential in nature; it is intended 
to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  are  soundly  manged  and  thereby  to  protect 
 4 
their  depositors,  or  other  customers  such  as  holders  of  insurance  policies,  and 
also to protect the overall stability of the financial system.    
 The regulatory framework in Uganda 
 Uganda  has  four  separate  financial  sector  regulators  which  each  regulate  and 
supervise a specific set of financial institutions or financial markets. These four 
regulators  are  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  the  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority,  the 
Capital  Markets  Authority  and  the  Retirement  Benefits  Regulatory  Authority 
which  regulate,  respectively,  deposit  taking  financial  institutions,  insurance 
companies, the capital markets and the pension sector.  
 We  have  separate  regulators  rather  than  one  single  multi-sector  financial 
regulator mainly because there are qualitative differences between the four main 
types of financial markets in terms of the objectives of regulation and especially 
with  regard  to  the  supervisory  methodologies  and  techniques  employed  by  the 
regulators.  Consequently,  there  would  be  little  to  be  gained  by  combining  the 
regulation  of,  for  example,  banks  and  financial  markets,  within  one  single 
regulatory agency. This is the case in most countries, where banking regulation 
and  supervision  is  separate  from  that  pertaining  to  non-bank  financial 
institutions and markets.  
 Each  regulator  in  Uganda  conducts  its  supervisory  and  regulatory  operations 
according to the requirements of a specific piece of legislation. Deposits taking 
financial  institutions  are  regulated  under  the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004 
and the Micro Deposit Taking  Institutions Act, 2003; insurance companies are 
regulated  under  the  Insurance  Act,  2017;  Capital  markets  are  regulated  under 
the Capital Markets Authority Act and its subsequent amendments; the pensions 
industry under the Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.  
 5 
Hence all of the four financial sector regulators conduct their operations within 
a legal framework which has been legislated for by Parliament, and which sets 
out their statutory responsibilities, objectives and powers.   
 The  primary  objectives  of  each  regulator  depend  on  the  characteristics  of  the 
financial market that they regulate. For example, the majority of the liabilities of 
banks  are  customer  deposits.  Banks  also  dominate  the  financial  sector  and 
perform  crucial  functions  in  the  economy,  such  as  transacting  payments. 
Consequently the primary objectives of the bank regulator, the Bank of Uganda, 
is to safeguard the interests of depositors, so that they do not lose their savings 
as  a  result  of  reckless  bank  management  or  fraud,  and  to  protect  the  overall 
stability of the banking system; i.e. to prevent a banking crisis which would  be 
extremely disruptive for the economy.  
 In  contrast  to  the  banking  system,  the  main  participants  in  capital  markets  are 
wholesale investors which are relatively sophisticated in terms of their financial 
acumen; these investors consist mainly of financial institutions such as pension 
funds.  Moreover,  the  capital  markets  are  not  large  enough  in  Uganda  to  pose 
any  systemic  dangers  to  the  wider  economy.  Consequently,  the  regulatory 
priority of the Capital Markets Authority is market conduct, so that all investors 
are treated fairly by issuers of securities and brokers and that they have accurate 
information on which to base their investment decisions.      
 Is the Financial Sector in Uganda Over-regulated? 
 I will now turn to the question posed in the title of this address; is the financial 
sector over-regulated? How should we attempt to answer such a question?  
The approach that I will adopt is to acknowledge that bank regulation has costs 
as  well  as  benefits  for  the  economy,  and  that  regulation  is  optimal,  in  the 
 6 
economic sense of  maximising welfare, when there is a balance between costs 
and benefits. The potential costs of regulation are that it might stifle growth and 
risk  taking,  especially  lending  to  the  private  sector,  whereas  the  benefits  are 
soundly  managed financial institutions which do not put their depositors funds 
at  risk  or  jeopardise  the  overall  stability  of  the  financial  system.  I  will 
concentrate  on  the  regulation  of  the  banking  system  for  two  reasons;  first 
because  it  is  more  straightforward  to  identify  indicators  for  the  costs  and 
benefits  of  regulation  in  banking  than  in  other  financial  markets  and  second, 
because  the  banking  industry  is  by  far  the  most  important  component  of  the 
financial markets in Uganda, with commercial banks accounting for around 80 
percent of the total assets of the financial system. 
 I will start by discussing the benefits of banking regulation. As I noted earlier, 
the primary objectives of banking regulation are to safeguard depositors’ funds 
and to prevent a systemic financial crisis, so we should evaluate the benefits of 
regulation in terms of those objectives.  
 How does the bank regulator aim to safeguard depositors’ funds? The BOU, in 
common with other bank regulators around the world, does not aim to prevent 
every  single  bank  failure.  In  principle  it  would  be  possible  to  do  this,  by 
restricting banks to invest only in safe assets, but that would prevent banks from 
making one of their most important contributions to the economy, the extension 
of credit to the private sector. Extending credit is inherently risky, because not 
all  borrowers  will  be  able  to  repay  their  loans.  Consequently,  bank  regulators 
accept  that  banks  must  incur  some  risk  if  they  are  to  perform  their  proper 
functions,  and  that  optimal  bank  regulation,  therefore,  cannot  prevent  all  bank 
failures. Bank regulation aims to ensure that banks do not take excessive risks 
and  also  that  they  properly  manage  their  risks,  for  example  by  adequate 
 7 
diversification  of  their  loan  portfolio,  so  that  bank  failures  are  the  exception 
rather than the norm.  
 One  of  the  most  important  tools  of  bank  regulation  is  the  minimum  capital 
adequacy  requirement, which is based  on the globally  agreed  approach  set  out 
in  the  Basel  Capital  Accords.  Capital  adequacy  requirements  stipulate  that 
banks must hold a minimum amount of regulatory capital as a percent of their 
risk weighted assets. In Uganda, banks must hold total capital which is at least 
12 percent of their risk weighted assets. The purpose of these capital adequacy 
requirements is to ensure that banks hold a buffer which can absorb losses and 
thus protect their deposits. If a bank suffers losses because of, for example, bad 
loans, these losses are first absorbed by the bank’s capital. It is only if the losses 
exceed the bank’s capital that the bank’s depositors or other creditors will incur 
losses. 
 To safeguard depositors, the BOU is mandated under the Financial Institutions 
Act,  2004  to  implement  prompt  corrective  actions,  which  are  triggered  by  a 
failure  of  a  bank  to  comply  with  the  capital  adequacy  regulations  or  by  other 
indicators  of  financial  distress.  These  prompt  corrective  actions  are  designed 
either  to  restore  the  bank  to  a  sound  financial  condition,  for  example  through 
recapitalisation by its owners, or if that is not possible, to trigger intervention by 
the BOU to resolve the failing bank in some way, for example by closure or by 
selling it to another bank, before significant losses to its deposits can occur.    
 What  is  the  record  of  Uganda  with  respect  to  bank  failures  and  losses  of 
deposits?  The  current  legal  framework  for  bank  regulation  was  put in place  in 
2004 when Parliament enacted the Financial Institutions Act, legislation which 
strengthened  bank  regulation  following  the  bank  failures  that  had  occurred  in 
the  1990s.  Since  the  enactment  of  the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004,  there 
 8 
have  been  three  bank  failures  in  Uganda:  two  very  small  banks  in  2012  and 
2014  and  one  larger  one  in  2016.  The  combined  deposit  market  share  of  the 
three  banks,  at  the  time  that  each  one  was  closed,  was  about  seven  percent. 
Because the BOU intervened in these banks in a prompt manner, in line with the 
mandatory prompt corrective actions stipulated in the Financial Institutions Act, 
depositors did not lose any of their money. In all three cases, the BOU was able 
to transfer the failed banks’ deposits in full to other banks through Purchase of 
Assets  and  Assumption  of  Liabilities  transactions,  using  the  powers  conferred 
on the BOU by the FIA. Had the BOU delayed its interventions in these failed 
banks, the losses which they incurred would have grown much larger and as a 
consequence it would have been much more difficult to ensure that depositors’ 
funds were repaid in full.  
 Consequently,  in  terms  of  the  objective  of  safeguarding  depositors’  funds,  I 
think that it is fair to argue that bank regulation has been successful, in that bank 
failures  have  been  few  in  number  and  that,  when  banks  have  failed;  prompt 
regulatory  intervention  has  protected  their  deposits  from  losses.  In  addition, 
given that the banks which failed collectively comprised less than 5 percent of 
the  banking  system’s  deposits,  Uganda  has  not  come  close  to  suffering  a 
systemic  banking  crisis.  Hence  the  second  strategic  objective  of  the  BOU’s 
bank  regulation,  that  of  preventing  a  systemic  financial  crisis,  has  also  been 
achieved.  
 Let me now turn to the potential costs of bank regulation. As I noted earlier, the 
more  stringent  are  bank  regulations,  the  more  difficult  it  will  be  for  banks  to 
incur  risks  (i.e.  by  investing  in  risky  assets)  and  this  in  turn  will  impede  the 
growth of bank lending and stifle the overall dynamism of the banking system. 
Does  the  performance  of  the  banking  system  since  the  enactment  of  the 
 9 
Financial Institutions Act, 2004 offer any  evidence that bank lending has been 
stifled by over regulation? 
 In  September  2004,  the  total  loans  of  the  banking  system  amounted  to  37 
percent  of  its  deposits.  At  that  time  the  Ugandan  banking  system  was  still  a 
relatively  low  intermediation  banking  system.  Since  2004,  however,  rates  of 
intermediation  have  risen  markedly.  In  September  2017,  the  loan  to  deposit 
ratio was 64 percent. This ratio had been as high as 78 percent in 2011, during 
the credit boom of that year. Most of the increase in the banking system’s rate 
of  intermediation  took  place  in  the  five  years  immediately  following  the 
enactment  of  the  FIA,  2004,  which  does  not  suggest  that  the  more  stringent 
prudential  regulations  embodied  in  the  FIA  have  impeded  bank  lending  to  the 
private sector.  
 Another approach to assessing whether regulation has impeded bank lending to 
the  private  sector  is  to  ask  whether  specific  regulatory  provisions  have  been  a 
binding  constraint  on  lending.  As  a  mentioned  earlier,  banks  are  required  to 
hold  a  minimum  amount  of  capital  as  a  percent  of  their  risk  weighted  assets. 
Loans are the main component of risk weighted assets, with a risk weighting of 
100 percent. If a bank is only just able to comply with the minimum regulatory 
capital adequacy ratio, it cannot increase its holdings of risk weighted assets, for 
example, by expanding its loan portfolio, unless it also mobilises more capital. 
In such circumstances, the capital adequacy ratio will be a binding constraint on 
the growth of bank lending. Has this been the case in Uganda?     
 In  the  period  since  the  enactment  of  the  FIA,  2004,  the  statutory  minimum 
requirement  for banks’  total  capital  has been 12 percent  of their  risk  weighted 
assets.  Over  that  period,  the  banking  systems’  actual  levels  of  total  capital 
averaged  18.8  percent  of  its  risk  weighted  assets  and  it  was  never  lower  than 
 10 
16.4 percent at  any  point during  this  period. Hence at  the  level  of  the  banking 
system, which is what is relevant for lending to the overall economy, the capital 
adequacy requirement has not been a binding constraint to bank lending.  
 Of course, at the level of some individual banks, the statutory capital adequacy 
requirement  has  been  a  binding  constraint  on  lending  and  other  forms  of  risk 
taking  in  circumstances  where  banks  have  been  suffering  from  financial 
distress.  This  is  the  purpose  of  the  capital  adequacy  ratio;  when  banks  are 
suffering  financial  distress,  their  risk  taking  must  be  curtailed  to  protect  their 
deposits. As I discussed earlier, bank capital provided a buffer which helped to 
protect deposits in the three cases of bank failure which have occurred in recent 
years.  Hence  I  would  argue  that  our  capital  adequacy  requirements  have  not 
curtailed  bank  lending  at  the  aggregate  level  but  have  made  an  essential 
contribution to safeguarding depositors’ funds in the few instances when banks 
have incurred financial distress.  
 Conclusion 
 Financial  regulation  in  Uganda  is  based  on  well-established  global  principles, 
such as the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Regulation, and which 
have been incorporated into the legislation which governs regulation in the four 
main  segments  of  the  financial  system;  banks  and  other  deposit  taking 
institutions, insurance companies, pension funds and the capital markets.  
 There are sound economic reasons for subjecting the financial sector to greater 
regulation than other sectors of the economy, but I would argue that there is no 
compelling  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  banking  sector  is  overregulated  in 
Uganda.  
 11 
No system of regulation is perfect, but the record of banking sector performance 
since 2004, when the current banking legislation was enacted, indicates that the 
primary objectives of bank regulation have been realised and that this has been 
achieved  without  significant  negative 
impacts  on 
lending  growth  and 
intermediation.  
 Thank you for listening.  
   12 
