Benoît  Cœuré:  A  cooperative  approach  to  CCP  recovery  and
resolution
Panel intervention by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the ILF Conference on "Resolution in Europe: the unresolved questions", Frankfurt am
Main, 23 April 2018.
 1
The order of the topics at today’s conference on “resolution in Europe” was well planned.
The  fact  that  we  are  discussing  central  counterparty  (CCP)  resolution  after  discussing  bank
resolution echoes the fact that CCP resolution is, by and large, an event that occurs only when
all other safeguards, including bank resolution, have failed.
There are a number of reasons for this.
One is that the ways in which CCPs are set up makes them particularly resilient. CCPs are not
banks, they are (financial market) infrastructures.
They manage the risk of a matched book and rely on the strength of their membership to provide
margin and to share losses if this proves insufficient. Bail-in is integral to CCPs’ operational set-
up,  as  clearing  members  are  required  to  share  losses.  In  this  way,  their  resilience  is  further
strengthened  by  banking  supervision  and  recovery  and  resolution  arrangements  which  help
ensure that clearing members meet their obligations.
2
Another reason for CCPs’ resilience is the implementation of international standards.
The Principles for Financial Markets Infrastructures of the Committee on Payments and Market
Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)
have  recently  benefitted  from  more  granular  guidance  providing  clarity  to  CCPs  and  their
3
regulators.
This also includes risks other than financial ones. The adoption of the CPMI-IOSCO guidance on
cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures, for example, is an important step towards
4
operational resilience.
Yet, while CCP resolution remains a very unlikely event, the disorderly failure of a major CCP
would be disastrous.
Many CCPs are globally systemic, responsible for clearing global markets and with participants
from  across  the  world.  This  is  why  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  guidance  on  central
counterparty  resolution,  and  its  focus  on  planning  and  cooperation  between  authorities,  is
important.
Cooperation in resolution planning, and co-ordination between recovery and resolution planning,
is essential to ensure that a CCP is always able to continue performing its systemically relevant
functions across all concerned jurisdictions. I will return to this in a minute.
I  also  welcome  the  fact  that  policy  discussion  is  now  scrutinising  seriously  the  wisdom  of
increased  top-down  prefunding  requirements  for  CCP  resolution.  It  is  doubtful  that  such
requirements would be effective or proportionate, given the very low probability of CCP resolution
and the marked differences between CCPs’ risk profiles.
What is more, increasing funding requirements could discourage the use of CCPs and instead
push counterparties towards riskier and more opaque bilateral clearing. And while I would not
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
exclude  cases  where  additional  financial  resources  should  be  available  for  both  recovery  and
resolution, ring-fencing resources for resolution only may distort the incentives of all stakeholders
to support a successful recovery.
That  said,  the  resolution  authority  should  have  flexibility  to  determine  the  optimal  choice  of
available  tools,  as  well  as  the  best  point  in  time  for  entry  into  resolution,  as  long  as  the  “no
creditor worse off” principle is respected.
It  is  helpful  to  assess  how  further  guidance  could  support  authorities  in  assessing  potential
resolution funding needs for individual CCPs, taking into account, for example, the specific risk
characteristics of the products they clear, the types of market they serve and the concentration in
CCP memberships. I fully support work currently under way in the FSB in this respect.
Today, I would like to focus on three key areas where more work is needed.
First, more international cooperation is needed.
Authorities  responsible  for  several  major  cross-border  CCPs  have  not  yet  embarked  on
5
resolution planning and no cross-border crisis management arrangements are yet in place.
This  could  be  because  of  barriers  to  sharing  confidential  information,  including  different
approaches  as  to  what  is  considered  confidential  and  what  timely.  If  that  is  true,  then  these
barriers need to be removed.
Likewise, authorities may be reticent to engage with others while legislative frameworks are still
evolving.  Assessing  the  cross-border  implications  of  a  CCP  resolution  takes  time  and
discussions should get under way as soon as possible.
CPMI and IOSCO are conducting some work in this respect.
Second, authorities need to better understand how a CCP resolution might look like.
CCP resolution scenarios cannot be defined in absolute, quantitative terms given the nature of
market  events  causing  resolution.  There  will  always  be  considerable  uncertainty  around  CCP
resolution and related funding needs.
Nevertheless,  further  steps  should  be  taken  to  improve  the  analytical  foundation  of  CCP
resolution planning and to better prepare authorities.
While the FSB is addressing this issue in its report, I see two steps in particular.
First, CPMI and IOSCO have recently published guidance for supervisory stress testing, which
6
includes guidance on how multiple authorities can conduct stress tests.
Testing a CCP’s recovery plan by authorities may help to assess the market conditions under
which recovery – and potentially resolution – may be necessary, as well as the potential funding
required. Internationally coordinated stress-testing is essential to foster a better understanding of
the aggregate amount and quality of committed funding that is available across major CCPs.
Co-ordinating  CCP  and  banking  stress  testing  will  provide  additional  understanding  on  how
resolution plans would work in case of extreme scenarios.
Second, recent analysis of central clearing interdependencies carried out by the standard-setting
committees  has  revealed  the  limited  number  of  banking  groups  that  are  members  of  CCPs
7
across the world, thereby closely linking CCPs themselves.
Even  without  stress  testing,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  a  CCP  under  stress  would  send  a
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
liquidity shockwave across its participants and beyond as it requires additional margins and/or
passes on losses. This is especially important for central banks. With stress testing, potential
funding strains can be further explored, and useful information for CCP and bank supervisors as
well as resolution authorities can be gleaned.
Third, European arrangements for CCP recovery and resolution must be coordinated.
The significant interdependencies between CCPs globally are also present in the Single Market.
8
Resolution planning should therefore be coordinated across all European Union CCPs.
This is crucial to preserve financial stability within the Union in the event of a crisis.
Critics  of  EU-wide  coordination  claim  that  the  fiscal  risks  of  central  clearing  arise  primarily  in
CCPs’ respective home countries. But given that cross-border membership of EU banks in EU
CCPs is widespread, this argument is flawed.
The losses faced by a CCP during default management and recovery and resolution are mostly
borne  by  its  clearing  members,  rather  than  by  the  CCP  itself.  Even  though  a  CCP’s  home
country may choose to provide temporary public funding during resolution, such support would
be recouped from clearing members, in line with their obligations to contribute to comprehensive
loss absorption.
Therefore, fiscal risks would in fact appear to arise in countries in which major CCP participants
are located. Domestic authorities may need to provide these participants with financial support if
they are faced with large payment obligations due to CCP losses.
Thus, EU-wide coordination in resolution planning is necessary to ensure that system-wide risks
are fully identified and mitigated in a fair and effective manner.
At  the  same  time,  a  resolution  is  not  a  discrete  event.  The  boundaries  between  default
management and recovery and resolution are blurred, so it is important to align responsibilities
and control measures throughout the potential lifecycle of EU CCPs.
The resolution of a CCP relies, to a large extent, on the recovery process. Under the legislative
proposal for a regulation on CCP recovery and resolution, authorities will be required to enforce
CCPs’ contractual obligations before using any resolution tools, subject to limited exemptions.
Another aspect to keep in mind is that systemic risk for the Single Market may arise not only from
EU  CCPs,  but  also  from  non-EU  CCPs  with  substantial  activities  in  the  EU.  This  aspect  will
become increasingly important after the United Kingdom’s departure from the EU.
Against  this  background,  current  efforts  to  strengthen  the  EU  arrangements  for  third  country
CCPs are very important. In particular, if a third country CCP is systemically important for the
EU, it is not enough to focus on regulatory equivalence alone.
While deference to home country rules and supervisors should be used to the extent possible,
EU authorities also need to have tools for direct liaison with a third country CCP to identify, clarify
and address issues that may pose specific concerns from an EU financial stability perspective.
This is fully in line with the set up in other major jurisdictions.
Similarly, as regards CCP resolution, the development of home country arrangements in line with
international standards must be complemented with the involvement of relevant EU authorities in
resolution  planning  in  line  with  international  standards,  to  ensure  that  their  systemic  risk
concerns are fully taken into account.
To sum up, CCPs are systemically important across border and across the EU. Any recovery
and  resolution  planning  for  individual  CCPs  therefore  requires  an  EU  wide  systemic  risk
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessment and a strong co-ordination at global level.
At EU level, this could involve, for instance, aggregated data collection, joint stress-testing and
crisis simulation exercises, and the closer coordination of related supervisory assessments and
recovery and resolution planning. And given the financial stability, macroprudential and liquidity
issues a CCP resolution raises, central banks must be involved in all aspects of this work.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 I would like to thank Corinna Freund for her contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
At all times, CCPs are required to hold prefunded, high quality collateral to cover 99% of current and potential
losses that may arise from their participants defaulting. On top of this, they need to hold additional resources to
withstand a range of extreme but plausible stress scenarios. These could include, for instance, the two largest
participants in a major cross-border CCP defaulting. To prepare for situations of even more extreme market
distress, CCPs also need to formulate recovery plans that show how they intend to absorb losses and restore
business  viability.  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2015),  “Ensuring  an  adequate  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  central
counterparties,”  Remarks  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  2015  Symposium  on  Central  Clearing,
Chicago, 10 April.
See CPMI-IOSCO (2017), “Recovery of financial market infrastructures – Revised report”, July.
See  CPMI-IOSCO  (2016),  “Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial  market  infrastructures”,  June.  The
Eurosystem  recently  established  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  (ECRB)  for  pan-European  Financial
Infrastructures,  which  will  help  raise  awareness  and  provide  a  platform  for  discussing  issues  related  to
cybersecurity.  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “A  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European  Financial
Infrastructures”, introductory remarks at the first meeting of the ECRB, Frankfurt, 9 March.
Under the FSB Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes, FSB members have committed to establish
crisis management groups for CCPs that are systemically important in more than one jurisdiction.
See CPMI-IOSCO (2018), “Framework for supervisory stress testing of central counterparties (CCPs)”, April.
See BCBS, CPMI, FSB and IOSCO (2017), “Analysis of central clearing interdependencies”, 5 July.
See also ECB (2017), Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on a framework for the recovery and resolution of central counterparties and
amending  Regulations  (EU)  No  1095/2010,  (EU)  No  648/2012,  and  (EU)  2015/2365  (CON/2017/38),  20
September.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
