Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Strength without agility is mere mass
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 11th ING-FINEX Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Award Ceremony,
20 November 2017.
 For the past eleven years, FINEX in partnership with the ING Bank has conducted a methodical
nationwide pursuit for the country’s top chief financial officer (CFO).
“The Agile CFO” – is a change enabler, one that goes beyond tradition, quickly adapts, thrives
and succeeds in the ever evolving financial environment.  The search has ended.  We will have
the distinct privilege of the great reveal in a while.  It’s quite exciting.
Nevertheless, as I look around this room, I can see many agile leaders of Philippine commerce,
banking  and  finance  whose  swift  and  responsive  initiatives  have  contributed  to  shaping  the
business environment into the robust and thriving one it is today.
FINEX  President  Benedicta  Du-Baladad,  ING-Manila  Branch  Managing  Director  and  Country
Manager  Hans  B.  Sicat,  Ms.  Judith  V.  Lopez,  overall  chairperson  of  CFO  of  the  Year Award
Committee…former  ING-Manila  Branch  Managing  Director  and  Country  Manager  Consuelo  D.
Garcia, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
In the printed format of this message, I placed the following title:  “Strength Without Agility is Mere
Mass.” This is a direct quotation from Fernando Pessoa, Portuguese poet, writer, literary critic,
translator, publisher and philosopher. 
The  quote  stirred  me  as  I  thought  of  our  economy’s  strength.    We  enjoy  today  a  robust
macroeconomy owing to strategic and comprehensive reforms boldly taken through the years. 
But while we have touted the economy’s strength, and lauded its resilience, we have not said
much about its pro-active agility.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to say that our economy is not only strong and buoyant.  It is
also infused with dynamism and responsiveness.  It is not passive.
A strong and agile economy
The  Philippines  sustained  its  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals.    It  is  one  of  the  fastest
growing economies in Asia, registering a 6.9 percent growth on gross domestic product (GDP) in
the third quarter of 2017.
The  inflation  outlook  remains  manageable.    Inflation  has  averaged  3.2  percent  in  the  past  ten
months.  This in line with the Government’s target range for 2017, and should remain on target
through 2019. 
Our balance of payments and the exchange rate are firmly under control.  We have a hefty buffer
of gross international reserves (GIR) at USD 80.6 billion as of end-October 2017, covering the
equivalent 8.4 months’ worth of imports.
The  banking  system,  likewise  sustained  its  growth  trajectory  through  the  3rd  quarter  of  2017.
Total resources of the Philippine banking system expanded by 14.1 percent year-on-year.  This
was funded by the sustained inflows of deposits which grew by 15.3.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Domestic liquidity and credit dynamics are consistent with our expanding economy.  The  current
pace of credit growth of 19.6 percent is sustainable as credit exposures remain diversified, with
89  percent  of  going  into  the  production  sectors.    The  country’s  credit-to-GDP  ratio  of  63.6
percent as of Q2 2017 is still one of the lowest by far in Asia.
Asset quality is satisfactory as the industry non-performing loans ratio further improved to 1.9
percent, coupled with banks’ prudent provisioning for credit losses. 
Meanwhile,  banks  maintained  ample  buffer  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  and  capital  that
collectively protect the system against shocks. System-wide capital adequacy ratio recorded at
16.0 percent, is well above the BSP and the international minimum.
Against  this  backdrop  of  strength,  the  financial  system  is  also  alert  and  responsive.    We  are
ready to employ our monetary policy toolkit in light of policy normalization of the Federal Reserve
which could affect capital flows, domestic interest rates and the foreign exchange rate. We are
also watchful of geo-political risks, including protectionist policies in some advanced economies
that could pose challenges to the country’s trade, remittances, and foreign direct investments.
Need for agile management and leadership
ING-FINEX’s theme for this year’s search for CFO of the year resounds. Why?  Well, aside from
the  lingering  uncertainties  in  the  global  economy,  our  financial  and  business  landscape  is
continuously  and  radically  being  redefined  by  evolving  international  standards,  new  best
practices,  disruptive  digital  innovation,  changing  customer  preferences  and  demographic
changes. 
For instance, our increasing population of tech-savvy millennials demand innovation and expect
faster  and  more  streamlined  products  and  services.    To  compete  and  be  successful,  these
changes in the operating environment demand agility. I am certain this year’s awardee displays
this required dynamism.
BSP’s prudential reform genda
As CFOs and industries thrive in the changing business environment, the BSP faces the same
challenges. Hence, we have implemented strategic policy reforms to protect the financial system
and provide a conducive and more agile macroeconomic environment.
Much headway to ensure financial stability has been made with the adoption of Basel III reforms,
particularly  in  the  areas  of  capital,  leverage,  liquidity  and  regulation  of  systemically  important
banks.
Since  the  start  of  the  year,  the  BSP  continues  to  build  on  this  theme.  For  example,  we
implemented a major upgrade of corporate governance and risk management standards in our
supervised institutions in line with the thrust of global best practice.
We  adopted  reforms  to  strengthen  banks’  capabilities  to  nimbly  manage  risks  related  to
information  technology.  Recently,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  cyber  security  risk
management framework under Circular No. 982 to further guard against cyber security threats
and attacks.
Even as we bolster our cyber-security stance, the BSP is determinedly pursuing the digitization
of the financial system.  Last November 8, 2017, the Philippine Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT)
System  and  Operations  network,  or  PESONet,  was  launched.    This  is  the  first  Automated
Clearing  House  (ACH)  under  the  National  Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS).    We  envision
PESONet to be an electronic alternative to the paper-based check system, significantly cutting
down costs and allowing better liquidity management.  It features same day crediting of the full
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
amount being transferred.  Businesses and individuals will be able to conveniently move funds
from their own account to any other account in the system.  For me, this initiative which depends
heavily on the collaboration of our banks and other non-bank financial institutions to achieve full
payments inter-operability, is financial agility in action.
Forthcoming reforms for greater agility
The BSP is also enhancing liquidity risk management guidelines under a four-phased program.
The first phase covers enhancing the guidelines on liquidity risk management, including intraday
liquidity.  This was recently approved by the Monetary Board through the issuance of Circular No.
981.  Also in the pipeline are the amendments to the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) standard
and  the  issuance  of  the  complementary  Minimum  Liquidity  Ratio  (MLR),  which  is  a  simplified
version of the LCR requirement for less complex financial institutions.  Third, is the issuance of
guidelines  implementing  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  standard.    Lastly,  the  BSP  will
issue  intraday  liquidity  reporting  guidelines  to  complement  the  qualitative  intraday  risk
management guidelines under Circular No. 981.
Development of financial markets
Another  major  BSP  strategic  policy  reform  is  to  accelerate  financial  market  development  with
special focus on the local currency debt market and foreign exchange (FX) market. We envision
a more balanced financial ecosystem where a well-functioning banking system is complemented
by a deep and liquid capital market.
There  is  much  room  for  growth  in  the  domestic  debt  market.  The  numbers  show  that  the
outstanding local currency (LCY) bonds represent a mere 34.2 percent of the country’s GDP. 
To  hasten  local  currency  debt  market  development,  the  BSP,  in  collaboration  with  the
Department of Finance (DOF), the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr), and Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), is working on a package of joint and coordinated initiatives.  This reform
agenda officially unfolds with the launching of the Government Securities Repo Program on 27
November 2017.  The reforms are geared towards increasing transparency in the issuance and
pricing of government bonds that would translate into increased efficiency, lower borrowing cost,
and  more  dynamic  participation.  Strengthening  the  foundational  elements  would  facilitate
development of the broader financial market.
Foreign exchange (FX) regulations are being overhauled to achieve more efficiency and ease of
doing  business.    The  BSP  will  soon  release  an  exposure  draft  on  the  liberalized  rules  on  FX
loans  and  offshore  loans  of  the  private  sector.    This  will  re-focus  the  registration  process  to
primarily  data-gathering  and  minimize  documentary  requirements.  The  liberalization  of  FX
regulations is embedded in the broader thrust for a better organized FX market.  The sequence
of  reforms  aims  to  encourage  innovation,  improve  transparency,  and  price  discovery,  and
enhance market conduct.
Closing thoughts
Thinking about agility made me reminisce about badminton.  Badminton is very fast-paced. To
play it well, one certainly needs strength.  But one also needs to be agile.  Because of the speed
in  which  the  game  is  played,  a  player  must  be  able  to  change  his  position  nimbly,  quickly,
efficiently. The movements required are seamless, interconnected with great need for balance
and coordination.
I believe the same holds true for the industry, for the economy.  Strength without agility is mere
mass.  Mass sits at inertia.  We certainly cannot afford to sit at inertia.
I have always been grateful for our partnership with the banking industry and the private sector.  It
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
is through our cooperation, our collaboration and constant touching base that we gain greater
agility to weather through our fast-paced environment.  We at the BSP are uplifted at embracing
change and the future with you as our partners.  We thank you for your support for the ambitious
financial sector reform agenda that impart motion and dynamism to our economy.  Like a well-
trained athlete, disciplined conditioning is our defense against over-heating and burn out.
Congratulations  to  FINEX  and  ING.  Congratulations  to  the  men  and  women  whose  dedication
and  unwavering  efforts  have  made  the  continuous  holding  of  this  prestigious  event  possible. 
Congratulations to this year’s best CFO whose agility has elevated the finance profession to a
higher level!  Thank you and a pleasant afternoon to all of you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
