Andreas Dombret: Where do we go from here? The future of US-EU
financial relations following the finalisation of Basel III
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers,  Annual  Washington  Conference,  Washington  DC,  5
March 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the kind introduction. It is a pleasure to be in Washington and at the IIB’s annual
conference.  Let  me  use  this  opportunity  to  give  you  my  perspective  on  the  future  of  US-EU
financial  relations  at  this  well-suited  moment,  given  that  the  most  important  post-crisis  global
reforms have now been finalised.
When I was going to prepare this speech, I asked myself: “What do all of us in this room have in
common?” Do bankers and supervisors across the atlantic share the same convictions? Do we
have the same ideas on financial policy? Honestly, I am not perfectly sure on this. So I assume
there  is  at  least  one  major  area  of  common  ground,  and  that  is  the  uncertainty  we  feel  with
respect to how things will proceed.
Take  global  banking  regulation  –  and  Basel  III,  in  particular.  On  the  one  hand,  we  have  just
finalised  Basel  III,  the  global  minimum  standard  for  international  banks.  On  the  other  hand,
parliaments  and  governments  in  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  are  debating
regulatory changes that seem to diverge from this global compromise. Banks remain uncertain
about precisely what the regulatory future holds.
Moreover,  this  uncertainty  does  not  stop  at  finance.  The  US  administration’s  economic  policy
announcements, as well as Brexit and other elections, are causing many to call into question the
extent to which nations will actually coordinate their future economic policies.
This  tension  between  the  global  and  national  level  creates  political  uncertainty.  For  example,
many  enterprises  feel  insecure  about  the  economic  policies  under  which  they  will  have  to  do
business in the future. Likewise, bankers are asking how much of Basel III will be implemented in
their jurisdictions and wondering about the individual paths that some countries will take.
This  tension  between  global  harmonisation  and  cooperation,  on  the  one  hand,  and  countries’
demands for individual approaches, on the other, will be one of the main fault lines – if not the
crucial one – in future US-EU financial relations. Let me elaborate on this challenge.
2 What we should – and should not – expect from international harmonisation
Recent years have made us confident – perhaps a little overconfident – with respect to global
harmonisation. It would be fair to assume that the global financial crisis and its aftermath played
a  considerable  role  in  that  respect.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  we  have  witnessed  a  resolute
international  response  led  by  the  world’s  twenty  heavyweight  economies.  The  international
community has put on a truly remarkable display of determination. While the G20 was founded
quite  some  time  before  the  crisis,  its  members’  resolve  to  take  common  action  was
unprecedented in the US city of Pittsburgh in 2009 and at subsequent summits. Key milestones
were achieved in international banking regulation. And this will to reform continued until recently,
when the new international minimum standards for banking regulation, also known as Basel III,
were finalised.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The international response to the crisis was necessary to make the architecture of the global
banking system both credible and acceptable to society at large.
But let’s not get carried away by global thinking, and we should not fall into the trap of global
harmonisation as a cure-all – by which I mean the idea that, if some global rules are good, more
global rules would always be better. Instead, we have to live with the fact that, in today’s world,
international agreements are still  made  with  national  and  regional  interests  in  mind. And  even
though there are strong arguments in favour of harmonisation, we have to respect that, in some
areas, there are also strong arguments against common approaches and reasons as to why
countries should set their own distinct sets of rules.
A  key  topic  nowadays  is  that  of  nations  striving  for  greater  sovereignty.  In  Europe,  the  most
striking example of this was when the United Kingdom decided in a national referendum in 2016
to  withdraw  from  the  European  Union.  On  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  too,  we  have  also
experienced it in the form of drawn-out negotiations for trade agreements. Just think about the
criticism  levelled  against  CETA,  the  comprehensive  Canada-EU  trade  deal,  and  TTIP,  the
corresponding US-EU project, which slowed these projects down or even brought them to a halt.
Proponents of greater national sovereignty have a point: sovereignty provides scope to deal with
issues in a national way. A regulatory landscape that is aligned to national particularities requires,
to some extent, that there are national instruments and policies on hand. Fully harmonised rules
take away that leeway.
We can even observe this with respect to banking regulation. Currently, global standards that are
aimed at large and internationally active banks also have an impact on small community banks.
These  institutions  do  not  inherently  require  the  same  rules  as  international  banks.  On  the
contrary, these rules may interfere with the important role that they play in the economy. I will
come back to this subject later on.
For  now,  my  point  is  a  general  one.  When  thinking  about  the  future  of  international  relations,
ignoring national political constraints does us no favours. Instead, we will need to tolerate some
degree of international diversity. The first consequence is to take note of the ongoing necessity to
balance  national  and  international  goals.  The  second  consequence  is  to  identify  those
instruments that serve these goals most effectively. Today – and across policy fields – we are
still figuring out how this can be achieved.
But what does this mean in practice? Going beyond political speeches, redefining the balance of
global  cooperation  and  national  sovereignty  will  be  a  demanding  process  involving  many
technical and political decisions, where it may make sense to opt for greater harmonisation in
some cases and for greater divergence in others.
That’s  why  we  do  not  have  a  simple,  universal  blueprint.  Let  me  outline  some  of  the
developments  in  three  crucial  areas  of  future  cooperation:  the  breadth  and  depth  of  financial
globalisation  and  cross-border  banking,  global 
regulatory  standards,  and  supervisory
cooperation.
3 Implementing Basel III: the limits of global regulatory standards
Let  me  start  out  with  the  task  of  balancing  global  regulatory  banking  standards  and  regional
peculiarities.
In December of last year, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision finalised the Basel III
agreement after eight years of global cooperation to devise the complex set of rules.
As I am a strong supporter of implementing this standard in the European Union on a binding
basis, I very much expect that the US authorities will take a similar view. Only if both the United
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
States  and  the  European  Union  keep  their  word  and  implement  Basel  III  faithfully  –  and  in  its
entirety, which means including the Fundamental Review of the Trading Book – we will avoid
regulatory conflict or arbitrage and be able to provide a reliable framework for international banks.
However, please note two qualifications: these are minimum standards for internationally active
banks.
Since  Basel  standards  are  minimum  standards,  a  country  may  decide  to  set  stricter
requirements. For example, Switzerland has a higher leverage ratio. And the United Kingdom has
ring-fencing rules in place that separate a bank’s vital basic functions from its riskier ones. This
policy is not of the Basel Committee’s making, and the United Kingdom is free to apply it in its
jurisdiction.
The second qualification of the Basel III standard is that it is for internationally active banks. As a
result, jurisdictions are free to apply a different set of rules to smaller, only nationally active banks
that pose no threat to international financial stability. The majority of countries already have less
restrictive rules in place for smaller banks in order to reduce the operational burden imposed on
them.  I  am  a  strong  proponent  of  extending  this  proportionality  further,  because  the  highly
complex regulatory reforms introduced in the wake of the financial crisis were intended for global
banks and overburden smaller, regional banks.
In sum, then, we ought to focus on truly global aspects, like regulating globally active banks, while
leaving it to individual countries to carry out those tasks that they are better placed to take care
of, such as regulating locally active banks.
4 The challenge of supervisory cooperation
The  second  area  in  which  we  will  see  a  re-balancing  of  global  cooperation  is  supervisory
cooperation.
Here, like with regulation, we should reassess where a global approach is sensible, and in which
cases national approaches are better suited. As a result, we are likely to see more divergence in
some areas, but hopefully some more cooperation in other areas.
An  example  for  more  divergence  is  likely  to  be  higher  demands  for  licensing  foreign  bank
branches  and  subsidiaries.  Take,  for  example,  the  discussion  about  introducing  an  EU
intermediate  holding  company,  or  IHC  for  short,  equivalent  regime.  The  European  Union  has
been debating a draft law proposing the establishment of what are referred to as intermediate
parent undertakings, or IPUs for short: similar to the US IHCs, foreign banks would have to bring
their EU operations under a single holding company. This will most likely become law; and for
good reason, because we need to have a better, consolidated understanding of what is going on
in international banks doing business in Europe. What’s more, we need to be able to act reliably
in times of turmoil. Otherwise, we would not be able to fulfil our mandate of ensuring financial
stability. But to be clear, this instrument is by no means intended to make market entry more
difficult for foreign banks – and the Bundesbank will continue to advocate fair access for foreign
banks.
As a result, we will move further away from the idea of serving the world from one spot with the
need for only one licence. This is frustrating in a way, but it’s a realistic approach.
This must, however, not come at the expense of less cooperation. The opposite is true. It’s not a
coincidence  that  my  last  meeting  before  this  conference  was  with  Randal  Quarles.  Trilateral
cooperation – between US, UK and EU authorities – will become crucial if we are to get a full
picture of what is going on at global banks. And, while this applies when times are good, it applies
all  the  more  so  in  times  of  crisis  –  winding  up  a  global  bank  would  still  be  a  nightmare,  the
progress  that  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  made  on  this  notwithstanding. And  Brexit  will
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
contribute  to  a  growing  need  for  cooperation  between  supervisory  authorities.  Semi-formal
supervisory  colleges  of  internationally  active  banks  will  gain  in  importance  when  the  United
Kingdom  leaves  the  European  Union.  This  will  be  all  the  more  true  if  and  when  regulatory
standards diverge.
I have no blueprint for you. In a first step, I think it is vital to acknowledge that, even with some
degree of divergence, we should not forget how important it is to remember the repercussions
for global and national financial stability if we do not cooperate. This sometimes means that we
should accept solutions that are not in our immediate interest.
This  concerns,  not  least,  the  issue  of  protectionism.  Naturally,  structural  change  poses  a
daunting challenge to the industrialised world, too. However, protective tariffs are not the right
answer, as they harbour the threat of countermeasures that could spiral into a trade war – one
that would ultimately only produce losers and one that I give an urgent warning of. While going it
alone may seem like a particularly sophisticated approach for some countries, it will ultimately
turn  out  to  be  rather  short-sighted.  I  am  confident  that  the  new  German  government  will
strengthen the rule-based, fair approach to trade policy in the European Union and globally.
5 The future of financial globalisation and cross-border banking
When looking at international banking regulation and supervisory cooperation across borders, we
can see that rebalancing is still on the horizon. These instances of rebalancing should not take
existing regimes to new “black or white” extremes but rather bring them to a mature state. This is
what we can also see when it comes to the evolution of cross-border banking.
We have seen tremendous shifts, but I do not believe that they are bringing about the end of
global finance. Let’s briefly look at some facts – two trends stand out.
First,  while  flows  have  been  receding  since  2007,  their  build-up  since  2000  had  been  far  too
extreme. From the 1990s to the 2000s, they more than doubled relative to GDP; if you look at the
absolute numbers, cross-border capital flows rose more than five-fold between the early 2000s
and  2007.  By  2016,  flows  had  returned  to  their  levels  at  the  turn  of  the  millennium.  If  we
remember the freezing of funds during the financial crisis, and the instability that this brought
about, the decline constitutes a reasonable trend of de-risking to risk-appropriate levels.
The second major trend is that the composition of global finance has changed significantly since
2007. While all types of capital flows have declined, more than half of the drop came from cross-
border lending.
IMF  and  McKinsey  analyses  reveal  that  the  decline  stems  mostly  from  a  move  away  from
overseas business and a shift away from cross-border wholesale funding by major European
and some US banks. At the same time, stable capital flows, such as foreign direct investment
and portfolio lending, have grown since the crisis. 
Overall, we should not make too much of the drop in cross-border flows since 2007, especially in
the  light  of  the  severe  bubble  before  the  crisis.  Moreover,  cross-border  banking  has  become
more stable in terms of not only volume but also composition since the financial crisis.
That means that firms seem to have become less reliant on the idea of a fully global market.
They acknowledge that crossing national borders entails risks, and they see that overreliance on
short-term wholesale financing is quite problematic.
These are not signs of a global financial recession, but rather of a maturing process.
6 Conclusion
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen,
I was born in the United States, grew up in Germany and have worked throughout Europe. I have
US, German, and European citizenship.
To end the close cooperation between our two nations would necessitate a split personality on
my  part.  But  I  accept  that  my  two  homes  have  distinct  preferences  and  rules.  That  we  have
overcome  some  of  these  differences  is  a  remarkable  achievement,  but  we  should  not  try  to
make everything equal when it’s not.
It  is  our  duty  to  rebalance  global  economic  policy  cooperation  with  the  demand  for  national
sovereignty.  We  should  value  the  maturing  of  cross-border  finance  at  a  hopefully  more
sustainable level and composition; we should honour the commitment made in the context of
finalising Basel III while nevertheless accepting its limitations for non-international banks; and we
should  overcome  our  reservations  about  close  supervisory  coordination,  as  this  will  become
more important in the future.
The  future  of  US-EU  financial  relations  will  be  more  complicated.  But  this  complication  could
prove beneficial – rather than leading us into an ice age, it could help our relationship mature.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
