SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
  6 Dec 2017 
Deputy Governor Per Jansson 
Fores, Stockholm 
 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
The ideological debate on monetary 
policy – lessons from developments in 
Sweden∗ 
These are unusually exciting times to be working at a central bank. Challenges 
have always been present, of course, but I think that it could be claimed that sel-
dom have they been of such a fundamental nature as they are today. One exam-
ple is the debate on limiting central banks’ independence that has arisen recently. 
This has come about after several countries have found themselves unable to con-
duct monetary policy using policy rate adjustments alone. Instead, they have had 
to complement this with tools that some observers feel have blurred the bound-
ary between monetary policy and other economic policies. Another example is 
that technological progress within the area of payments has led to the rapid de-
cline of cash usage in a number of countries, not least Sweden. Whether and how 
this trend will affect the conditions for conducting monetary policy and whether it 
provides reason for the central banks to issue electronic money as a complement 
to physical cash will be the focus of intense discussions in the period ahead. 
These are important and fundamental issues. Today, however, I would like to fo-
cus on another discussion, one that I feel is at least as vital and, at the moment, 
perhaps even more relevant. This concerns whether the conditions for monetary 
policy have changed so much in recent years that central banks will be forced to 
abandon, or at any rate considerably modify, the inflation-targeting policy that 
has been the dominant monetary policy regime of recent decades. 
                                                           
∗ I would like to thank Mikael Apel for help with the text of this speech, Emelie Theobald for help with the slides 
and Claes Berg, Charlotta Edler, Rebecka Hallerby, Stefan Ingves, Cecilia Skingsley, Marianne Sterner, Ulf Söder-
ström and Anders Vredin for useful suggestions. 
  1 [20] 
   International debate on whether inflation 
targeting has become outdated 
On one side of the discussion are economists and observers who argue that the 
inflation process now is so different from before that it is very difficult, perhaps 
even impossible, for central banks to conduct traditional inflation targeting, at any 
rate with the targets of around 2 per cent prevailing today. More specifically, they 
argue that inflation faces such strong ‘headwinds’ in the form, for example, of 
globalisation and digitalisation that it is doubtful whether central banks can steer 
inflation in any meaningful way. Instead, it is argued, monetary policy should be 
focused on dampening financial cycles and maintaining financial stability.1 
On the other side are most central banks, who argue that rumours of inflation tar-
geting’s imminent demise are significantly exaggerated. They admit that it has 
now become more difficult and more complicated to conduct monetary policy, 
when global real interest rates have fallen for a long time and are currently very 
low. This means that central banks’ policy rates are likely to reach their lower 
bounds more often and that monetary policy will occasionally have to be con-
ducted using other means than policy rate cuts. They also agree that digitalisation 
and globalisation are making it more difficult to reach inflation targets. But, it is 
argued, even if these complications must be managed, there is nothing to indicate 
that the inflation process should have changed so much and so fundamentally 
that inflation targets have become unobtainable and that inflation targeting as 
such would have to be fundamentally reassessed. 
Financial Times columnist Gavyn Davies has described this debate as an implicit 
ideological struggle between Claudio Borio, chief economist at the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements (BIS), perhaps the leading advocate of the new ideas, and 
the departing Chair of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, 
Janet Yellen, advocate of the traditional view.2 
There are good reasons for looking more closely into this debate. One is that it 
will probably be an important part of international monetary policy discussions in 
the years ahead. Another is that the debate is not merely about practical mone-
tary policy but in fact also about fundamental issues within economic science. 
The debate in Sweden is ahead of the inter-
national debate 
There is reason to believe that the experiences we have had in Sweden in recent 
years mean that we can make useful contributions to the international debate. 
For quite some time, we have had a discussion on the process of inflation and the 
conditions for inflation targeting, while this is a relatively new phenomenon in 
                                                           
1 There is also a parallel debate on whether the inflation target should be replaced, for example, with a price-
level target or a target for nominal GDP. However, I will not address this debate in this speech. 
2 See Davies (2017). For the sake of simplicity, I will adopt Davies’ terminology hereafter and refer to the two 
opinions as the ‘Borio camp’ and the ‘Yellen camp’. Of course, this does not mean that all arguments can be 
linked to specific statements by Janet Yellen or Claudio Borio. For typical references, see Borio (2017), Borio et al. 
(2017) and Yellen (2017a, b). 
  2 [20] 
   most other countries. Almost exactly one year ago, I held a speech where I noted 
that the long period of below-target inflation had led to a debate in Sweden which 
had few equivalents abroad. Analysts and observers argued that this develop-
ment, with inflation persistently below forecast and quite far below the inflation 
target, indicated that the target was so hard to reach that the Riksbank should 
abandon the attempt and instead conduct a less expansionary policy aimed at 
dampening rising household debt and housing prices.3  
While participating in international meetings recently, I have been struck by how 
much the discussion reminds me of the one we had in Sweden a couple of years 
ago. Countries that had not fallen below their inflation targets for very long at 
that point have now increasingly started to ask themselves whether they have not 
underestimated the difficulties of getting inflation to rise. One example is the 
United States, where, even though the Federal Reserve's main argument is that 
inflation will reach the target of 2 per cent in due course, Janet Yellen has also 
noted that “many uncertainties attend this assessment, and downward pressures 
on inflation could prove to be unexpectedly persistent”.4 Her colleague on the 
Board of Governors, Lael Brainard, has similarly expressed unease that “the recent 
low readings for inflation may be driven by depressed underlying inflation, which 
would imply a more persistent shortfall in inflation from our objective”.5 The Eu-
ropean Central Bank (ECB) is grappling with similar problems. The President of the 
ECB, Mario Draghi, recently stated that, even if inflation is expected to rise gradu-
ally in the period ahead, “progress towards a durable and self-sustaining conver-
gence of inflation towards our objective is not yet sufficiently convincing”.6 
Of course, it remains to be seen how justified this unease is. But what can be said 
so far is that we in Sweden have already been in the situation that other countries 
may be about to enter and have had, for some time, the debate that may be on 
the horizon there. In this respect, we are, in a sense, ‘ahead of the cycle’, both as 
regards the development of inflation and the monetary policy debate. It could 
therefore be worthwhile to summarise our experiences so far. Maybe there will 
be a few lessons that other countries and central banks may find useful and that 
have implications for the international debate. 
So let me start there. When I discuss the lessons that I think we have learned, I 
would like to divide the period after the global financial crisis into two different 
sub-periods and discuss them separately: the period of falling inflation 2011–2014 
and the period of rising inflation 2015–2017. I would like to emphasise that, as 
usual, I am expressing my personal opinion. It is possible that my colleagues on 
the Executive Board have come to the same conclusions as I do here, but it is also 
conceivable that they have made a different interpretation. 
                                                           
3 See Jansson (2016), where I discuss the criticism of the inflation target in more detail. It should be emphasised 
that this was one type of criticism that was expressed. In the speech, I also address other types of criticism, with 
less far-reaching implications. 
4 Yellen (2017b).  
5 Brainard (2017). 
6 Draghi (2017). 
  3 [20] 
   The period 2011–2014 – inflation falls far be-
low target 
In conjunction with the global financial crisis, Sweden’s GDP fell heavily, but the 
recovery was also surprisingly rapid. In 2010, Sweden’s GDP increased by about 6 
per cent, approximately as much as it had fallen in the year before. The increase 
was mainly due to the recovery in world trade and strengthening in global activity, 
which benefited Swedish exports and investment. Exports were also helped along 
by the weak krona. In July 2010, the Riksbank started to raise its repo rate from 
the level of 0.25 per cent to which it had been cut in conjunction with the crisis. 
CPIF inflation in 2010 amounted to 2 per cent.7 The Swedish economy developed 
strongly and resource utilisation increased rapidly. Until the summer of 2011, the 
recovery seemed to be continuing at a fairly good pace. By this point, the Riks-
bank had raised the repo rate in stages to 2 per cent. 
However, during the summer and autumn of 2011, unease increased over devel-
opments in public sector debt in the United States and several euro area coun-
tries. Growth prospects abroad deteriorated. This also spilled over onto the Swe-
dish economy. Sweden’s GDP slowed down sharply in 2011, fell slightly in 2012 
and only showed modest growth in 2013. Inflation started to fall in 2011 and basi-
cally fell until 2014, when CPIF inflation amounted to about 0.5 per cent and CPI 
inflation to just below zero. This fall started earlier than in most other countries 
(see Figure 1). To counteract this development, the Riksbank started to cut the 
repo rate at the end of 2011.  
 
One circumstance that has a certain significance for my discussion going forward 
is that the Riksbank was already concerned about the rise in household debt and 
housing prices by this point. With the aim of contributing, to some extent, to 
dampening the build-up of debt and price increases, the repo rate was set slightly 
higher than otherwise would have been the case.8 This is usually described as 
monetary policy ‘leaning against the wind’, where the wind represents some kind 
of financial imbalance that is deemed to be building up.  
 
However, what is important to understand is that, at this time, monetary policy 
was nevertheless largely governed by traditional monetary policy motives, that is, 
the expected development of economic activity and inflation over the coming 
years (see Figure 2). Risks linked to developments in household debt and housing 
prices were included in the assessment but did not play a leading role. I discussed 
this in detail in a speech a few years ago and, consequently, I shall not say much 
about it now.9 But let me just emphasise that neither did other economic analysts 
consider that the monetary policy conducted was mainly a matter of the Riksbank 
                                                           
7 The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed interest rate. CPIF inflation became the Riksbank’s formal target variable in Sep-
tember 2017 instead of CPI inflation, but, in practice, also acted as target variable before then.  
8 See, for example, Ingves (2012). 
9 See Jansson (2014), where I also note that it cannot be specified exactly how much this affected the repo rate. 
This is partly because the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions are taken by a committee with six members, and 
partly because it can also be difficult for an individual member to specify how much of a rate rise is aimed at 
dampening the accumulation of debt, as opposed to dampening economic activity. The only conclusion that can 
be drawn is that ‘leaning against the wind’ was not extensive, but neither was it negligible. 
  4 [20] 
   leaning against the wind, even if there were, of course, different opinions on ex-
actly how high the policy rate should be.10  
  
This was an educational period in many ways. Looking back on it with a few years’ 
perspective, there are two main conclusions, or lessons, that I would like to em-
phasise: 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
It is important not to lose sight of inflation and inflation expectations. 
Fairly significant interest rate rises may be needed to brake the build-
up of financial imbalances. 
 
I shall discuss these conclusions separately and explain what I mean in a little 
more detail.  
Conclusion (i): It is important not to lose sight of  
inflation and inflation expectations 
 
My conclusion that it is important not to lose sight of inflation and inflation expec-
tations may seem obvious and trivial to many people, but it is nevertheless worth 
some reflection. Moreover, the international debate that has arisen recently sug-
gests that it may not be so obvious after all. 
 
One apparent reason for keeping sight of inflation is that it has turned out to be 
surprisingly difficult to bring it back on target once it has fallen, particularly if in-
flation expectations have fallen too. I have to admit that I, for one, underesti-
mated these problems. One possible explanation is that I, probably along with 
many others, had been lulled into a belief that the positive developments in the 
years prior to the financial crisis confirmed that we had succeeded in tackling the 
more significant problems and that the inflation target was completely credible 
and more or less a natural element of the Swedish economy. 
 
Of course, that it is important not to lose sight of inflation is easy to say, but it is 
harder to live up to. Obviously, it was not the Riksbank’s intention for inflation to 
become as low as it did and for such a long time.11 We made the best forecasts we 
could and implemented the policies we deemed to be the most appropriate. In 
retrospect, of course, had we known that inflation would become as low as it did, 
we would have cut the rate sooner and faster.  
 
                                                           
10 This view is also supported by Goodfriend and King (2016). Somewhat surprisingly, the interpretation that un-
ease over household debt was the main or even only reason for the increase of the repo rate 2010–2011 is still 
being put forward occasionally. One clear example that the economic slowdown in 2011 instead surprised most 
analysts is provided by the forecast made by the National Institute of Economic Research in June 2011. In this 
forecast, it was assumed that the repo rate would be 3 per cent by the end of 2012 and just over 4 per cent at 
the end of 2014 (in reality, the repo rate was 0 per cent at the end of 2014). This policy was considered compati-
ble with a balanced resource utilisation in 2014 and a CPIF inflation rate close to 2 per cent in 2013–2015. This 
forecast, which was representative of Swedish forecasters, thus assumed that continued rate hikes would be jus-
tified for normal economic reasons.   
11 For an analysis of the factors that contributed towards this low inflation, see Andersson, Corbo and Löf (2015). 
  5 [20] 
   But it is not particularly meaningful to evaluate events with the benefit of hind-
sight. For it to be meaningful, it has to be possible to identify things that could be 
done differently in a similar situation in the future. For example, there is no real 
point in observing that we would have acted differently if we had managed to pre-
dict the debt crisis in Europe and its effects. It is highly likely that, in the future, 
this type of event will be more or less just as difficult to predict.  
 
However, one experience that I believe we should take with us concerns our mon-
etary policy communication. Much of our communication at this time was about 
pointing out risks connected to the development of debts and housing prices, in 
particular during the period in which we had again started to cut the repo rate. 
Even if we still expected to reach the inflation target, it could well be that we 
talked too little about the target and too much about financial imbalances. This 
may have created uncertainty among economic agents regarding the status of the 
inflation target, which may, in turn, have contributed towards inflation expecta-
tions falling. This is something worth bearing in mind going forward. The problem 
was possibly also exacerbated by the Riksbank's critics often exaggerating the sig-
nificance to monetary policy of the development of debt and housing prices. 
 
A deeper question concerning keeping inflation in sight is whether confidence in 
the inflation target is really so important. Would it not be possible to conduct 
monetary policy without there being confidence in the inflation target – or, for 
that matter, without there being any inflation target at all? Why is it not possible 
for monetary policy merely to stabilise the real economy or lean against the wind? 
Such a monetary policy arrangement would be well in line with the new thinking 
in the international debate that I presented in my introduction, in particular if this 
were to be taken to its logical conclusion.12 I intend to return to this debate soon, 
so let me put this issue to one side for a moment. 
 
Conclusion (ii): Fairly significant interest rate rises may 
be needed to brake the build-up of financial imbal-
ances 
 
One issue in which I have gradually revised my opinion in recent years is that of 
how much a central bank should and must lean against the wind to deal with the 
build-up of a financial imbalance. Previously, I had a rather strong belief that lean-
ing against the wind relatively moderately could have a good effect, primarily by 
sending a clear signal that the central bank is concerned over developments and 
perceives them to be risky. Today, I am more doubtful about this. It certainly 
seems reasonable that the effectiveness of such a strategy will vary over time and 
from economy to economy, depending on the exact circumstances, for example 
regarding market sentiment and debt levels, but overall I am significantly more 
sceptical than before. I still believe that a certain degree of leaning against the 
wind, combined with clear communication of the risks, could increase awareness 
                                                           
12 For one example, see Scholes and Alankar (2017). 
  6 [20] 
   of the problems among the general public, market participants and economic pol-
icy decision-makers. But it is, of course, necessary that this raised awareness re-
sults in concrete measures or changed behaviour that counteracts the financial 
imbalance. It is doubtful, as far as Sweden is concerned, whether it can be said 
that this has been the case, at any rate not to such an extent or at such an early 
stage as could have been hoped for.  
 
The fairly modest leaning against the wind that we practised was thus insufficient 
to halt the build-up of debts and housing prices. Nevertheless, I myself was not 
prepared to keep the rate any higher than we did in an attempt to achieve this. 
This was also apparently true of the Executive Board as a whole. If we had set the 
repo rate significantly higher, the increase in indebtedness would perhaps have 
stopped more permanently, but, at the same time, there is a severe risk that the 
development of the economy would also have been significantly worsened. Per-
haps even more importantly, the development of inflation would have been even 
weaker than it actually was and it would have been even more difficult to bring it 
up and maintain confidence in the inflation target. 
 
One further conclusion, or lesson, is that a policy that leans against the wind re-
quires that there is confidence in the inflation target. When we felt that this confi-
dence was in the process of becoming undermined in 2014 and early 2015, we 
made the assessment that there was no other option than to increase the pace of 
repo rate cuts to clarify that the focus was entirely on inflation. Accordingly there 
was no longer any scope to use the repo rate to attempt to influence debts and 
housing prices. In this respect too, the Riksbank has been a forerunner in the 
world of central banking, albeit unintentionally. As far as I know, no other central 
bank applying a policy that uses its interest rate to counteract the build-up of fi-
nancial imbalances, such as Norges Bank, has had to make such a clear and im-
portant choice. 
 
Having said this, I now also see more fundamental problems with a monetary pol-
icy that leans against the wind, even when there is confidence in the inflation tar-
get. I will return to this at the end of this speech.  
 
Consequently, my interpretation of Sweden’s experiences so far is that a policy 
that leans against the wind has its limitations. For example, it seems, at least un-
der certain circumstances, that the policy rate would have to be set quite a lot 
higher to effectively dampen the increase of debt. But such a policy could slow 
down the economy as a whole quite seriously and risk leading to inflation falling 
significantly below target for a long period. It is effects of this type that are re-
ferred to in the international debate when arguing that the policy rate is far too 
blunt an instrument to counter financial imbalances. Sweden's experiences also 
suggest that the policy rate cannot always be expected to be available for this pur-
pose. Even when a central bank is leaning quite moderately against the wind, such 
a policy could be in conflict with the task of maintaining confidence in the inflation 
target. 
 
Here too, of course, the question arises of whether it is really so important to 
maintain confidence in the inflation target. Would it not be possible for monetary 
  7 [20] 
   policy instead to just lean against the wind and let inflation develop as it will? 
Once again, I will return to this shortly. 
 
Before continuing, I would like to add that there is a growing amount of research 
that explicitly attempts to calculate the costs and benefits of using the policy rate 
to attempt to counteract financial imbalances. The debate is ongoing and the jury 
is still out.13 Of course, in this context, the view I present here should only be seen 
as a country-specific case study. But considering that practical experience of this 
type of policy is very limited, reflections from someone who has been involved in 
taking decisions in a country that is ‘ahead in the cycle’ may perhaps be of some 
value. 
The period 2015–2017 – inflation rises to-
wards target again  
In 2014, monetary policy came to focus on rapidly returning inflation to target and 
anchoring inflation expectations. The repo rate was cut by 0.5 percentage points 
to 0.25 per cent in July and further to zero per cent in October. At the beginning 
of 2015, inflation was still very low and inflation expectations were developing in 
a worrying manner (see Figure 3). The repo rate was cut further in 2015 and early 
2016 to -0.5 per cent. In addition, the Riksbank started purchasing government 
bonds on a large scale.  
The expansionary policy gradually started to have effect. Growth rose and em-
ployment increased. Inflation started to show a more-or-less rising trend in 2015 
and again reached the inflation target in 2017. Inflation expectations also turned 
upwards and long-term expectations are now again anchored around the target 
(Figure 4).  
The conclusion from the period 2015–2017 that I would particularly like to em-
phasise is the following: 
(iii) 
It may take a long time with a highly expansionary policy to bring in-
flation up – but it is possible. 
 
It could be claimed that neither is this conclusion particularly remarkable. It is the 
conclusion that comes to mind first, having observed monetary policy and the de-
velopment of inflation in Sweden in recent years. But, in light of the current inter-
national debate, it is nevertheless important and worth bringing up.  
 
                                                           
13 For example, the International Monetary Fund (2015) and Svensson (2017) argue that the costs are greater 
than the benefits, while Filardo and Rungcharoenkitkul (2016) and Gourio, Kashyap and Sim (2016), for example, 
draw the opposite conclusion. 
  8 [20] 
   Conclusion (iii): It may take a long time with a highly 
expansionary policy to bring inflation up – but it is pos-
sible 
 
As I have already mentioned, the first part of this lesson provides an important 
reason for not losing sight of inflation and inflation expectations. If this is allowed 
to happen, the way back may be difficult and arduous. In Sweden’s case, CPIF in-
flation was systematically below target for about six years, 2011–2016, occasion-
ally by a considerable margin. To halt and then reverse the fall in inflation, we cut 
the repo rate to levels it had never previously approached and, in addition, the 
Riksbank purchased large amounts of government securities. Significant commu-
nication interventions were also required, for example when it came to describing 
which development of the krona the Riksbank deemed to be compatible with ris-
ing inflation. Unlike what had possibly been the case earlier, there can, from a 
communication point of view, hardly have been any doubt of the Riksbank's de-
termination to reach the target. 
 
This policy has thus contributed towards inflation rising and currently being in line 
with the target. The situation is reminiscent of that in the mid-1990s, when the 
Riksbank, despite widespread scepticism, managed to establish confidence in the 
inflation target, even though the aim that time was to bring down inflation. There 
are, of course, no guarantees that inflation will stay at around 2 per cent going 
forward. Nevertheless, things look good so far, even though a lot of support from 
monetary policy will still be necessary and further monetary policy easing cannot 
be ruled out. 
Links to the international debate 
How, then, can Sweden's experiences be linked to the international debate – the 
implicit ideological debate between the Yellen camp and the Borio camp? To 
more easily understand this, it is useful to start by reviewing the debate in a little 
more detail. There are, above all, two differences, which are closely related, be-
tween the two camps: the view of the so-called Phillips curve and the view of the 
possibilities central banks have to steer inflation. 
 
The Phillips curve exists in different variations but, in one way or another, all of 
these deal with the relationship between resource utilisation and the develop-
ment of prices or wages. The starting point is that, by adjusting its policy rate, the 
central bank can influence resource utilisation in the economy. When resource 
utilisation increases, prices and wages rise faster, and vice versa, via the Phillips 
curve. 
 
The Yellen camp’s view is that the Phillips curve looks largely as it normally does 
or, at any rate, has changed so little that it still works as an effective channel 
through which central banks can influence inflation. According to the Borio camp, 
the Phillips curve has instead almost broken down or, at any rate, changed so 
  9 [20] 
   much that it no longer forms a central part of the inflation process. More specifi-
cally, high resource utilisation no longer results in higher inflation, according to 
this view. 
 
Instead, it is claimed, inflation is highly influenced by structural factors. Factors of-
ten emphasised as exerting downward pressure on inflation are globalisation and, 
looking forward, more and more digitalisation.14 These are arguments that those 
who have followed the debate in Sweden in recent years will recognise. According 
to this view, the central banks will find it difficult to steer inflation for a long time 
to come. As I mentioned in my introduction, taken to its conclusion, this means 
that it is pointless to set up targets for inflation, as this is mainly determined by 
factors outside monetary policy. As I also noted earlier, the Yellen camp does not 
share this view but believes that inflation targets are meaningful, important and 
possible to attain. 
Implications of the Swedish experiences 
What view, then, should we take of the international debate in light of our experi-
ences here in Sweden? As I see it, our experiences overall are more in line with 
the Yellen camp's view. One example is that it seems to be possible to reach the 
target with a sufficiently powerful expansionary policy. One reservation here, of 
course, is that we still cannot be certain that inflation will really remain around 
the target, even if this is what the Riksbank expects.  
 
Another reservation is that neither is it obvious what part the Phillips curve has 
played in the rise of inflation in Sweden so far. Increased resource utilisation has 
certainly gone hand in hand with rising inflation, but we have also seen that wage 
increases have so far been surprisingly modest given the economic situation. In 
that sense, it is too early to say whether Sweden's experiences suggest that the 
Phillips curve is continuing to work like usual. But our experiences nevertheless 
suggest that central banks’ inflation targets are fully possible to reach. And the re-
cent, relatively rapid increases in service prices are, after all, a sign that some 
form of Phillips curve is active (see Figure 5). 
 
There has been quite a lively international debate on the Phillips curve recently – 
about its slope and even about its existence.15 Personally, I take a fairly agnostic 
view of it. I see it as a mostly qualitative relationship between resource utilisation 
and inflation that does not say much more than that high resource utilisation 
sooner or later tends to lead to prices and wages rising more rapidly and that low 
resource utilisation leads to them rising more slowly. The effect on inflation of a 
given level of resource utilisation can certainly vary over time, which is to say that 
the slope of the Phillips curve is not necessarily always the same. The time dynam-
ics may also vary, that is the time lag of the impact of resource utilisation on infla-
tion is not always the same. In addition, inflation is, of course, affected all the 
time by a series of other factors – various shocks, in the vocabulary of economics. 
                                                           
14 See Borio (2017). 
15 See, for example, Blanchard (2016) and The Economist (2017). 
  10 [20] 
   These can be highly temporary, but also relatively persistent. However, I find it 
very hard to swallow, not to say completely unlikely, that, other things being 
equal, there should be no relationship between resource utilisation and inflation. 
 
My conclusion that it is important not to lose sight of inflation and inflation expec-
tations is also quite well in line with the Yellen camp’s view, in the sense that the 
inflation target and confidence in the target are seen as vital. It is worth noting 
that there is a debate, not least in the United States, which has come the furthest 
with its policy rate rises, about how rapidly monetary policy should be made less 
expansionary.16 The concern is precisely that excessively rapid changes will make 
inflation and inflation expectations fall below target again – something that there 
thus is reason to avoid.  
 
The conclusion that it could take quite significant interest rate rises to halt the ac-
cumulation of financial imbalances is also more in line with the Yellen camp’s 
view. It points to the limitations of the policy that the Borio camp argues should 
be given a greater influence, or possibly even be the main aim of monetary policy.  
Inflation targets are necessary  
However, as I have discussed, in this respect it is necessary to go a little deeper 
into the analysis. More specifically, the issue of whether it is really necessary to 
have a target for inflation at all needs to be addressed. Would it not be possible 
for monetary policy instead to focus on attempting to counteract the accumula-
tion of financial imbalances and allow inflation to develop as it will? 
 
As I see it, this would not be an appropriate set-up. In my view, it is extremely im-
portant that there is an inflation target in which there is confidence, and that that 
target is set at a sufficient distance from zero. It is quite common that debaters 
who advocate a new type of monetary policy omit to discuss the problems that 
could arise if the central banks were to abandon their inflation targets. This is also 
the case in the Swedish debate. 
 
If the central banks were to abandon their inflation targets in the current situa-
tion, inflation would almost certainly fall and there would be a large risk that infla-
tion and inflation expectations would become permanently stuck on a very low 
level. This would make it more difficult for monetary policy to counteract reces-
sions in the future. If average inflation is low, the nominal average interest rate 
will also be low. And the lower the interest rate is in normal conditions, the less 
scope there is to lower it before it reaches its lower bound. 
  
A more general problem is that the inflation target acts as a benchmark for price 
and wage formation – it forms what is usually called a nominal anchor in the econ-
omy. When economic agents have a collective picture of how prices will develop 
in the future, it becomes easier to plan for the long term. The absence of a nomi-
nal anchor could also lead to not just inflation varying more, but also output and 
                                                           
16 See, for example, Duy (2017) and Summers (2017). 
  11 [20] 
   employment. Assume that a negative shock impacts demand in the economy, 
causing inflation to fall. If there is uncertainty about the inflation target, inflation 
expectations may also fall in the slightly longer term. This will cause a rise in the 
real interest rate, i.e. the interest rate corrected for inflation expectations, if the 
nominal interest rate remains unchanged. The higher real interest rate amplifies 
the effect of the original negative shock on demand and weakens the economy 
even more, as it is the real interest rate that affects companies’ and households’ 
investment and consumption decisions. In a corresponding way, a positive shock 
to demand can make inflation and inflation expectations rise. It lowers the real in-
terest rate and contributes towards further increasing demand. When confidence 
in the inflation target is weak and inflation expectations are not well anchored, 
the result thus becomes larger fluctuations in the economy. We went through 
such a development in Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s, when the fixed exchange 
rate did not act as a sufficiently strong nominal anchor, which in turn resulted in 
recurrent cost crises and devaluations. 
 
The reason that debaters do not address the problems of abandoning the inflation 
target could, of course, be that they consider that the process of inflation has 
changed so much that central banks simply no longer can reach their inflation tar-
gets. This seems after all to be quite a common view in the debate. This would im-
ply that it is not meaningful to set up targets for inflation, as it is determined by 
factors outside monetary policy. However, this is an assumption that, were it cor-
rect, would actually turn much of what is considered accepted within economic 
science on its head. Economic paradigms do change every now and again, of 
course. But, at a minimum, one may argue that quite a heavy burden of proof lies 
on those claiming it is no longer possible to choose an inflation target. Among 
other things, they would have to disprove Milton Friedman’s thesis that inflation 
is basically a monetary phenomenon.17 
 
Having said this, in practice, it is probably more of a gradual scale than a binary 
zero-one solution. Structural factors can push inflation down in a way that can be 
difficult to counteract for a relatively long time, even if not permanently. It is 
therefore quite an important discussion that the Borio camp has initiated.18 How 
should a central bank act in a situation in which, despite conducting the most ex-
pansionary policy it deems possible, it does not expect to be able to reach the tar-
get in a foreseeable time frame? As I see it, the reasonable decision in such a situ-
ation is to hold fast to the inflation target and continue with the expansionary pol-
icy.19 If the central bank instead were to change its policy in a less expansionary 
direction, the inflation target would become even more distant and even more 
                                                           
17 Friedman (1963). It should be mentioned that, according to the so-called ‘fiscal theory of the price level’, fiscal 
policy has crucial influence over inflation, see for example Christiano and Fitzgerald (2000). To achieve low and 
stable inflation, a well-balanced monetary policy is therefore insufficient. It also requires fiscal policy to be con-
ducted in a way that is compatible with the inflation target. However, this theory is controversial and does not 
actually question the value of central banks having inflation targets.  
18 It should be emphasised that the BIS, where Borio is chief economist, has often been early to bring up issues of 
fundamental importance for central banks. For example, the BIS was one of the first to emphasise that low and 
stable inflation does not necessarily imply macroeconomic stability and a reduced risk for financial crises, see for 
example Borio and Lowe (2002) and White (2006). However, contributions were not only made by the BIS in this 
context. Rajan (2005) is another example. 
19 I discussed this case in a speech last year, see Jansson (2016). 
  12 [20] 
   difficult to attain. Sooner or later, confidence in the inflation target would be lost, 
bringing us back to the problems I just outlined. 
More fundamental problems with a mone-
tary policy that focuses on financial stability 
There are also other reasons why a monetary policy that focuses heavily on at-
tempting to counteract the accumulation of financial imbalances may be problem-
atic. I have just addressed one of these, namely that fairly large rate rises may be 
required to slow down, for example, a rapid increase of debt. Even if the effect of 
this on inflation is not considered so important, it is more difficult to disregard 
that the effect on output and employment could be significant.  
 
The issue can also be considered from a more general perspective. Thinking about 
it, it would be quite strange if the main way of preventing financial crises was to 
hold monetary policy tighter than could be justified by basic economic prospects. 
As I see it, financial cycles, at least those which are big enough to create signifi-
cant disorder, are often the result of the regulations governing the financial sys-
tem not being sufficiently stringent or even, perhaps, of fundamental shortcom-
ings in the entire ‘business model’ of the financial sector. The failure of important 
markets to function sufficiently well may also be of great significance. One exam-
ple that I have raised before, but which is worth raising again, is the comparison 
of how policy rates and housing markets have developed in Sweden and Germany 
(see Figure 6). Despite a similar monetary policy, the development of housing 
prices in Germany has differed entirely from that in Sweden. Of course, a well-
functioning financial sector and well-functioning markets would not generate 
completely stable credit paths, for example. But it is highly likely that the large 
and dangerous fluctuations would be heavily restrained.  
 
It seems reasonable that the financial system should be sufficiently stable and ro-
bust to be able to handle both an occasionally very low neutral interest rate – as is 
the case today – and that monetary policy is conducted in a manner that fulfils 
normal monetary policy targets – such as an inflation target – without collaps-
ing.20 If it is deemed that the financial system is insufficiently stable to cope with 
this, the most reasonable and long-term sustainable solution must be to ensure 
that it becomes so rather than dodging the problem and instead demanding that 
the central bank slows down the entire economy by setting an unnecessarily high 
interest rate.21 
                                                           
20 The term neutral interest rate normally refers to the real interest rate, which has neither an expansionary nor 
a contractionary effect on the economy. Central banks cannot influence the neutral interest rate but they must 
consider it when they adjust their policy rates. For an analysis of the level of the repo rate in the long term, see 
the article “The long-term repo rate” in the Monetary Policy Report, February 2017. 
21 See, for example, Wolf (2017) for a similar argument. 
  13 [20] 
   Concluding comments 
Let me sum up and round off. Monetary policy around the world is, in many ways, 
at a crossroads. The flexible inflation targeting that has been the dominant mone-
tary policy model of recent decades is facing major challenges. In my address to-
day, I have focused on one of these: the international debate that has arisen re-
cently, in which a number of economists and observers have argued that the pro-
cess of inflation is now so different from before that it is very difficult, perhaps 
even impossible, for the central banks to conduct traditional inflation-targeting 
policies. Instead, it is argued, monetary policy should be aimed at attempting to 
counteract financial imbalances to a greater degree, possibly even exclusively. 
In relation to this debate, Sweden finds itself in a rather unique position. We have 
discussed these issues for longer than most other countries, we have experience 
of a policy that was aimed, to a certain extent, at counteracting financial imbal-
ances, inflation fell earlier in Sweden than in many other areas, and we have also 
– after a long period of highly expansionary monetary policy – managed to bring it 
back on target. In other words, we have a number of experiences to share.  
Here, I have given an account of what I consider have been the most important 
experiences: that it is important not to lose sight of inflation and inflation expec-
tations, that it may take significant interest rate rises to halt the accumulation of 
financial imbalances and that it may take a long period of highly expansionary pol-
icies to bring inflation up – but that it is possible to bring it up.  
In conclusion, to avoid misunderstandings, I would like to emphasise that my com-
ments today do not, in any way, mean that I consider that central banks should 
not have any role or responsibility for financial stability. That issue deals with 
much more than whether or not it is appropriate to address financial imbalances 
with monetary policy and the policy rate. And, in Sweden, the Riksbank has in-
deed important functions in this context, both in preventing financial crises and 
tackling them should they occur. In addition, the ongoing parliamentary inquiry 
into the Riksbank will examine this matter and others in more detail, and I look 
forward to its conclusions with interest. My discussion today has centred on my 
view that monetary policy and the policy rate are better suited to focus on an in-
flation target – and that good conditions exist for them to continue to do so. Of 
course, monetary policy systems and frameworks do not last forever. But, so far, I 
consider that there are good reasons to keep the one we have.  
 
 
 
 
 
  14 [20] 
   References 
Andersson, Björn, Vesna Corbo and Mårten Löf (2015), ”Why has inflation been so 
low?”, Economic Review 2015:3, pp. 5–46. 
Blanchard, Olivier (2016), ”The US Phillips curve: Back to the 60s?”, Policy Brief 
No. PB16-1, Peterson Institute of International Economics, January. 
Borio, Claudio (2017), “Through the looking glass”, OMFIF City Lecture, London, 22 
September. 
Borio, Claudio, Piti Disyatat, Mikael Juselius and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul 
(2017), “Monetary policy in the grip of a pincer movement”, paper presented at 
21st Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile “Monetary policy and finan-
cial stability: Transmission mechanisms and policy implications”, Santiago, Chile, 
16-17 November. 
Borio, Claudio and Philips Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary sta-
bility: exploring the nexus”, BIS Working Papers, no 114, July.  
Brainard, Lael (2017), “Understanding the disconnect between employment and 
inflation with a low neutral rate”, speech at The Economic Club of New York, 5 
September.  
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald (2000), “Understanding the fiscal 
theory of the price level”, Economic Review, No. Q II, pp. 2–38. 
Davies, Gavyn (2017), ”Central bank disputes: Yellen vs Borio”, blog post, Financial 
Times, 24 September. 
Draghi, Mario (2017), Statement at the thirty-sixth meeting of the International 
Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington D.C., 13 October. 
Duy, Tim (2017), “Taking stock”, blog post, Tim Duy’s Fed Watch, 13 November, 
https://blogs.uoregon.edu/timduyfedwatch/files/2017/11/FedWatch111317-
1kkucv3.pdf  
Filardo, Andrew and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul (2016), ”A quantitative case for 
leaning against the wind”, BIS Working Papers No. 594. 
Friedman, Milton (1963), Inflation: Causes and Consequences, Asian Publishing 
House, New York. 
Goodfriend, Marvin and Mervyn King (2016), ”Review of the Riksbank’s Monetary 
Policy 2010–2015”, Reports from the Riksdag 2015/16: RFR 16, Sveriges Riksdag. 
Gourio, Francois, Anil K. Kashyap and Jae Sim (2016), ”The tradeoffs in leaning 
against the wind”, paper presented at 17th Jacques Polak Annual Research Con-
ference, November. 
Ingves, Stefan (2012), “Stora risker med alltför låg ränta” [“Major risks in exces-
sively low interest rate”], debate article, Svenska Dagbladet, 18 October.  
International Monetary Fund (2015), ”Monetary policy and financial stability”, IMF 
Policy Papers. 
  15 [20] 
   Jansson, Per (2014), “Swedish monetary policy after the financial crisis – myths 
and facts”, speech at SvD Bank Summit 2014, 3 December. 
Jansson, Per (2016), “Time to scrap the inflation target?”, speech at Swedbank, 
Stockholm, 7 December. 
Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?” 
Paper presented at The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future—A Symposium 
Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
August 25–27. 
Scholes, Myron and Ash Alankar (2017), “What investors can teach central banks 
about inflation”, Opinion Markets Insight, Financial Times, 1 November. 
Summers, L. H. (2017), ”5 reasons why the Fed may be making a mistake”, blog 
post, 14 June, http://larrysummers.com/2017/06/14/5-reasons-why-the-fed-may-
be-making-a-mistake/ 
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2017), ”Cost-benefit analysis of leaning against the wind”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 90, pp. 193-213. 
The Economist (2017), “The Phillips curve may be broken for good”, Daily Chart, 1 
November. 
White, William R. (2006): “Is price stability enough?”, BIS Working Papers, no 205, 
April. 
Wolf, Martin (2017), “Central banks alone cannot deliver stable finance”, Opinion 
Central Banks, Financial Times, 24 October. 
Yellen, Janet L. (2017a), Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference, 20 Septem-
ber.  
Yellen, Janet L. (2017b), “Inflation, uncertainty, and monetary policy”, speech at 
“Prospects for growth: Reassessing the fundamentals”, 59th Annual Meeting of 
the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, 26 September. 
 
 
 
   16 [20] 
   Figure 1. Swedish inflation ’ahead of the international cycle’ 
Annual percentage change  
 Note. Inflation for Sweden is measured as the CPIF, for the US as ‘core PCE’ and for the euro area as the HICP.  
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, European Commission (Eurostat) and Statistics Sweden 
 
 
    17 [20] 
   Figure 2. Natural to raise the repo rate 2010–2011 
Purchasing Managers’ Index in the  
manufacturing sector 
An index over 50 indicates growth 
 Lending to households and companies 
Annual percentage change 
GDP 
Quarterly change in per cent calculated as an annual rate,  
Seasonally-adjusted data. 
    
Inflation 
Annual percentage change 
 
CPIF excluding energy
CPIF
CPI
 6
4
2
0
-2
06
08
10
12
14
6
4
2
0
-2
Note. Forecasts from April 2011. 
Sources: Institute for Supply Management (ISM), Swedbank, Statistics Sweden and Sveriges Riksbank 
 
 
      18 [20] 
   Figure 3. Troubling situation at turn of year 2014-2015 
Inflation 
Annual percentage change 
Inflation expectations 
Annual percentage change 
   Note. Measured using the CPIF (left) and the CPI (right). 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Sifo Prospera 
 
Figure 4. 2015–2017 – inflation rises towards target again 
Inflation 
Annual percentage change 
Inflation expectations 
Annual percentage change 
   Note. Measured using the CPIF (left) and the CPI (right). 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Sifo Prospera 
 
     19 [20] 
  Figure 5. The development of services prices indicates that the Phillips curve 
works 
Annual percentage change 
 Note. Broken lines represent mean values since 2000. 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 
Figure 6. A monetary policy like that in Sweden does not have to result in runa-
way housing prices 
Policy rate in Sweden and Germany 
Housing prices in Sweden and Germany 
180
Germany
Sweden
160
140
120
100
80
60
Note. Per cent and house price index (HPI) respectively, 2005 Q1 = 100. 
Sources: ECB, Macrobond and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
 00
03
06
09
12
15
 180
160
140
120
100
80
60
  20 [20] 
