Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Why the Philippines
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippines  Investment  Forum,  Euromoney  Conferences,  27
November 2017.
 Distinguished  guests;  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:    Good  morning!    I  thank  Euromoney  for  the
invitation to speak at this annual Investment Forum. My message is simple and straightforward.
The  Philippines  today  offers  viable  and  strong  investment  opportunities.  The  very  topics  for
today’s panel discussions point to the key reasons. First, our economic outlook is strong and
robust;  Second,  our  capital  markets  are  being  deepened  and  developed;  Third,  massive
infrastructure building gears us for increased growth and development;  Fourth,  we can rely on
aggressive trade and industrial development and Fifth, there are untapped markets, the unserved
and  underserved,  such  as  MSMEs  and  the  agricultural  sector,    that  present  not  just  the
opportunity  to  exercise  social  responsibility,  but  also  to  create  and  deliver  new  products  and
services. 
First: The economic outlook 
The Philippines is one of the fastest growing investment-grade rated economies in the region.
We  realized  a    better-than-market  forecast  GDP  growth  of  6.9  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of
2017, our 75th consecutive quarter of uninterrupted economic growth since the Asian financial
crisis.  We are on track to meet this year’s target GDP growth of 6.5 to 7.5 percent.  Further
economic  growth  of  7.0  to  8.0  percent  over  the  medium  term  is  expected.The  sustained
economic growth is a product of two decades of structural reforms.
Amidst this rapid economic development, we expect inflation to remain low and stable and within
target. We estimate it will settle at 3.2 percent this year, 3.4 percent in 2018, and 3.2 percent in
2019.
To maintain price stability, the BSP adopted the Inflation Targeting framework in 2002. This has
served  us  well.  We  continuously  refine  monetary  policy  conduct.  The  implementation  of  the
interest  rate  corridor  system  in  July  2016  is  a  manifestation  of  our  commitment.    More
refinements are coming.  These changes are enhancing the transmission channels of monetary
policy.
The country’s external payments position remains manageable and we have built up a strong
liquidity  buffer  against  external  shocks. At  $80.4  billion  as  of  end-October,  our  GIR  level  can
cover  8.4  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services,  even  exceeding  the
outstanding external debt amounting to $72.5 billion as of end-June 2017. We also have in place
substantial regional safety net arrangements.
The  banking  system  is  strong  and  stable.  Banks  are  lending  more,  and  to  productive
sectors. Outstanding loans of universal and commercial banks as of end-September 2017 are
up by 21.1 percent year-on-year.  But the non-performing loans (NPL) ratio stood at a mere 1.4
percent. As  of  end-June  2017,  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  stood  16.0  percent  on  consolidated
basis, double the international minimum. 
Our comprehensive risk-based supervision approach ensure that our banks operate in a safe
and sound manner and that the economy is guarded against shocks that may affect financial
sector stability.  Because of bold reforms, the banking system today is very different from the
banking system before the Asian Financial Crisis.
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nevertheless, there are those who raise overheating concerns. Some also worry of a potential
asset bubble in the real estate sector.
Our data and analysis suggest otherwise. And we are vigilant to avoid these risks. The credit-to-
GDP  ratio  of  63.6  percent  as  of  Q2  2017  is  still  one  of  the  lowest  by  far  in Asia,  indicating
relatively low overall leverage. 
At any rate, regulations are in place that require banks to manage their exposures to the real
estate sector. Last September, the Monetary Board approved enhancements to bank reportorial
requirements on exposures to the real estate sector and to infrastructure projects. More granular
information are to be submitted for the BSP to better monitor the extent of bank exposure to real
estate and infrastructure projects. 
We are ready to implement appropriate macro-prudential measures as the situation may require.
Another concern being raised is the country’s current account balance which,  after posting 13
consecutive years (2003–2015) of surplus, turned into a small deficit in 2016 (-0.3% of GDP) and
in  2017  (-0.2%  of  GDP  in  Jan-June).  This  concern  is  misplaced.    Indeed,  IMF  observed  that
previous current account surpluses actually reflected low levels of investment.
Behind  the  deficit  is  the  economy’s  rapid  growth,  backed  by  rising  investments.  There  is  an
increase  in  imports  of  machineries,  capital  goods,  intermediate  goods  and  raw  materials. 
Eventually, we expect these to translate into higher productivity and exports, lending support to
the sustainability of the current account and overall external payments position. We also expect
BOP deficits to the mitigated by robust overseas Filipino remittances, BPO revenues, tourism
receipts, and FDI flows.
increased  direct  and  portfolio 
Recent  weakness  of  the  peso  is  also  being  spotlighted.  We  assure  that  the  peso’s  recent
modest and controlled depreciation is consistent with the economy’s structural shift from being
consumption-led  to  being  more  investment-led.    This  is  driven  by  strong  imports  demand,
residents’ 
for  expansion  and  risk
diversification;  as  well  as  public  and  private  sector  debt  prepayments  to  manage  foreign
exchange  risks.  There  is  also  outflow  of  hot  money.  We  believe  these  developments  are
fundamentally healthy and help improve price competitiveness.
Second: capital markets
investments  abroad 
Capital  market  development  also  gives  more  reason  to  invest  in  the  Philippines.  The  BSP  is
working hand-in-hand with the Department of Finance (DOF), the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr),
and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  on  a  local  currency  debt  market
development  roadmap,  where  reforms  to  deepen  the  market  will  be  undertaken  over  an  18-
month  time  frame.  The  reform  agenda  will  officially  unfold  with  the  launch  of  the  Government
Securities Repo Program later this very afternoon (Nov 27)!  Indeed exciting and transformative
times!
The roadmap includes initiatives to 1) increase the volume of treasury bills, 2) provide stable,
predictable and transparent issuance of government securities, 3) develop a systematic set of
obligations,  rights  and  incentives  for  market-makers,  4)  establish  a  reliable  yield  curve,  5)
introduce a repo program, and 6) strengthen regulatory oversight over the repo and fixed income
market.
These  reforms  in  the  government  securities  market  will  translate  into  increased  market
efficiency,  lower  borrowing  cost,  more  dynamic  and  increased  participation. As  the  domestic
debt  market  develops  rapidly,  there  will  be  more  alternative  sources  of  funding  for  economic
activities besides the banking sector.  Risks will also be better managed.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third: infrastructure building
We  are  in  a  period  of  build,  build,  build!  This  will  be  driven  by  massive  key  infrastructure
investments.These  will  enhance  competitiveness,  support  the  economy’s  rising  growth
trajectory, and spread development across the country’s regions.
Under the National Government’s program, spending for big-ticket infrastructure projects is set
between  $160  billion  and  $170  billion  in  the  next  five  (5)  years.    With  this,  government
infrastructure  spending  as  a  share  of  GDP  will  rise  annually  from  5.4  percent  in  2017  to  7.3
percent  in  2022.  Public  investments  in  infrastructure  and  human  capital  development,  while
observing fiscal discipline, will be a major growth driver.
Sustainable funding sources must support this thrust. Deepening our domestic capital market,
as earlier mentioned, will help in this regard. 
BSP  will  continue  to  support  infrastructure  development  through  enabling  regulations.  Last
month, the Monetary Board excluded loans guaranteed by multilateral financial institutions (MFIs)
where  the  Philippine  Government  is  a  member  or  shareholder,  from  the  regulatory  limits  on
banks’ loans to their subsidiaries and affiliates.This will boost available resources for the funding
of big-ticket projects, including infrastructure.
While  National  Government  builds  infrastructure,  we  at  the  BSP  are  focused  on  the
FINfrastructure  –  (this  is  a  word  I  coined)  referring  to  the  financial  infrastructure.  We  are
encouraging further digitization of the financial sector. 
In  line  with  this,  the  BSP  is  closely  working  with  the  National  Government  to  implement  a
biometric-based foundational ID system to broaden the reach, quality, and integrity of financial
services. 
We are also working with the industry so that more Filipinos can send and receive payments via
any electronic device under the National Retail Payment System (NRPS). Last November 8, we
launched the Batch Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) Credit system or PESONet. With PESONet,
businesses, the government, and individuals will be able to conveniently initiate electronic fund
transfers and recurring payments from the sender’s accounts maintained in any BSP supervised
financial  institution  to  corresponding  recipient  accounts  in  other  institutions  with  full  inter-
operability. Funds will be made available to the recipient account/s within the same banking day
at  full  value.    In  the  first  quarter  of  2018,  we  will  launch  InstaPay,  another  automated
clearinghouse  allowing  real  time,  low-value  push  electronic  fund  transfers  perfect  for  e-
commerce. 
All of these initiatives will help lower the cost of doing business, enable increased e-commerce,
and give wide access to credit and other vital financial services. 
Fourth: trade and industrial development
The  BSP  supports  trade  and  industry  development    through  progressive  liberalization  of  the
foreign  exchange  market.  Building  on  previous  reforms,  the  BSP  will  soon  liberalize  foreign
borrowings  by  the  private  sector.  This  will  re-focus  the  registration  process  to  primarily  data-
gathering. It will minimize documentary requirements. Down the road, further liberalization of FX
regulations  will  support  ease  of  doing  business  and  help  improve  the  country’s  investment
climate.
The  banking  sector  was  fully  liberalized  earlier  in  2014  to  allow  entry  of  foreign  banks  under
Republic Act No. 10641. Since the law’s enactment, the BSP has already approved the entry of
11 new foreign banks.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fifth: the agricultural sector
Today’s  fifth  panel  discussion  will  revolve  around  the Agriculture  Sector.   And  this  sector  is
indeed an important driver and draw for increased investments.
Recently, the BSP issued guidelines on agricultural value chain financing (VCF) to facilitate credit
to the agriculture sector. This opens up credit provision to all the players in an organized value
chain  and  promotes  VCF  as  an  effective,  organized  means  of  channeling  funds  to  the  agri-
fisheries  sector,  promoting  their  financial  inclusion.  By  encouraging  linkages  among  various
players in an agri-value chain, the credit risk of participating smallholder farmers and fisher-folk
can be reduced and facilitate their access to more credit. 
But beyond this sector are other unserved, underserved and untapped markets. 
To  promote  MSME  access  to  finance,  the  BSP  has  issued  comprehensive  credit  risk
management  (CRM)  guidelines  so  that  banks  can  be  more  flexible,  extend  more  credit,  and
implement innovative credit products and lending programs.  Also, a wide range of microfinance
services of banks now cover nearly 1.7 million microentrepreneurs with an outstanding portfolio
of P13 Billion. 
Empowering these sectors are not just opportunities to exercise social responsibility, but their
inclusion creates viable business propositions.
To sum up, . . .
Why the Philippines?
First, the Philippines is among the fastest growing and most resilient economies in the region. 
Second,  coordinated  efforts  towards  structural  reforms  and  public  sector  investments  in
infrastructure  and  human  capital  development  will  make  the  business  climate  even  more
competitive. And  Third,  you  can  rely  on  the  BSP’s  staunch  commitment  and  effectiveness  in
delivering on its core mandates of price and financial stability conducive to economic growth. 
We are deeply committed to implementing ambitious financial sector reforms. 
Let me end on this note.  I wish you a very productive Investment Forum ahead!
Thank you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
