 News conference 
   Berne, 14 December 2017 
Fritz Zurbrügg 
Introductory remarks by Fritz Zurbrügg 
 
In my remarks today, I would like to address some of the developments currently taking place 
in the field of financial stability. I shall look at the big banks first before turning to the 
domestically focused banks. I will conclude with a few words on the new banknote series. 
Big banks 
As Thomas Jordan has already noted, the international economic environment has continued 
to improve since the last news conference in June. Conditions on the financial markets have 
remained stable. Premia for bank credit default swaps, for instance, have barely changed since 
June. Premia have thus settled at lower levels again following the turbulence in 2016. 
Against this positive backdrop, both of Switzerland’s big banks remain on track to meet the 
requirements of the ‘too big to fail’ regulations with respect to resilience. This first pillar of 
the regulations covers requirements pertaining to the going-concern loss-absorbing capacity 
of systemically important banks. Both Credit Suisse and UBS already comply fully with the 
final1, risk-weighted requirements. However, further improvement is needed with respect to 
the leverage ratio. 
Both of the big banks have also made progress on the second pillar of the regulations, 
‘resolution’, which covers the orderly restructuring and wind-down of a bank that can no 
longer function as a going concern and is thus deemed to have become a gone concern. With a 
view to managing such a crisis scenario, Credit Suisse as well as UBS have increased their 
gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity by issuing further bail-in instruments, which can be 
converted into equity in the event of impending insolvency. As we explained in our Financial 
Stability Report published in June, since the ‘too big to fail’ regulations came into force, 
 1 Final requirements refer to the requirements that will apply after expiry of all transitional provisions, and in particular to the qualitative 
requirements for going-concern capital. 
   Page 1/3 
  News conference 
 Berne, 14 December 2017 
Fritz Zurbrügg 
Credit Suisse and UBS have also taken important organisational steps to improve their 
resolvability. Despite these positive developments, the two big banks still need to make 
further progress if they are to fully comply with the second-pillar requirements. This applies 
both to their gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity and their resolution planning. 
Full compliance with all of the ‘too big to fail’ requirements will further strengthen the big 
banks’ going and gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity as well as improve their resolvability 
in a crisis. Both of these sets of requirements must be addressed if Switzerland’s ‘too big to 
fail’ problem is to be solved.  
Domestically focused banks 
I would now like to turn to the domestically focused banks. These institutions’ biggest risks 
continue to stem from the mortgage and real estate markets. I will make three points in this 
regard. 
First, imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets persist. Although mortgage growth 
has remained relatively low in 2017 – as in the previous year – developments on the real 
estate market show a somewhat different picture: price growth in the residential property 
segment2 had been falling since 2013, but recently transaction prices have started to pick up 
again. Moreover, with the exception of a few quarters (including the third quarter of 2017), 
prices in the residential investment property segment have risen markedly since 2013. As 
prices over this period have increased more strongly than fundamentals such as rents, risks 
have accumulated in this segment; it is thus especially vulnerable to a substantial correction in 
the medium term. This situation is compounded by brisk construction activity in the rental 
apartments segment, which could lead to oversupply. Signs of this can already be seen in 
rising vacancy rates. 
Second, the risk appetite of domestically focused banks remains high. This is particularly 
evident from the affordability risk data. The share of new mortgages with high loan-to-income 
ratios has risen significantly in recent years and has reached a historical high. The interest rate 
risk of domestically focused banks likewise remains high, while their interest margin 
continued to decline in the first half of 2017. As long as there is pressure on margins, 
incentives for domestically focused banks to increase risk-taking will remain substantial. 
Third, notwithstanding the risks in the macroeconomic environment and the banks’ high risk 
appetite, SNB stress tests continue to suggest that, overall, domestically focused banks’ 
resilience remains adequate. Thanks to robust capitalisation, most of these banks would be 
able to absorb the losses likely to be incurred in adverse scenarios; given the risks I have 
outlined, this is welcome. In the future, too, it will be decisive for the stability of the financial 
system that banks hold sufficient capital to cover the risks on their books – irrespective of 
ongoing margin pressure. 
 2 Single-family houses and privately-owned apartments. 
   Page 2/3 
  News conference 
 Berne, 14 December 2017 
Fritz Zurbrügg 
The SNB will continue to monitor developments on the mortgage and real estate markets 
closely, paying particular attention to the residential investment property segment as well as 
to risks emanating from mortgage lending. In parallel, it will continue to regularly reassess the 
need for an adjustment of the countercyclical capital buffer. 
Ninth banknote series 
Allow me to close with a few remarks about the new banknote series. This year, the SNB 
issued two further denominations: the new 20-franc note was released in May and the new 10-
franc note in October. So, half of the denominations in the new banknote series have now 
entered circulation. I am happy to report that things have been progressing well and the 
issuance of the new banknote series has been very smooth so far. To date, returns of eighth-
series banknotes to the SNB have also been in line with our expectations. 
As announced, the next denomination, the 200-franc note, will be issued in autumn 2018. The 
1000-franc note and the 100-franc note will follow in 2019. The SNB will announce the 
precise issue dates well in advance. 
 
   Page 3/3 
 