Ariff Ali: Reserve Bank of Fiji August 2016 – July 2017 Annual Report 
Presentation  by  Mr  Ariff  Ali,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  to  the  Standing 
Committee on Economic Affairs, Suva, 5 April 2018. 
 Introduction
1.
Thank  you  Honourable  Chair,  and  Honourable  Members  for  the  invitation  to  present  the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji’s Annual Report for the period 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017, to the 
Standing Committee on Economic Affairs. 
I had presented an extensive background to the Standing Committee last year on the role of 
central banks, and the functions of the RBF as stated in the RBF Act and the 2013 Constitution. 
However, I would wish to re-iterate as stated last year that central banking is not for the faint 
of heart as Alice Rivlin so aptly said, “The job of the central banks is to worry”. 
Honourable members, as I had highlighted in my presentation to you in 2017, the RBF is tasked 
to maintain: 
 (i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Price stability – ensuring that inflation is low and stable; 
External (currency) stability – that foreign reserves level are comfortable; and 
Financial stability – that our financial system is strong and robust.  
Key outcomes
2.
Honourable Chair, please allow me to first provide highlights of the outcomes of our 2016/2017 
operations, before I respond to the questions from the Standing Committee: 
Financial performance 
(i) 
As we have highlighted previously, the objective of the central bank is not to maximise profit. 
While profit maximisation is not our goal, making losses is also not acceptable.  As an important 
policy making institution, financial losses often results in reputational risk which then translates 
into loss of confidence from our key stakeholders. 
Honourable Chair, for the financial year in review, the RBF made a profit of $28.3 million and 
transferred to Government a total of $29.4 million which included one-fifth or $2.1 million of the 
revaluation  reserve  account (RRA). Of the  $28.3 million  in  profits, the  RBF  Board  with  the 
approval of the Minister transferred $1.0 million to the General Reserve Account to strengthen 
the Reserve Bank’s capital base. This is similar to how private companies retain dividends or 
earnings to strengthen their capital positions. 
This compares with a transfer of $16.9 million to Government ($13.9 million profits and one-
fifth RAA totalling $3.0 million) for the seven month period ended 31 December 2015 with no 
transfers to the General Reserve Account. 
Similar  to  past  years,  RBF’s  profit  is  underpinned  by  the  income  earned  from  our  foreign 
reserves holdings which are invested in safe and liquid assets offshore.  In the 2017 financial 
year,  the  Bank  earned  $41.7  million  in  net  foreign  exchange  income,  boosted  by  elevated 
levels of foreign reserves. 
I wish to further inform the Standing Committee that we again managed to sign off on the 
Bank’s annual audited financial statements for the twelve months ending 31 July 2017, on 
28 September  2017,  within  two  months  after  the  end  of  our  financial  year.    Following  the 
signing  of  the  audited  accounts  and  in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  RBF  Act,  the  Bank 
provided  to  the  Honourable  Minister for  Economy  a  certified  auditor’s  copy  of  our financial 
accounts along with the operations report of the Bank, on 29 September 2017.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   Price stability 
(ii) 
Honourable Members, as you are well aware, Fiji was hit by Tropical Cyclone (TC) Winston in 
February 2016. It negatively impacted the supply and prices of fruits, vegetables, root crops 
and  kava  thereby  placing  upward  pressure  on  domestic  prices.  Consequently,  inflation 
averaged 5.2 percent in the first half of the fiscal year 2016-2017 and was something beyond 
our control.  
However, supplies began to normalise in 2017 resulting in a decline in headline inflation from 
6.8 percent in January 2017 to a low 2.0 percent by July 2017.  The subdued global prices of 
key imports such as oil and food also contributed to this outcome. 
External stability 
(iii) 
As a small open economy dependent on imports of a variety of goods, we need to maintain a 
sufficient level of foreign reserves, otherwise there will be pressures on our exchange rate.  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has set a benchmark on the level of foreign reserves 
which states that it should be sufficient to cover 3 months of imports.  Given the external shocks 
and risk we face such as natural disasters like the one we experienced a few days ago, we 
built in an additional buffer above this benchmark.  
I am therefore pleased to inform that Fiji’s foreign reserves remained well above the benchmark 
throughout the review period.  At the end of July 2017, our foreign reserves level stood at 
$2,313.7 million and was sufficient to cover 5.5 months of retained imports.  In addition, there 
was approximately $591 million in foreign reserves held by non-bank financial institutions. 
Honourable Members, it may be worth noting that our foreign reserves level broke a number 
of records last year and reached a high of $2.445 billion on 18 September 2017.    
Financial stability 
(iv) 
It is paramount that we continue to have a sound, stable and healthy financial system to ensure 
confidence,  and  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  and  distribution  of  risks  across  the 
economy. You may recall that the Minister for Economy made a Ministerial Statement on the 
importance  of  safeguarding  the  stability  of  Fiji’s  financial  system  in  the  recent  sitting  of 
Parliament and therefore, I will be brief on this outcome. 
I am pleased to inform the Standing Committee that the Fijian financial system remains safe 
and sound supported by a growing asset portfolio which rose from $16.8 billion in August 2016 
to $18.5 billion in July 2017 and a further increase to $19.4 billion by the end of 2017. This is 
almost twice our GDP. 
The growth and importance of our financial system was validated by the recent findings of the 
Financial  Sector  Stability  Review  (FSSR)  for  Fiji  which  was  undertaken  by  the  IMF.    It  is 
important for me to highlight that Fiji was only the fifth country in the world and the first in the 
Pacific region to undergo a financial sector stability review. The 7-member mission team was 
here from 14-27 February 2018. 
Honourable  Members,  the  IMF  has  concluded  the  2018  FSSR  for  Fiji  with  its  stress  test 
assessment indicating that the banking system in Fiji as a whole appears to be resilient to 
shocks  similar  to  those  experienced  in  the  last  15  years.  However,  to  further  ensure  the 
ongoing  safety  and  soundness  of  our financial system,  the  2018  FSSR  mission  has  made 
some key recommendations for the continued strengthening of the RBF’s regulatory role on 
which we will commence work shortly.  
Responses to questions by the standing commitee 
3. 
Let me now respond to the list of questions posed by the Standing Committee. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
[i] We note that the Housing Facility to assist low income first time home owners has 
increased to $60 million from $25 million.  Can we be given a number of how many have 
benefitted  from  this  facility?    Will  this  facility  progressively  increase  in  line  with 
demand?  
Honourable Members, please allow me to preface my response by saying that the Reserve 
Bank grants special lending facilities to address specific areas that may be impeding economic 
development and growth. From a national or macro perspective, these facilities do provide 
positive  benefits.  We  have  our  National  Disaster  Recovery  facility  which  we  reactivated 
recently  in  light  of  the  recent  floods,  and  the  Import  and  Export  Substitution  Facility.  The 
Housing Facility was introduced to help address the housing affordability issue. 
Funds for the initial $25.0 million Housing Facility for low income households was channeled 
through the Housing Authority (HA). The amount was increased to $60.0 million given the need 
to assist first home buyers, and broaden the coverage to include commercial banks, licensed 
credit institutions and the Fiji Development Bank. To date, the Reserve Bank has approved a 
total of 142 first home applications with a total value of $12.5 million in addition to the 635 that 
benefited initially from the Facility through HA. The maximum interest rate charged on this 
Facility for home owners is 5.00 percent, and financial institutions borrow funds from the RBF 
at 1.00 percent. Therefore, a total of $22.8 million remain available for lending to new first 
home buyers and we expect this to be utilised in the next 12-18 months.   
In line with the expected buoyant economic activity and rising need for housing, the Reserve 
Bank will continue to review the demand for funds in meeting the objective of the Housing 
Facility.  
[ii] Please provide an update on the status of Fiji’s Green Bond?  
Fiji floated its first Green Bond on 1 November 2017 attracting interest from both local and 
foreign investors. The participation rate recorded was three times more than were normally 
associated with the Fiji Government Infrastructure Bonds. 
Of the total of $40.0 million floated on 1 November, a sum of $87.7 million was received in 
tenders, for the two tenors of 5 and 13 years. A second issuance of $20.0 million was made 
on 28 December which was also oversubscribed with $31.5 million received in tenders, for the 
13 year tenor.  A total of $100.0 million is targeted to be raised for this financial year for which 
we have received $60.0 million with the remaining $40.0 million expected to be raised in April 
and June this year.  
In  line  with  the  Green  Bond  Principles,  these  Green  Bond  proceeds  are  being  channeled 
towards  eligible  projects  such  as  the  maintenance  of  drainage  and  flood  protection,  the 
construction  of  the  new  Labasa  weather  office  and  the  rehabilitation  and  construction  of 
schools destroyed by Tropical Cyclone Winston. 
Fiji’s Green Bond Framework is guided by the Green Bond Principles which sets out process 
guidelines  for  best  practices:  which  include  the  Use  of  Proceeds,  Process  for  Project 
Evaluation and Selection, Management of Proceeds and Reporting.  An external independent 
verifier had confirmed that Fiji’s Green Bond Framework is credible, transparent and aligns 
with the core principles. In addition, we are developing reporting and monitoring guidelines to 
ensure compliance with the Green Bond Framework and any environmental and social risk 
assessments. A key outcome would be the release of periodical reports on both the use of 
green bond proceeds and expected climate and/or environmental impacts of eligible projects. 
Given  Fiji’s  success  story  and  experience  on  its  green  bonds,  the  International  Finance 
Corporation has released a report titled “Guidance for Sovereign Green Bond Issuers” which 
focuses on lessons from Fiji’s example as the first emerging economy to issue a sovereign 
green bond, and which can be applied by any future green bond issuer.  In addition, Fiji was 
also awarded a prestigious Green Bond Pioneer Award at the recent Climate Bonds Initiative’s 
Conference  in  London.  To  further  leverage  our  position  on  the  global  scale  and  bolster 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   awareness and interest from foreign investors and stock exchanges, Fiji Green Bonds will be 
listed on the International Securities Market of the London Stock Exchange on 18 April 2018.  
[iii] On page 50 under ‘Reserve’ we note that $1.0 million was transferred to General 
Reserve whereas no such transfer was made in 2016.  Can this be explained? 
In accordance with the RBF Act, all the profits of the Reserve Bank are distributed annually to 
Government together with one-fifth of the foreign currency revaluation reserve account. Over 
the years, the total capital and reserves of the Bank have been declining and stood at around 
$82.0 million as at the end of July 2017.  
As  explained  earlier,  it  is  prudent to set  aside  a  small  portion  of the  profits  to the  General 
Reserves  to  strengthen  the  Bank’s  capital  base  similar  to  what  is  practiced  by  private 
companies. The Reserve Bank had written to the Minister for Economy on 17 August 2017 
recommending the transfer of $1.0 million from the 2016-17 financial year profits to the General 
Reserve Account. 
The request for the transfer of profits is in line with the provision of section 8 of the RBF Act. 
The  last  transfer  to  the  General  Reserve  Account  was  made  for  the  financial  year  ended 
31 December 2007 when the Minister approved that $1.0 million be set aside from the profits 
distributable to Government. 
[iv] On page 33 relating to the development of the economy; we note that these are not 
the  core  functions  of  the  RBF  and  we  would  like  to  know  how  much  resources  are 
devoted to these areas.  
Honorable  Members,  the  definition  of  ‘core  role’  of  central  banking  has  blurred  over  time. 
Central  Banking  has  evolved  quite  significantly,  but  we  continue  to  refer  to  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy to achieve price stability as well as financial stability, as the heart or ‘core’ of 
what a central bank does. Other functions such as the development role we play complement 
our core functions and contribute to our overall vision of “Leading Fiji to Economic Success”.  
The development function of the Reserve Bank is driven by the Financial System Development 
Group. The Group was established in 2009 to drive sustainable and inclusive economic growth 
initiatives. This Group is headed by a Chief Manager with a total staff complement of 21. In the 
2018 financial year, the Group has a budget allocation of $1.9 million or 7.4 percent of the 
Bank’s Total Operating Budget.  
[v] Page 8 outlines the roles played by the Governor, some of which are outside the core 
responsibilities within RBF.  Can we be given the assurance that these extra roles are 
not in conflict with what is expected of the Governor and that they do not impact on the 
performance of his core duties? 
Thank  you  for  this  question  as  I  had  actually  planned  to  address  this  issue  to  clear  what 
appears to be mis-information that has been raised both inside and outside Parliament.  
Under  section  15  of  the  RBF  Act,  the  Duties  of  the  Governor  are  stated  accordingly.  In 
particular, section 15(2) states: 
The  Governor  shall  devote  the  whole  of  his  or  her  professional  services  to  the 
Reserve Bank and shall not, without the approval of the Minister – 
(a)  Receive any salary or supplement thereto from any other source other than 
the Reserve Bank; 
(b)  Occupy any other office or employment, whether remunerated or not except 
as nominee of the Reserve Bank except that he or she may – 
Act as a member of any statutory, committee or commission established by 
the Government; 
(i) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   (ii)  Become  a governor,  director  or member  of the board  of  any  international 
financial institution of which Fiji is a member.  
Alternate Governor for Fiji at the International Monetary Fund; 
Alternate Governor for Fiji at the Asian Development Bank; 
Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee; 
Chairman of the Macroeconomic Committee; 
Chairman of the Capital Markets Advisory and Development Taskforce; 
Chairman of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce; 
Chairman of the Government Tender Board; 
Chairman of the Sugar Cane Growers Fund; and 
Board Director of the Fiji Sugar Corporation Limited. 
In the Reserve Bank of Fiji August 2016-July 2017 Report, you will note on Page 8 that I am 
also the: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I assumed all positions except for the last three by virtue of being the Governor of the Reserve 
Bank of Fiji.  The Hon Attorney-General and Minister for Economy appointed me to serve on 
those boards when I was the Deputy Governor.  Since the Report was published, I have also 
been appointed Chairman of the Accident Compensation Commission Fiji by the Hon Attorney-
General and Minister for Economy. 
The Standing Committee on Economic Affairs can be rest assured that the role of the Governor 
remains intact in serving the priorities of the Reserve Bank and also meeting the expectations 
of stakeholders.  Issues of conflict of interest have been highlighted in some circles and I wish 
to clarify that contrary to such statements; none of these institutions that I serve on as a board 
member or chair are licensed or regulated by the RBF.  
Notwithstanding  the  assurance  I  have  given,  I  further  wish  to  reflect  on  the  vision  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  of  Leading  Fiji  to  Economic  Success  and  one  of  our  key  mission 
statements to “Enhance our role in the development of the economy”.  This mandate calls for 
the Governor to play a wider role in the economy and the community allowing for knowledge 
and expertise sharing.  I also wish to highlight that the RBF has an approved policy on external 
board appointments which supports the conduct of a transparent process in approving staff 
participation in external boards. 
[vi]  We  note  that  since  the  report  was  published  Mr.  Esala  Masitabua  has  been 
appointed the new Deputy Governor, making RBF an institution that has fully localised 
all  its  positions  from  Governor,  senior  managers,  etc.  We  also  note  that  of  your 
8 Executive Managers 5 are female and 3 are male – this is highly commendable. In your 
opinion, how can other institutions follow suit and possibly learn from RBF’s example?  
Thank you for noting our fully localised management team and the high composition of female 
members  in  this  regard.  I  wish  to  add  that  the  RBF  have  a  long  history  of  fully  localised 
management team. 
We take pride in developing a corporate culture that rewards our people on merit. This drives 
us  to  ensure  that  our  leaders  are  those  who  have  the  capacity  to  lead  with  integrity  and 
commitment to our vision and missions.  Having more females in our leadership team was not 
made a special consideration as sometimes promoted by some gender based propositions. 
The female members of our team have made it to the senior positions that they hold, through 
merit, and they are supported the same way as we support our male members. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   However, like many other organisations, we also have our share of challenges and continue 
to invest in empowered and accountable leadership through tailor made leadership training 
programmes, as well as receiving regular guidance from the board and the Governors. 
We also wish to highlight that the RBF continues to promote merit based individuals into its 
leadership team while ensuring gender diversity in its key roles. In line with this, the RBF had 
issued a press release on 3 February 2017 on a call to action for greater participation and 
representation by women of merit on the boards of listed companies of the South Pacific Stock 
Exchange. We believe that gender diversity is a key indicator for good corporate governance, 
and the Bank will continue to collaborate with stakeholders in support of Fiji’s National Gender 
Policy and the achievement of SDG 5 of Gender Equality. 
For other local institutions, it would be of immense benefit if a merit based culture is inculcated 
in the organisation, and fairness and honesty guide decision making on leadership positions.  
Institutions  will  also  need  to  invest  in  high-quality  leadership  training  and  be  specific  with 
leadership qualities they wish to have. The top echelon of the organisation structure will have 
to show interest in the continuous development of their senior and middle management, and 
ensure that effective succession planning is in place. 
[vii]  On  page  60  –  Statement  of  Cash  flows  –  there  seems  to  be  a  lot  of  movement 
between  the figures  of  the  seven  month  period  ended  31  July  2016  and  Year  ended 
31 July  2017  i.e.  Net  movement  in  Short  Term  Commercial  Paper,  Net  movement  of 
Domestic Securities, Net movement in Demand Deposits. We realise that one report is 
just a 7 month period and the other covers 12 months, however, the differences are still 
large. Please give us some insight into why the big differences. 
The movements noted in the statement of cash flow reflect the changes (increases/decreases) 
in the Bank’s financial position as at 31 July 2017 compared to the same period in 2016. The 
underlying  reason for the  movement  in cash flow  is  the  increase  in total  external  reserves 
which rose from $1,982 million to $2,314 million (Page 68 Note 5).  
The reduction in short term commercial papers from $376.2 million to $257.8 million can be 
explained by a rise in the current account ($124.4 million to $241.3 million). 
On  the  other  hand,  domestic  securities  declined  by  $8.4  million  as  RBF  holdings  of 
Government bonds matured (Page 68 Note 6). 
Unlike  short–term  papers  and  domestic  securities  which  are  assets  of  the  Bank,  demand 
deposits are a liability and rose significantly over the year directly correlating to the level of 
foreign reserves.  The demand deposits are commercial bank’s settlement balances placed 
with  the  RBF  and  they  are  paid  equivalent  Fiji  dollar  when  they  sell  their  surplus  foreign 
currency to RBF. 
[viii] Also along the same lines – Page 67 – Interest Expense ‘International Monetary 
Fund’ 66 against 604 for 2017. 
All  central  banks  have  an  account  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).    The  RBF 
receives  interest  on  Special  Drawing  Rights  (Asset)  and  in  the  year  received  $579,000 
compared with $53,000 in the previous financial year (page 67).  Central Banks also have 
Liability – SDR Allocation where we pay interest to IMF.  In the latest financial year, the RBF 
paid $604,000 compared with $66,000 in the previous year.  The RBF tries to maintain its SDR 
Assets and Liabilities in a similar amount so that the interest received and paid are netted off. 
The SDR is a basket of currency used by IMF and includes the US dollar, Euro and Japanese 
Yen.  The interest paid/received is the weighted average short-term market interest rate in the 
three currencies and the increase in interest paid/received is due to two main factors: 
• 
On 1 October 2016, the IMF announced the inclusion of the Chinese renminbi in the 
SDR basket of currencies  With the renminbi rate higher than the other currencies, 
this pushed the average interest rate higher; and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Over the course of 2017, the short-term US interest rates have risen reflecting the 
interest rate hike by the US Federal Reserve as well as the tightening bias by the 
financial market. 
  [ix] We notice that there is a lot of emphasis on financial inclusion. Can we be given an 
update on how we are reaching out to the section of our population that does not have 
access to the banking system?  
Work  on  financial  inclusion  is  guided  by  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategic  Plan  
(2016 -2020). The overall target of this Strategic Plan is to increase access and usage of formal 
financial  services  from  64  percent  to  85  percent  (an  additional  130,000  adults),  of  which 
50 percent are women. In terms of geographical distribution, it is anticipated that 6 percent will 
be  from  the  Eastern  Division,  22  percent  from  the  Northern  Division,  40  percent  from  the 
Western Division and 32 percent from the Central Division. 
These 2020 targets are based on findings from the 2015 Fiji Financial Services Demand Side 
Survey which highlighted that around 221,077 (36%) of the adult population are underserved.  
This Strategic Plan focuses on 7 key areas: Empowerment of Women, Youth and those living 
with  disabilities;  Financial  Infrastructure;  Digital  Finance;  Services  and  Products;  Financial 
Literacy  and  Consumer  Protection;  Public  and  Private  Sector  partnership  and  Data 
Measurement. 
The  RBF  closely  monitors  the  financial  inclusion  core  set  of  indicators  which  include  the 
following: 
• 
• 
• 
Number of cash-in cash-out financial access points per 10,000 adults; 
Percentage of new account(s) at a formal financial institution; 
Percentage of adults that have an active mobile money account (used in the last 90 
days); 
Percentage of adults using formal credit products; 
Percentage of adults with an insurance product; and 
Percentage of adults with a FNPF membership account. 
• 
• 
• 
Some achievements made to date include the launch of a bundled insurance product that has 
enabled 12,500 sugar cane farmers to be insured. An alternative affordable low cost life and 
health insurance product was launched in 2016 which customers can purchase using their 
mobile phones. A survey of the subscribers to this product showed 80 percent previously never 
had any form of insurance.  
Financial inclusion has been achieved through the collaboration of public and private sector 
partners  working together to  remove  the  barriers that  deter  people from  engaging  with the 
formal financial system. Hence financial education is now embedded into the school curriculum 
and free community financial literacy training and media awareness programmes are some of 
the initiatives that have been made widely available to the public to assist them in making 
informed financial decisions. 
Summary 
4. 
Honourable Members, before I end, I wish to highlight a few key points for your noting: 
[1] 
The inflation rate has been below 3.0 percent since August 2017 and was 2.6 percent 
in March 2018.  While we expect the end year inflation to be around 3.0 percent, we 
anticipate a rise in inflation over the next few months due to the impact of TC Josie 
on the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 [2] 
[3] 
Foreign reserves are currently just below $2.2 billion, sufficient to cover 4.9 months 
of retained imports and reflect the seasonal outflow as well as venting of reserves to 
non-bank financial institutions; and 
We had projected the economy to grow by 3.6 percent in 2018, and this is currently 
being  reviewed.  This  will  be  our  9th  consecutive  year  of  growth  –  a  record  not 
achieved since independence.   
  Finally Honourable Members, I would like to acknowledge the great team that we have at the 
Bank and I wish to thank them, including our former Governor Whiteside who also contributed 
towards the 2016/2017 financial year, and the RBF Board for their leadership and guidance.  
I hope these remarks are helpful background for the Committee’s review of the Reserve Bank 
of Fiji’s August 2016-July 2017 Report and we would be happy to answer any further questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
