Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 9 July 2018.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be back at the European Parliament before your Committee.
Since  we  last  met,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  taken  important  decisions  on  the
recalibration of our monetary policy stance after September this year. In my remarks today, I will
outline  these  decisions  and  explain  the  assessment  of  the  current  economic  environment  on
which they were based. Following the recent euro area summit, I will also take this opportunity to
discuss the future of our Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), pointing to priorities for the near
term from an ECB perspective.
Economic and inflation developments
The  euro  area  economy  grew  by  0.4%  during  the  first  quarter  of  2018,  marking  five  years  of
continued  economic  expansion.  Underlying  economic 
remain  solid,
notwithstanding some moderation in growth at the beginning of the year.
fundamentals 
The labour market has improved notably over recent years. Employment has risen by 8.4 million
since mid-2013, and is growing in nearly all euro area countries. The unemployment rate stood at
8.4% in May, its lowest level since December 2008, and labour force participation now stands at
an all-time high.
Looking ahead, the latest Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections foresee average annual
growth of 2.1% in 2018, 1.9% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020. While uncertainties related to global
factors, including the threat of increased protectionism, have become more prominent, the risks
surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain broadly balanced. Of course, we continue to
closely monitor developments.
According to the Eurostat flash estimate, headline inflation increased to 2.0% in June from 1.9%
in May, reflecting higher rates of energy and food inflation. Excluding these more volatile items,
inflation decreased from 1.1% in May to 1.0% in June. As the economy continues to grow and
slack is absorbed, supporting rising wages, underlying inflation is expected to pick up. Recent
wage agreements in several countries point to a continuation of these favourable dynamics.
I will discuss the inflation outlook in more detail as I explain the monetary policy decisions taken
by the Governing Council in June.
The ECB’s monetary policy and the phasing-out of non-standard measures
At  our  last  monetary  policy  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  undertook  a  careful  review  of  the
progress  made  so  far  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  inflation.  Specifically,  we  assessed
inflation  developments  against  the  three  conditioning  criteria  for  net  asset  purchases:
convergence, confidence and resilience.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  regards  convergence,  the  June  2018  Eurosystem  staff  projections  see  headline  inflation
reaching 1.7% in each of the next three years. These are the latest in a series of projections
which foresee inflation converging towards our inflation aim of below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term.
Our  confidence  in  the  inflation  path  is  also  rising.  First,  the  range  of  uncertainty  around  the
inflation projections has narrowed. Second, underlying inflation has increased from the very low
levels  that  prevailed  in  2016  and  is  foreseen  to  rise  as  the  economy  continues  to  expand,
capacity utilisation strengthens and labour markets further tighten.
Finally,  on  the  third  criterion,  the  projected  path  of  inflation  appears  to  be  self-sustained,  i.e.
resilient to a gradual ending of net asset purchases.
On  the  basis  of  this  assessment,  the  Governing  Council  concluded  that  progress  towards  a
sustained  adjustment  has  been  substantial  so  far  and  should  continue  in  the  period  ahead,
although some uncertainties persist. We therefore anticipate that after September we will reduce
our  monthly  net  asset  purchases  from  €30  billion  to  €15  billion  and  will  end  our  net  asset
purchases at the end of December. This is subject to incoming data confirming our medium-
term inflation outlook.
The  expected  end  of  the  net  asset  purchases  in  December  2018  does  not  mean  that  our
monetary policy ceases to be expansionary. Monetary policy will have to continue to accompany
the economic expansion for some time. We have therefore reaffirmed our reinvestment policy
and enhanced our forward guidance on the key interest rates.
We intend to maintain our policy of reinvesting the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased  under  the  APP  for  an  extended  period  of  time  after  the  end  of  our  net  asset
purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions
and an ample degree of monetary accommodation. And we expect key ECB interest rates to
remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019 and in any case for as long as
necessary to ensure that the evolution of inflation remains aligned with our current expectations
of a sustained adjustment path.
EMU governance: taking stock of financial union and the euro area architecture 
Let me now turn to the governance of Economic and Monetary Union.
In  times  of  heightened  global  uncertainty,  it  is  more  important  than  ever  that  Europe  stands
together. The efforts we have made in recent years to strengthen EMU governance have already
made  EMU  more  resilient  to  shocks.  However,  our  monetary  union  is  still  incomplete  and
remains  vulnerable.  To  support  confidence  and  continue  the  economic  expansion,  we  need
further convergence and integration among euro area Member States.
It is almost exactly six years since European leaders decided to launch banking union. This was
a major step forward and it has significantly contributed to risk reduction and thus a more stable
European  banking  sector.  But  banking  union  is  not  yet  complete.  The  swift  adoption  of  the
banking package will help to further strengthen the resilience of the financial sector. We welcome
the  Committee’s  adoption  of  the  report  on  the  banking  package  and  call  for  a  swift  trilogue
process. The agreement on the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) as the backstop for the
Single Resolution Fund is equally important. It will provide an additional layer of safety for banks
in  resolution,  ensuring  that  they  can  be  resolved  effectively  and  without  endangering  financial
stability. All this, in turn, will enhance confidence in the banking sector as a whole and make it
more stable. The backstop should be made operational as soon as possible and be given swift
and efficient decision-making procedures.
In the period ahead, including the deliberations on a European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS),
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
we should not be held back by the distinction between risk reduction and risk sharing, for two
reasons in particular.
First,  substantial  risk  reduction  has  already  taken  place.  Common  Equity  Tier  1  ratios  of
significant banks – a key indicator of bank health – are now 67% higher than they were ten years
ago.  Further  risk  reduction  is  under  way  with  the  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  and  toxic
assets in the portfolios of some large banks.
Second,  risk-sharing  greatly  helps  risk  reduction.  Consider  the  United  States  Federal  Deposit
Insurance  Corporation.  It  successfully  resolved  500  banks  without  causing  financial  instability,
also because it was backstopped by the US government. The corresponding number for the euro
area was ten times lower, which is another reason why the euro area banking sector still faces
structural challenges. In other words, if risk-sharing were to lead to an orderly management of
the financial stability consequences derived from risk reduction, risk reduction would proceed at
a much faster pace. Moreover, a European deposit insurance scheme would avoid the risk of
destabilising self-fulfilling prophecies in the form of bank runs. It would also reduce the risk of
financial fragmentation and thus support the effectiveness of monetary policy throughout EMU,
contributing to economic stability. With the right policy framework, risk-sharing and risk reduction
1
are thus mutually reinforcing .
A more resilient EMU would also benefit from a bolstered crisis management framework. The
commitment to strengthen the ESM made at the recent Euro Summit is therefore very welcome.
This should include an increase in its effectiveness and agility in terms of both governance and
instruments, while fully respecting the mandates of the Commission and the ECB.
To absorb shocks and reduce the risk of full-blown crises, the euro area would also benefit from
a common stabilisation function. Such an instrument could provide macroeconomic support in
the event of euro area-wide recessions, thereby preserving convergence, supporting stabilising
national  policies  and  allowing  monetary  policy  to  operate  effectively.  At  the  same  time,  this
instrument  should  not  undermine  incentives  for  Member  States  to  pursue  sound  fiscal  and
economic policies. We therefore very much welcome the renewed impulse to this discussion.
An ambitious agenda for the capital markets union (CMU) can further underpin and facilitate the
priorities I have outlined. First, CMU would increase private sector risk-sharing, and thus help to
cushion local shocks, reducing the need for using public stabilisation tools. Second, a consistent
framework is essential for deep and resilient financial integration. For instance, harmonising and
improving  insolvency  frameworks  would  make  it  easier  for  banks  to  deal  with  non-performing
assets, which would be beneficial to banks’ health. A genuine capital markets union would also
support deeper, integrated and more stable capital markets, improving access to funding for all.
Let  me  emphasise  that  none  of  the  measures  I  have  mentioned  are  possible  without  trust
between Member States, and that requires national governments to play their part in increasing
the resilience of their economies and modernising economic structures.
Conclusion
Our monetary policy measures  have  been  very  effective.  We  estimate  that  the  measures  we
have  taken  since  mid-2014  will  have  an  overall  cumulative  impact  of  around  1.9  percentage
points on both euro area real GDP growth and inflation for the period between 2016 and 2020.
Our measures are playing a decisive role in bringing inflation back on track to reach a level that is
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. However, we need to be patient, persistent and
prudent in our policy to ensure that inflation remains on a sustained adjustment path.
As  I  have  said  before,  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  mainly  relate  to  the  threat  of  increased
protectionism. A  strong  and  united  European  Union  can  help  reap  the  benefits  of  economic
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
openness while protecting its citizens against unchecked globalisation. In leading by example,
the EU can lend support to multilateralism and global trade, which have been cornerstones of
growing economic prosperity over the past seven decades. But to be successful on the outside,
the EU requires strong institutions and sound economic governance at home.
Thank you for your attention.
I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
See “Risk-reducing and risk-sharing in our Monetary Union”, speech by Mario Draghi, President of the European
Central Bank, at the European University Institute, Florence, 11 May 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
