 Spotlight: Developing a Financial System for the Future 
Speech by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Bloomberg ASEAN Business Summit 
July 12, 2018, Siam Kempinski Hotel, Bangkok Thailand 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good morning to you all. 
 
 
It is my pleasure to be here today and take part in this event. First of all, I would like 
to thank Bloomberg for organizing this exciting conference and for inviting me to share with you 
my thoughts on “Developing a Financial System for the Future.” It is a timely and important 
topic as I am sure that most of us have been pondering how, in this age of disruptions, the 
financial system will develop to support economic growth while at the same time preserve 
financial stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
In  this  VUCA  world  of  high  volatility,  uncertainty,  complexity,  and  ambiguity, 
Thailand’s economy, like other emerging economies, is facing new challenges. Monetary policy 
normalization  in  advanced  economies,  record-high  debt  levels  in  many  parts  of  the  world, 
stretched  global  asset  valuation,  and  risks  of  an  all-out  trade  war  are  posing  immediate 
challenges to the stability of our financial systems. At the same time, technology disruption, aging 
society,  and  growing  income  inequality  are  also  presenting  structural  challenges  to  many 
emerging economies, including Thailand.   
 
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Thailand has the duty not only to preserve and 
maintain economic and financial stability, but also to develop our financial system so that it can 
effectively  unlock  Thailand’s  economic  potential,  uplift  productivity,  and  bring  about  more 
inclusive growth for the future.     
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
For  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  maintaining  economic  and  financial  stability  is  a 
prerequisite for sustainable growth. Thus far, the Thai macroeconomic outlook remains favorable, 
with the economy expected to grow 4.4 percent this year, the highest since 2012. Additionally, 
1/6 
 the Thai economy has adequate buffers to withstand any immediate challenges, with ample 
international  reserves,  covering  3.5  times  our  short-term  external  debts;  low  dependency  on 
external borrowing; and current account surplus of around 8 – 9 percent of GDP1. Moreover, our 
banking sector is robust, with high capital adequacy ratio and stable domestic funding. In the 
first quarter of 2018, the capital adequacy ratio of the banking system averaged 18 percent, among 
the highest in the region.  
 
To  further  safeguard  financial  stability,  additional  micro  and  macro-prudential 
measures were introduced, such as the regulations on domestic systemically important banks 
(D-SIBs), along with more stringent regulations on credit cards and personal loans to tackle 
household  debt  challenges.  Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  recently  revised  regulations  to 
enhance  financial  institutions’  corporate  governance,  with  emphasis  starting  at  the  Board  of 
Director’s level. Meanwhile, in collaboration with the Thai Bankers’ Association, we established a 
“debt clinic” to offer multi-creditor debt restructuring program for troubled individuals. Another 
initiative ongoing is to work with other agencies to enhance supervision of saving cooperatives as 
well as other non-bank entities, which do bank-like businesses, to mitigate shadow banking risks.    
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
Amidst the structural challenges facing the Thai economy, the Bank of Thailand has 
stepped up our “stewardship” role by providing policy directions and ensuring that the financial 
system develops with the sustainable well-being of the Thai people as the main goal. Taking 
advantage  of  the  rapid  advancement  in  technology,  which  has  become  increasingly  more 
powerful and affordable, we have focused on three key imperatives of productivity, immunity, and 
inclusivity to guide the development of our financial system for the future.  
 
First, uplifting productivity is a critical requirement for long term economic growth. 
One of the main challenges Thailand is facing is structural change due to an aging workforce. 
Moreover,  our  labor  productivity  growth  has  been  on  a  decline,  with  growth  rate  of  labor 
productivity averaging 2.9 percent during 2002 to 2017 compared with an average of 5 percent 
during 1986 to 2001. A shrinking workforce and low labor productivity growth will pose a challenge 
to Thailand’s long term growth prospect. To ensure sustainable growth for our economy, we must 
become more productive. Undoubtedly, proactive adoption of modern technology will be the 
key to achieve this goal. 
Second, immunity must be emphasized given the VUCA nature of the future global 
 
economic landscape. We are living in a time of disruptions, where outcomes can be unpredictable 
                                                           
1 Estimated for 2018. BOT 
2/6 
 and volatile, bringing with them new forms of risks. Not only will firms face risks related to finance 
and  operation,  but  they  will  also  face  strategic  risks  and  risks  associated  with  driving  digital 
transformation. All these uncertainties necessitate that building sufficient immunity becomes a key 
factor to safeguard resilience of our economy and financial system.  
Third,  inclusivity  is  a  prerequisite  for  long-term  sustainable  growth.  Any  policy  or 
 
action that does not pay attention to inclusivity can threaten long-term growth and stability. In 
many emerging economies, income inequality is a significant cause of economic and social instability 
and could lead to widespread support of populist policies. Unbanked and underserved people 
need to have access to financial services, which can help them raise their standards of living. 
Emergence  of  FinTech  and  TechFin  firms,  along  with  their  diverse  platforms,  can  offer  more 
targeted  financial  products  at  lower  costs  and  improve  financial  access,  especially  to  the 
underserved people.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
To  fulfil  these  three  key  imperatives,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  taken  on  various 
 
initiatives during the past few years: 
 
On boosting productivity, we have many exciting projects underway. Last year, the 
Bank of Thailand together with the Ministry of Finance and the Thai Bankers’ Association launched 
the PromptPay faster payment infrastructure. With PromptPay, funds can be transferred to a 
recipient’s preferred bank account in real time and at virtually no cost. PromptPay provides a 
crucial payment infrastructure, which helps propel a wider adoption of e-payment.  Currently, 
there are almost 43 million registered user accounts and over 3 million transactions per day. The 
increasing usage of PromptPay also served as a catalyst that led all banks in Thailand to eliminate 
electronic fund transfer fees for online retail transactions. Besides, being a common infrastructure, 
PromptPay has also paved ways for many other digital payment features, including cross-bank bill 
payment, request-to-pay as well as e-donation services.  
 
Another initiative to promote digital payment services is the standardized QR code. 
Launched in collaboration with the five major global payment card network providers, Thailand’s 
standardized QR code for payment allows acceptance of common QR code for e-payment on 
any platforms regardless of merchants’ and consumers’ service providers. Its interoperability has 
led to remarkable speed of adoption; in less than one year since its launch, QR code payment is 
accepted  by  over  2  million  merchants  all  over  Thailand.  More  importantly,  having  common 
standards would improve competition and innovation, as they allow easy market entry for all 
players, especially small innovative players. Ultimately, greater adoption of digital payment will 
 3/6 
help facilitate the transformation from collateral-based lending to information-based lending for 
SMEs as their payment transactions information can be consolidated and analyzed.  
In addition, the Bank of Thailand also supports financial innovation through our regulatory 
 
sandbox.  The sandbox serves as a platform for financial institutions and FinTech firms to test 
new technologies and operating standards in a safe environment before the products and services 
are launched to the general public. Technologies under reviewed include biometrics for electronic 
know-your-customers,  machine  learning  for  alternative  credit  scoring  models,  and  blockchain 
applications for cross-border payments, supply chain financing, and document authentication.  
 
Another  way  in  which  productivity  is  being  enhanced  is  through  improving  regional 
financial connectivity. Recent efforts by banks in the region to partner and adopt the Thai QR 
code  standard  and  blockchain  applications  for  cross-border  payments  are  examples  of  how 
financial  innovations  can  help  improve  regional  financial  connectivity  and  facilitate  smoother 
cross-border financial services.  
 
Let me now turn to building immunity, which is a significant imperative for the future 
VUCA world. With the vast amount of data and modern analytical tools available, resilience can 
be  significantly  improved.  For  example,  banks  can  use  transactional  data  to  better  forecast 
customers’  credit  demand  and  credit  risks.  Regulatory  agencies  can  analyze  financial 
connectedness through network analysis to detect risk events and safeguard financial stability. 
The Bank of Thailand has employed a number of big data analytics to detect early signals of 
imbalances in the economy and respond pre-emptively should risks arise.  
Additionally,  in  this  increasingly  digital  environment,  cyber  resilience  and  cyber 
 
security must be a top priority and all of us must be prepared to prevent and respond effectively 
to cyber threats. Adoption of modern technologies like biometrics and blockchains can help 
safeguard financial information and reduce the number and magnitude of fraudulent activities. In 
our  part,  last  year  the  Bank  of  Thailand  in collaboration with 15 Thai banks and the Electronic 
Transactions Development Agency, set up the Thailand Banking Sector Computer Emergency Response 
Team (TB-CERT) as a platform for banks and regulators to share information on cyber incidents and 
build standards and capacity for IT-personnel to handle new threats.  
Furthermore,  to  ensure  that  our  legal  framework  fits  with  the  current  digital 
 
environment and can keep up with new innovations, the Bank of Thailand had proposed the New 
Payment  Systems  Act,  which  became  effective  in  April  of  2018.  The  Act  unifies  previously 
fragmented  payment  laws  and  regulations  and  empowers  the  Bank  of  Thailand  to  oversee 
development of the Thai payment systems and regulate new payment innovations and players. 
Moreover, our supervisory guidelines on management of information technology risks have also 
 4/6 
been updated to ensure that banks have appropriate governance structure in place and can 
swiftly  respond  in  the  event  of  cyber  attacks.  These  developments  will  contribute  to  safer 
environment for both service providers and customers. 
 
On  inclusivity,  despite  high  level  of  financial  access  in  Thailand  relative  to  other 
emerging  countries,  financial  inclusion  remains one  of  our top  priorities.  Various  measures  to 
promote financial inclusion have been implemented and many more are in the pipeline. The 
Bank of Thailand and the Thai Bankers’ Association will soon launch the Basic Banking Account 
scheme to improve financial access for vulnerable groups, especially those in the lower-income 
brackets. The basic banking account has no minimum balance requirement and offers free ATMs and 
debit cards to those who qualify. The scheme is expected to roll out by October this year.  
The Bank of Thailand is also undergoing regulatory reform to review outdated rules 
 
and regulations, to facilitate ease of doing business and ensure that our regulations do not impede 
competition and innovation and contribute to high costs of financial services. We started with 
foreign exchange regulations last year and are now reviewing banking regulations to improve digital 
banking environment and SME financing.  
In addition, the current backdrop of high household debt in Thailand and the need to 
 
improve individual’s financial safety net necessitate an overall improvement in financial literacy 
as well as financial planning skill. We have also tightened our market conduct regulations to 
ensure that misselling is minimized and financial institutions provide fair and transparent products 
and services. Given the growing importance of digital technology for financial services, we must 
also make sure that those with lower skills can reap the benefits that technology brings, to avoid 
digital divide. 
 
Last but not least, creating a financial ecosystem that values sustainability is critical to 
ensure that the Thai financial system of the future can continue to develop in such a way that 
would benefit all segments of the society and create minimal negative externalities. Later this 
month, the Bank of Thailand will host the first Bangkok Sustainable Banking Forum. The event 
will allow industry leaders to learn from one another and showcase their efforts and services to 
promote sustainability and highlight areas we must improve.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
The Bank of Thailand is committed in our duty to maintain economic and financial 
stability  amidst  this  VUCA  environment  and  future  disruptions.  We  are  also  committed  to 
supporting the adoption of financial technology and promoting financial innovations to develop 
a financial system for the future that will improve productivity, immunity, and inclusivity. Such a 
 5/6 
financial system will unlock our economic potential, ensure sustainable economic growth, and 
improve the well-being of our people.  The Bank of Thailand is also committed to supporting 
regional connectivity through collaboration with other central banks, public agencies, and the 
private  sector.    Together,  we  can  fulfill  our  vast  potential,  build  strong  safeguard  against 
unintended consequences of disruptions, and develop a strong and inclusive financial system for 
the future.  
 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 6/6 
