Vitas Vasiliauskas: Opening speech - China Financial Summit
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Vitas  Vasiliauskas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Lithuania,  at  the  China
Financial Summit 2018, Beijing, 16 May 2018.
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is an honour to be here today and address you in the opening session of this distinguished
summit intended to discuss the opportunities that the new financial era holds.
I will start with a bright Chinese proverb, which says that ‘opportunity knocks at the door only
once’. And – if you allow – I will add a European twist to it: ‘if opportunity does not knock – build a
door’.
I believe that in our times, opportunity lies in novel financial technologies. And we – by this I mean
both businesses and public authorities – should act decisively to capture it.
Here in China, as far as I know, the doors to innovative financial technologies have been opened
quite widely. The country is one of the largest and most vibrant FinTech markets in the world. It
ranks among global leaders in terms of capital investments in the industry and enjoys some of
the most developed e payments and online lending sectors. It is thus no coincidence that one in
three most successful FinTech start-ups worldwide – the so-called ‘unicorns’ – originate from
China.
For businesses, FinTech allows opening new doors not only domestically, but also globally. Let’s
take, for example, Lithuanian start-ups: dozens of them have taken the chance to surpass the
limits  of  the  domestic  market  and  jump  into  international  waters.  Today  we  have  Lithuanian
FinTech  firms  making  instant  money  transfers  across  the  globe  and  providing  international
mobile payment services, with substantial attention from international investors.
In  this  vein,  Lithuania  has  been  pushing  actively  for  increased  FinTech  cooperation  within  the
‘16+1’  framework,  as  we  strongly  believe  that  formats  like  this  are  crucial  for  unlocking  new
markets and taking most of what FinTech has to offer. We are willing to host a high-level FinTech
forum for Central and Eastern European countries and China. I would be glad indeed to see your
delegation next year in our capital Vilnius.
The potential of financial innovation
In terms of FinTech’s potential, I would underline three of its benefits that I find key. First, novel
financial  technologies  may  boost  growth  by  providing  additional  credit  sources,  especially  for
small and medium enterprises and households. It is estimated that by 2024 the global peer-to-
peer  market  will  be  worth  nearly  USD  900  billion  –  growing  by  around  50%  annually.  An
impressive trend, indicating the scale of opportunities that alternative funding sources hold.
Second, FinTech may help increase financial inclusion. World Bank data shows that around 40%
of the global population still do not have access to the formal financial system. At the same time
we  have  got  remarkable  examples  proving  that  technological  innovations  allow  underbanked
societies  to  skip  the  step  of  conventional  banking  expansion  and  move  directly  to  the  latest
financial instruments, such as instant mobile payments.
And third, by digitalising the financial system, FinTech limits space for the ‘shadow economy’.
Due to increased transparency, digitalisation allows authorities to curb illegal economic activities
more effectively. With the amount of money laundered globally, ranging from USD 800 billion to
USD 2 trillion on an annual basis, financial innovations can offer substantial gains.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I could go on about the benefits that FinTech brings, but…
I suppose there is no need to prove the obvious, so let us now move to the challenges.
FinTech calls for increased flexibility
Financial innovations alter the way the whole financial system functions. While providing better
quality  and  more  efficient  services,  FinTech  challenges  the  operative  models  of  established
financial  institutions.  In  fact,  more  than  80%  of  actors  on  the  global  market  believe  that  their
businesses  are  at  risk  due  to  competition  from  innovators.  This  suggests  that  the  traditional
players either have to change, or face a risk to be pushed out of the market.
On top of this, FinTech renders some of the long-standing regulatory practices ineffective. This
means that regulators need to become more flexible. If they do not, they risk not fitting through
the doors opened up by new technologies. To put it bluntly, without adapting to rapidly changing
financial  developments,  regulators  may  find  themselves  sidelined  and  unable  to  meet
expectations. More and more authorities across the world seem to be realising this.
Back in 2016, the UK Financial Conduct Authority was the first in the world to set up a ‘regulatory
sandbox’.  In  essence,  it  functions  as  a  ‘playground’  for  testing  novel  instruments  before  they
reach the market. This is done under the guidance of the regulator, allowing it to keep up with
market developments and build the necessary know-how.
In other words, such formats serve two purposes. First, they allow innovative start-ups to test
their  ideas  and  grasp  the  regulatory  requirements.  Second,  ‘sandboxes’  enable  regulators  to
upgrade  their  toolkits,  aligning  them  with  the  new  generation  of  business  models  and
technological solutions brought about by FinTech.
In recent years, similar formats for regulator engagement with the industry have sprung up widely
– from Canada to Australia. Arguably, these developments mark a shift in authorities’ thinking –
facilitating innovation instead of aiming to restrict it.
In this regard, the idea of developing a central bank digital currency has recently been gaining
traction.  The  task  of  issuing  a  central  bank  digital  currency  is  indeed  complex  and  requires
extensive  long-term  efforts.  Yet  it  also  offers  substantial  gains.  These  include  increased
transparency,  more  efficient  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  enhanced  instruments  for
financial risk monitoring.
With more flexibility come new responsibilities
Nevertheless – and here I have to put the strongest emphasis – with more flexibility come new
responsibilities.  While  becoming  more  open  to  innovations,  we  –  I  mean  both  industry  and
regulators – cannot turn a blind eye on the associated risks.
First  of  all  –  cyber  risks,  which,  under  intensifying  digitalisation  processes,  attract  elevated
regulator attention. Financial institutions increasingly base their operations on novel technological
solutions,  such  as  cloud  computing.  This  certainly  brings  efficiency  gains.  But  also  makes
financial firms more vulnerable to hacking and malware, placing vast amounts of data and critical
ICT  infrastructure  in  a  potential  danger  zone.  Today  this  challenge  is  particularly  relevant  in
Europe due to the ongoing regulatory shift towards ‘open banking’.
It is therefore no surprise that international standard setters, such as the Bank for International
Settlements,  have  recently  become  more  active  in  this  domain.  As  a  result,  today  financial
institutions  and  regulators  are  offered  guidance  –  including  the  recent  steps  taken  by  the
European Central Bank – that they can implement to enhance the level of cyber resilience. To
strengthen these efforts, the International Monetary Fund has lately been putting more emphasis
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
on cyber risks within its surveillance and policy advice frameworks.
Nevertheless,  digitalisation-induced  risks  for  the  financial  system  stem  beyond  cyber  threats.
Financial innovations also tend to create additional room for ‘shadow banking’ to expand.
It  takes  time  to  identify  and  fully  understand  these  new  and  often  obscure  financial  services,
sometimes  revealing  regulatory  and  supervisory  loopholes.  Through  interlinkages  with  other
financial  institutions,  this  may  eventually  lead  to  a  build-up  of  hidden  systemic  risk.  In  other
words,  in  absence  of  adequate  regulation,  ‘shadow  banking’  operations  risk  putting  the  whole
financial system under threat.
In the last several years, we have witnessed an increase in scrutiny towards ‘shadow banking’
activities on a global scale. It seems that regulators are not willing to take chances and wait for a
‘Minsky moment’ to occur on the back of technological innovation. Looking from the perspective
of international financial stability, this is a highly welcome and reassuring development.
Treating FinTech as an opportunity, not as a headache
So: an opportunity or a headache? Adapting the regulatory framework to ever-changing financial
innovations is not an easy task. Yet instead of treating this as a problem, we should see it as an
ideal chance. This is exactly the strategy that we are pursuing at the Bank of Lithuania.
A  couple  of  years  ago,  our  institution  set  out  on  a  mission  to  turn  Lithuania  into  a  regional
FinTech hub. The Nordic-Baltic region is known for its highly digitalised economies and financial
systems. Yet Lithuania has managed to stand out as a particularly FinTech-focused and open
jurisdiction.  Of  course,  this  does  not  undermine  our  core  mission  –  to  ensure  stability  and
credibility of our financial system.
Looking into specific FinTech-supporting regulatory elements, the Bank of Lithuania is one of the
few  central  banks  globally  providing  direct  access  to  its  payments  infrastructure  for  non-bank
financial firms. This means that FinTechs can provide payment services across the euro area on
their own, cutting out the middleman. In other words, innovative financial institutions are placed
on a truly equal footing with established banks, fostering competition in the sector.
While  ‘regulatory  sandboxes’  for  interacting  with  new  market  entrants  have  become  quite
widespread  by  now,  we  have  taken  a  step  further.  Next  year,  we  are  preparing  to  launch  a
‘technological  sandbox’,  codenamed  LBChain.  It  will  function  as  a  service-based  platform  for
cooperating with private actors both nationally and internationally. The platform’s central goal is
developing and testing state-of-the-art solutions based on the emerging blockchain technology.
Being  a  FinTech  frontrunner  regionally,  Lithuania  also  offers  one  of  the  most  favourable
regulatory  environments  in  Europe.  Take,  for  example,  licensing.  As  we  are  highly  speed-
oriented,  an  electronic  money  or  payments  institution  licence  will  be  ready  in  3  months  –
compared with roughly 12 months in most other European countries.
On top of this, we have introduced a unique ‘specialised bank’ licence, which allows FinTech
firms to transform themselves into banks, but with lower capital requirements. And it is not just a
Lithuanian licence that you get. It also enables FinTechs to offer their services across Europe,
with basically no additional documentation or fees. Such openness and flexibility is what allowed
Lithuania to take up the role of a FinTech gateway to Europe’s payments and banking sectors.
The Lithuanian doorway has been used by FinTechs from a broad set of jurisdictions. Firms with
origins ranging from the US to Singapore have established presence in Lithuania. Recently, we
have also been witnessing elevated attention from China. Several Chinese FinTech companies
have  already  entered  the  European  financial  market  via  Lithuania,  with  more  currently  in  the
consultative phase. Yet there is still plenty of room inside.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Embracing the change
Dear Colleagues,
FinTech is shaking the foundations of the financial system as we know it. It is also pushing for a
shake-up in the regulatory mindset. This is challenging. Yet change is never easy.
But it does offer substantial benefits. Innovations create better, more effective financial services
and facilitate their provision on a cross-border basis. Under the right circumstances, this may
give a new boost to globalisation, which is much-needed in the uncertain times that we live in.
To  wrap  up,  I  would  like  to  come  back  to  the  thought  that  I  mentioned  before  –  opportunity
knocking at the door. I am sure that the knock has already been heard – it is FinTech. And this is
the very moment for us to learn to embrace it. If we do not, we risk missing out on what may be
the once-in-a-generation opportunity.
Thank you for your attention.
   4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
