Peter Praet: Improving the functioning of Economic and Monetary
Union - lessons and challenges for economic policies
Keynote  dinner  speech  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  the  NABE  (National  Association  for  Business  Economics)  International
Symposium "Global Recovery: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly", Madrid, 16 April 2018.
 The ongoing economic expansion shows that our monetary policy has been effective in laying the
1
groundwork for a return of inflation to a rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Euro area real GDP has expanded for 19 consecutive quarters. The latest economic data and
survey results point towards some moderation of late, following several quarters of very strong
growth  Inflation  developments,  however,  remain  subdued,  and  we  have  not  yet  met  the
Governing Council’s three criteria – convergence, confidence and resilience – for a sustained
adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  which  is  our  stated  condition  for  ceasing  our  net  asset
purchases.  Overall,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains  necessary  for  underlying
inflation pressures to continue to build up and support headline inflation developments over the
medium term. Hence, we must be patient, persistent and prudent with our policy.
 1 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our monetary policy has effectively contributed to euro area macroeconomic adjustment through
the staunch pursuit of our price stability mandate. Monetary policy, however, is only one side of
the story. Price stability is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for sustained and balanced
growth in Europe. The  run-up  to  the  crisis  proved  that  macroeconomic  imbalances  can  grow
amid price stability (see Figure 1 and 2), highlighting the need to keep economic policy high on
Europe’s agenda.
Tonight I would like to concentrate on economic policies and their essential role in ensuring a
smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). I will look back at the experience of
the  euro  area  since  1999  and  illustrate  the  emergence  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  by
focusing on three countries: Spain, Germany and France.
The crisis acted as a litmus test for Europe’s institutional framework, revealing the need for a
number  of  institutional  reforms.  Lessons  have  been  learned  and  significant  progress  towards
strengthening  EMU  has  been  achieved,  including  elevating  the  responsibility  of  banking
supervision from national to the European level, the creation of the European Stability Mechanism
as  a  permanent  crisis  management  institution,  and  improvements  in  the  EU  surveillance
framework  for  economic  policies.   Progress  towards  completing  the  banking  union  and  the
capital  markets  union  has  rightly  emerged  as  one  of  the  immediate  priorities  in  strengthening
2
3
 2 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
EMU,  not least as such progress is seen as crucial in supporting macroeconomic adjustment in
a monetary union.
Today it is fair to say that the euro area has lived up to the challenges posed by the existential
crisis  and  euro  area  countries  have  displayed  a  strong  commitment  to  EMU.  Macroeconomic
adjustment  in  EMU  has  made  significant  progress,  with  countries  implementing  significant
growth-enhancing  reforms  and  correcting  external  imbalances,  but  this  process  has  been
difficult.  Countries  most  affected  by  the  crisis  were  confronted  with  significant  hardship,  even
though financial support provided by the Union and its Member States to countries facing acute
financing  difficulties  prevented  catastrophic  outcomes  and  cushioned  some  of  its  impact  by
providing time for economic adjustment. Looking forward, in order to sustain a high level of social
welfare in the long term, it is essential for euro area countries to improve their capacity to prevent
crisis and hence to ensure that macroeconomic adjustment progresses in a smoother way.
The emergence of macroeconomic imbalances
The  crisis  has  demonstrated  how  persistent  losses  in  competitiveness  can  translate  into
macroeconomic  imbalances,  eventually  leading  to  a  painful  adjustment.  Spain’s  experience
during the crisis is instructive in this regard.
With  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  the  disappearance  of  exchange  rate  risk  premia  and  the
unprecedented  fall  in  interest  rates  facilitated  capital  inflows  and  encouraged  risk-taking
behaviour, resulting in a rapid rise in private debt and a property boom. The expectation of higher
levels of income led to excessive consumption and investment relative to the supply capacity of
the  Spanish  economy.  This  continuous  demand  pressure  generated  a  positive  inflation
differential  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  leading  to  a  strong  appreciation  of  the  real
4
exchange rate and an erosion of price competitiveness.
When the crisis hit, the subsequent adjustment was severe – with unemployment rising above
25 percent, a rapid erosion of the fiscal position and a number of bank failures – leading to a
significant contraction in both domestic demand (see Figure 3) and real GDP. The same was
true for other current account deficit countries, such as Portugal, Ireland and Greece.
For countries with large current account deficits, the adjustment was painful. The correction of
euro  area  macroeconomic  imbalances  was  particularly  asymmetric,  with  the  bulk  of  the
adjustment falling on current account deficit countries through a strong contraction in domestic
demand, with limited support from a higher demand contribution from current account surplus
countries,  despite  those  countries  being  less  affected  by  the  crisis.  Growth  in  the  surplus
countries, including Germany, became even more export-oriented (see Figure 4).
An important lesson from the crisis was that the euro area had insufficient tools at its disposal to,
on  the  one  hand,  prevent  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  asset  price  booms  and,  on  the  other
hand, mitigate their impact if they do occur. The answer to such problems lies, ex ante, in better
macroprudential and microprudential policies and better regulation of the financial system and, ex
post, in better resolution institutions. Strengthening Europe’s financial framework, including the
establishment of the banking union, is the right way to address this source of macroeconomic
imbalances. It is of the utmost importance to complete the banking union without delay.
 3 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Competitiveness  problems  in  the  euro  area  can  also  be  attributed  to  factors  other  than  the
financial cycle, such as the lack of adequate wage and price flexibility or impediments to factor
mobility. The importance of such economic factors already featured prominently in the theory of
optimal currency areas, as pioneered by Mundell in 1961. Competitiveness imbalances are one
of the most visible symptoms of insufficient macroeconomic adjustment mechanisms in the euro
area.   The  developments  in  Germany  and  France  –  two  countries  which  together  represent
nearly half of euro area GDP, and have seen broadly similar movements in GDP and in prices
(see Figures 5 and 6) since the start of Monetary Union – are instructive in this regard.
5
 5 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 6 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
7
6
Germany, at the start of Monetary Union, was considered the “sick man of Europe”. At the time,
the  country  was  still  recovering  from  the  high  costs  associated  with  its  reunification  and  its
conversion rate was widely considered to be overvalued.  The national policy response was a
prolonged  period  of  union-backed  wage  moderation  together  with  a  significant  labour  market
overhaul which aimed, among other things, at improving job search efficiency and employment
flexibility.  The result was striking: from 1999 to 2008, nominal unit labour costs were virtually
unchanged for the economy as a whole (see Chart 8) and were thus growing significantly below
what the “golden wage rule” would suggest.  This resulted in a strong export performance, but
weak  domestic  demand.  The  economic  policies  Germany  pursued  before  the  crisis  largely
explain why it emerged relatively unscathed from the Great Recession. Exports recovered swiftly
and  currently  stand  at  an  all-time  high,  roughly  equalling  half  of  the  country’s  GDP.  Exports
recovered particularly strongly towards non euro area countries. As a result, the decline in the
euro  area  share  in  total  German  exports  accelerated.  Meanwhile,  the  domestic  demand
contribution to GDP continued on its downward path, in part on account of subdued wage growth
together with a tight fiscal policy (see Figure 12).
9
 7 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 8 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
  9 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 10 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
In  contrast  to  Germany,  France  entered  Monetary  Union  in  much  better  shape.  Growth  in  the
initial  years  was  strong  and  unemployment  declined  by  more  than  a  fourth  within  five
years.
 Wage increases remained moderate, even below euro area averages (see Chart 7),
and unit labour costs moved according to the “golden wage rule”, i.e. at an average annual rate
below, but close to, 2%. However, with German unit labour costs remaining virtually unchanged
over the period, a significant competitiveness gap built up. This was further aggravated by the
crisis,  during  which  French  wages  remained  relatively  sticky,  in  spite  of  the  sharp  fall  in
productivity. The consequences were especially detrimental for the French export sector, which
suffered significant losses in  market  share  (see  Figure  9),  despite  the  substantial  squeeze  in
profit margins (see Figure 10). At the same time, the contribution of domestic demand to growth
became  increasingly  important,  supported  by  fiscal  policy  (see  Figure  11)  and  sticky  wage
developments.
11
 11 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 12 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a result, there is now a striking divergence between France and Germany on a number of
macroeconomic dimensions: in Germany, the domestic demand to GDP ratio is now among the
lowest across advanced economies, whereas in France, it is among the highest. The opposite is
true for exports (see Charts 13 and 14).
 13 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 14 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
The recent economic policy orientations and plans set out by the German and French authorities
are steps in the right direction. In particular, the labour market reforms that have already been
implemented  by  the  French  authorities,  and  those  that  are  still  planned,  could  yield  sizeable
growth  benefits  and  improve  competitiveness.  These  recent  developments  show  that  cross-
country  interdependencies  in  the  Monetary  Union  are  better  internalised  in  national  decision-
making processes.
Some lessons for the future
Our monetary policy measures are bearing fruit, and the growth outlook confirms our confidence
that inflation will converge towards our aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Monetary policy alone cannot prevent divergences in a monetary union. Sound economic policies
are the key drivers of Europe’s prosperity. They are pivotal to the smooth functioning of EMU,
thereby preventing the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances.
The nature of EMU makes macroeconomic adjustment in the euro area more complex than in a
 15 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
federal  state.  Monetary  policy  is  a  competence  assigned  at  EU  level.  The  European  Central
Bank’s price stability objective is enshrined in the Treaty.
 By contrast, economic policy remains
in the remit of Member States.
 It is, however, a Treaty obligation for Member States to regard
their economic policies as a matter of common concern and to coordinate them.
12
13
Our framework for the coordination of economic policies was clearly not effective in preventing
the  emergence  of  lasting  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis.  Protracted
losses of competitiveness eventually led to unsustainable external positions and even “sudden
stops” in the financing of external deficits. This is not new. Unfortunately, we can point to several
episodes  in  history  when  governments  and  social  partners  failed  to  internalise  external
constraints, resulting in widening imbalances. This typically led to currency crises and exchange
rate  realignments  in  Europe.  Monetary  instability  prevented  Europeans  from  reaping  the  full
benefit of the internal market and limited Europe’s growth potential and emergence as a global
economic actor.
In our institutional framework for economic policies, it is primarily up to the Member States to
respond to the economic challenges they are faced with, thereby ensuring that their economic
structures  are  compatible  with  participation  in  Monetary  Union.  To  reap  the  full  benefit  of
Monetary  Union,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  national  economic  policies  lead  to  sustainable
growth.  Preventing  the  emergence  of  economic  imbalances  and  creating  the  conditions  for  a
thriving  social  market  economy  is  not  only  a  matter  of  national  interest.  It  is  also  a  matter  of
common concern, as a crisis in one country has repercussions for all members of Monetary
Union. Effective surveillance is needed at both EU and national level.
Looking  ahead,  we  need  to  further  enhance  the  coordination  of  national  economic  policies.
National economic policies, the effects of which can propagate through the EU, should no longer
be  decided  in  isolation.  At  the  European  level,  the  European  Semester  process  for  the
coordination of economic policies – including the macroeconomic imbalance procedure – which
was introduced by the EU in 2011, can play a key role.
 However, it should be used to its full
potential. Equally important, though, is for national debates and decision-making processes to
more fully internalise what it means to be part of Monetary Union. Precisely for this purpose, the
Five Presidents’ Report of 12 February 2015  called for the set-up of National Competitiveness
Authorities.
  These  bodies  are  intended  to  foster  national  responsibility  for  identifying  any
necessary  reforms  and  facilitating  their  implementation.  Subsequently,  the  Council  of  the
European Union adopted on 19 September 2016 a Recommendation for the establishment of
National  Productivity  Boards   and  Member  States  were 
the
Recommendation by 20 March 2018. We should make full use of this Recommendation. National
Productivity Boards have the potential to become an important catalyst in supporting the sound
functioning of national adjustment mechanisms.
implement 
invited 
to 
14
15
16
17
1
2
3
4
5
6
I would like to thank Isabel Vansteenkiste for her support in preparing this speech.
The “two-pack” and “six-pack” legislative packages, which bundle together 6 regulations and 1 directive, aim to
more  closely  coordinate  economic  policies  through  (i)  a  strengthening  of  budgetary  surveillance  under  the
Stability and Growth Pact, (ii) the introduction of a new procedure in the area of macroeconomic imbalances, (iii)
the establishment of a framework for dealing with countries experiencing difficulties with financial stability and
(iv) the codification in legislation of integrated economic and budgetary surveillance in the form of the European
Semester (see, for instance, eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52014DC0905 ).
See, for instance, ec.europa.eu/commission/news/reducing-risk-banking-union-2018-mar-14_en
See A. Estrada, J.F. Jimeno and J.L. Malo de Molina (2009), The Spanish economy in EMU: the first ten years,
Banco de España, Documentos Ocasionales, No. 0901
See A. Sapir (2016), The Eurozone needs less heterogeneity, VoxEU, 12 February 2016
 16 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See F. Schrapf (2018), International Monetary Regimes and the German Model, Max Planck Institute for the study
of societies, Discussion paper 18/1.
See P. Bofinger (2015), German wage moderation and the EZ crisis, VoxEU
See  N.  Engbom,  E.  Detragiache,  and  F.  Raei  (2015),  The  German  Labour  Market  Reforms  and  Post-
Unemployment Earnings, IMF Working paper 15/162.
The golden wage rule states that real wages should grow in line with (medium-run) national productivity and
nominal wages so as to be compatible with price stability. This implies that nominal wages in each country
should  equal  (medium-run)  national  productivity  plus  the  target  inflation  rate  of  the  central  bank  (see,  for
instance, European Commission, 2005). In practice, this would mean that on average, unit labour costs growth
should approximately equal the target inflation rate of the central bank.
for 
See, 
lessons? CESifo Working paper number 1078
instance,  J.  Pisani-Ferry 
(2003), The  surprising  French  employment  performance:  what
See for instance S. Collignon and P. Esposito (2017), Labour costs and returns on capital in the EMU: a new
measure of competitiveness. Mimeo
Article 127 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Articles 120 and 121 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
To reinforce ex ante coordination of EU Member States’ economic and fiscal policies, a new monitoring cycle
was  introduced  in  2011:  the  “European  semester”  –  a  six-month  period  every  year  during  which  national
budgetary and structural policies will be reviewed to detect any inconsistences and emerging imbalances while
major budgetary decisions are still under preparation. Specifically, the reform reinforces the preventive arm of
the Stability and Growth Pact, introduces a new procedure for addressing macroeconomic imbalances, and
places  greater  emphasis  on  monitoring  the  national  fiscal  frameworks,  identifying  macrostructural  growth
bottlenecks and detecting macrofinancial risks in the Member States (see W. Köhler-Töglhofer and P. Part
(2011), Macro Coordination under the European Semester. Monetary Policy and the Economy December 2011
issue).
ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/5-presidents-report_en.pdf
See www.bde.es/f/webbde/SES/Secciones/Publicaciones/InformesBoletinesRevistas/BoletinEconomico/descargar/16/nov/files/be1611-
art2e.pdf
Council Recommendation of 20 September 2016 on the establishment of National Productivity Boards (2016/C
349/01). Euro area member states are expected to implement the recommendation within 18 months from its
approval on 19 September 2016.
 17 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
