“Rising Above Disruptions: A Call for Action” 
Keynote Remark by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
National Directors Conference 2018 
Thai Institute of Directors 
21 June 2018, Plaza Athenee Hotel, Bangkok Thailand 
 
Dr. Bandid Nijathaworn,  
Mr. Andrew Sheng, 
Secretary General Rapee Sucharitakul, 
Chief executives,  
Directors,  
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen. 
 
A very good morning to you all. 
First of all, I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Thai Institute of 
Directors (IOD) for inviting me to be a part of this exciting and important event. I have 
always had strong appreciation for IOD’s mission and work to improve director 
professionalism and corporate governance in Thailand.  I would also like to 
commend the IOD on organizing this year’s conference with a proactive and forward 
looking agenda that goes well beyond its focus on corporate governance. This year’s 
conference program concentrates on areas that we need to collaborate to ensure 
the future success of our country. It is therefore such an honor to be here today to 
share my thoughts with distinguished directors and key leaders who play an integral 
role in driving Thailand forward.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 We are living in an unprecedented period of profound changes where 
exponential advancement in technologies is transforming everything we know. The 
speed, scope and impact of this technological change are unlike anything we have 
experienced before. It is disrupting and transforming the whole value chains, across 
all sectors in all corners of the globe, at an extremely fast pace.  
The effects of this digital revolution are far reaching. We have seen it affecting 
a wide spectrum of industries ranging from agriculture to automobile, encompassing 
a broad range of professions from farmers to financial professionals. Drones can now 
be used to monitor agricultural yields and provide logistic services.  Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) can now predict certain forms of cancer more accurately than 
doctors and enable cars to be self-driven. From 3D printing, to genome mapping, to 
Internet of Things (IoT) and, very soon, Internet of Everything, the possibilities are 
limitless.  
As a country, how we respond to these challenges will determine Thailand’s 
position in the world economy and the path our future generations take. Of course, 
no one can accurately predict where this path of technological advancement will 
lead us to and how our digital future will unfold, but what we can be certain of is 
that traditional ways of conducting businesses have been upended and leaderships 
are being challenged. Board members and executives are faced with strategic risks 
that could threaten viability of their organizations if they do not make timely changes 
to their business models to remain relevant and competitive. Equally important is 
how to manage risks associated with this digital transformation. As all directors know 
well, executing successful strategic transformation is not an easy task.  Executing 
successful digital transformation when the ecosystem is still evolving will be even 
more challenging.   
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Amidst these rapid technological advancements, I believe everyone here 
agrees that a wait-and-see strategy is inadequate. Hence, I very much concur with the 
conference’s theme of “A Call for Action.” It takes courage to lead a transformative 
 2 
 journey into an unknown territory. The collective wisdom shared among directors 
here will enable all of us to make better informed decisions and lead our 
organizations, and more importantly, lead Thailand, onto the right path – the path 
which will rise above disruptions, as the IOD has eloquently put it. 
As Thailand embarks on the journey for digital transformation, we must focus 
on three key imperatives of productivity, immunity, and inclusivity. Technological 
advancement provides tremendous opportunity for us to uplift these three areas like 
never before. While policymakers and regulators can provide support at the 
infrastructure level and promote a stable environment conducive for innovation, it is 
at the firm level that actions can be and must be taken to drive meaningful changes 
for the country as a whole.  
First, on productivity: uplifting the country’s productivity is necessary to 
ensure continued long-term economic growth. Specifically, structural changes due 
to an aging workforce have hastened the need for our country to improve 
productivity just to maintain output level. In fact, Thailand’s labor productivity 
growth has been on a decline. From 2002 to 2017, our annual growth of labor 
productivity averaged 2.9 percent, a significant drop from an average of 5 percent 
during 1986 to 2001. In contrast, countries such as China and Indonesia have been 
experiencing rises in productivity growth.  Should this trend continue, Thailand will 
not be able to maintain its competitiveness and output level.  
Fortunately, many technological advancements available at much lower costs 
today hold huge promises for raising productivity. Cloud computing, robotics and 
automation have allowed businesses to save significant costs. Big data, artificial 
intelligence and machine learning capabilities can now offer insights that enable 
more targeted services. I urge you all to seize this opportunity and leverage on new 
technologies to improve the productivity of your firms, your industries, and 
eventually our country.  
Second, on immunity: for growth to be sustainable we must have 
sufficient immunity to withstand unexpected shocks. We are living in a time of 
great changes, where outcomes can be sudden, unpredictable, and volatile, bringing 
 3 
 with them new forms of risks. Not only will firms face risks related to strategy, 
finance, and operation, but they will also face risks associated with driving digital 
transformations. Managing the transformation process in the digital environment 
requires fostering an organizational culture that is agile and nimble—to gain flexibility 
and speed that drives productivity and innovation. But, at the same time, a strong 
culture on risk management must also be instilled to safeguard firms’ resilience. 
   
As industries increasingly rely on data and data-driven technologies, cyber 
security must be considered a top priority. Globally, the number of threat incidents 
have been rising, with increased frequency, sophistication and scale of their impacts. 
For instance, in 2010 McAfee Labs recorded about 60,000 new malwares per day, but 
by 2017 that number had risen almost ten folds to 500,000 or about 350 new 
malwares per minute. It is also estimated that the cost of cybercrime will be in 
excess of USD 600 billion this year. As such, organizations must build up sufficient 
cyber resilience by putting in place safeguards to improve threat prevention and 
detection and ensure preparedness for response and recovery should a cyber attack 
occur.   
Third, on inclusivity: economic development without fair distribution can 
induce social and economic instabilities, threatening long-term sustainable 
growth. This is one area we must improve as a country. According to Credit Suisse 
Global Wealth Report, 58 percent of the nation's wealth is controlled by the richest 1 
percent of the people. Meanwhile, 61 percent of land is owned by the top 10 
percent of the land owners, and three quarters of the population do not own any 
land. 
Like previous industrial revolutions, the digital revolution brings with it 
challenges in income and wealth distribution, as those with higher skills and access 
to capital are much more likely to reap the benefits and get larger pieces of the pie. 
This calls for increased efforts to address this issue to make sure that no one is left 
behind.  If this issue is neglected, the digital divide will widen inequality gap even 
further. 
 4 
 Ensuring easy and affordable access to technology and innovation can help 
reduce inequality and promote Thailand’s inclusivity. Lower-income groups and 
people in remote areas need to have access to quality services essential to 
improving their welfare, such as education and banking services. It is therefore crucial 
that basic infrastructures are put in place starting, for instance, with national-wide 
internet broadband access points and the PromptPay electronic fund transfer system.   
Moreover, these infrastructures must be interoperable and open to all, which 
would definitely require collaboration of the whole industry, not just an effort of any 
one firm. Our PromptPay infrastructure was the result of close collaboration between 
the Bank of Thailand and the Thai Bankers’ Association. It has spurred healthy 
competition amongst banks, catalyzing enhancement in the e-payment landscape 
such that it provides increased opportunities for many small merchants and 
consumers. 
Another important factor for inclusivity is digital literacy. It is imperative to 
equip people with necessary skills to survive and thrive in this digital era. This is an 
enduring task and one that requires active participation at every level. This effort can 
begin with individual staff in one’s own organization—working from tech-savvy juniors 
to technologically-challenged peers.     
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I believe the three key imperatives of productivity, immunity, and inclusivity 
will help Thailand navigate through this digital disruption and continue on the path 
for sustainable economic growth. 
Before I end my remark this morning, I would like to emphasize once again 
that while this new digital ecosystem is still evolving and the future remains 
uncertain, we cannot afford to hold back. We must strategically adapt and adopt 
technologies now to remain relevant and competitive and provide support for 
sustainable improvement in the standard of living of the Thai people.   
 5 
 In closing, I would like to congratulate the IOD once again for fittingly 
organizing this Call for Action conference. Actions taken at the firm level can 
determine the direction of our country and whether we can efficiently catch up with 
rapid technological changes. These changes will also inevitably affect the whole 
ecosystem of Thailand.  Therefore, I urge you all to think on a bigger picture on how 
your firms can help make Thailand’s digital transformation successful and fruitful.  
So, think big, stay informed, and act wisely. Only then we can be certain that 
together we could truly rise above disruptions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
   6 
