   
 
Ideas and Institutions – A Growth Story 
 
Speech given by 
  Andrew G Haldane 
Chief Economist 
Bank of England 
   The Guild Society 
University of Oxford 
23 May 2018 
  The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy 
Committee.  I would like to thank Shiv Chowla and David Ronicle for their help in preparing the text.  I 
would like to thank Will Abel, Sandra Batten, Sarah Kinson and Patrick Schneider for their comments 
and contributions.  
 
 1 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  Economic growth has been among the greatest gifts given to us, as individuals and societies.  It may no 
longer be fashionable to say so.  Measures of economic growth, like Gross Domestic Product (GDP), can be 
highly imperfect metrics of how well individuals and societies are faring, their subjective sense of well-being.1  
And growth in income and output is not, of course, an end in itself.   
 Nonetheless, it is now pretty well-established that growth is a vital ingredient, indeed pre-requisite, for 
meeting many of the broader societal objectives many would view as important to our longer-term health, 
wealth and happiness.2  While not an end in itself, economic growth appears to be a vitally important means 
of achieving those societal ends. 
 Economic growth is the main reason why global levels of poverty and rates of infant mortality have fallen 
spectacularly over recent centuries.  It is why longevity and educational standards have risen secularly over 
the same period.  And growth may even have contributed to the incidence of global conflicts and wars having 
fallen to their lowest levels, perhaps in human history.3 
 That makes growth a gift, one necessary (if not necessarily sufficient) to deliver secular improvements in 
living standards.  And it is what makes a good understanding of the determinants and drivers of growth so 
crucial for societal progress.  By understanding the forces driving growth, past, present and future, we can 
begin to devise and implement economic policies that support improvements in society. 
 I thought I understood the story of economic growth, its drivers and determinants.  But recently I have 
changed my mind.  I have a new story of growth.  I think this story carries important implications for 
understanding the future challenges of technology and for devising the future policies and institutions 
necessary to meet them.  That might require, among other things, a repurposing of successful institutions 
like this one, turning them from universities into multiversities.  
 The Story of Growth 
 The story of economic growth often begins with a chart like this one (Chart 1).  This plots the path of global 
economic growth, measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per head, over the past 1000 years.  And 
what a story it tells.  It is a tale of two halves – or, more accurately, a tale of three-quarters and a quarter.4   
 For the first three-quarters of the past 1000 years, the global economy stood still in growth terms.  GDP 
growth per head of population averaged less than 0.1% per year.  Just try and imagine those rates of growth.  
They meant it took more than a millennium for living standards to double.   
                                                       
1  Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2009). 
2  For example, Coyle (2014).   
3  Two recent excellent books (Pinker (2018), Rosling (2018)) chart this and other dramatic improvements in societal well-being over 
time.   
4  De Long (1998). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
 This growth experience is likely to have had an important psychological, as well as financial, impact.  The 
average person would not see any improvement in living standards over their lifetime.  Their lived experience 
was imperceptibly different than their parents, grandparents or indeed great, great grandparents.  People’s 
lives were lived on a travellator.  Rising living standards was not a social norm.  Secular stagnation was. 
 You could argue, with some justification, that measures of GDP at this time might have been missing a trick.  
We did not have any formal, statistical means of measuring incomes and outputs in the economy until well 
into the 20th century, with the development of the National Accounts.  And GDP anyway underplays 
important factors shaping people’s well-being, such as levels of nutrition, infant mortality and longevity.5 
 
Yet, as best we can tell, alternative well-being metrics tell broadly the same story.6  Rates of infant mortality 
were unchanged over this period.  Life expectancy flat-lined at 30 to 40 years.  Levels of calorific intake 
stood still.  And the global population scarcely budged, held in check by unchanged food supplies, as 
predicted by Thomas Malthus in the late 18th century.7  Not for nothing was this called the Malthusian era.  
 Another example of this secular stagnation, a favourite of mine, is provided by plotting heights from 
excavated skeletons records.  These are a diagnostic on levels of health and nutrition.  Male skeleton 
heights were essentially unchanged, at 160-170cm, for at least 2,000 years prior to 1750.  Humans grew 
neither physiologically nor financially.  And neither, then, did the societies in which they lived.   
 That makes the contrast with developments in the last quarter of the millennium all the more striking.  From 
around 1750, GDP per head suddenly took off and has kept on rising ever since, growing by around 1.5% 
per year.  The magic of compound interest means these growth rates have transformed people’s living 
standards.  The time it takes for living standards to double has shrunk to less than 50 years.   
 The impact on people’s well-being, financial and psychological, has been transformational.  It has meant 
each generation has been around 50% better off than its predecessor.  After 1750, generational progress 
suddenly became visible, children to parents to grandparents.  Growth in living standards became a social 
norm, in a way never previously true in human history.  Life’s travellator turned into an escalator. 
 And not just for GDP.  Broader metrics of well-being tell a similar tale.  Rates of infant mortality have fallen by 
40 percentage points since the end of the 18th century.8  The estimated lifespan of a human has risen by a 
factor of over two.9  And estimated male skeleton heights have risen by 5-10cm.10  Humans have grown, 
financially and physiologically, in lockstep.  The world has moved from a Malthusian Era to a Golden one. 
                                                       
5  Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2009). 
6  For example, Clark (2009).   
7  Malthus (1798). 
8  Our World In Data:  https://ourworldindata.org/child-mortality 
9  Our World In Data:  https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy 
10  Haldane (2015a). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
 A Story with One “i”  
 What explains this extra-ordinary inflexion point in the history of economic growth and living standards?  So 
fundamental is this question to so much of social and economic history that, understandably, it has attracted 
huge amounts of empirical, historical, social and theoretical research.  Out of this cloud of evidence, a clear 
sunbeam of understanding has emerged about the deep causes and catalysts of economic growth.   
 
If you ask a schoolchild what happened in England around the middle of the 18th century, as I often do, many 
will give you the right answer.  It marked the dawn of the Industrial Revolution.  But what exactly was this a 
revolution in and what exactly caused it?  In the standard account, the catalyst for this revolution in economic 
growth came from a single source, from one “i” - ideas.11 
 
In the second half of the 18th century in the UK, ideas began sprouting like morning mushrooms.  These 
ideas emerged seemingly spontaneously and roughly contemporaneously.  They were also relatively closely 
clustered geographically.  They included James Hargreaves’ spinning jenny in 1764, Richard Arkwright’s 
water frame in 1769 and James Watt’s steam engine in 1775. 
 In the fullness of time, these ideas began to revolutionise both industry and work.  After a lengthy adoption 
lag, they spread across sectors and across regions.  They migrated from being mere ideas to becoming 
“GPTs” or General Purpose Technologies.12  In the process, they generated waves of investment in new 
factories, machines, processes and infrastructures.  There was, in the jargon, capital-deepening. 
 
Neo-Classical theories of economic growth are very clear what would be expected to happen next.13  When 
an outward shift in the economy’s technological frontier is combined with higher levels of physical capital, the 
fuse is lit on higher productivity among companies, higher wages among workers and, ultimately, higher 
living standards among societies.  So it was during the Golden Era.  
 Chart 2 plots productivity, wages and GDP per head in the UK since the Industrial Revolution.  All three 
plateaued prior to 1750.  Since then, all three have moved up in lockstep.  Ideas and innovation have borne 
continuous fruit in higher productivity, pay and living standards.  This fruit has been shared roughly equally 
between owners of companies (profits) and workers in companies (wages).  We know that because labour’s 
share of the national income pie is similar today to 1750. 
 
Of course, it is not ideas and innovation from the 18th century that has sustained growth over the subsequent 
period.  Although the innovation process is continuous, historians often point to three distinct waves – three 
Industrial Revolutions.  The second came in the latter part of the 19th century with the emergence of GPTs  
                                                       
11  For example, Romer (1990) describes a theoretical model of growth based around innovation.   
12  Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995). 
13  For example, Mokyr (2011) discusses Britain during the Industrial Revolution. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 4 
 
4 
such as electricity, the internal combustion engine and sanitation.  The third came in the middle of the  
20th century with new GPTs such as computing, digitisation and the internet.14   
 Yet in each case the playbook was familiar from the first Industrial Revolution.  The emergence of a new 
strain of GPTs resulted in an outward shift in the production possibility frontier and capital-deepening.  With 
higher levels of investment in physical and human capital, the productivity of companies, the wages of 
workers and the living standards of societies continued their Northerly ascent.  The Golden Era continued.   
 Some people are now discussing the next innovation wave, a so-called Fourth Industrial Revolution.  The 
GPTs driving this are likely to include Artificial Intelligence (AI), Big Data, automation, robotics, 3D-printing 
and nano-technology.15  I will return to the Fourth Industrial Revolution when discussing future growth. 
 A Different Growth Story 
 As appetising as this growth story sounds, a reading of the history books make it difficult to swallow whole.  It 
is certainly plausible to think that a divine coincidence of Hargreaves, Watts and Arkwrights, in roughly the 
same place at roughly the same time, resulted in a white-hot crucible of creativity.  Indeed, we might be 
seeing that self-same crucible of creativity in Silicon Valley today. 
 But the Industrial Revolution was hardly the first firing of that crucible.  We have, through history, seen many 
episodes of furnace-hot crucibles of innovation, spanning most continents and most centuries.16  Successful 
cities, regions, countries, continents and empires of the recent and distant past were often built and 
sustained on ideas and innovation and accompanying investment in machines and people. 
 The Roman Empire is a case in point.  Some of you will remember the sequence from Monty Python’s The 
Life of Brian which begins with the rhetorical question:  “What did the Romans ever do for us?”  The sketch 
concludes:  “But apart from better sanitation and medicine and education and irrigation and public health and 
roads and a freshwater system and baths and public order...what have the Romans done for us?”   
 You do not need to go that far back for examples of big ideas which had a transformative impact on industry 
and society.  Immediately prior to the Industrial Revolution and running chronologically, these included the 
windmill in the 12th century, the mechanical clock in the 13th, the cannon in the 14th, the printing press in the 
15th, the postal service in the 16th and the telescope and microscope in the 17th.17  
 It will surprise no-one that waves of innovation, big and small, have been lapping the shores of society for the 
entirety of human civilisation.  In other words, while ideas and innovation may well be a necessary condition 
                                                      
14  Van Reenen et al (2010), for example, document the economic impact of ICT. 
15  See Bughin et al (2017) and Haldane (2018), for example. 
16  Flohr (2016), for example, discusses innovation in Roman society. 
17  Clark (2009). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 5 
 
5 
for economic growth, the historical record suggests they may not themselves have been sufficient.  Other 
forces appear to have been at play, translating these ideas into sustained growth in living standards. 
 What might those forces be?  I want to provide two different, but complementary, lenses on the growth story.  
The first focusses on a rather broader set of “capitals” – not just physical capital (plant and machines) but 
human (skills and expertise), intellectual (ideas and technologies), infrastructural (transport and legal 
systems), social (co-operation and trust) and institutional (national and civic, private and public) capital.18   
 History suggests each of these capitals may have played an important supporting role in the story of growth.  
Ideas alone, without the support of one or more of these broader capitals, have historically run aground.  For 
example, in the UK many of the foundations for growth after the Industrial Revolution were laid in the 
centuries preceding it.  It was on this platform of “capitals”, plural, that ideas and innovation then built. 
 Take human capital.  The most dramatic improvements in educational standards in the UK occurred prior to 
1750 (Chart 3).  So too did the largest improvements in measures of social, infrastructural and institutional 
capital.19  Ideas needed these foundations to flourish.  A steam engine is not much use without the skills to 
build it, the tracks to run it on, the institutions to oversee it, the trust of the public to accept it.  The causes of 
the growth inflexion in 18th century England were as much sociological as technological.  
 Another lens through which to view this alternative growth story has recently been provided by economic 
historians, Steve Broadberry and John Wallis.20  Indeed it was probably this lens on the world, above all 
others, that led me to change my own story about growth.  Broadberry and Wallis do two things. 
 First, they construct some new estimates of growth going back to 1300.  Rather than relying on period 
averages, they use higher-frequency measures of growth.  This changes the growth picture significantly.  
Period averages conceal large, long-lasting swings in growth over time (Chart 4).  Their revised measures 
suggest growth did not flat-line prior to 1750, even though it averaged zero.  Rather, growth oscillated wildly.   
 Second, given the scale and duration of these oscillations, they decompose their growth data into 
“expanding” and “contracting” periods.  Chart 5 plots these for the UK over the past 700 years.  A broadly 
similar pattern of expanding and contracting periods can be found in Spain, France, Italy, Portugal, and the 
Netherlands over roughly the same period.  This decomposition changes the growth story radically. 
 Even prior to the Industrial Revolution, economies experienced notable periods of strongly positive growth.  
Between 1300 and 1700, GDP expanded slightly more than half the time.  Over these expanding periods, 
growth averaged 5.3% per year.  The reason average growth was far-lower over this earlier period – indeed, 
                                                      
18  Solow (1956), Mincer (1984), Romer (1990), Iyer, Kitson and Toh (2005), North (1990). 
19  Haldane (2015a).   
20  Broadberry and Wallis (2017).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 6 
 
6 
little more than zero – was because expanding periods were almost exactly offset by contracting periods.  
They accounted for slightly less than half the period, during which growth averaged minus 5.4% per year. 
 So what has changed in the period since the Industrial Revolution?  Growth during expansion periods is 
relatively little changed.  Since 1750, it has averaged 3.2% per year.  That is in fact a bit less than growth 
during expansion periods prior to the Industrial Revolution.  This strongly implies it is not the greater 
incidence of ideas-fuelled booms after 1750 that accounts for the growth inflexion.  
 The explanation lies instead in the dramatic fall in both the probability and cost of GDP contractions.  
Recessions have occurred only 30% of the time since 1700 and only 17% of the time since 1900.  During 
these periods, growth has averaged minus 2.2% per year since 1700 and minus 3.4% per year since 1900.  
Since 1750, recessions have become far less frequent and less painful.  It is the avoidance of deep 
recessions that differentiates the Golden Era from its Malthusian predecessor.  
 Where does this leave our story of growth?  Well, the story that better fits the facts appears to be one in 
which the conveyor belt of ideas and innovation has been continuous over the centuries, causing lengthy if 
lumpy ideas-fuelled expansions.  But whereas prior to the Industrial Revolution this conveyor belt was 
regularly halted by recessions, more recently these interruptions have been far fewer and less costly. 
 Put differently, the real revolution in living standards after 1750 came about not exclusively, or perhaps even 
mainly, from the surge in ideas and technologies.  Rather, it resulted from societies having found some 
means of avoiding the subsequent recessionary bullets.  Prior to the Industrial Revolution, these killed 
expansions dead.  After it, societies appear to have found some effective means of dodging them.  
 A Second “i” on Growth 
 To understand growth, then, we need to explain why economies become less recession-prone after 1750.  
For me, the explanation lies in a second “i” – institutions.  I will argue that it was the emergence of institutions 
that explains the rise in the other capitals that were essential pre-conditions for growth (human, social, 
infrastructural, intellectual etc.)  It was the emergence of these same institutions which also cushioned the 
damaging effects of recessions.  As with sight, to gain a true perspective on growth you need two “i"s. 
 This is, in one sense, not a new story.  A number of distinguished economists have, over the years, placed 
institutions centre-stage in explaining secular trends in social and economic development.  They include 
classical economists such as Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill and, more recently, Nobel Laureates such as 
Ronald Coase and Douglass North.21  Broadberry and Wallis themselves conclude that the most likely cause 
of fewer downside growth surprises since the Industrial Revolution has been the rise of institutions.   
                                                       
21  Smith (1776), Mill (1848), Coase (1960), North (1991). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
 Empirical work supports the institutional hypothesis.  Cross-country growth regressions suggest nations with 
high-quality institutions out-grow those without.22  Detailed country case studies reach a similar conclusion.  
For example, institutional quality has been used to explain the very different economic fortunes of North and 
South Korea after separation.  The absence of institutions is, for some, Why Nations Fail.23   
 If institutions hold the key, what exactly do we mean by them and how exactly do they come about?  
Douglass North’s definition is a good starting point:  “humanly devised constraints that structure political, 
economic and social interactions”.24  So defined, institutions are social infrastructure.  They include formal or 
legal institutions, like Parliaments, judiciaries, central banks, social safety nets and schools.  But they also 
include less formal associations and groups, such as universities, trade unions, guilds and charities. 
 As for their genesis, history suggests institutions emerge for a variety of reasons.  Sometimes they have 
been a direct response to political upheaval.  Some of the largest transformations in political institutions have 
resulted from revolutions:  in the UK, after the Glorious Revolution of the 17th century, in France after the 
French Revolution of the 18th century, in the United States after the Civil War of the 19th century.   
 At other times, institutions have emerged in response to the pressing financial or social needs of citizens.  
Often, those times of most pressing financial and social need have coincided with sharp changes in the 
economic environment which have left large swathes of society worse-off.  And often, technological 
disruption and displacement have been the root cause of these sharp changes in the economic environment. 
 The three Industrial Revolutions provide a useful set of case studies.  Each caused technological disruption 
and significant job displacement.  Each had, as a result, a wrenching and lasting impact on the job and 
income prospects of large swathes of society.  Each caused a significant and sustained period of hardship 
for many.25  And each caused a stretching of the social fabric, often to close to breaking point. 
 It is now well-established that each industrial revolution caused a significant loss of livelihood for workers 
whose set of tasks was most susceptible to automation.  The upshot, often, has been a “hollowing out” of 
jobs across the skill distribution.26  Because reskilling and retraining takes time and effort, job displacement 
worsens pay prospects for a great many, significantly and persistently.27  And these losses were often made 
worse because they were concentrated occupationally and geographically.28 
 A second, accompanying adverse side-effect of technological disruption has often been rising levels of 
income inequality.  Historically, those skilling-up to keep one step ahead of the machine saw demand for 
                                                      
22  Levine and Renelt (1992). 
23  Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). 
24  North (1990). 
25  Haldane (2015b). 
26  Katz and Margo (2013), for example, show that skilled blue collar employment in US manufacturing declined while white collar and 
unskilled manufacturing employment increased. 
27  Autor (2017) documents lower relative wages for those in US most exposed to international competition. 
28  Autor (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
 their skills rise and, with it, their wages.  By contrast, those at the other end of the skills distribution saw their 
incomes fall, due to reduced demand and increased supply of their skills.  The resulting rise in income 
inequality has tended, historically, to heighten popular discontent and worsen social cohesion.   
 A third adverse side-effect was that workers did not always benefit, fully or immediately, from  
technologically-induced gains in companies’ productivity and profitability.  In the early stages of each 
industrial revolution, wages tended not to rise in line with productivity, causing labour’s share of the national 
income pie to fall.29  This, too, tended to add to popular discontent and damage social cohesion.  Labour’s 
income share has also fallen in a number of advanced economies over the past few decades.30 
 A final side-effect is that periods of technological transition were often lengthy as well as painful.  In the first 
Industrial Revolution, many displaced workers had still to find alternative work by the middle of the  
19th century, with income inequality running high and labour’s share falling.  This period is known by 
historians as “Engel’s pause”.31  Subsequent industrial revolutions have seen similar, if less long-lived, 
pauses. 
 If economic hardship is widespread and social cohesion damaged, a societal response is needed.  One such 
response is the creation of new pieces of social infrastructure – in other words, institution building.  Each 
industrial revolution saw a surge in such institution-building, to cushion the adverse side-effects of 
technological change on jobs and pay.  In this way, the recessionary hit to workers and the economy could 
be shortened or dampened.   Broadly speaking, two such sets of institution emerged.   
 One set equipped workers with the new skills they needed to thrive in a new jobs environment.  It was only 
by acquiring these skills that workers could transition to where new jobs were being created.  By keeping one 
step ahead of the machine, technological unemployment could be avoided.  A shorter, more seamless skills 
transition reduced the hit to workers’ incomes and lowered the risk of skills atrophy, which might otherwise 
cause lasting damage to employment.  This social infrastructure might be called “enabling” institutions.   
 Another set of institutions provided workers with support to cushion the hit to their finances and well-being 
during the painful and lengthy period of job transition.  This might be financial support, in income or loans.  It 
might be housing or shelter.  Or it might be social or emotional support.  This social insurance ensured that 
lives were underpinned, inequalities held in check and the social fabric held together.  It reduced recession 
risk, for individuals and for societies.  These might be called “insuring” institutions.32 
                                                       
29  Allen (2005) documents the stagnation of real wages in Britain from 1800 to 1840.   
30  IMF (2017). 
31  Allen (2009) discusses Engels’ pause in the context of the British economy from 1760 to 1913. 
32  Of course, many other institutions played a role in the labour market beyond the “enabling” and “insuring” ones mentioned here.  For 
example, the ‘Poor Laws’ in the 1800s meant that the poor had to enter workhouses with terrible conditions to receive help in the form of 
clothes and food.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
 During the first three Industrial Revolutions, the skills workers needed to keep one step ahead of the 
machine were largely cognitive.  Machines undertook largely manual (“doing”) tasks, which had previously 
used labour-intensive technologies.  Cognitive (“thinking”) tasks remained, by and large, the exclusive 
domain of humans.  So institutions emerged to nurture thinking skills, largely in children and young adults, to 
increase the chances of successful transition to the cognitively-intensive future world of work.   
 In children, the most important of these institutional innovations was probably compulsory schooling.  For 
children between the ages of 5 and 10, this was formally introduced in the UK with the Elementary Education 
Act of 1880.  It was extended to age 11 in 1893 and age 12 in 1899.  The Fisher Act of 1918 provided for 
compulsory education to age 14 and part-time education to age 18.  Compulsory full-time education was 
extended to age 15 in 1947 and age 16 in 1972.33   
 As these pieces of social infrastructure developed, so too did standards of educational attainment and 
cognitive skills.  The fraction of the population aged 15 and over that attended secondary school rose from 
23% to 60% between 1950 and 2010.34  In the 1950s, less than 11% of the relevant age group passed five 
or more GCSE O levels in England and Wales.  By 2010, that had reached almost 80%.35 
 Beyond age 18, there was in parallel a rise in both numbers and attendance at universities.  For over six 
hundred years from 1209, England had only two universities – this one (Oxford) and the other one 
(Cambridge).  It was not until the formation of University College London in 1829 that their duopoly was 
broken.  And it was not until the 20th century that some of the other main cities – Manchester, Liverpool, 
Leeds, Bristol, Birmingham and Sheffield – established their own universities.36  Today, there are around 130 
universities in the UK as a whole. 
 Participation rates in higher education have also undergone a secular rise and, latterly, a revolution.  The 
share of young people attending university has increased from just over 3% in 1950 to over 8% in 1970, over 
19% in 1990, 33% in 2000 and 49% by 2016.37  Having been less than 5,000 in 1920, the number of first 
degrees obtained at UK universities had increased to over 365,000 by 2016. 38 
 Through the rapid rise in school and university attendance, there was a revolution in cognitive skills in the 
workforce.  That provided the human capital necessary to turn new technologies and machines into higher 
levels of productivity among companies, higher wages among workers and, ultimately, higher living 
standards among societies.  Put differently, higher cognitive skills reduced the odds of a lengthy 
recessionary period of technological unemployment for many individuals and societies.   
                                                       
33  Legislative dates for compulsory schooling vary from dates of enforcement. 
34  Barro-Lee Educational Attainment Dataset:  http://www.barrolee.com/ 
35  Bolton (2012).   
36  Willetts (2017). 
37  Bolton (2012) for data from 1950 to 2000.  2016 data from Department of Education. 
38  Bolton (2012) and Universities UK (2017).  Refers to full-time first degrees only. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 10 
 
10 
Raising levels of skills and training for workers is one way of limiting the costs of technological disruption.  
Providing them with access to finance or housing is another.  This support helped smooth the hit to incomes 
and lifestyles brought about by job displacement.  Starting in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, at the 
dawn of the Industrial Revolution, financial institutions began to emerge to provide financial support through 
bridging loans, often operating on collective or co-operative principles.  In the UK, the Friendly Societies Act 
of 1819 established today’s credit unions.  The Regulation of Benefit Building Societies Act followed in 1836. 
 Other sets of institution emerged to support workers in wider ways.  Trade unions grew in importance during 
the 18th century, as workers’ jobs were hollowed-out and their share of the income pie was consumed.  
Unions gained rights progressively during the 19th century, culminating in the foundation of the Trade Union 
Congress (TUC) in 1868.  The Trade Union Act of 1871 gave unions fully-fledged legal status.   
 Trade unions helped workers by campaigning to protect their rights, improve their conditions and boost their 
bargaining power in the workplace.  They also provided direct financial support to unemployed workers, 
through an early form of unemployment insurance, to smooth the income consequences for workers of job 
loss.  The National Insurance Act (1911) and the Beveridge Report (1942) subsequently made this a 
responsibility of the state and put it on a comprehensive footing. 
 
This was part of a wider-ranging shift in the role played by the state in society from the 17th century onwards.  
State spending as a proportion of national income rose from around 1% in the 16th century to around 12% in 
the 18th, 14% in the 19th and 33% in the 20th.39  It financed social infrastructure of various kinds supporting 
those facing greatest hardship.  This ranged from social housing to healthcare to income support.  Its effect 
was to cap the downside, recessionary risk to individuals, economies and societies.40 
 Another form of institutional support came from the creation of state-owned and/or central banks.  The Bank 
of England was set up at the end of the 17th century to manage the government’s debt and safeguard the 
nation’s currency and finances.  Over the course of subsequent centuries, this role has expanded.  Since at 
least the middle of the 19th century, the Bank of England has become one of the key institutional safeguards 
against recession risk and financial crisis.41  Indeed, today, those roles are defined in statute. 
 Non-state institutions have also played an important role in protecting those facing the adverse side-effects 
of economic change.  This included many religious, philanthropic and charitable organisations and citizen 
movements that emerged from the 18th century onwards, often as a direct response to hardship brought 
about by technological change.  These institutions offered, and many continue to offer, a combination of 
financial, housing, training and emotional support to those in need. 
                                                       
39  Clark (2009).  Figures refer to government command of output as a percentage of GNP in England. 
40  Other 19th century legal changes that supported individuals from adverse side-effects of economic change included recognition of 
limited liability companies and constraints on the ability of courts to sentence debtors to prison.  
41  Anson et al (2017), for example, discuss the emergence of the Bank of England as lender of last resort. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
 To mention one, the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) was founded in 1844, at around the time of 
Engels’ pause.  It was established explicitly to meet the housing and social needs of young men who had 
moved from rural towns and villages to find work in factories in the cities.   It soon grew into a regional, and in 
time global, network offering financial, housing, training and social support, to both men and women, 
cushioning the recessionary hit to societies.  And that remains its role today.  
 The story, then, is of a social infrastructure emerging to support workers and societies buffeted by 
technological change.  These institutions aimed either to reduce the length or to limit the costs of adjustment 
by displaced workers.  By enhancing skills and mitigating hardships, the incidence and cost of recessionary 
adjustment was reduced, for individuals and societies.  And this, ultimately, was the difference between the 
living standards escalator of the Golden Era and the travellator of its Malthusian predecessor.   
 
Joseph Schumpeter spoke powerfully about the forces of “creative destruction”.42  The lesson of history 
seems to be that we need both to “cultivate the creative” and to “disarm the destructive” if innovation is to 
translate into rising levels of social, human and infrastructural capital and, then, higher living standards.  It is 
only by establishing strong institutional roots that technological fruit can subsequently be harvested. 
 Future Growth and Future Institutions 
 From the past and present to the future.  What lies in store for future economic growth?  It is difficult to know 
with any confidence.  But if history is any guide, the story of growth will hinge on the interplay between the 
two “i”s – the disruptive forces of innovation on the one hand, the stabilising role of institutions on the other.   
 There is an active debate underway on the first of these – the likely future path of innovation.  Some have 
recently argued that the pace of innovation may be declining.43  The argument here is that many of the  
low-hanging fruit from the ICT revolution have already been picked.  Diminishing returns to R&D may have 
set in.  And other secular forces – including adverse demographics and rising inequality – may have acted as 
additional headwinds to growth.44  This view sometimes goes by the name secular stagnation.45 
 An alternative school of thought believes we may instead be on the cusp of a new great wave of innovation, 
a Fourth Industrial Revolution.46  This revolution in innovation will, it is said, be jet-propelled by a set of 
potentially new GPTs, among them AI, Big Data and robotics.  For technology optimists, the story is one of 
secular innovation, not stagnation.  And on this view, the potential gains in productivity and growth could be 
as large as any of the earlier industrial revolutions.47   
                                                       
42  Schumpeter (1942). 
43  Gordon (2012), Fernald (2014). 
44  Summers (2013) and Rachel and Smith (2015).  
45  Secular stagnation theory was originally proposed by Hansen (1938) in the aftermath of the Great Depression 
46  Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014) discuss ‘The Second Machine Age’. 
47  Brynjolfsson, Rock and Syverson (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
 Typically, the two sides of this argument are taken to be in a secular struggle:  the dark forces of secular 
stagnation pitted against the dynamic forces of secular innovation.  Yet in practice, both arguments have 
merit.  They are certainly not mutually incompatible.  It is perfectly possible to imagine a world of rapid 
innovation which nonetheless leaves large swathes of society in its slipstream.  More than that, recent 
research suggests this is a likely outcome of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 
 There are good conceptual grounds for thinking the displacement effects of the Fourth Industrial Revolution 
may be larger than ever-previously.  Every industrial revolution has resulted in a hollowing-out, typically of 
mid-skilled tasks.  Historically, that has meant largely manual, labour-intensive tasks.  Machine has replaced 
human in activities that are routine and repetitive. 
 The future could well be very different.  For example, the dawning of AI means that humans will no longer 
have the cognitive playing field to themselves.  Thinking or non-routine tasks may increasingly be taken up 
by machines.  They will be able to process more quickly, more cheaply and with fewer errors than their 
human counterpart, at least in some activities.  That could make the hollowing-out of human tasks, now 
cognitive as well as manual, far greater than ever before.48  
 A cottage industry has emerged over recent years manufacturing estimates of job loss that might result from 
this rise of the robots.  As an early contributor to this industry, I am at least partly to blame.49  The estimates 
of gross job loss span a pretty wide range, but lie anywhere between 10% and 50% of the global workforce, 
depending on whether it is jobs or tasks that are assumed to be displaced (Table 1 summarises). 
 Even at the lower end of this range, the societal impact would be significant.  At the upper end, they would 
be truly transformative.  If the truth lies in between, this could still make the jobs loss from the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution greater than its predecessors.  And if so, then the potential societal costs – such as 
rising wage inequality and threats to social cohesion – could also be as great as ever previously.50   
 Some of the potentially powerful effects of automation on jobs and wages are already apparent.  In the US, 
each industrial robot per thousand workers has been found to reduce the employment rate by  
0.2-0.3 percentage points and wages by 0.25-0.5%.51  In Europe, results are more mixed.52  Research 
suggests that technology may have been the largest single contributor to falling labour shares over the 
recent past.53 
 Whether these effects on jobs and pay will be temporary or permanent is far harder to judge.  At this stage of 
the technological cycle, the evidence is more likely to be picking up the shorter-term displacement effects of 
                                                      
48  Haldane (2015b) 
49  Haldane (2015b). 
50  Schwab (2017). 
51  Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). 
52  For example, Dauth, Findeisen, Südekum and Woßner (2017). 
53  IMF (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
 technology than their positive longer-term effects on pay, productivity and the demand for new goods and 
jobs.  It is the balance of these two effects, each large in gross terms, which will ultimately determine where 
unemployment will settle.54   
 No one could say with confidence today the long-run net effect will be.  What can be said with confidence is 
that the scale of gross displacement may be larger than ever-previously.  This means that, if technological 
unemployment is to be avoided, positive effects on productivity, goods and jobs will also have to be 
commensurately larger.  That has led some to argue that technological unemployment is more likely this time 
around.55  
 Even if it is avoided, the societal costs of transition could well be larger, in terms of rising wage inequality, a 
falling labour share and damage to social cohesion.  And if that recessionary impact of technological change 
on individuals and societies is sufficiently large, it could well call into question the merits of having pursued 
the creative course in the first place.  Or that, at least, is the lesson of history. 
 What experience since the Industrial Revolution has taught us is that this risk can be mitigated by an 
appropriate institutional response.  To be effective in curbing recession risk, that response should have as its 
objectives, first, speeding-up the process of reskilling by workers (“enabling”) and, second, cushioning the 
impact of new technologies on displaced companies and their workers (“insuring”).   
 In the face of mounting concern about the societal impact of the rise of the robots, quite a lot has been 
written recently on the sorts of new insurance mechanism that might be required to smooth this transition.56  
Here, I will focus on two areas where new “enabling institutions” could ease the transition for workers and 
companies.  Both draw on one of the greatest institutional inventions of the past millennium – universities. 
 In 1852, John (later Cardinal) Newman published The Idea of a University, a book that has since assumed 
classic status as a statement of the principles by which universities should be run and organised.  There are 
many themes to that text.  From these, I would highlight two which have particular relevance to the debate 
about the future role of universities within our societies. 
 First, Newman emphasised universities’ role in providing a liberal education for students, by which he meant 
access to a range of disciplines.  Rigid specialism was to be avoided.  The capacity to think was what 
mattered.  Second, the role of the university was to propagate ideas, rather than necessarily generate them.  
The capacity to diffuse knowledge, rather than generate it, was what mattered.   With a twist, both are 
relevant to the Idea of a University in the 21st century.  David Willetts, for example, emphasises the role of 
universities with just as much vigour as Newman in his recent book, A University Education.  
                                                       
54  See, for example, Acemoglu and Restropo (2018) for an organising theoretical framework. 
55  For example, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), Susskind and Susskind (2015). 
56  Martinelli (2017) and Standing (2017), for example, discuss universal basic income. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 14 
 
14 
(a) Human Capital 
 Let me start with human capital, workers’ skills and experience.  Two fundamental shifts in the jobs and skills 
market are likely in the period ahead.  The first is demographic.  A young person born today can be expected 
to live a 100-year life.57  That being the case, it is likely they will have a career of 60, perhaps 70, years.  
Given changes to the future world of work, multiple changes of career, not just job, are likely during a 
lifetime.  This has never before happened in human history. 
 The second secular shift is in the demand for skills.  In the past, this skill-shift has been uni-directional.  
There has been a secular rise in demand for cognitive skills and a corresponding decline in demand for 
technical skills involving routine and repetitive tasks.  That is why cognitive skills have attracted a rising wage 
premium (Chart 6).  Put differently, demand for skills of the “head” (cognitive) have dominated those of the 
“hands” (technical) and, to lesser extent, those of the “heart” (social) over the past 300 years. 
 In the century ahead, those skill-shifts may be about to go into reverse.  To see why, we need to ask 
ourselves what sets of humans’ skills robots are likely to find it hardest to reproduce and replace in the 
period ahead.  My reading of the runes is that there are three areas where humans are likely to preserve 
some comparative (if not always absolute) advantage over robots for the foreseeable future. 
 The first is cognitive tasks requiring creativity and intuition (“heads”).  These might be tasks or problems 
whose solutions require great logical leaps of imagination rather than step-by-step hill-climbing.  Existing 
machine learning algorithms allow huge numbers of solution permutations to be tried quickly and costlessly.  
This allows these hill-climbing algorithms to scale local peaks in record time.  
 Whether they scale global peaks is altogether another matter.  It is harder for machines to solve problems 
where it is difficult to define the solution steps in a logical sequence in advance.  Humans call solutions 
arrived at in this way “intuition”.  Despite rapid progress in deep learning techniques, it remains far-harder to 
devise search algorithms which solve problems requiring a leap into the unknown.58 
 Even in a world of super-intelligent machine learning, a demand is still likely to exist for people with the skills 
to programme, test and oversee these machines.  Some human oversight and judgemental overlay of these 
automated processes is still likely to be needed.  Machine design, improvement and oversight require, at 
least for the moment, humans and machines to operate in partnership.   
 The second area of prospective demand for humans skills is bespoke design and manufacture (“hands”).  
Routine technical tasks are relatively simple to automate and are already well on their way to disappearing.  
                                                      
57  Gratton and Scott (2016). 
58  AlphaGoZero is one such attempt.  It is an updated version of AlphaGo, a computer programme that plays the game ‘Go’, which itself 
was the first software to beat a human professional player in full match. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
 But the same is not true of non-routine technical tasks – for example, the creation of goods and services that 
are distinctive in their design, manufacture or delivery.   
 A rise in global wealth and income is likely to create an increasing demand for luxury goods and services of 
this type, whose characteristics are unique and supply constrained.  Indeed, this can be seen already in the 
rising demand and price of rare art and artefacts and independently-produced foodstuffs and beverages.   To 
meet this demand, Mark Carney has spoken about the re-emergence of a new artisan class.  If so, this would 
mark something of a return to our pre-industrial revolution future.59 
 The third, and perhaps the biggest potential growth area of all, is social skills (“hearts”).  That is, tasks 
requiring emotional intelligence (such as sympathy and empathy, relationship-building and negotiation skills, 
resilience and character) rather than cognitive intelligence alone.  These are skills a robot is likely to find it 
hard to replicate.  And even if they could replicate them, humans might still prefer humans to carry them out. 
 The future could see a world of work in which EQ rivals IQ for skill supremacy.  Professions involving high 
degrees of personal and social interaction – such as health, caring, education and leisure – could see 
demand rise.  Indeed, it is possible the balance between cognitive and social skills might alter significantly 
even among jobs which traditionally have been cognitively-intense. 
 Take medicine.  The doctor of the future might be valued far less for their clinical competence in diagnosing 
illness and prescribing solutions.  In a world of individual medical records and data-hungry diagnostic 
algorithms, much of the process of diagnosis and prescription might fall to machine rather than human.  
Indeed, the UK Prime Minister has recently suggested a strategy to deliver just that.60 
 But that is unlikely by itself to eradicate the need for doctors.  Patients are still likely to want to discuss their 
diagnosis and prescription.  And they will want this advice delivered personally and empathetically.  In 
surveys of patient satisfaction it is a doctor’s bedside manner, rather than clinical competence, that matters 
most.61  In future, that balance between social and clinical skills may shift further.  And, most likely, those 
social skills will be demanded from flesh-and-blood rather than robo-doctors. 
 If both the nature of a career and the skills it requires are changing, does this carry implications for 
educational institutions?  That seems likely.  For decades, the primary focus of these institutions has been on 
providing young people with cognitive skills.  That model has worked well in meeting the needs of the  
skill-shifts seen through each of the three industrial revolutions. 
                                                       
59  Carney (2016). 
60  PM speech on science and modern Industrial Strategy, available here:  https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-
science-and-modern-industrial-strategy-21-may-2018 
61  For example:  https://vanguardcommunications.net/doctor-online-review-study/ 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
16 
 
16 
 Whether that model will meet the needs of the Fourth Industrial Revolution seems more questionable, for two 
reasons.  First, in future it seems very likely young and old alike will be in equal educational need – to train, 
retrain and retrain again through their 60 or 70-year careers.  Second, the skills these people require for the 
future world of work will no longer be cognitive.  Rather, they are likely to be more evenly balanced between 
the cognitive, technical and social – head, hands and heart. 
 It has become rather trite to talk of the need for “life-long learning”.  But never has the need for such learning 
likely to have been greater given the longer span and greater volatility in future career paths.  Making these 
career transitions will itself call for a particular set of skills – personal resilience, problem-solving and 
flexibility.  As is now well-recognised, these character attributes are best instilled in early years.   
 If we now turn to our existing universities and colleges, at present these do not appear to be ideally sited to 
meeting either of these secular shifts in educational and training need.   By and large, they are not currently 
configured as centres for life-long learning.  And nor, in the main, are they institutions providing a balanced 
educational offering of cognitive, technical and social skills.   
 To meet the needs of the future world of work, that might need to change.  The importance of a broad-based, 
Newman-style, education is likely to be greater than ever.  This might criss-cross disciplinary boundaries, as 
one way of increasing people’s ability to make giant logical leaps.  Those skills will be social and technical 
every bit as much as cognitive, with head, hands and hearts sharing equal billing. 
 Put this way, the future university may need to be a very different creature than in the past.  It may need to 
cater for multiple entry points along the age distribution, rather than focussing on the young.  And it may 
need to cater for multiple entry points along the skills spectrum, rather than focussing on the cognitive.  It 
would, in short, need to be plural rather than singular – a “multiversity”, rather than a university.  
 (b) Intellectual Capital 
 Multiversities are about spreading future skills across the workforce.  Another educational challenge is how 
to spread future technologies across companies.  This is crucial if ideas and innovations are to become 
GPTs, boosting productivity, pay and living standards.  At present, evidence on the diffusion of new 
technologies across firms paints a rather mixed picture. 
 To understand why, it is useful to recognise that two forces are at work when a new idea is diffusing through 
the economy.  First, there is adoption (or extensive margin) – the time it takes a new technology to first reach 
a country or company.  Second, there is penetration (or intensive margin) – the extent to which this 
technology then reshapes processes and products within a company or country.62   
                                                       
62  Comin and Mestieri (2013a). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
 Take an example like computing technology or robotics.  The adoption lag would measure the time it took for 
a country or company to have their first computer or robot.  The penetration rate would measure how many 
computers or robots the country or company had and how intensively they were used.  You would expect 
both to be important to the process of technological diffusion and to boosting productivity.  And, empirically, 
both are typically found to be important to these processes.63 
 So what does the evidence suggest about these twin diffusion processes?  Looking at adoption lags of a 
range of different technologies across countries, the time-series evidence suggests these have fallen over 
time.  Average adoption lags have shrunk from over a century in the 18th century, to perhaps 40-80 years in 
the 19th century and 20-50 years in the 20th century.64  It seems possible these lags may have fallen further 
entering the 21st century, with cross-border flows of information and ideas having risen to new heights. 
 This is a good news story for productivity.  Indeed, one of the key benefits of globalisation over the past 
several decades is that the freer flow of goods and services, people and capital, ideas and information, has 
served as a vehicle for the transmission and diffusion of new technologies across borders.  Other things 
equal, this should have accelerated catch-up between countries operating at and inside the technological 
frontier.65 
 Other things, however, have not been equal.  Penetration rates of new technologies, once adopted, tell a 
different tale.  They suggest that, over time, there has been a divergence between frontier and non-frontier 
countries.  In other words, the intensity with which new technologies have been used has expanded more 
rapidly in frontier (especially Western) economies than in non-frontier (non-Western) ones.  This will have 
retarded catch-up between the two blocs.  It is a less encouraging story about the diffusion of innovation. 
 With the intensive and extensive margins of diffusion pushing in opposite directions, which has won out?  It 
seems to have been the forces of divergence:  slower rates of penetration of new technologies have more 
than counter-balanced faster rates of adoption across countries.  This has shown up in levels of productivity 
between frontier and non-frontier which, since around 1980, have if anything diverged.   
 Chart 7 illustrates that.  It compares levels of productivity across 44 countries since 1950 relative to the 
frontier country (the US).  Convergence prior to 1980 has given way to divergence subsequently.  That 
divergence in levels of productivity has, in turn, translated into divergence in levels of GDP per head across 
countries over the same period.66  The process of livings standards catch-up has stalled, possibly reversed.  
And the reason for that appears to be a slowing in rates of technological diffusion. 
                                                       
63  Comin and Mestieri (2013a). 
64  Comin and Mestieri (2013b). 
65  Baddeley (2006). 
66  Comin and Mestieri (2013b). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
18 
 
18 
 If there has been a slowing in rates of technological diffusion across countries, is the same potentially true 
within countries?  Evidence using micro-level company data within countries suggests it is.  Research by the 
OECD suggests there has been a slowing in rates of technological diffusion across firms in a number of 
countries.67  Put differently, there is a long and lengthening lower tail of companies failing to keep pace with 
the technologies used in frontier companies.  Their productivity performance has fallen ever-further behind. 
 This widening dispersion in the performance of upper and lower tail companies appears to be a particularly 
acute in the UK.  To a greater extent than elsewhere, it appears that the UK is a tale (or tail) of two 
companies.  At the upper end, the UK seems to have as many high-productivity companies as its main 
competitors (Chart 8).  That fits with the UK’s standing as a global innovation hub, with world-leading 
companies and universities and high indices of innovation by international standards.68 
 That is more than counter-balanced, however, by productivity performance in the lower tail.  This tail appears 
to be both materially longer and lower than the UK’s main international competitors (Chart 8).  Moreover, this 
lower tail has lengthened by more over the past decade than in those other countries.69  The already slower 
rates of technological diffusion in the UK, by international standards, have slowed further over the recent 
past. 
 These diffusion dynamics are important to productivity and living standards.  The wider dispersion and longer 
lower tail of companies helps explain the UK’s roughly 30% productivity gap with, say, France and Germany.  
And the widening dispersion in productivity performance between the upper and lower tails of companies 
helps explain the UK’s relatively poorer productivity performance than these countries over the past decade. 
 These diffusion dynamics are also consistent, or at least are not inconsistent, with the dawning of a Fourth 
Industrial Revolution.  This will have had the effect of shifting outward the technology and productivity frontier 
for pioneer firms.  There is clear evidence of that having happening.  Productivity among firms in the top 1% 
of the distribution grew, on average, by 8% per year over the ten years to 2014.  The most-productive 0.1% 
of firms exhibited 12% annual growth.70   
 As a point of comparison, the lower 99% tail of firms have experienced annual average productivity growth of 
less than 1% over the same period.  In other words, looking at a cross-section of UK companies, secular 
innovation (for the upper 1% or 0.1%) has co-existed with secular stagnation (for the remaining 99%).  The 
two are engaged, not so much in a secular struggle, as a secular stand-off.  Technological diffusion, and 
hence productivity growth, has been the casualty.  
                                                       
67  Andrews, Criscuolo and Gal (2016). 
68  Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (2017). 
69  Haldane (2017). 
70  Productivity figures refer to the non-financial business sector, but other sectors for which data are not available over the full ten-year 
period are also omitted. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
19 
 
19 
 There have been one or two recent studies which have been quoted as questioning the importance of this 
“long tail” issue for the UK.71  These pieces use the same data used here.  The problem arises not from the 
data but from the (mis)interpretation placed on them by these studies.  All of these studies show, very 
clearly, that the UK has a significant long tail problem.  Appropriately defined, they also demonstrate that this 
tail has lengthened during the course of the crisis.  
 To give one example, my Bank colleague Patrick Schneider recently published a blog post showing that a 
good chunk of the slowing of productivity growth since the crisis could be accounted for by workers in the top 
quartile of the productivity distribution.72  This is entirely consistent with the tale of two companies.  Indeed, it 
is evidence of the lower tail of companies with flat-lining productivity having lengthened during the crisis and 
by more in the UK than in competitor countries, consistent with the long tail hypothesis.  
 Why might the UK’s long tail, and hence technological diffusion, problem be more acute than elsewhere?  
Several reasons have been posited and probed.73  One interesting window on this issue is provided by 
looking at the intensive and extensive diffusion margins, to see if these provide clues.  Looking at a range of 
ICT technologies, the data suggests that high and relatively consistent levels of technological adoption, but 
low and variable rates of technological penetration, mimicking the international evidence.   
 Take internet access.  Almost all UK businesses – in excess of 90% – now have internet access.  But the UK 
ranks poorly compared to other OECD countries in terms of broadband penetration (Chart 9).74  That is true 
not only for standard broadband connectivity, but also for more advanced infrastructure such as optical fibre 
connections.  Those low rates of penetration largely reflect large/small firms differences.  As with other 
OECD countries, broadband usage by large firms is almost 100%.  But for smaller firms that falls to 93%. 
 Similarly, the share of UK businesses with a website is above the OECD average, at around 83%.  But that 
masks sizable large/small firm differences.  Almost 100% of UK large firms use websites, which has been the 
case for a decade.  Only two-thirds of small firms had a website in 2007.  One may have expected that gap 
to close rapidly.  Even today, however, only around four-fifths of small firms have a website. 
 E-commerce is another technology that has arguably been surprisingly slow to propagate through the UK 
economy.   In 2016, over 80% of UK individuals ordered goods or services online, more than any other 
OECD country.  One may have expected that to have been mirrored by a large share of UK businesses 
selling online.  In practice, the UK is only marginally above the OECD average.  And between 2009 and 
2016, the share of UK businesses making e-commerce sales increased by only 6pp, from 17% to 23%.  
                                                       
71  Swinney (2018), Giles (2018). 
72  Schneider (2018). 
73  Haldane (2017), Jacobs et al (2017), Swinney (2018), for instance.   
74  OECD data. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
20 
 
20 
 If the story, then, is one of diffusion dynamics being more sluggish in the UK than elsewhere, what might be 
done to improve matters?  Institutions, and within that universities, may well have a role to play.  At present, 
a relatively small sub-set of the UK’s universities operate as innovation hubs.  They conduct world-leading 
research using world-leading researchers.  And, in an increasing number of cases, they are doing so in 
tandem with businesses in spin-off science parks, acting as incubators of innovation. 
 What the UK may lack is some diffusion spokes to accompany these innovation hubs – spokes that could 
help spread new and existing technologies, new products and practices to the long and lengthening lower tail 
of companies.  To be successful, these spokes would need to be repositories of knowledge and expertise on 
technologies and their application to companies.  And, ideally, these repositories would have regional and 
sectoral reach to enable them to touch the long tail. 
 The UK’s existing university network would be one institutional solution to this spoke problem.  They have 
regional and sectoral reach.  They also have embodied expertise and knowledge.  By working in partnership 
with local businesses, they could serve as repositories of expertise on good company practices – in 
management, organisation, logistics, robotics, AI and the like.  A new set of business parks attached to these 
universities could serve, not so much as innovation incubators for new companies, but as diffusion clinics for 
existing ones. 
 This idea goes with the grain of the earlier proposal;  it would broaden the scope and purpose of universities.  
In future, these would develop a broader set of capitals – beyond human capital (in people) to include 
physical and intellectual capital (in firms).  And they would do so throughout the lifecycle of companies, not 
just in their early years.  As it happens, this would also be consistent with Newman’s original conception of 
universities as diffusion-engines, every bit as much as innovation-engines. 
 In Germany, a network of applied research institutes, run jointly by universities and industry, has been in 
place since 1949.  The Fraunhofer institutes now total 72.75  Their extensive project work means they can 
apply technological solutions quickly to a wide variety of firms.  Each year, they engage in between  
6,000-8,000 projects, large and small, with companies.  The Fraunhofer have been found to play a vital role 
as both innovation hubs and diffusion spokes, boosting productivity in the German economy.76   
 Since they first become operational in 2011, the UK now has around 10 Catapult centres, modelled on the 
German Fraunhofer.  These are smaller in number and scale than their German counterparts and have far 
less project experience.  Their focus, to date, has primarily been on acting as innovation hubs rather than 
diffusion spokes.  This means the UK does not currently have the diffusion infrastructure for its companies 
enjoyed by Germany.  This is not unimportant in explaining its longer lower tail of firms.  The UK’s university 
network, repurposed, could potentially provide that diffusion infrastructure.  
                                                      
75  https://www.fraunhofer.de/en/about-fraunhofer/profile-structure/facts-and-figures.html 
76  Comin, Trumbull and Yang (2011). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 21 
 
21 
Conclusion 
 The story of growth is a story with two “i”s – ideas and institutions.  The Fourth Industrial Revolution will 
expand the range of ideas, perhaps more than any of its predecessors.  It may also expand the range of 
workers who suffer its side-effects, perhaps more so than any of its predecessors.  In the past, new 
institutions have emerged to cushion this painful transition, limiting the recessionary hit to societies.  
Historically, doing so appears to have held the key to sustainable growth. 
 If this time’s technological transition is as great as any previously, securing sustainable growth will need new 
institutions to manage this transition and mitigate its societal side-effects.  I have speculated on one area 
where that next institutional wave might usefully break – universities like this one, as new centres of lifelong 
learning and technological diffusion.  In future, institutional innovation will be every bit as important as 
technological innovation if that gift of growth is to keep on giving.    
                     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
22 
 
22 
 References 
 
Acemoglu, D and Restrepo, P (2017), ‘Robots and Jobs:  Evidence from US Labor Markets’, NBER 
Working Paper, No. 23285. 
 
Acemoglu, D and Restrepo, P (2018), ‘Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work’, NBER Working Paper, 
No. 24196. 
 
Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J (2012), Why Nations Fail:  The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty, 
Penguin Random House. 
 
Allen, R (2005), ‘Capital Accumulation, Technological Change, and the Distribution of Income during the 
British Industrial Revolution’, University of Oxford Economic Series Working Papers, No. 239. 
 
Allen, R (2009), ‘Engels’ pause:  Technical change, capital accumulation, and inequality in the British 
industrial revolution’, Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 418-435. 
 
Andrews, D, Criscuolo, C and Gal, P (2016), ‘The Global Productivity Slowdown, Technology Divergence 
and Public Policy:  A Firm Level Perspective, Hutchins Center Working Papers. 
 
Anson, M, Bholat, D, King, M and Thomas, M (2017), ‘The Bank of England as lender of last resort:  new 
historical evidence from daily transactional data’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 691. 
 
Autor, D (2014), ‘Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the “Other 99 Percent”, Science, 23 
May 2014, pp. 843-851. 
 
Autor, D (2017), ‘Economic and political consequences of China’s rise for the United States:  lessons from 
the China shock’, IFS Annual Lecture 2017, 22 June 2017. 
 
Baddeley, M (2006), ‘Convergence or Divergence?  The Impacts of Globalisation on Growth and Inequality 
in Less Developed Countries’, International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 391-410. 
 
Bolton, P (2012), ‘Education:  Historical statistics’, House of Commons Library, Standard Note SN/SG/4252. 
 
Bresnahan, T and Trajtenberg, M (1995), ‘General purposes technologies ‘Engines of growth’?’, Journal of 
Econometrics, Vol. 65, No. 1, pp. 83-108. 
 
Broadberry, S and Wallis, J (2017), ‘Growing, Shrinking, and Long Run Economic Performance:  Historical 
Perspectives On Economic Development’, NBER Working Paper, No. 23343. 
 
Brynjolfsson, E and McAfee, A (2014), The Second Machine Age:  Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company. 
 
Brynjolfsson, E, Rock, D and Syverson, C (2017), ‘Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity 
Paradox:  A Clash of Expectations and Statistics’, NBER Working Paper, No. 24001. 
 
Bughin, J et al (2017), ‘Artificial Intelligence – The Next Digital Frontier?’, McKinsey Global Institute 
Discussion Paper. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
23 
 
23 
 Carney, M (2016), ‘The Spectre of Monetarism’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/the-spectre-of-monetarism 
 
Clark, G (2009), A Farewell to Alms:  A Brief Economic History of the World, Princeton University Press. 
 
Coase, R (1960), ‘The Problem of Social Cost’, The Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 1-44. 
 
Comin, D and Mestieri, M (2013a), ‘Technology Diffusion:  Measurement, Causes and Consequences’, 
NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19052. 
 
Comin, D and Mestieri, M (2013b), ‘If Technology Has Arrived Everywhere, Why Has Income Diverged?’, 
NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19010. 
 
Comin, D, Trumbull, G and Yang, K (2011), ‘Fraunhofer:  Innovation in Germany’, Harvard Business 
School, Case 9-711-022, March 2011.  Revised 2012. 
 
Coyle, D (2014), GDP:  A Brief by Affectionate History, Princeton University Press. 
 
Dauth, W, Findeisen, S, Südekum, J and Woßner, N (2017), ‘Trade and Manufacturing Jobs in Germany’, 
Düsseldorf Institution for Competition Economics Discussion Paper, No. 242. 
 
De Long, J B (1998), ‘Estimates of World GDP, One Million B.C. – Present’, available online. 
 
Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (2017), ‘Industrial Strategy:  building a Britain fit 
for the future’, UK Government Policy Paper. 
 
Fernald, J (2014), ‘Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great Recession’, NBER 
Working Paper, No. 20248. 
 
Flohr, M (2016), ‘Innovation and Society in the Roman World’, Oxford Handbooks Online. 
 
Giles, C (2018), ‘UK’s biggest companies are productivity slackers’, Financial Times. 
 
Gordon, R (2012), ‘Is U.S. Economic Growth Over?  Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds’, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 18315. 
 
Gratton, L and Scott, A (2016), The 100-Year Life:  Living and working in an age of longevity, Bloomsbury 
Information Ltd. 
 
Haldane, A (2015a), ‘Growing, Fast and Slow’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2015/growing-fast-and-slow 
 
Haldane, A (2015b), ‘Labour’s Share’, speech available at  
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2015/labours-share 
 
Haldane, A (2017), ‘Productivity puzzles’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/productivity-puzzles 
 
Haldane, A (2018), ‘Will Big Data Keeps Its Promise?’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/andy-haldane-centre-for-data-analytics-for-finance-and-
macro 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
24 
 
24 
  
Hansen, A (1938), Full Recovery or Stagnation?,  W. W. Norton. 
 
IMF (2017), ‘Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Income Shares’, World Economic Outlook, April 
2017. 
 
Iyer, S, Kitson, M and Toh, B (2005), ‘Social Capital, Economic Growth and Regional Development’, 
Regional Studies, Vol. 39.8, pp. 1015-1040. 
 
Jacobs, M, Hatfield, I, King, L, Raikes, L and Stirling, A (2017), ‘Industrial Strategy:  Steering structural 
change in the UK economy’, IPPR Commission on Economic Justice. 
 
Katz, L and Margo, R (2013), ‘Technical Change and the Relative Demand for Skilled Labor:  The United 
States in Historical Perspective’, NBER Working Paper, No. 18752. 
 
Levine, R and Renelt, D (1992), ‘A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions’, American 
Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, pp. 942-963. 
 
Malthus, T (1798), An Essay on the Principle of Population, J. Johnson. 
 
Martinelli, L (2017), ‘Assessing the Case for a Universal Basic Income in the UK’, University of Bath IPR 
Policy Brief. 
 
Mill, J S (1848), Principles of Political Economy, John W. Parker. 
 
Mincer, J (1984), ‘Human capital and economic growth’, Economics of Education Review, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 
195-205. 
 
Mokyr, J (2011), The Enlightened Economy:  Britain and the Industrial Revolution, 1700-1850, Penguin. 
 
North, D (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge University Press. 
 
North, D (1991), ‘Institutions’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 97-112. 
 
Pinker, S (2018), Enlightenment Now:  The Case for Reason, Science, Humanism, and Progress, Allen 
Lane. 
 
Romer, P (1990), ‘Endogenous Technological Change’, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 5, Part 2, 
pp. S71-S102. 
 
Productivity Leadership Growth (2017), ‘How good is your business really?  Raising our ambitions for 
business performance’, available at bethebusiness.com 
 
Rachel, L and Smith, T (2015), ‘Secular drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England Staff 
Working Paper, No. 571. 
 
Rosling, H (2018), Factfulness:  Ten Reasons We’re Wrong About the World and Why Things Are Better 
Than You Think, Sceptre. 
 
Schneider, P (2018), ‘The UK’s productivity puzzle is in the top tail of the distribution’, Bank Underground. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
25 
 
25 
 Schumpeter, J (1942), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Harper & Brothers. 
 
Schwab, K (2017), The Fourth Industrial Revolution, Portfolio Penguin. 
 
Solow, R (1956), ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
Vol. 70, No. 1, pp. 65-94. 
 
Standing, G (2017), Basic Income:  And How We Can Make It Happen, Pelican. 
 
Stiglitz, J, Sen, A and Fitoussi, J-P (2009), Report by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic 
Performance and Social Progress. 
 
Smith, A (1776), The Wealth of Nations, W. Strahan and T. Cadell. 
 
Summers, L (2013), speech at IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer. 
 
Susskind, R and Susskind, D (2015), The Future of the Professions:  How Technology Will Transform the 
Work of Human Experts, Oxford University Press. 
 
Swinney, P (2018), ‘The wrong tail’, Centre for Cities. 
 
Universities UK (2017), ‘Patterns and Trends In UK Higher Education’, Universities UK. 
 
Van Reenen, J, Bloom, N, Draca, M, Kretschmer, T, Sadun, R, Overman, H and Schankerman, M 
(2010), ‘The Economic Impact of ICT’, SMART N. 2007/0020.  
 
Willetts, D (2017), A University Education, Oxford University Press. 
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
26 
 
26 
 Annex 
Chart 1:  World GDP per head since 1000 AD 
1990 International Dollars  
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
Year 
Sources:  De Long (1998). 
 Chart 2:  UK productivity, real wages and GDP per head 
Index, 1760 = 100 
1760
1810
1860
1910
1960
2010
Productivity
Real wages
GDP per head
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
  Sources: Bank of England, ‘A millennium of macroeconomic data’, available online. 
Notes:  Labour productivity per head uses GDP at factor cost.  Real wages defined as nominal wage divided by GDP deflator at factor 
cost.   
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
27 
 
27 
 Chart 3:  Literacy rates in Western Europe 
Sources:  OurWorldInData.org, based on Buringh and Van Zanden (2009) and Broadberry and O’Rourke (2010). 
  Chart 4:  Long-run UK GDP growth  
Sources:  Broadberry and Wallis (2017) and Bank calculations. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  28 
 
28 
Chart 5:  Expanding and contracting periods in UK GDP growth   
Sources:  Broadberry and Wallis (2017) and Bank calculations. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
29 
 
29 
 Table 1:   Estimates for Job Destruction and Creation from Automation (MIT (2018)) 
 When 
Where 
Jobs 
Destroyed 
Jobs Created 
Predictor 
2016 
Worldwide 
 900,000 to 1,500,000 
Metra Martech  
2018 
US jobs 
13,852,530 
3,078,340 
Forrester 
2020 
Worldwide 
 1,000,000-2,000,000 
Metra Martech 
2020 
Worldwide 
1,800,000 
2,300,000 
Gartner 
2020 
Sampling of 
15 countries 
7,100,000 
2,000,000 
World Economic Forum (WEF) 
2021 
Worldwide 
 1,900,000-3,500,000 
The International Federation of Robotics 
2021 
US jobs 
9,108,900 
2022 
Worldwide 
1,000,000,000 
  Forrester 
Thomas Frey 
2025 
US jobs 
24,186,240 
13,604,760 
Forrester 
2025 
US jobs 
3,400,000 
 ScienceAlert 
2027 
US jobs 
24,700,000 
14,900,000 
Forrester 
2030 
Worldwide 
2,000,000,000 
 Thomas Frey 
2030 
Worldwide 
400,000,000-
800,000,000 
555,000,000- 
890,000,000 
McKinsey 
2030 
US jobs 
58,164,320 
No Date 
US jobs 
13,594,320 
No Date 
UK jobs 
13,700,000 
   PWC 
OECD 
IPPR 
 
Source:  MIT Technology Review (2018) - https://www.technologyreview.com/s/610005/every-study-we-could-find-on-what-automation-
will-do-to-jobs-in-one-chart/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
30 
 
30 
 Chart 6:  Wage premium for cognitive skills 
Real wage level of full time U.S. male workers relative to 1963 
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Some College
Bachelor's Degree
Greater than Bachelor's Degree
1963
1968
1973
1978
1983
1988
1993
1998
2003
2008
Sources: Autor (2014). 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 7:  Productivity levels relative to the US 
Per cent 
AEs
EMEs
World
1950
1958
1966
1974
1982
1990
1998
2006
2014
Sources:  Penn World Tables 9.0 and Bank calculations. 
 
Notes:  Median TFP level at current PPPs; USA = 1 
 
 
 
 
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
 100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
31 
 
31 
 Chart 8:  UK and Germany firm-level productivity (Productivity Leadership Group (2017)) 
Sources:  McKinsey & Company Inc. analysis of Orbis (2013) data, as shown in Productivity Leadership Group (2017). 
Available at:  https://www.bethebusiness.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/how-good-is-your-business-really.pdf 
 
 
 
Chart 9:  Enterprises’ broadband connectivity by firm size in 2016 for OECD countries 
All enterprises
10-49 employees
50-249 employees
250+ employees
Sources: OECD 
 
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  Per cent 
100
90
80
70
60
50
 32 
 
32 
