Mario Draghi: The benefits of European supervision
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Autorité de contrôle
prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR) Conference on Financial Supervision, Paris, 18 September
2018.
 1
It has long been understood that deeper financial integration would lead to a better functioning of
Economic and Monetary Union.  And when the euro was first introduced there were encouraging
signs that this integration was taking place. Price-based indicators of financial integration showed
a pronounced increase, and the standard deviation of interbank lending rates across the euro
area  fell  to  close  to  zero.   Quantity-based  measures  of  financial  integration  only  adjusted
sluggishly,  as  crucial  parts  of  the  banking  sector,  such  as  retail  banking,  remained  mainly
national.
2
Financial integration proved to be shallow and reversible. At the outbreak of the crisis, interbank
markets fragmented along national lines and threatened the integrity of the single currency, laying
bare the existing fault lines in our Monetary Union.
One of these fault lines was the fragmented system of national supervision and resolution. The
tendency  of  supervisors  to  promote  and  defend  national  champions  often  prevailed  over  the
Union’s pursuit of efficiency and stability. Measures deployed during the crisis, such as liquidity
ring-fencing may have focused on securing domestic financial stability, but they neglected the
adverse external effects on other countries. Domestic policies thus tended to reinforce negative
spillovers and exacerbate systemic risk across the euro area.
The Banking Union addresses these shortcomings by pooling national financial policies at the EU
level.  It  has  two  main  objectives:  ensuring  that  banks  are  sound;  and  encouraging  deeper
3
integration in the banking sector.
European Supervision makes a significant contribution to these objectives. Stronger and uniform
supervision leads to resilient banks and provides a more coherent policy framework for cross-
border banking.
The benefits of European supervision
European  supervision  brings  three  important  benefits  when  compared  with  the  fragmented
system of national supervision.
First, European supervision harmonises supervisory practices. It has merged the 19 national
approaches  into  one  single  supervisory  method.  The  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation
Process  allows  supervisors  to  treat  all  banks  equally  by  measuring  risks  against  the  same
yardstick and setting capital requirements accordingly.
Risk assessments have become more harmonised and systematic, significantly improving the
consistency  with  which  capital  add-ons  are  applied  across  banks.  The  correlation  between
banks’ risk profiles and capital requirements increased to 82% in 2017, from just 40% in 2014. In
other  words,  banks  with  equivalent  risk  profiles  in  the  euro  area  now  face  similar  capital
requirements.
Second,  European  supervision  adopts a  system-wide  perspective  when  monitoring  and
mitigating risks. Supervisors can draw on a comprehensive dataset and information on banks
across  the  euro  area.  On  this  basis,  experienced  staff  from  28  different  countries  can  make
comparisons, spot common weaknesses and monitor potential channels of contagion.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  has  two  benefits.  It  helps  address  systemic  risks,  as  better  analysis  of  cross-border
linkages  and  spillovers  improves  the  coherence  of  macro-prudential  policies  set  by  national
authorities  and  the  ECB,  which  contributes  to  reducing  excessive  risks  and  cross-border
4
externalities.
And it supports the identification of bank-specific risks. For example, supervisors have developed
analytical  tools  to  carry  out  detailed,  comparative  assessments  of  banks’  business  models.
Comparisons within peer groups have helped identify bank-specific issues early on, which are
then addressed with each bank individually.
The third benefit of European supervision is that it reduces fragmentation in the supervisory
framework.  In  the  past,  broad  discretion  in  applying  EU  rules  led  to  significant  national
differences  in  key  prudential  aspects,  such  as  the  definition  of  funds,  or  capital  and  liquidity
requirements. The resulting divergences in the capital strength of banks undermined confidence
in their soundness.
European supervisors identified 175 options and discretions (O&Ds) available under EU law, 130
of which are available to national supervisors and are now applied in a uniform way across the
euro  area.  More  harmonised  rules  have  helped  re-build  confidence  in  banks  and  reduce
compliance costs for cross-border groups.
However, the remaining O&Ds exercised by national legislation still stand in the way of a level
playing field for banks, and so further legislative action is still needed.
Similarly,  the  decision  as  to  whether  a  bank  should  be  resolved  or  liquidated  is  made  more
difficult by different insolvency rules. As a result, some harmonisation of national insolvency rules
is needed to make European resolution more effective.
Overall,  these  three  qualitative  benefits  of  European  supervision  have  been  instrumental  in
making banks more resilient.
Substantial risk reduction has also taken place. The CET 1 ratio of banks supervised by the ECB
increased by 300 basis points between the end of 2014 and the end of 2017 and funding and
liquidity are now more stable. In the same period, banks raised their leverage ratios from 4.9% to
5.8%, catching up with their US peers.
Banks’  improved  strength  helps  them  withstand  potential  shocks.  Recent  ECB  analysis,  as
published in the ECB’s latest Financial Stability Review, has shown that the majority of banks
would maintain average capital buffers over 10% in the event of an adverse shock such as a
5
sharp repricing of risk premia or a strong economic slowdown.
Improving European supervision to foster banking integration
Despite having a single supervisor and more harmonised rules, the banking market in Europe
remains fragmented. 86% of euro area bank lending to firms and households was domestic in
2017. And cross-border consolidation, which is one way to increase cross-border lending, has
6
recently reached historic lows.
More efforts are needed if we want to reap the benefits of an integrated market that helps share
risks through the private sector and improve macroeconomic stability in the monetary union.
In the United States for example, retail banking integration has led to a significant increase in the
number of multi-state banks. That was not always the case. For example, following the oil price
collapse in the mid-1980s, almost every bank in Texas failed, creating a state-wide credit crunch.
One  reason  was  that  that  banks  were  not  allowed  to  operate  across  states,  so  the  balance
7
sheets of local banks were completely concentrated on their home state.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a more integrated US banking sector, banks have geographically more diversified loan-books
and deposit bases. By offsetting losses made in crisis-hit states with gains in other states, US
8
banks are more resilient to local shocks and can keep their lending stable.
As a result, US credit markets smooth out a quarter of local shocks, which is significant given
banks’ much smaller role in financing the economy compared to capital markets. In the euro area
by  contrast,  risk-sharing  through  credit  markets  is  much  less  advanced,  despite  the
predominantly  bank-based  nature  of  the  economy.  Only  12%  of  local  shocks  are  smoothed
through  credit  markets.   Research  finds  that  during  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  Italian  banks
10
tightened their lending and increased interest rates more than foreign banks operating in Italy. 
9
So what are the obstacles standing in the way?
Of course, there are fundamental legal, judicial and cultural differences between countries, which
hinder cross-border integration. But there are also two important obstacles that exist in the area
of supervision.
11
The first is related to legacy assets, which have weighed on cross-border lending over the past
years.
 Banks with high levels of legacy assets have reduced their cross-border exposures in
an  effort  to  shore  up  impaired  balance  sheets.  They  have  also  kept  their  lending  low  as  their
ability  to  build  up  capital  is  limited.  Similarly,  low  profitability  and  uncertainty  regarding  the
valuation of legacy assets reduce the appeal of cross-border M&As, as banks still expect larger
gains from internal restructuring and cost cutting.
Significant progress has been made in reducing legacy assets, which include non-performing
loans (NPLs) and level 2 and 3 exposures.
Over  the  past  three  years,  the  NPL  stock  of  significant  banks  decreased  by  one  third.
12
  Targeted  supervisory  action  helped  banks  to  draw  up  ambitious  reduction  plans  and
governance structures for the disposal of NPLs.
 And more uniform supervisory standards and
stricter classifications make it less likely that new NPLs will emerge.
13
14
But while NPLs are washing out as the economy strengthens, supported by our accommodative
monetary  policy,  the  NPL  ratios  of  euro  area  banks  are  still  higher  than  those  of  US  banks.
Further efforts are needed from banks, supervisors and regulators to reduce the remaining stock
of NPLs, especially in those countries where the NPL ratio remains high.
European supervision also needs to continue and extend its work on the valuation of level 2 and 3
exposures.
The share of Level 1, 2 and 3 assets on the balance sheets of significant institutions has come
down from above 30% to 23% of significant institutions’ total assets. Level 3 assets decreased
from €188 billion to €132 billion, constituting less than 1% of significant institutions’ total assets.
Although  the  average  share  of  Level  3  assets  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  largest  euro  area
banks is now lower than that of US banks, some banks in the euro area still have high shares of
Level 3 assets, if compared with international competitors, hampering further bank consolidation
in the EU.
It is crucial that banks have sound and effective valuation and risk management frameworks in
place.  Therefore,  sustained  supervisory  efforts  are  needed  to  identify  and  address  potential
problems  with  banks’  valuation  and  classification  methods.
  Dedicated  inspections  were
performed  with  the  objective  of  evaluating  the  soundness  and  effectiveness  of  the  valuation
framework, the controls over the pricing models used to produce fair values, and the adequacy of
the classification of positions measured at fair value. Supervisory efforts remain high with on-site
inspections, deep dives and benchmarking exercises already planned or ongoing.
15
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second obstacle to cross-border integration lies within the prudential framework.
At  present,  regulatory  capital  cannot  be  freely  allocated  across  subsidiaries  of  cross-border
groups.  Banks  are  required  to  comply  with  capital  requirements  on  a  standalone  basis  and
waivers can only be applied to domestic banking groups.
Similarly, while the free movement of liquidity across borders is made possible by cross-border
waivers,  the  practical  application  of  these  waivers  is  hampered  by  the  remaining  national
prerogatives in the regulatory framework which allow national authorities to apply large exposure
limits on intragroup lending and ring-fence liquidity.
For example, the requirement to comply with the liquidity coverage ratio at individual level locks
up liquidity in cross-border subsidiaries of G-SIBs of up to €130bn. Some of this liquidity could
potentially be freely allocated if impediments, such as large exposure limits on intragroup lending,
were  removed  and  euro  area  waivers  granted.
  The  effects  may  be  significant,  given  the
importance of intra group lending in the euro area, which in 2017 accounted for 70% of cross-
border lending.
16
The  free  movement  of  funds  is  a  precondition  for  a  single  banking  market.  With  the
establishment  of  European  supervision,  there  is  less  reason  to  restrict  this  free  movement.
European  supervision  is  able  to  identify  and  address  financial  stability  risks  posed  by  cross
border groups
17
, reducing the need for national safeguards. And this is all the more true as national safety nets
for resolution and deposit protection are gradually being shifted to the EU level.
Removing the obstacles to  the  free  movement  of  funds  could  improve  financial  integration  by
allowing banks to allocate resources efficiently across countries. US banks, for instance, rely on
intra-group funding to respond to local shocks and manage the credit growth of their subsidiaries,
18
allowing them to keep their lending and income streams more stable to economic fluctuations.
Other regulatory factors are also hampering cross-border integration. Currently, the international
regulatory framework does not treat the euro area as a single jurisdiction for the purposes of
calculating capital surcharges (G-SIB buffers). In other words, intra-euro area cross-border loans
from euro area banks are considered foreign loans, leading to higher systemic risk scores and
capital requirements relative to their international peers. Against this background, it is crucial that
reforms to complete the banking union do not lose steam, so that the euro area can be treated
as a single jurisdiction in the international G-SIB framework.
Conclusion
As much as the global financial crisis has exposed weaknesses in the regulation and supervision
of  banks  around  the  world,  in  the  EU  such  weaknesses  were  exacerbated  by  fragmentation.
From the early stages of the crisis the banking sector fragmented along national lines, driven by
diverging  macroeconomic  conditions  in  different  countries  and  by  governments’  diverging
responses in dealing with failing banks. Differently from the US, common resolution frameworks
backstopped  by  public  money  were  absent.  Governments  that  could  do  so,  because  of  their
sound budgets, massively bailed out their failed banks. An opportunity for bank consolidation was
lost, but their economies were spared a credit crisis after a financial crisis.
In  other  countries  where  bailouts  were  not  possible  due  to  constrained  finances  or  new
regulatory restrictions introduced by the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), the
crisis  lasted  much  longer.  European  supervision  and  the  European  framework  for  managing
bank  failures,  of  which  the  BRRD  is  an  important  part,  have  made  such  a  cause  of
fragmentation, namely the different countries’ responses to banking crises less likely today. But
more needs to be done.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Progress in completing the Banking Union – namely, first harmonising options and discretions,
completing  resolution,  and  laying  the  groundwork  for  the  creation  of  an  effective  deposit
insurance – is essential and I am confident that significant steps in this direction will soon be
taken.
But  let’s  keep  in  mind  that  fragmentation  starts  with  the  decision  by  banks  not  to  operate  in
regions where the risk-return of lending is judged to be insufficient to remunerate their invested
capital 
Ultimately,  what  ensures  a  steady  flow  of  bank  lending  to  the  economy,  even  in  times  of
unforeseen stress or disruption, is a growth-friendly environment, which can only be assured by
the appropriate government policies.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Report to the Council and the Commission on the realisation by stages of Economic and Monetary Union in the
Community  (Werner  Report),  1970;  Report  on  economic  and  monetary  union  in  the  European  Community
(Delors Report), 1989; Padoa-Schioppa T. (1999), “EMU and Banking Supervision”, International Finance, Vol. 2,
No 2, pp. 295–308
ECB (2008), Financial Integration in Europe, April.
See: About the Single Supervisory Mechanism
European Central Bank (2016), “Chapter 1 – Topical issue: The ECB’s macroprudential policy framework”,
Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 1.
The 10% average requirement refers to the average total capital “supervisory demand” without systemic buffers
(i.e. Pillar 1, Pillar 2 and capital conservation buffer). For further information, see: ECB (2018), Financial Stability
Review, May.
ECB (2017), Financial integration in Europe, May.
See Hane, G. (1998), “The Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s: Summary and Implications”, in FDIC
Banking Review, Vol. 11, No 1.
Retail banking integration significantly weakened the relationship between local capital and local credit supply:
See Krozner, R. and Strahan, P. (2014), “Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes,
Consequences,  and  Implications  for  the  Future",  in  Economic  Regulation  and  Its  Reform:  What  Have  We
Learned?, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Furceri,  D.  and  Zdzienicka, A.  (2015),“The  Euro Area  Crisis:  Need  for  a  Supranational  Fiscal  Risk  Sharing
Mechanism?”, Open Economies Review, Vol. 26, No 4, pp. 683–710; Nikolov, P. (2016), “Cross-border risk
sharing after asymmetric shocks: evidence from the euro area and the United States”, Quarterly Report on the
Euro Area, Vol. 15, No 2.
Bofondi, M., Carpinelli, L., and Sette, E., “Credit supply during a sovereign debt crisis”, Banca d’Italia Working
Papers, No 909, April 2013.
Schmitz, M. and Tirpák, M. (2017), “Cross-border banking in the euro area since the crisis: what is driving the
great retrenchment?”, Financial Stability Review, November, pp. 145–157.
From 7.5% in early 2015 to 4.8% in early 2018
ECB (2017), Guidance to banks on non-performing loans, March.
ECB  (2017), Addendum  to  the  ECB  Guidance  to  banks  on  non-performing  loans:  Prudential  provisioning
backstop for non-performing exposures, October.
Dedicated inspections were performed with the objective of evaluating the soundness and effectiveness of the
valuation framework, the controls over the pricing models used to produce fair values, and the adequacy of the
classification of positions measured at fair value. Supervisory efforts remain high with on-site inspections, deep
dives and benchmarking exercises already planned or ongoing.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
16
17
18
ECB (2018), Financial integration in Europe, May.
For  example,  a  number  of  safeguards  are  introduced  when  applying  cross-border  liquidity  waivers  (e.g.
minimum requirements on high quality liquid asset holdings for significant subsidiaries) in order to mitigate
concerns in host countries. These safeguards may be reassessed in light of supervisory experience and the
ongoing development of institutional mechanisms within the banking union, to ensure the safety and freedom of
cross-border intragroup flows.
Cetorelli, N. and Goldberg, L. (2011), “Liquidity Management of U.S. Global Banks: Internal Capital Markets in
the Great Recession”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 511, August; De Haas, R. and Van
Lelyveld, I. (2008), “Internal capital markets and lending by multinational bank subsidiaries”, Working Paper
Series, No 105, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, January; Reinhardt, D. and Riddiough, S.
J. (2015), “The Two Faces of Cross-Border Banking Flows”, Bank for International Settlements, December
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
