Mojmír Hampl: Central bank independence in practice - the case of
the Czech Republic
Speaking points by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Annual
Research Conference of the Central Bank of Ukraine, Kiev, 1 June 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Before  I  begin  my  talk  in  earnest,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  this
inspiring event. It is an honor to participate in such a distinguished panel. And it is a particular
pleasure for me to visit Kiev, one of the great historical pivots of Europe and  also  a  city  with
immense economic potential. The latter, I believe, can be said about Ukraine in general.
The  topic  of  this  panel  and  the  entire  conference  is  monetary-fiscal  interactions.  This  is  an
important issue, and I am convinced that a good working relationship between the central bank
and  the  government  is  imperative  for  the  proper  counter-cyclicality  of  economic  policy.  My
intention  today,  however,  is  to  offer  a  related  but  cautionary  tale.  I  will  talk  about  central  bank
independence, with an emphasis on the experience of my own country.
Few  economists  nowadays  doubt  the  importance  of  central  bank  independence  for  achieving
price stability. For example, the latest meta-analysis of this research question summarizes 300
empirical  estimates  from  dozens  of  studies  and  finds  strong  evidence  that  independence  is
crucial  for  delivering  low  inflation  (Iwasaki  and  Uegaki,  2017).  This  finding  holds  for  both
developed and emerging economies, as the authors clearly show.
But many economists in this stream of literature, most prominently Alex Cukierman, stress that it
is not enough to have independence enshrined in the central bank’s charter. Legal independence
is a necessary condition for actual independence, but not a sufficient one. I would say that actual
independence  is  a  state  of  mind  of  central  bankers.  This  state  of  mind,  then,  determines  the
outcome of monetary policy and is imperative for providing price stability.
So how can actual independence differ from legal independence? The key condition for actual
independence is the de facto impossibility to dismiss central bank board members. In fact, the
charters of almost all central banks around the world (including the National Bank of Ukraine and
the Czech National Bank) allow for board members to be dismissed under some very specific
conditions. But the applicability of these conditions varies widely, depending on custom and –
crucially, I believe – the central bank’s standing in society.
This observation brings me to an important point I want to make. Even if a central bank is actually
independent from the government, it cannot over the long term act in direct contradiction to the
preferences  of  society.  For  example,  if  the  population  is  not  averse  to  modest  inflation,  the
central  bank  will  have  a  hard  time  imposing  an  ultra-low-inflation  environment,  with  all  the
associated costs and benefits, over the long run.
The experience of the Czech National Bank, perhaps, serves as a case in point, although in the
opposite direction. In general, Czechs despise inflation, and the central bank needs to explain
repeatedly why it uses the worldwide standard of a 2% inflation target instead of targeting literal
stability of the CPI level, or 0% inflation. Already many decades before the era of independent
monetary  policy,  in  the  early  1920s,  Czechoslovakia  pursued  a  strategy  of  deliberately
strengthening the national currency. This policy resulted in deep deflation, in strong contrast to
the hyperinflations seen at that time in neighboring countries (Austria, Germany, Hungary, and
Poland; see Sargent, 1982).
So, it comes as no surprise that the Czech National Bank is rarely applauded for cutting interest
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates,  while  hikes  are  often  welcomed  by  a  majority  of  the  population.  An  important  public-
relations  test  arose  for  the  Bank  in  2013,  when  interest  rate  cuts  proved  insufficient  to  return
inflation to the target. Inspired partly by one distinguished member of today’s panel, the Czech
National Bank adopted an exchange rate commitment to keep the currency from appreciating.
The commitment was terminated a year ago. Since then, studies by the IMF and academics alike
have  pointed  to  large  benefits  of  the  policy  in  terms  of  reducing  unemployment,  lifting  GDP
growth, and preventing deflation. Within two years after the commitment’s enactment, the Czech
Republic – at least in part thanks to the commitment – turned from a de facto sick man of Europe
to one of the fastest-growing economies with the lowest unemployment rate in the entire EU.
When I attend conferences and seminars at other central banks, my foreign colleagues often
assume that such a policy must have been tremendously popular. Indeed, the economics behind
it is straightforward, and the resulting boost to peoples’ wages is hard to deny. In spite of that, the
exchange rate commitment caused the sharpest ever deterioration of public confidence in the
Czech  National  Bank:  from  around  75%  to  around  50%.  Confidence  only  recovered  after  the
commitment was terminated. These were precisely the times when its hard-won independence
had to be put to work.
Thus, central bank independence built into the country’s law code is a treasure without which
price  stability  is  rarely  possible.  But  equally  important  is  the  perception  of  independence  by
central  bankers  themselves.  This  perception,  in  turn,  depends  on  the  compatibility  of  the
monetary policy regime with the preferences of the population. It is often overlooked, however,
that central bankers have an impact on these preferences. Rhetoric matters a great deal, and
communication is now one of the most potent tools of monetary and other policy.
True, enhancing financial literacy and altering public preferences in the process is a thankless,
tiresome, long-term job, one that is often only appreciated years or even decades later. The man
responsible for instilling a low-inflation mentality in Czechs, Alois Rašín, was shot dead in 1923
by a young communist. At that time, Rašín’s policies were very unpopular among some groups
of the population. But nowadays his legacy underpins the thinking of Czechs about inflation, for
better or worse, and through that, the stability of the Czech currency.
Thank you for your attention.
References:
Ichiro  Iwasaki  &  Akira  Uegaki,  2017.  “Central  Bank  Independence  and  Inflation  in  Transition
Economies: A Comparative Meta-Analysis with Developed and Developing Economies,” Eastern
European Economics vol. 55(3), pages 197–235.
Thomas  J.  Sargent,  1982.  “The  Ends  of  Four  Big  Inflations,”  NBER  Chapters,  in:  Inflation:
Causes and Effects, pages 41–98, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
