Yannis Stournaras: Greece - achievements, challenges, risks and a
strategy for the future
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Delphi  Economic
Forum, Athens, 3 March 2018.
 The  progress  made  since  the  beginning  of  the  debt  crisis  in  2009  is  remarkable  and
unprecedented by international standards. More specifically, Greece achieved: 
The full elimination of the twin deficits, i.e. the very high fiscal deficit and the large current
account deficit. 
The  full  recouping  of  competitiveness  in  terms  of  labour  costs  and  its  considerable
improvement in terms of prices. It is worth noting that this was achieved through a painful
process  of  internal  devaluation,  involving  significant  reductions  in  nominal  wages  and
salaries, mainly in the private sector. 
At the same time, a bold reform, privatisation and economic modernisation programme is
being implemented in areas such as the labour and product markets, the healthcare and
social  security  systems,  the  fiscal  framework,  the  tax  system  and  public  administration.
(However,  there  has  been  considerable  backtracking,  according  to  World  Bank  indices,
regarding the rule of law, the quality of governance and institutions.) 
As a result of all these major reforms during the eight years of the crisis, the economy has
become more extrovert and the production model has begun to rebalance towards export-
oriented sectors. 
Finally,  the  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  the  banking  system,  characterised  first  and
foremost by significant recapitalisation, following stringent stress tests and in-depth asset
quality reviews, ensure high capital adequacy ratios (Common Equity Tier 1-CET1), higher
than  the  European  average,  which,  along  with  a  satisfactory  NPE  coverage  ratio,  enable
Greek banks to effectively manage their high stock of NPEs. 
It should however be noted that, despite the progress made, the crisis has had significant costs
in terms of output and employment losses and a marked decline in household wealth. Between
2008 and 2016, Greece lost over one fourth of its GDP at constant prices, and unemployment
rose by nearly 16 percentage points. Furthermore, per capita GDP in purchasing power parity in
2016 came to merely 68% of the EU average, down from 93% in 2008. Meanwhile, a large brain
drain has taken place, depriving Greece’s society and economy of one of its productive parts,
with devastating demographic, economic and social consequences. 
Challenges ahead
(a) Public debt sustainability
The high level of public debt feeds uncertainty, undermines confidence in the prospects of the
economy,  weighs  on  Greece’s  credit  rating  and  hinders  the  smooth  exit  from  the  current
programme. 
The  debt  sustainability  report  by  the  institutions  and  the  adoption  of  the  medium-term  debt
restructuring measures by the Eurogroup need to be made as soon and as clearly as possible,
so  as  to  further  strengthen  financial  markets’  confidence  and  ensure  a  smooth  exit  from  the
programme. 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(b) Consolidating confidence
In  order  to  ensure  its  return  to  the  markets  on  favourable  terms,  Greece  must  consolidate
investor confidence in the continuation of reforms and convince that fiscal policy will not relapse
once  again  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  commitments  made  must  be  kept  and  decisive  steps
must be taken to continue reforms and privatisations, starting with the removal of obstacles to
large investment projects that have already been agreed to, but are lagging. Land-use legislation
should play an important role in this area. 
(c) A smooth return to the markets
After  the  end  of  the  programme,  Greece  will  have  to  secure  the  funds  required  to  cover  its
financing needs by resorting to international financial markets on sustainable terms. As already
mentioned,  the  consolidation  of  confidence  is  a  sine  qua  non. At  the  same  time  however,  a
financial safety net will need to be put in place to assure that Greece is able to weather adverse
developments that could temporarily drive borrowing costs up to unsustainable levels. 
The  envisaged  “cash  buffer”  is  one  such  safety  net,  that  would  enable  Greece  to  avoid  a
recourse to the markets at times of heightened volatility and high refinancing costs. This cash
buffer is currently being built up with the trial bond issues before the end of the programme, as
well as with disbursements from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
However, episodes of financial markets turmoil such as the recent ones appear to have a greater
impact on countries with poor credit ratings and a weaker economy. These countries saw the
yields on their government bonds rise considerably. This suggests that, in the present uncertain
conditions, the Greek State’s return to the markets, as necessary as it may be for a return to
normality, must proceed with caution. 
International experience has shown that trial bond issues for the purpose of creating a sound
cash buffer prior to the expiry of a programme helps bolster confidence and paves the way to the
exit from the programme. Nevertheless, the need for a complementary precautionary assistance
programme should not be  neglected.  The  possibility  of  a  recourse  to  a  precautionary  support
programme, especially if financial market conditions call for one, must not be overdramatised, as
the  European  mechanisms  are  there  to  be  used  if  needed.  Such  a  precautionary  assistance
framework  can  be  expected  to  support  the  Greek  economy,  by  helping  to  reduce  borrowing
costs, since it will provide assurance of the Greek government’s and banks’ access to funding
beyond the end of the current programme in August 2018. Under an ESM precautionary credit
line, funds would become available, without necessarily having to be raised beforehand, whereas
the build-up of a cash buffer necessarily entails additional borrowing, which would increase the
annual debt service costs. Moreover, this precautionary financial assistance framework would
ensure  that  the  waiver  on  Greek  government  bonds  stays  in  place,  so  that  the  latter  remain
eligible  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations  until  Greece  regains  an
investment grade credit rating. Furthermore, in such case, the buffer for systemic banks should
remain available beyond August 2018. Finally, the maintenance of the waiver, along with the debt
sustainability  measures,  would  enable  the  purchase  of  Greek  government  bonds  by  the
European Central Bank under its public sector purchase programme either in its regular duration
or during the reinvestment period, thereby exerting a downward effect on the borrowing costs of
Greek government.
(d) The post-programme surveillance framework
According to the European institutional framework, the end of the Greek programme in August
2018 does not relieve Greece of its obligations vis-à-vis its lenders. What changes is the form of
the surveillance framework for Greece, which must conform to the general surveillance terms
and regulations in force in the European Union. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regulation  (EU)  No.  472/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  provides  for
automatic post-programme surveillance until the country repays 75% of the loans it has obtained
from  other  Member  States,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Fund  (EFSF)  and  the  European
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  reserves  the  right  to
subject  a  Member  State  to  enhanced  surveillance,  if  it  judges  that  this  is  warranted  by  the
circumstances. 
Apart from these provisions, already in force, the European Commission has proposed changes
to the economic governance of the euro area, some of which could be relevant for the type of
post-programme surveillance that the Greek economy would be subject to, and will be discussed
by  the  European  Council  within  the  first  half  of  2018.  The  aspects  of  potential  relevance  to
Greece concern the enhanced role of the ESM and the possible support to Member States for
the implementation of structural reforms. 
Therefore, it is clear that Greece’s smooth exit from the programme and its successful course in
new post-crisis European normality entail a commitment to safeguard the achievements made
so far, to pursue sound economic policies and to continue and complete the structural reforms. 
(e) Banks – Non-performing loans
The effective management of NPEs is the most crucial legacy problem that banks now have to
tackle, if they are to fully consolidate their loan portfolios and become capable of increasing their
lending. In the period immediately ahead, banks must step up their efforts to attain their NPE
operational targets. The targets for the next two years are high and ambitious, yet feasible, now
that the economy has returned to positive growth. Banks must, as soon as possible, broaden the
scope of workouts offered to borrowers and move towards more drastic decisions, in particular
with respect to the restructuring of viable businesses, the conclusion of multi-creditor workouts,
the identification of strategic defaulters and the implementation of definitive solutions in the case
of non-viable businesses. 
Banks  are  facing  new  challenges  in  2018,  most  notably  the  implementation  of  International
Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9), the stricter treatment of loan-loss provisions for new
NPEs, as well as the EU-wide stress test to be conducted by the ECB.
Risks and sources of uncertainty
Despite  the  progress  made  so  far,  as  reflected  in  key  economic  indicators,  domestic  and
external risks remain, which could jeopardise the course of the Greek economy. 
In the short term, the main risks relate to a delayed implementation of the measures agreed in
the third review, which would in turn delay the completion of the fourth and last review of the
current  programme,  as  well  as  to  an  underachievement  of  the  fiscal  targets.  In  addition,  the
absence of a timely specification of the debt relief measures could rekindle uncertainties. 
Equally significant is the risk of a serious and sustainable reversal of the Greek government bond
yields. Considering that the yield on the 10-year Greek government bond was yesterday 4.48%,
compared with 1.93% for the Portuguese and Italian counterparts, the risk to the debt dynamics
is all too clear. 
There  are  also external risks, which give rise to concerns about the preservation of the very
favourable  global  economic  conjuncture  and  global  stability.  More  specifically,  some  of  the
matters pending at the EU level that could hinder the smooth development of the EU economy
are: the Brexit preparations after the agreement of 15 December 2017 for an orderly exit, and the
need to reach a mutually acceptable agreement on how to address the refugee crisis ahead of
the revision of the Dublin Regulation in June 2018. Furthermore, at the euro area level, significant
changes to its architecture are expected to be carried out this year, such as the setting up of the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
European Monetary Fund and the completion of the banking union. Any delays to the scheduled
changes  could  stoke  uncertainties.  Turning  to  the  global  level,  the  deterioration  of  relations
between the United States and both North Korea and Iran has given rise to turmoil. Finally, the
surge  of  populism  in  several  countries  across  the  globe  erodes  public  trust  in  democratic
institutions and the rule of law. 
A strategy for sustainable growth
Today, Greece faces the historic challenge of returning to normality and to a path of convergence
with  its  European  partners.  A  return  to  strong  economic  growth  calls  for  maintaining  and
implementing the structural reforms already legislated, as well as further crucial reforms in areas
still lagging behind, such as the tax system, public administration, the judicial system and the
goods and services markets. For all of the above to materialise and for Greece to once again
become  a  friendly  place  for  doing  business  and  an  attractive  destination  for  productive
investment,  the  end  of  the  current  adjustment  programme  will  have  to  mark  the  launch  of  a
comprehensive national plan of economic restructuring, whose authorship and ownership will lie
with the Greek government. Economic policy for the ‘day after’ Greece’s exit from the economic
adjustment programmes will have to focus not only on actions to smooth out cyclical shocks, but
also,  and  more  importantly,  on  a  medium-to-long-term  growth  policy  geared  towards  the  dual
goal of fully utilising the economy’s productive potential and safeguarding fiscal stability. 
This  plan  must  aim  for  high  and  sustainable  growth  rates  by  encouraging  private  initiative,
extroversion  and  broader  social  engagement.  The  success  of  such  a  plan  will  require  radical
changes in the fabric of the economy. The implementation of these changes requires effective
and broader consensus and consultation across all social groups as well as across European-
oriented political forces in the country. Today, at this critical juncture for the Greek economy, it is
important to avoid a halt of the positive momentum or, worse yet, a situation where the lack of
social consensus or a polarised political climate could jeopardise what has been achieved after
nine years of great sacrifices. More specifically, what is needed is: 
First,  a  drastic  overhaul  of  public  administration  with  clear  delimitation  of  state  intervention  in
private initiative. The state’s role should be to regulate the institutional framework governing the
private  economy  and  provide  oversight  of  performance  and  monitoring  capacity  rather  than
acting as an entrepreneur-producer. Furthermore, the use of public-private partnerships in a wide
range of administrative procedures and in the delivery of public services would shift costs from
taxpayers onto users, while at the same time enabling care to be taken to support the weaker
groups of the population. 
Second, speeding up the privatisation programme and the development of public property. With
government intervention under the new productive model being limited to the role of overseer-
regulator, privatisations will increase public revenue, while also strengthening competition to the
benefit of the consumer. 
Third, changes in the tax system with a view to creating a clear and stable tax regime with lower
tax rates for households and businesses and to broadening the tax base. 
Fourth, expanding the use of electronic transactions to all types of economic activity, so as to
effectively reduce the informal economy and increase public revenue with a fairer distribution of
the tax burden. The success of this endeavour will crucially hinge upon citizens’ familiarisation
with digital technology applications, as well as upon building a taxpaying culture. 
Fifth, emphasis on the “knowledge triangle” (education-research-innovation), with evaluation of
higher  education  and  linking  research  to  funding  and  to  the  production  process.  This  is  so
because  linking  higher  education  with  the  production  process  promotes  innovation  and  the
country’s competitive advantages. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sixth, and most important, strengthening the operational independence of key institutions and
the rule of law. For this to become possible, society and the political forces must understand that
strong and sound inclusive institutions, which do not serve the interests of specific groups at the
expense of others, promote the welfare of society as a whole. For the restart of the economy to
be  a  success,  the  status  of  institutions  –  which  is  synonymous  of  confidence  –needs  to  be
elevated in future. Weak and closed institutions generate uncertainty and disorientation, whereas
strong, open and socially accepted institutions are necessary for a return to normality. 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
