     Conference of the ACPR – Palais Brongniart, 8 June 2018 
The major issues at stake in the review of prudential supervision of banks 
  Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France, 
Chairman of the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR) 
         Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 of 6 
I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference  of  the  Autorité  de 
contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  résolution  (ACPR),  which  this  morning  focuses  on 
major  issues  at  stake  in  the  review  of  prudential  supervision  of  banks.  The 
subject  is  not  new,  but  it  is  always  topical.  Let  me  first  stress  the  greater 
degree of security already achieved in prudential matters: the agreement of 7 
December  2017  on  the  finalisation  of  Basel  III  and  the  now  standard  use  of 
macroprudential instruments. I will then touch on what remains to be done in 
Europe, specifically the completion of the Banking Union, an essential step.   
 The implementation of the Basel III agreement of 7 December 2017 
I. 
in Europe, fully respecting the envisaged timetable,  is essential  
The finalisation of Basel III – and not of Basel IV, definitely not – brings to an 
end a decade of regulatory efforts which have considerably strengthened the 
resilience of the international banking system. I reiterate that the agreement of 
7 December 2017 is the best possible agreement for France and for Europe. It 
is  balanced  and  reasonable:  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  prudential  framework 
has  been  preserved  thanks  to  a  large-scale  retention  of  the  internal  model 
approach, which was one of our main concerns. Moreover, trust in the internal 
models will be strengthened by greater oversight, while the increase in capital 
requirements  will  remain  moderate  and  spread  out  until  2027.  Banks  were 
rightly  calling  for  long-term  strategic  visibility  for  their  regulatory  framework: 
they now have it.  
The  agreement  that  we  have  negotiated  relies  on  a  strong  commitment  to 
implementation  by  the  main  jurisdictions,  including  the  United  States.  The 
European Union must of course keep its word with regard to implementation 
and the timetable.  
Additionally,  we  are  confident  about  the  rapid  completion  of  the  current 
discussions on the standardised approach to market risk. The first version of 
Page 2 of 6 
 
the  text,  published  in  2016,  would  have  entailed  ex  post  an  unjustified  and 
excessive increase in the capital requirements for market activities. The ACPR 
has  since  then  actively  participated  in  the  work  of  the  technical  Market  Risk 
Group  of  the  Basel  Committee.  The  new  rules  proposed  in  the  document 
currently  submitted  for  consultation  should  permit  a  return  to  the  impacts 
initially  sought  ex  ante,  i.e.  an  average  increase  of  20%  to  30%  in  the 
minimum capital requirement for market risks.  
Beside  regulation  – 
thus  clarified  –  and  microprudential  supervision, 
macroprudential  policies  now  round  off in  many  countries  the  financial 
stability trifecta. In France, the ACPR contributes actively to the discussions of 
the Haut Conseil de Stabilité Financière (High Council for Financial Stability – 
HCSF)  chaired  by  the  Minister  for  the  Economy  and  Finance.  In  the  face  of 
rapid  and  excessive  growth  in  the  debt  of  several  large  corporations,  the 
HCSF has adopted a measure which comes into force on 1 July; it imposes on 
French systemic banks a limit to their exposures to the most leveraged large 
non-financial resident corporations. The HCSF nevertheless remains vigilant in 
the face of the rapid increase in bank lending to the private sector, which stood 
at  +5.5%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2018.  French  private  debt  reached  130%  of 
GDP at end-2017, the highest  of the large countries in the  euro area.  Since 
2014, it has risen by more than 9% of GDP, while it has declined by 5.4% of 
GDP  on  average  for  the  euro  area.  The  HCSF  stated  on  29  March  that  it 
stands ready to act. In particular, if we have to decide, at our next meeting, on 
a countercyclical capital buffer, that would evidently not be in order to stop the 
lending today: it would be – as the name suggests – to avoid a credit crunch 
tomorrow  when  there  is  a  cyclical  downturn  in  the  economy,  particularly  for 
small and medium-sized enterprises. Should banks lack sufficient capital, they 
could manage the heightened risks thus materialising in their balance sheets 
by restricting new lending. It is this excessive credit cycle – the risk of “go and 
stop” seen during financial crises – that a moderate capital buffer must seek to 
smooth  out.  It  should  be  noted  in  passing  that  a  clear  majority  of  Member 
States of the European Union have adopted other macroprudential measures 
 
to specifically limit residential lending, constraining households: in my view it is 
out of the question in France. 
Page 3 of 6 
 II. To reduce fragmentation and improve private risk sharing in Europe, 
we must now complete the Banking Union. 
 
We  must  now  resolutely  work  towards  completing  the  European  Banking 
Union. I would first like to explain why. The finalisation of the Banking Union 
should,  alongside  the  Capital  Markets  Union,  contribute  to  improving  private 
risk  sharing  within  the  euro  area.  Private  risk  sharing  fulfils  an  economic 
stabilisation function: in the United States, for example, private financial flows 
between  the  federal  states  are  a  more  powerful  damper  than  budget 
mechanisms  involved  in  public  risk  sharing.  Furthermore,  this  private  risk 
sharing should help to channel the euro area’s large savings surplus  – EUR 
390  billion  in  2017  –  towards  European  companies,  within  a  real  Financing 
Union for Investment and Innovation at the European level. 
We  have  taken  a  step  forward  with  the  agreement  of  25  May  at  the  Ecofin 
Council meeting on the "banking reform package" set out in the Commission's 
legislative  proposal  of  23  November  2016.  Even  if  we  need  to  wait  for  the 
Parliament's  proposal  and  the  outcome  of  the  trialogue  discussions,  this 
agreement  is  overall  positive.  On  the  supervision  side,  it  provides  the 
European Union with all the prudential ratios of the international framework. It 
also provides for the gradual introduction of the revised market risk framework, 
the  Fundamental  Review  of  the  Trading  Book  (FRTB),  which  is  still  being 
finalised in Basel. In addition, a first step has been taken towards recognising 
the euro area as a single jurisdiction, in which cross-border exposures within 
the  Banking  Union  are  considered  domestic  exposures  for  measuring  the 
systemic  importance  of  European  banks.  On  the  resolution  side,  we  have 
obtained  an  agreement  to  broaden  the  subordination  requirement  of  the 
Minimum  Requirement  for  Own  Funds  and  Eligible  Liabilities  (MREL)  to 
 
beyond  global  systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs),  thereby  reducing  the 
threshold effect between G-SIBs and other banks. In addition, the text defines 
a  subordinated  debt  ceiling,  very  close  to  the  international  Total  Loss 
Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) standard. 
Page 4 of 6 
However,  this  agreement  contains  a  number  of  more  problematic  aspects 
about which we shall remain vigilant. To name but one, as regards the internal 
MREL,  cross-border  exemptions  within  the  Banking  Union  similar  to  the 
methodology  for  calculating  the  capital  surcharge  for  systemic  banks  would 
have been desirable. In addition, we are concerned about a reference to the 
threshold  allowing  access  to  the  Resolution  Fund  being  introduced  into  the 
calibration  of  the  internal  MREL;  this  makes  no  sense  when  resolution  is 
carried out at parent company level.    
As  regards  the  measures  still  needed  to  finalise  the  Banking  Union, 
completing the resolution framework is, in my opinion, the first priority, even 
more  so  than  deposit  insurance,  the  third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union.  Mario 
Draghi was most insistent on this in his Florence speech of 11 May.i In most 
large jurisdictions –  the United States, the United Kingdom  and Japan – the 
intervention capabilities of resolution funds are not capped because they are 
backstopped  by  the  fiscal  authorities,  without  being  a  burden  on  public 
finances,  since  any  public  outlays  are  generally  reimbursed  by  the  private 
sector.  During  the  last  financial  crisis,  market  and  depositor  confidence 
resulting  from  a  credit  line  backstopped  by  the  US  Treasury  enabled  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  to  resolve  500  banks  without 
tapping into the resources of the safety net.ii Today, in the event of a severe 
crisis in the European Banking Union, the resources of the Single Resolution 
Fund (SRF) could be depleted. 
This  is  why  a  common  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  is  urgently 
needed. Let me emphasise that the aim of a common backstop is not to bail 
out banks or draw on government budgets. Such a step would only be taken in 
accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, and all the sums borrowed would 
Page 5 of 6 
 
be  gradually  repaid  by  the  banking  sector.  Rather,  it  is  about  building 
confidence in bank resolution in Europe by showing that it will always be able 
to  intervene  effectively  in  the  event  of  a  crisis.  Such  a  system  will  also 
encourage the lifting of the constraints imposed by certain national authorities 
on capital and liquidity flows. I regard the European Commission's proposal to 
set  up  a  backstop  through  a  credit  line  provided  by  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism  (ESM)  as  a  top  priority.  We  also  need  a  common  scheme  for 
providing  liquidity  to  financially  sound  banks  after  resolution  which  is  in  line 
with euro area monetary policy rules. 
Of course, a compromise will have to be found in order to make headway on 
the  third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union,  deposit  insurance.  Once  we  have 
completed  the  resolution  framework,  we  will  be  less  in  need  of  a  shared 
European  scheme.  A  pragmatic  approach  could  be  to  introduce  a  system  of 
loans  between  national  deposit  guarantee  schemes  (DGS),  with  guarantee 
mechanisms  to  ensure  that  liquidity  advances  do  not  lead  to  losses  for  the 
lending  DGS.  This  would  lead  to  a  sharing  of  liquidity  without  sharing  risks, 
which would be a first step towards shoring up financial sector confidence and 
strengthening depositor protection. 
 To conclude, I would like to stress that the completion of the Banking Union in 
Europe  is  one  of  the  key  elements  of  a  broader  ambition:  the  crucial 
strengthening  of  Economic  Union.  As  Mario  Draghi  said  on  11  May:  "The 
people  of  Europe  have  come  to  know  the  euro  and  trust  the  euro.  But  they 
also expect the euro to deliver the stability and prosperity it promised. So our 
duty, as policymakers, is to return their trust and to address the areas of our 
union that […] are incomplete”. Beyond national democratic debates – there is 
no  shortage  of  such  debates  today,  both  in  Europe  and  elsewhere  –  this 
confidence in the euro is our shared asset everywhere. We are bound by this 
trust, while needing to respect reality, but also the urgency of time and – I think 
– of History. 
 Page 6 of 6 
                                                           
i “Risk-reducing and risk-sharing in our Monetary Union”, Speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, at the 
European University Institute, Florence, 11 May 2018 
ii Sapir, A. and Wolff, G. (2013), “The neglected side of banking union: reshaping Europe’s financial system”, 
note presented at the informal ECOFIN meeting in Vilnius on 14 September 2013. 
