William C Dudley: Making globalization work
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Central Bank of Brazil, São Paulo, 1 March 2018.
 Thank you, Ilan, and thanks to the Central Bank of Brazil for organizing this event.  It is a pleasure
to have the opportunity today to talk about the issue of globalization.  As always, what I have to
say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market
1
Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
Although the debate about the benefits and challenges of globalization is not new, it has recently
come into sharper focus.  This debate is important to all of us, and I think it is particularly relevant
to Brazil given its importance in the global economy. 
Globalization means different things to different people.  In my remarks today, I will focus on the
role of globalization as a force for international economic integration and economic development. 
I will highlight three themes:
First, the important role that trade plays in promoting higher standards of living globally. 
Second, how changes in trade can create challenges for industries and their workers when they
lose competitiveness.  Insufficient attention has been given to this issue.  We must do better in
addressing the very large costs that can be imposed on particular communities and households. 
Third, the answer to those challenges is not greater protectionism.  Instead, we need to provide
greater support to displaced workers so they can obtain the skills needed to find new well-paying
jobs.    We  also  need  to  ensure  that  there  are  strong  global  institutions  and  international
cooperation  to  help  manage  the  effects  of  globalization.    This  includes  responding  to  the
challenges stemming from financial globalization—the flow of capital across national borders.  
These issues are important to me as a central banker, as they affect the long-term health and
productivity  of  the  U.S.  economy,  the  economic  opportunities  available  to  our  people,  and  the
efficiency and stability of the global financial system. 
The  debate  around  globalization,  particularly  in  advanced  economies,  reflects  many  factors. 
Undoubtedly, the global financial crisis and subsequent slow recovery have been significant.  But,
just as important have been longer-term trends, such as growing income inequality, the loss of
middle-income jobs, and the rise of large emerging market economies such as China and India. 
Although the debate about globalization is not new, I believe we are at a particularly important
juncture.    If  support  for  liberalized  trade  and  an  integrated  global  economy  were  to  suffer  a
significant  setback,  the  consequence  could  be  slower  economic  growth  and  lower  living
standards around the world. 
While considerable effort has gone into liberalizing trade and developing the existing set of trade
agreements, that does not mean they cannot be improved upon.  I have no doubt some trade
agreements could be enhanced or updated.  Some may not adequately address recent changes
in the global economy—such as the rise of digital trade—and may need to be refreshed.  And,
important  trade  barriers  still  remain  that  should  be  addressed.    In  particular,  from  a  U.S.
perspective, the access of U.S. firms to some foreign markets and the protection of intellectual
property  rights  are  issues  that  deserve  close  attention.    But,  in  addressing  these  issues,  we
should  take  care  to  preserve  the  vital  benefits  of  trade  to  higher  standards  of  living  in  both
advanced and emerging market economies.  Our focus should be on further strengthening an
open trade regime, and, as appropriate, amending and improving these agreements.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Pace of Globalization
To begin, let me briefly describe the pace of globalization as a reminder of what is at stake. 
Global economic integration has increased dramatically in recent decades.  Trade in goods and
services, for example, has grown from nearly 40 percent of global GDP in 1990 to 54 percent in
2016.  Over the same period, the stock of foreign direct investment has increased from roughly
10 percent of global GDP to 36 percent.  Put simply, national economies and financial systems
2
have become more integrated and interdependent.   
This rapid growth in trade reflects falling trade barriers, declining transport costs, and improved
information  and  communication  technology.    These  trends  have  enabled  the  development  of
complex global supply chains that allow companies to manage their production more efficiently.
Emerging  market  economies  now  make  up  a  much  larger  share  of  global  trade,  the  global
economy, and global growth.  As an illustration, emerging market economies have accounted for
70 percent of global  economic  growth  since  the  crisis—double  their  share  from  two  decades
ago.    This growth has provided much-needed support to world economic activity, as advanced
economies have recovered slowly from the crisis. 
3
Rising  economic  integration  is  also  evident  when  we  examine  the  trade  relationship  between
Brazil and the United States.  Bilateral trade flows in goods have risen from $17 billion in 1994 to
nearly $57 billion in 2016.  The United States is Brazil’s second-largest export market, and an
important destination for manufactured goods.  In 2016, the stock of U.S. direct investment in
Brazil was $64 billion, up from $18 billion in 1994.    Recent initiatives announced by the Brazilian
authorities—including  a  large  and  transparent  infrastructure  concession  program  and  greater
foreign participation in the oil and gas and aviation industries—underscore the potential for further
increases in foreign direct investment. 
The Benefits of Open Trade
4
Increased  trade,  through  its  longer-term  impact  on  productivity,  has  been  a  key  contributor  to
global  growth  and  prosperity  since  the  Second  World  War.    Openness  to  trade  brings  many
benefits to the supply side of the economy, including:
larger  markets,  greater  specialization  opportunities,  and  the  increased  ability  to  exploit
economies of scale and scope;
faster transmission of technology and innovation; and
greater competitive pressure on domestic firms to increase their productivity. 
Collectively, these forces lead to a more efficient allocation of a country’s scarce resources—
one that is more closely aligned to its international comparative advantage. 
As a consequence, consumers can benefit from lower prices, higher real incomes, and greater
variety and quality of goods and services.  Increased openness may also reduce wasteful rent-
seeking behavior on the part of protected industries and the related costs of corruption.
Openness to trade has certainly played a large role in the economic ascent of Asia.  Following
the rise of Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and others, fast growth in China and India has lifted hundreds
of millions of people out of extreme poverty—an unprecedented feat in human history.  Reflecting
these gains, a number of emerging market countries have become strong supporters of open
trade, a sign of how much the world has changed in recent years. 
Benefits  from  open  trade  are  evident  in  Brazil.       Following  its  dramatic  trade  reforms  in  the
1990s, productivity growth in Brazil increased.  Brazil also has leveraged its ample and diverse
natural  resource  endowments  to  become  a  leading  exporter  of  iron  ore  and  a  number  of
5
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
agricultural  products.    And,  the  country  has  benefitted  from  the  rise  of  China—total  export
volumes  more  than  doubled  between  2000  and  2010,  and  have  now  nearly  tripled.    Brazilian
multinational  companies  are  also  important  global  players  in  industries  such  as  mining  and
metals, food, paper products, and transportation equipment. 
But, increased openness to trade is not a panacea in and of itself.  Actual benefits depend on a
range of other critical factors. These include macroeconomic policy, the business and regulatory
environment,  the  legal  and  tax  regime,  labor  and  product  market  flexibility,  and  the  quality  of
infrastructure and public services, such as education.  While the gains from a liberalized trade
regime  are  not  guaranteed,  the  alternative  of  trying  to  achieve  a  high  standard  of  living  by
following a policy of economic isolationism will fail.  Trade has played a key role in nearly all of the
high-growth success stories since the middle of the last century.
The Challenges of Open Trade
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  while  trade  and  international  integration  tend  to  increase  the
overall economic pie, the distribution of the larger pie may be very uneven.  In fact, slices for
some particular groups may even shrink.  Some workers—particularly those in industries that
are less competitive and whose skills may have become less relevant—can be hurt and can find
adjustment difficult.  Successful adjustment often requires individuals to change industries and to
relocate to different regions.  So, while trade is almost always a win for a country’s economy, not
everyone within that economy will be a winner.  This is especially the case where the policies to
cushion  the  negative  consequences  of  trade  and  to  facilitate  adjustment  are  lacking  or
inadequate. 
Effects  are  country-  and  industry-specific,  and  depend  on  initial  endowments  and  conditions. 
Low-income workers in emerging markets, for example, may find it more difficult to adapt, given
weaker  safety  nets  and  fewer  financial  resources  available  to  deal  with  adverse  economic
shocks.    The  bigger  the  adjustment  process,  the  more  the  gains  from  trade  will  tend  to  be
eroded. 
While the rise in the skill premium from trade liberalization has been well established for both
developed and developing countries, determining the aggregate impact of trade on jobs has been
more challenging.  To date, the evidence has been mixed.  We need further research in this area
to  determine  with  more  confidence  a  reasonable  range  of  estimates  for  these  employment
effects. 
Although evidence of the extent to which jobs have been lost due to global trade is inconclusive,
job losses that are attributed to trade tend to be viewed differently.  That is, they are seen as
having been “lost to foreigners” and are often viewed as a consequence of the policy decision to
liberalize trade in the first place.
The challenge of adjusting to open trade is a serious issue that has not received the degree of
attention  it  fully  deserves.    This  may  partly  reflect  the  fact  that  the  burden  has  been  borne
unequally and spread out over a long time period.  It also may reflect the fact that the winners
from trade have often tended to have a stronger voice than those who have been the losers. 
Research  has  documented  that  the  effects  on  individuals  of  job  dislocation—including  those
resulting  from  trade—can  be  significant  and  long  lasting.    Older  workers  tend  to  suffer  larger
earnings losses, and often face more difficult transitions.  Displaced workers may not have the
appropriate skills to find good jobs in other areas of the economy, including in growing export
sectors. 
When the affected industry represents a large share of the local economy, the damage is often
magnified.  In this case, the burden can become more widespread as the level of wages across
the community is negatively affected.  And, this doesn’t begin to capture the full human toll—
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
including the impact on workers who have lost confidence in the future and the poorer health
outcomes that occur because of increased stress. 
Research  on  Brazil  has  found  that  workers  employed  in  regions  facing  larger  tariff  cuts
experienced  declines  in  formal  sector  employment.       They  also  generally  did  not  migrate  to
more  favorable  regions.   Instead,  they  either  became  unemployed,  moved  into  the  informal
sector of the economy, or—when more fortunate—moved into another sector within the same
region.
6
We should find better ways to help communities that are struggling because of the effects of free
trade.  In the United States, we have historically experienced a high degree of geographic labor
mobility—much higher than in other advanced economies.  The ability to move in search of better
opportunities, when possible, has helped to mitigate some of the adverse effects of trade.  But,
mobility has declined in the United States in recent years, implying that the adjustment costs to
trade may have increased.
Protectionism Is Not the Answer
Given these costs of global integration and more liberalized trade, what is the best path forward? 
Although protectionism can have a siren-like appeal because of its potential to provide short-term
benefits to particular segments of the economy, in the longer term it would almost certainly be
destructive. 
Countries need to compete better, not compete less.  Trade barriers are a very expensive way to
preserve  jobs  in  less  competitive  or  declining  industries.    They  blunt  opportunities  in  export
industries and they reduce the affordability of goods and services to households.  Indeed, such
measures often backfire, resulting in harm to workers and diminished growth. 
A  better  course  is  to  learn  from  our  experience.    From  a  U.S.  standpoint,  we  should  work  to
reduce remaining foreign trade restrictions that impair our ability to capitalize on our comparative
advantages.    For  example,  market  access  restrictions  can  mean  that  certain  U.S.  industries
cannot realize their full potential.  Similarly, weaknesses in the protection of intellectual property
rights limit the ability of U.S. producers to realize the full returns from their investments.  This
lowers profits and diminishes incentives to grow the business and employ more workers. 
If we are going to enhance the benefits of free trade and better manage its costs, it is critical that
we continue to strengthen the global rules-based system.  On the positive side, I would point to
the  World  Trade  Organization’s  Trade  Facilitation  Agreement,  which  addresses  customs
procedures  and  could  reduce  global  trade  costs  significantly.    But,  at  a  broader  level,  the
momentum behind global trade reform has clearly waned in recent years.  This has occurred
even  though  there  are  a  number  of  areas  that  would  benefit  from  further  reform,  such  as
agriculture  and  services.    That  momentum  needs  to  be  rekindled  and  reaffirmed.    Although
advanced economies historically have tended to lead the way, it is important that large emerging
market countries now play a greater role.  This is appropriate given their growing prominence in
the global economy. 
There  are  many  approaches  to  dealing  with  the  costs  of  globalization,  but  protectionism  is  a
dead end.  Trade restrictions address the symptoms and not the underlying problems, and they
introduce other costs and distortions.  While such measures might generate a temporary boost
to growth from greater domestic production and consumption, these would likely be offset by a
range of other costs.  Over time, such measures would retard productivity growth and thereby
shrink  the  economic  pie.   As  an  illustration,  import  substitution  models  that  were  pursued  by
many  emerging  market  economies  following  the  Second  World  War  eventually  led  to  poorer
economic outcomes.  Such was the experience in Brazil, which helped trigger the reforms of the
early 1990s. 
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In assessing the benefits and costs of trade, it is important to understand that a nation’s trade
balance reflects much more than its trade policy.  Just as important are the country’s saving and
investment  spending  proclivities,  which  are  affected  by  many  factors,  including  tax  and  fiscal
policies.  For example, in the United States, we have a chronic trade deficit because domestic
investment spending exceeds our domestic saving.  Foreign capital inflows make up the gap.  In
this  process,  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  plays  an  important  equilibrating
mechanism.  If the domestic saving/investment imbalance is unchanged, then any reduction in
the  trade  balance  from  higher  trade  barriers  will  need  to  be  offset  by  lower  exports.    The
domestic  currency  will  appreciate  to  cause  the  trade  deficit  to  widen  to  accommodate  the
desired capital inflows.  Thus, trade restrictions affect the composition of trade but not the gap
between exports and imports, which is determined by the difference between domestic savings
and investment.  At the end of the day, the protectionist country would produce more goods in
sectors protected by higher trade barriers but also fewer goods for export.
The expectation that higher trade barriers would save jobs ignores these critical second-round
effects.  Moreover, the story may not end there.  What happens if another country that now faces
higher trade barriers responds by raising its own barriers?  That would push production even
further out of high-value-added exports that are now deterred by the higher foreign trade barriers
and into those exports that face lower trade barriers, or into the goods protected by the higher
domestic trade barriers.  Raising trade barriers would risk setting off a trade war, which could
damage economic growth prospects around the world. 
Measures that raise trade barriers typically would protect lower-wage, import-competing jobs, but
would also weigh on the prospects for jobs in the more efficient export sector, which tend to be
higher-paying.  The outcome would be countries producing more where they have a competitive
disadvantage, and less where they have a competitive advantage—the exact opposite of what
we should be aiming for.  For example, in the United States, one of our largest manufacturing
exports  is  aerospace  parts  (which  requires  skilled  labor)  and  one  of  our  largest  imports  is
apparel (which requires less skilled labor). 
These second-round effects would also likely hurt productivity growth.  Scarce resources would
be used less efficiently and trade protection would likely lessen the level of competitive pressure
that  helps  drive  innovation.    Moreover,  lower  productivity  growth  would  likely  lead  to  a  slower
7
improvement in a nation’s living standards over time.   
Better Approaches to Deal with Globalization
Rather than protectionism, a better policy would be to help domestic workers and companies
compete more effectively, rather than compete less.  We need additional mechanisms that allow
us to more fully capture the benefits from liberalized trade and to more proactively mitigate its
costs.    Ideally,  policy  should  also  better  address  job  losses  and  income  inequality  from
automation and other technological advances.
How  we  respond  should  depend  on  regional  and  industry  circumstances.    These  include  the
nature of trade impacts, the skill sets and location of the workers that have been affected, and
the amount of resources that can be mobilized to facilitate adjustment. 
Increasing  specialization  brings  real  economic  benefits,  but  can  also  leave  workers  more
exposed to shifts in demand for their services, potentially on short notice.  These issues are not
going  away,  especially  as  emerging  market  economies  take  on  a  larger  role  in  the  global
economy and automation continues apace.  If we are to maintain a more open trade regime,
globalization must be socially and politically sustainable.  For that to be the case, we have to
provide greater support to those who are hurt by trade.  Policies should include more assistance
8
with job retraining, help with job search and mobility, and broader unemployment support.
We  also  need  to  do  more  research  into  what  measures  have  been  effective  in  economies
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
around  the  world,  and  we  should  encourage  greater  experimentation  with  new  approaches. 
Getting the balance right between providing assistance and making sure that individuals hurt by
trade can get back on their feet and achieve their earning potential will be a challenge, and we
need a better understanding of what actually works. 
More generally, we need to do a better job positioning our workforce to cope with globalization
and technological change.  Improvements across a range of areas—including not only education
and training, but also the business regulatory environment and infrastructure investment—could
support  greater  worker  mobility.    These  measures  would  also  promote  higher  productivity
growth.    While  the  scope  and  scale  of  issues  differ  substantially  by  country,  many  of  these
issues may also be relevant in Brazil. 
There  are  various  measures  available  in  current  trade  agreements,  such  as  antidumping
measures and countervailing duties for dealing with “unfair” trade, as well as escape clauses that
provide safeguards for industries that face a sudden surge of imports.  Again, the challenge is to
ensure that such measures are effective, that they help facilitate rather than retard adjustment,
and  that  they  are  not  abused  so  as  to  avoid  foreign  competition.    But,  both  sanctions  and
temporary relief have been provided for in global trade rules.  We should be willing to use them
when their use would lead to more equitable outcomes and would help sustain political support
for a more open trade regime. 
Financial Globalization Is Also Important
Financial globalization—the flow of capital across national borders—is also an important issue
that must be considered.  These flows help to support global economic integration in the trade of
goods and services.  This is a large, complex subject—and one the Central Bank of Brazil is well
acquainted with, having successfully managed the pressures of heavy capital inflows as well as
outflows  during  periods  of  stress.    The  tremendous  damage  of  the  global  financial  crisis
underscores the importance of this issue.  As with issues related to trade, achieving effective
financial globalization requires robust and mutually supportive measures at both the domestic
and international levels.   
First,  the  high  level  of  cross-border  capital  flows—and  their  potentially  volatile  nature—further
underlines the importance of solid domestic fundamentals, including exchange rate flexibility, a
credible  monetary  policy  framework,  sustainable  fiscal  policy,  sufficient  foreign  exchange
reserves, and a strong financial system.
The United States has a special responsibility to keep its own house in order, given the large size
of  its  financial  markets  and  the  U.S.  dollar’s  status  as  a  reserve  currency.    Indeed,  the  U.S.
financial  system  was  the  epicenter  of  the  global  financial  crisis.    I  believe  that  promoting
economic  growth  and  financial  stability  at  home  is  the  most  important  contribution  the  United
States can make to promoting growth and stability worldwide. 
With  that  in  mind,  U.S.  monetary  policy  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  global  financial
conditions,  including  exchange  rates,  and  shifts  in  U.S.  monetary  policy  can  lead  to
consequential shifts in global capital flows.  Therefore, good communication and transparency
from  the  Federal  Reserve  is  needed.    In  this  respect,  I  believe  we  have  made  a  number  of
improvements  in  recent  years  that  have  facilitated  smoother  market  adjustments  to  policy
changes.  One example is the process by which the Federal Reserve began the normalization of
its balance sheet last year.  We foreshadowed our intentions and initiated a program that was
transparent in its design and ramped up only slowly.  While the Federal Reserve has a domestic
mandate set for it by the U.S. Congress, it needs to be mindful of the international effects of its
actions, which can have important potential consequences for the global economy and financial
9
markets.
A high level of global interdependence also requires robust cooperation and effective international
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutions.  To provide one example, I have traveled several times a year for the last decade to
Basel,  Switzerland,  to  discuss  economic,  monetary,  and  regulatory  policy  with  foreign  central
bankers at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).  This dialogue—supported by ongoing
bilateral discussions between central banks—helps build trust, understanding, and the valuable
relationships that are crucial during periods of stress.    
The global financial crisis put the need for a more robust and resilient financial system in stark
relief.  Such a regime is necessary if we are to maintain the flow of credit to the real economy—
both  domestically  and  internationally—during  times  of  stress.    Over  the  last  decade,
policymakers  have  implemented  a  range  of  reforms  that  have  materially  strengthened  the
banking system, including higher capital and liquidity buffers for the major international banks.
10
International coordination has been essential to the successful implementation of these reforms. 
Banking is a global business that requires a high degree of regulatory consistency and as level a
playing field as possible to avoid distortions and regulatory arbitrage.  Under the auspices of the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision of the BIS, a wide-ranging set of reforms has been
introduced progressively, including the recent finalization of the Basel III reforms.
11
  
Tighter  regulation  of  international  banks  must  be  complemented  by  effective  supervision,  and
much  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  home/host  supervisory  cooperation.    In  a  local
context, cross-border supervisory coordination has taken on increased importance as Brazilian
banks have expanded internationally in recent years.  Still, greater clarity around how large global
banks will be resolved is required if we are to successfully end “too big to fail.”
Finally, it is increasingly clear to me that we also need to develop a better shared understanding
of the proper role of exchange rate policies and reserve accumulation in a healthy and fair global
trading system.  To be sure, in a world of volatile capital flows, experience has shown that having
adequate  reserve  cushions  has  helped  many  emerging  market  economies  ward  off  costly
instability.    Indeed,  Brazil’s  large  stock  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  has  been  a  key  pillar  of
stability through turbulent periods.  But, reserves are a relatively expensive form of insurance,
and  excessive  reserve  accumulation  can  undermine  global  adjustment,  shift  burdens  onto
trading partners, and erode political support for continued trade openness.  As I have said on
other occasions, I think that part of the solution lies in further improving the international safety
net, so that countries have more efficient and less costly ways of ensuring resilience.
12
To conclude, although the benefits from an open trade regime remain compelling, we must also
recognize  that  such  a  regime  imposes  costs,  and  these  need  to  be  forcefully  addressed. 
Focusing on these costs is necessary if globalization—including its financial dimensions—is to
work for all of us.
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to take some questions. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mary Amiti, John Clark, Gerard Dages, Matthew Higgins, Emily Howard, and Tom Klitgaard assisted in preparing
these remarks.
Figures  from  UN  World  Investment  Report,  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  Database,  World  Bank  World
Development Indicators. 
IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2017, in market exchange rate terms. 
Figures from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, IMF. 
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2014) “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica, Vol 82(3), 825–
885;  Dix-Carneiro,  Rafael  (2018)  “Trade  and  Labor  Market  Adjustment:  Recent  evidence  from  Brazil,”
Proceedings of the IMF Conference “Meeting Globalization’s Challenges.”
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2014) “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica, Vol 82(3), 825–
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
885;  Dix-Carneiro,  Rafael  (2018)  “Trade  and  Labor  Market  Adjustment:  Recent  evidence  from  Brazil,”
Proceedings of the IMF Conference “Meeting Globalization’s Challenges.”
This negative consequence of higher trade barriers can be illustrated most starkly by the estimates of the costs
per job saved through protectionist measures.  Researchers that have studied this closely estimate that the
costs  per  job  saved  from  protectionist  measures  in  the  United  States  typically  run  into  the  hundreds  of
thousands of dollars per year.  To illustrate, consider the case of import restrictions on Chinese tires.  The cost
of a job saved was estimated at $900,000 per year while the measures were in place, or more than 20 times the
average worker’s compensation. Hufbauer and Lowry, “US Tire Tariffs: Saving Few Jobs at High Cost”, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, April 2012. 
The U.S. provides some assistance to workers displaced due to trade through its Trade Adjustment Assistance
(TAA) program.  A recent academic paper finds that TAA-trained workers have higher cumulative earnings (after
10  years)  than  similar  workers  who  didn’t  receive  the  training.    These  higher  earnings  reflect  both  higher
incomes and greater labor force participation, with returns concentrated in the most disrupted regions, where
workers are more likely to switch industries and move to labor markets with better opportunities in response to
training.    Hyman,  Benjamin  (2017)  “Can  Displaced  Labor  Be  Retrained?    Evidence  from  Quasi-Random
Assignment to Trade Adjustment Assistance,” University of Pennsylvania.
For further discussion, see William C. Dudley, Panel Remarks at Bank for International Settlements’ Annual
General Meeting, June 26, 2017.
For  further  discussion,  see  recent  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  report, Structural
Changes in Global Banking after the Crisis.
Other committees of the BIS, including the CGFS, which I chair, and the Financial Stability Board, which the BIS
hosts, play an important role in analyzing international financial stability issues and developing related policy
prescriptions.
See William C. Dudley, U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies, March 27, 2014.
7
8
9
10
11
12
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
