Sabine Lautenschläger: European banking union - the place to be?
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the Biannual
high-level  networking  seminar  on  economic  and  financial  issues,  organised  by  Danmarks
Nationalbank, Copenhagen, 14 May 2018.
 “Getting to Denmark” has become a catchphrase among those who study how societies and
economies develop. And indeed, for many countries around the world, Denmark is the place to
be – or rather the place to become. After all, Denmark stands for a stable democracy, sound
institutions and a strong economy.
And  that’s  not  all.  Denmark  also  stands  for  happiness.  The  United  Nation’s  world  happiness
index shows that, on top of all this, Denmark is also home to a very happy people. This has not
gone unnoticed; indeed, there are many who strive to follow your example. Your idea of hygge
has become a huge trend in countries as close by as Germany and as far away as the United
States.
So on many counts, Denmark is the place to be. And I for one am very happy to be here today.
But I’m not here to talk about Denmark. I am here to talk about Europe, or rather the European
banking union. In my remarks, I will argue that the banking union is also the place to be.
Its beginnings, though, were not exactly hyggelig. In 2012, things were not going well in the euro
area. Banks were ailing, some governments were struggling to obtain the funding they needed,
markets were in turmoil, and there were fears that the euro area might eventually break apart.
Well, it didn’t break apart. In fact, the crisis triggered a chain of reforms, and these reforms have
made the euro area more stable. One of the boldest steps was taken at the peak of the crisis.
On 28 June 2012, EU leaders decided to move towards a European banking union.
And  move  they  did.  Two  years,  four  months  and  six  days  later,  they  had  turned  their  political
pledge  into  reality.  On  a  rainy  day  in  November  2014,  banking  supervision  was  taken  to  the
European  level. Another  year  later,  the  same  was  done  for  bank  resolution. And  there  is  an
ongoing debate about whether and how all this should be supplemented with a European deposit
insurance scheme. In my view, it should be, and I am certain that, at some point, it will be.
From the start, the banking union has covered the entire euro area. But its boundaries are not set
in stone. The banking union is not an exclusive club; it is not limited to those countries that share
the euro as their common currency. In fact, any EU country can join the banking union through an
arrangement known as “close cooperation”. I know that many in Denmark are very much aware
of this. But, as I said, I’m not here to talk about Denmark. I am here to talk about the banking
union.
The place to be
So what’s the point of the banking union? Why did policymakers feel the need to take banking
supervision and resolution from the national to the European level? What benefits does it offer to
its members? Well, the easy answer is that it allows us to gather some of the high-hanging fruits
– fruits that are out of reach from the national level.
Let  me  give  you  an  example.  In  politics  they  say:  he  who  knows  only  one  country  knows  no
country. The same can be said about banks. The more banks a supervisor covers, the more
they can learn about each of them and, thus, about all of them. They can compare, and they can
benchmark.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
And  European  banking  supervision  does  cover  a  lot  of  banks,  many  more  than  any  national
supervisor.  Instead  of  covering  just  one  global  systemically  important  bank,  for  instance,  we
cover eight of them. This helps us to understand much better how these gigantic banks work,
what standards and best practices they apply for different business lines and where special risks
might be hidden. We do this, for example, by comparing how they set up their risk management
and their governance to deal with cross-border issues. The same applies to banks with unusual
business models such as specialised lenders. All in all, our broader comparative reach helps us
to know and assess all the banks better and thus supervise them better.
And  we  also  benefit  from  our  broader  view  when  we  analyse  horizontal  issues.  A  lack  of
profitability is one of these issues. Here, we can pool insights from a large sample of banks, and
this improves our analysis. And it’s the same with other issues, such as governance, cyber risks
and the use of internal models. These models in particular are notoriously difficult to supervise,
so a broad yet in-depth knowledge of industry standards and practices comes in handy.
But it’s not just that we benefit from a broader view. We also benefit from a broader set of views.
Supervisors from across Europe work together day in day out, pooling their knowledge and their
different  experiences.  And  at  the  end  of  the  day,  it  is  the  ECB’s  Supervisory  Board  and  its
Governing  Council  that  take  decisions.  In  other  words,  each  decision  reflects  the  views  and
opinions of 26 national supervisors from 19 countries. There is less room for national bias and
less room for supervisory capture.
Finally, we benefit from economies of scale when it comes to employing specialists for certain
topics. If you supervise just a handful of banks, it might not be efficient to have specialists for
each and every topic. But if you supervise the 118 largest banks in the euro area, it does become
efficient. This is another huge advantage of European banking supervision.
In short, supervising banks at the European level takes us a long way towards making banks
safer  and  sounder. And  in  my  view,  it  takes  us  further  than  purely  national  supervision.  But  I
would  like  to  clarify  one  thing  that  is  often  misunderstood.  The  best  supervisors  in  the  world
cannot guarantee the success of each and every bank. Banks compete in a market. Some will
do  well  and  thrive;  others  will  do  less  well  and  fail.  They  will  make  way  for  better  business
models, for stronger banks.
What  I  want  to  say  is  this:  sometimes  banks  just  have  to  fail. And  when  that  happens,  the
European resolution mechanism kicks in, the second pillar of the banking union. It ensures that
banks can fail in an orderly manner.
And here too, the European approach has many benefits. Let me mention just two of them.
First,  over  time,  the  European  resolution  mechanism  will  gain  much  more  experience  than
national mechanisms. Why is that? Well, for the simple reason that it covers a much larger pool
of banks and so, statistically speaking, will have to deal with a larger number of banks exiting the
market.
Second, there is the Single Resolution Fund, which can step in under certain conditions to carry
some of the costs of bank failures in order to support financial stability. Since it is a European
fund,  it  has  much  more  firepower  than  any  national  fund. And  that  firepower  would  be  even
greater if a common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund were to be set up. In my view, that
should be done as soon as possible.
To summarise, European banking supervision allows us to take a broader view, which gives us
deeper insights and improves our analysis. At the same time, there are more views around the
table,  which  helps  to  counter  biases,  including  national  ones,  and  leads  to  better  decisions.
Banking supervision improves. And if a bank should fail, European resolution helps to deal with
this in a way that preserves financial stability and saves taxpayers money.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, the banking union stands for more stability. It might thus enhance the trust markets have in
banks, which in turn might lower funding costs.
But  there  is  more  to  it  than  that.  The  banking  union  also  stands  for  consistency.  We  have
harmonised  many  of  the  tools  that  we  supervisors  use,  most  notably  our  main  tool,  the
Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process. So when we supervise banks, we apply the same
high standards across the entire euro area. And when systemic banks need to be resolved, this
too is done in a consistent manner.
In other words, the banking union helps to level the playing field for banks in the euro area in
terms of supervisory practices and approaches. When banks operate across borders, they do
not need to adapt to 19 totally different forms of supervision, for instance. At the same time, they
can  engage  in  fair  competition.  They  need  not  fear  that  their  competitors  have  an  edge  just
because  supervisors  in  another  country  are  more  relaxed.  And  they  can  be  sure  that  their
business partners are as well supervised as they themselves are.
So,  the  playing  field  has  become  more  even,  which  is  essential  if  we  are  to  achieve  a  truly
European banking market. And that is our vision: a banking market that seamlessly covers the
entire banking union; a market in which banks can offer their services to customers from all over
Europe; a market in which they can compete on even ground. The benefits of such an integrated
market are well known: it is more efficient, it is more innovative, and it is better able to support
growth. This is true for the entire union as well as each country.
Are we there yet?
As I said, this is the vision. But are we there yet? No, not quite, but we are getting closer. The
banking union has brought its members closer together; it has lowered some of the barriers that
were standing in the way of a potentially seamless market. But it has not entirely removed them.
While supervision has been harmonised, the regulatory framework in Europe remains somewhat
fragmented. And this applies not just to minor details but also to big things. It runs counter to the
idea  of  a  single  market  and  fosters  regulatory  arbitrage;  and  it  violates  the  principle  of  same
business,  same  risks,  same  rules.  Every  day  we  supervisors  struggle  to  maintain  the  equal
treatment of banks that have to comply with different rules even though these differences are not
justified by national specificities with regard to risks.
That  said,  where  we  do  have  scope  to  act,  we  have  made  use  of  it.  We  have,  for  instance,
agreed to exercise options and discretions contained in European law in a harmonised manner.
This was a huge step, but more could be done. That, however, is up to the legislators. And there
are indeed a few areas where further harmonisation would help the single market to progress:
the  fit  and  proper  assessments  of  banks’  board  members,  the  liquidation  of  banks,  large
exposures and the supervision of branches of non-EU banks.
Now, don’t get me wrong: what has been achieved so far is truly remarkable. No large reform
project has ever been perfect from the start, so it is only natural that more remains to be done.
And it is worth putting our achievements into perspective. A lot has been done in a short time.
The banking union is a project that is unprecedented in scope and scale. Just look at its first
pillar, European banking supervision. It involves 26 authorities from 19 countries plus the ECB.
This sometimes prompts questions about how efficient it can really be. Did we, in the end, just
build a huge and overly complex bureaucratic machine?
Well, I’m not giving away any secrets if I tell you that it is kind of complex. And to countries that
are thinking about joining the banking union through close cooperation agreements, it might look
even more complicated.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In order to take a decision, we have to follow a finely balanced procedure. One of the reasons is
that  two  bodies  are  involved  which  have  to  interact  in  a  careful  manner.  The  first  one  is  the
ECB’s Supervisory Board, which brings together the ECB and all the national supervisors. The
second body is the ECB’s Governing Council; it brings together all the national central banks and
acts as the ultimate decision-making body.
While both bodies play a role when it comes to taking decisions, they are, at the same time,
subject to what is known as the separation principle. This principle was put in place to deal with
potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision.  It  does  so  by
ensuring  that  these  two  functions  of  the  ECB  remain  independent  from  each  other.  You  can
imagine that this results in a complex set-up.
In very broad terms, first the banking supervisory arm of the ECB prepares draft decisions, then
the Supervisory Board approves and submits these draft decisions to the Governing Council. If
the Governing Council does not object to a draft decision, the decision is adopted. But even if the
Governing  Council  does  object,  it  cannot  change  the  decision,  but  has  to  send  it  back  to  the
Supervisory  Board,  which  can  either  change  the  decision  or  call  upon  a  mediation  panel  to
resolve the difference of opinion.
I  can  see  that  countries  which  join  the  banking  union  from  outside  the  euro  area  might  have
some concerns. While they would have their seat on the Supervisory Board, they would not have
a seat in the Governing Council. So, would they lose control over decisions that might directly
affect their banks? Well, that would certainly not be in the spirit of the banking union. There are
thus safeguards to avoid just that.
Let me give you an example. If the Supervisory Board drafts a decision which affects a member
from outside the euro area, and if that member disagrees with the decision, it can formally state
its objection. Thus, the Governing Council is made aware that there are diverging views and has
to take them fully into account.
Now, what if the Governing Council objects to a draft decision, and the affected country does not
agree with the objection? In such a case it could, for instance, call upon the mediation panel to
resolve the issue.
What I want to say is this: if a country from outside the euro area were to join the banking union,
its voice would be heard at all stages of the decision-making process. And the other thing to note
is this: so far, not a single draft decision made by the Supervisory Board has been challenged by
the Governing Council.
But I admit that the decision-making process is complex. This, however, does not limit our ability
to take decisions. In 2017 alone, we took a total of 2,308 decisions. On average, that amounts to
more than six decisions a day, weekends included. So if something needs doing, it gets done.
Ladies and gentlemen, the banking union is the place to be. There is a lot to be gained from going
there. And  if  those  who  come  bring  along  a  stable  and  resilient  banking  sector  as  well  as  a
tradition of strong banking supervision, the gains will be mutual.
But let’s be honest. As any economist will tell you, there’s no such thing as a free lunch. Surely
all this must come at a price? Well, in my view, the price of being a part of the banking union is
low compared with the benefits it offers.
Is it a free lunch?
If you are part of the banking union, you need to share. You need to share control over banking
supervision and resolution. That is the price to be paid. Now, I understand that it is often seen as
vital to have total control over sensitive policy areas. And I understand that there is a feeling that if
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
you want something done well, you must do it yourself.
But is that really true? I don’t think so. If we work together, we are still in control and we can still
do things well. The history of the EU is a case in point. When European countries signed the
Treaty of Rome 61 years ago, they chose to work together instead of working alone. Today more
than ever, this choice is also a reaction to a changing world. Some of the current changes are
beyond any single government’s control, and are better managed with the help of strong allies
and good friends.
The  world  of  banking  is  no  exception.  Our  financial  systems  have  grown  closer  together  and
have become much more complex than they used to be. Large banking groups now cover many
Member States. We have all benefited from this. But if we want this trend towards integration to
continue, we must make sure it does not come at the cost of greater instability and more crises.
We need rules that apply across borders just as banks operate across borders. And we need
supervisors who have the power to see and act across borders. In short: we need to cooperate.
And when I say cooperate, that’s what I mean. I know that some may think we have created a
system in which the ECB and the Single Resolution Board hold all the power. I think otherwise.
The banking union is very much a joint project.
Just  look  at  banking  supervision.  We  at  the  ECB  cannot  act  alone.  Instead,  we  work  closely
together with the national supervisors. We also rely on their national expertise, and we rely on
their  experience.  After  all,  they  know  a  lot  about  the  local  circumstances,  such  as  specific
covered bond frameworks. Without them, European banking supervision would not work. In my
view, working together, and placing our trust in each other, is a small price to pay for a safe and
sound banking sector.
And in the end, sharing control does not mean losing control – it may even mean the opposite. As
members  of  the  banking  union,  countries  might  actually  gain  control  and  influence.  Together,
they may be able to shape policies and rules which have an impact beyond the banking union
itself. And they can also contribute to discussions at the global level, such as those of the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision.
So,  within  the  banking  union,  we  share  control  over  banking  supervision.  But  the  quest  for  a
stable financial system does not stop there. It is crucial for financial stability that each bank is as
safe  and  sound  as  it  can  be.  But  this  alone  is  not  enough.  The  health  of  each  bank  is  not
sufficient to ensure the health of the system. Things are a bit more complicated than that. When
it comes to financial stability, the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
If we want to limit risks in the whole system, we must do more than just monitor each part in
isolation. We must cooperate. Microprudential policy, which addresses risks in individual banks,
interacts with macroprudential policy, which aims to address risks in the whole system.
In  both  micro-  and  macroprudential  policy,  the  national  and  European  levels  must  work  in
tandem. And in the banking union, they do. While it is the national authorities that take decisions
in the first place, it is the ECB that assesses these decisions.
And if it sees a need to take stronger measures, it can do so; it can “top up”, as we say. For this
to happen, the ECB’s Governing Council would act on a proposal from the Supervisory Board.
So, the Supervisory Board is again strongly involved. In addition, the Supervisory Board and the
Governing Council meet regularly to discuss macroprudential issues. Again, everything is done
to  avoid  a  situation  where  a  Member  State  disagrees  with  a  decision  taken  by  the  Governing
Council.
Now, in order to work together, we must apply common standards and approaches. As I have
already said, I see such harmonisation as a major benefit of the banking union. It helps to level
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the playing field, and it ensures strong and consistent supervision.
But I know that some see this from a different angle. They feel that harmonisation is more of a
threat than a benefit. They fear that it will lead to a uniform banking sector, which leaves no room
for diversity – either for banks, or in terms of supervision and regulation.
Well, we do aim to achieve a level playing field. But we do not seek to flatten the landscape. We
do take into account country-specific circumstances that warrant specific supervisory treatment.
And this is the case not only when we act as macroprudential overseers, but also when we act
as  microprudential  supervisors,  in  particular  when  we  assess  the  business  models  of  banks.
Here, we are even bound by law to “have full regard to the different types, business models and
sizes of credit institutions”.  We understand the value of diversity, and for good reason.
1
Imagine that all banks had the same uniform business model. What would that do to innovation?
What  would  happen  to  progress?  And,  equally  importantly,  what  would  it  mean  for  financial
stability? If all banks had the same business model they would all be exposed to similar risks. If
that model was faulty, or were to be hit by an external shock, all banks would suffer.
So, as any risk manager will tell you: diversification pays off. For that reason, we value diversity
and account for it. We follow the principle of “same risks, same rules, same supervision” – which
also  means  that  different  risks  have  to  be  treated  differently  –  and  we  take  a  proportionate
approach to supervising banks.
So,  the  banking  union  is  not  at  all  about  centralising  power  or  doing  away  with  diversity.  The
banking union is a joint project, and it follows the motto of the EU: united in diversity, or forenet i
mangfoldighed as you would say in Danish.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to end by coming back to the concept of hygge.
According to the Cambridge dictionary, hygge describes a quality of cosiness. It’s about feeling
warm, comfortable and safe.
Isn’t Europe also a bit hyggelig, then? Isn’t it also about being together? Isn’t it also about feeling
comfortable and safe? From my point of view, there is much that speaks for a closer European
Union.
And the banking union is all about helping Europe to grow closer together. It helps to make the
single  market  more  single;  it  contributes  to  safer  and  sounder  banks  by  making  them  more
resilient; and it helps to foster financial stability by enabling banks to fail in an orderly manner. It
takes things such as banking supervision and resolution from the national to the European level.
And in doing so, it offers many benefits that would not be available if we kept everything at the
national level alone.
Now, I am sure that each and every one of you is fully familiar with the complexities of today’s
financial system. Each of you has a lot of insights and experience. But still, on occasions such
as  this,  surrounded  by  leaders  from  the  public  and  private  sector,  I  feel  I  must  stress  the
importance of cooperation. For all our insights and experience need to be shared.
You are all familiar with the challenges we face. But alone, none of you, none of us, would be
able  to  find  the  perfect  solution  for  regulating  and  supervising  the  financial  system.  No  single
person, no single institution and no single country has the perfect solution. We can and must
learn from each other. And we can and must work together.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The banking union now allows us to do so – effectively and efficiently.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Article 1 of the SSM Regulation (Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
