Dimitar Radev: Review of Bulgaria's economy and banking system
Banker's  Day'  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Radev,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  to  the
Association of Banks in Bulgaria, Sofia, 5 December 2017.
 Dear Colleagues,
Dear Members of Parliament,
Dear guests,
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation  –  on  my  behalf  and  on  behalf  of  my
colleagues in the BNB Governing Council. We are delighted to be with you this evening.
The passing year 2017 was good both for the economy and for the banking system in Bulgaria.
Perhaps,  this  has  been  the  first  year  for  a  long  time,  in  which  there  is  more  optimism  than
pessimism.
The economy is developing at better rates than we anticipated early this year. The fiscal position
is solid. The banking sector is in a very good state.
Capital adequacy and liquidity ratios are above the average levels for the European Union. For a
second consecutive year this sector’s profits nearly reach the highest historical levels. Lending
continues to increase. We see a long-term downward trend in non-performing loans.
We also have positive results from the accomplishment of the BNB’s main priorities. Generally,
the  measures  adopted  after  the  asset  quality  review  and  the  stress  test  last  year  are  being
implemented successfully. The efficiency of banking supervision is improving and all independent
observers of the developments in our banking sector point up this progress. Now we have in
place a framework for the recovery and resolution of banks, something that we did not have two
years  ago.  Serious  steps  forward  have  been  made  on  all  technical  issues  that  are  of  key
importance for the integration into the European financial infrastructure.
I wish to point out something in the BNB’s work, something that may be difficult to see – it is the
huge amount of experts’ work and the intensive technical consultations that we are having about
our joining the Exchange Rate Mechanism II and the euro area.
I’ve  already  had  a  suitable  occasion  to  thank  my  colleagues  in  the  central  bank.  Now  it  is  a
pleasure to thank you, too, for the very good results achieved in this sector.
All the items on our agenda are not yet completed and we still have a lot to do. I will not go into
details or numbers, but let me mention some of our today’s priorities.
I will begin with the amendments to the Law on Credit Institutions which take effect from today.
They create an appropriate legal framework for further consolidation of the BNB’s supervision
model.  You  probably  know  that  from  today  onwards  all  the  most  important  decisions  and
administrative acts will have to be approved and issued by the Governing Council.
The second group of most important issues relates to lending to so-called ‘related parties’. A
legal  framework  has  been  created  for  better  definition  of  this  subject  and  for  managing  the
relevant supervisory practices. You probably remember that last year, when we completed the
asset quality review, this was a topical issue. No problems were found in this sphere, but we did
know that some issues needed to be resolved. The new legal amendments help us make a step
forward in this direction.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  global  development  that  we  should  mention  and  that  will  affect  every  one  of  you  is  the
beginning  normalisation  of  the  leading  central  banks’  monetary  policies.  This  coincides  with  a
period  of  economic  recovery  both  nationally  and  internationally.  We  will  enter  a  new  cycle  of
increasing interest rates. This is not going to happen overnight. The process is expected to run
smoothly and to become more ostensible in 2019. This immediately raises the question of the
actions that we all have to take to manage credit risk and regarding expense policies.
Let me briefly outline what we are doing with regard to non-performing loans. Over the last two
years the improvement in this area is considerable indeed. At the end of 2014 the portion of these
loans was around 17%, now it is around 11%. Only a couple of days ago we sent the banking
association  a  draft  of  guidelines  on  the  continuation  of  this  trend.  We  expect  to  receive  your
views on these guidelines so that we can finalise them as soon as possible. It is important that
we divide the tasks related to non-performing loans into two – reducing the current level of non-
performing loans, and preventing new loans of this kind.
As  for  the  preparations  for  the  entry  into  force  of  the  new  International  Financial  Reporting
Standard No. 9, we have just aggregated the data received from you. I think, as a whole, the
sector is ready for its implementation, but more work is to be done, especially in some banks.
What I am trying to say is that this is not a one-off act; it is rather a process we are going to work
on.
And now a few words about the Law on Payment Services and Payment Systems, which will
come into effect from the beginning of 2018. It sets higher standards and requirements for banks
concerning the security of payment operations, including those made via Internet or through other
IT devices. We expect that the new law would reduce the number of disputes between providers
and  users  of  payment  services,  as  well  as  the  number  of  cases  where  the  BNB  should  get
involved directly.
Please  allow  me  to  thank  you  and  to  once  again  congratulate  you  on  this  year’s  very  good
results. I wish you joyful celebrations, a happy Banker’s Day, and very happy Christmas and New
Year, as well as good health and success in the New Year!
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
