Gent  Sejko:  Region's  financial  and  monetary  stability,  ten  years
since the crisis outbreak
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional summit on "Region's
Financial  and  Monetary  Stability,  Ten  Years  since  the  Crisis  Outbreak",  Governor's  Panel
"Monetary policy and the stability of the banking systems in the countries of the region – a decade
after the Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy", Bečići, Montenegro, 18 June 2018.
 Dear Guests,
Fellow Colleagues,
It is a pleasure to be amongst you today and to be able to share opinions on some of the most
pressing challenges we are facing at the moment.
I would like to focus my remarks on the topic of exchange rates. In particular, I would like to focus
on how the monetary policy reaction should be based in the exchange rate movements. I take my
premise from the rapid appreciation episode we experienced recently in Albania, which forced us
to launch an FX purchase program as a last line of defence towards ensuring medium term price
stability.
To cover this topic, first I intend to briefly discuss on various monetary policy regimes. I will then
discuss on the implications of exchange rate movements for inflation targeting central banks. To
conclude, I will give you a short overview of recent exchange rate developments in Albania and
our reaction towards them.
1.         The choice and implications of exchange rate regimes
A useful starting point on this topic would be to discuss the different options we have. We are
fully aware that small open and financially integrated economies have to choose between running
an independent monetary policy aiming to preserve macroeconomic stability, usually defined in
terms of an inflation target, and fixing the exchange rate. Both these options have their benefits
and drawbacks.
The first option – i.e. that of running an independent monetary policy – means central banks can
adjust  domestic  interest  rates  and  domestic  liquidity  conditions,  in  order  to  preserve
macroeconomic stability and to accommodate potential shocks to their economies. Furthermore,
exchange rate movements and corrections act as a shock absorber to various external shocks.
But on the other hand, central banks give up from the option of pursuing exchange rate stability,
both as a nominal anchor and as an instrument of promoting international trade.
The choice of the second option – i.e. that of fixing your exchange rate – revolves around two
main assumptions. The first is that exchange rate stability promotes external trade. The second
is that importing credibility from the anchor foreign central bank, such as the ECB, helps promote
overall domestic monetary stability. But on the other hand, this choice means central banks give
up from the option of running an independent monetary policy, or at least they accept to lose a
large piece of this independence. Consequently, they have to rely more on macro-prudential tools
or fiscal policies, in order to accommodate domestic shocks or to mitigate the impact of external
ones.
Our region offers a large variety of monetary regime choices. I will not attempt to do any analysis
here but I will limit my remarks to saying that the inflation targeting and the flexible exchange rate
regime we have chosen in Albania has served us perfectly well.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our  monetary  framework  has  strengthened  our  successful  transition  and  has  increased  the
resilience of our economy. Over the past two decades Albania has enjoyed: (i) rapid economic
growth,  –  with  GDP  growth  averaging  at  5  percent;  (ii)  price  stability,  –  with  inflation  rates
averaging at 2.4 percent; and, (iii) a rapid monetization, – with financial assets increasing from 52
to 92 percent of GDP.
Furthermore, the flexible exchange rate has proved to be a reliable shock absorber. The Albanian
lek depreciated by around 11% in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis. This depreciation occurred in
the face of reduced external demand, decreased capital inflows, and higher risk premia in the
domestic  financial  market.  This  helped  us  regain  some  external  competitiveness,  but  it  also
allowed us to pursue an expansionary monetary policy and to avoid recession.
2.         Exchange rate movements under an inflation targeting regime
An exclusive commitment to  price  stability  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  central  banks  can
afford to ignore exchange rate movements.
In  small  open  economies,  such  as  ours,  exchange  rates  have  both,  a  direct  effect  on  prices
through the imported goods, and an indirect one through their impact on cost competitiveness,
external  balances  and  aggregate  demand.  Therefore,  our  macroeconomic  forecasting  and
monetary policy analysis models prescribe an important role to the exchange rate. Furthermore,
in  financially  euroized  economies,  such  as  ours,  exchange  rate  movements  tend  to  have
financial  stability  implications.  Rapid  depreciation  increase  NPLs,  while  prolonged  periods  of
appreciation tend to impose financial risks and encourage further euroization.
In  designing  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  trend
movements driven by fundamentals, and short term volatility driven by sporadic factors or market
imperfections.
Inflation targeting central banks should strive to avoid leaning against trend movements in the
exchange  rate.  As  long  as  these  movements  are  in  line  with  fundamentals,  these  trends
represent structural adjustments that do not move the economy away from equilibrium. On the
other hand, short term exchange rate volatility is normal in a fully flexible exchange rate regime.
The reaction of central banks should depend on their impact on inflation, which in itself depends
on  the  intensity  and  duration  of  such  volatility.  The  stronger  the  duration  and  the  higher  the
intensity of the shocks, the bigger would be the expected impact on inflation, the greater the risk
of  rapid  shifts  in  inflation  expectations,  and  the  higher  the  need  for  a  systematic  reaction  of
monetary policy.
3.         Exchange rate movements and the Bank of Albania reaction to them
The above mentioned facts have guided our reaction to the recent appreciation of the exchange
rate in Albania.
The trend appreciation started around the second half of 2015, but it gathered considerable pace
in 2018. Lek appreciated on average by 2.3 percent against the euro in 2016 and 2017, while it
appreciated by around 7 percent during the first half of 2018.
Our analyses indicate clearly differing explanations for the pre and post 2018 appreciation.
The  2016–2017  lek  appreciation  has  been  largely  in  line  with  improving  fundamentals  in  the
economy. Some of these structural improvements include:
Declining current account deficits, on account of improved exports;
Increased capital inflows, on account of high FDIs;
Reduced financial market risk premia and increased confidence in our financial institutions.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the contrary, the rapid appreciation we experienced in 2018 has been largely a FX market
driven phenomenon. News of a sudden and sustained influx of foreign currency induced one-
sided expectations in the FX market. These expectations were reflected in an accelerated supply
of  foreign  currency  and  delayed  demand  for  it,  generating  a  vicious  cycle  of  continued
appreciation.
The Bank of Albania did not react upon the real appreciation trend of the past two years. While
minor miss-alignments were still present, we assessed the trend was largely driven by improving
fundaments. Thus, it allowed us to focus our monetary policy on achieving our 3 percent inflation
target.
We also did not react upon the recent financial market driven appreciation, in full consistence
with our monetary policy and exchange rate regimes. We expected for the market to self-regulate
and contain these shocks. However, this did not prove to be the case and the exchange rate
appreciation accelerated.
A  re-assessment  of  its  implication  on  price  stability  indicated  this  appreciation  was  not
compatible with our price stability target over the medium term. Under these premises, the Bank
of Albania was forced to act.
We lowered the policy rate to a new historical minimum of 1 percent.
We clearly communicated the Bank of Albania did not assess this appreciation to be in line
with fundamentals, anymore.
Lastly, we announced the initiation of an FX purchase program in the domestic market. This
program was aimed at controlling the pace of appreciation, removing the excessive short
term FX supply and reversing expectations and one-sided bets in the market.
In regard to this last one, I would like to emphasize the main features of it:
First, it was undertaken as measure of last resort, when the space for further conventional policy
rate cuts was limited. Therefore, any additional monetary policy stimulus would need to make
use of unconventional instruments.
Second, it was clearly communicated to the market to be of both an exceptional and a temporary
nature. Therefore, it does not represent a shift from our commitment to a flexible exchange rate
regime, and should not be represented as such.
As a result, these measures proved to be efficient and now the exchange rate movements are
going back to normality.
Thank You!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
