    
 
Looking out for the policyholder 
 
Speech given by 
Sam Woods, Deputy Governor, Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive Officer, 
Prudential Regulation Authority 
  Association of British Insurers Annual Conference 2018, London 
27 February 2018 
            I am grateful to Rebecca Pu for her assistance in preparing this speech and to other colleagues for comments and 
contributions.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
   
 
 
I will begin this speech with a bold claim: insurance regulation is fun! 
 This is just as well, because it is half of what we do at the PRA.  Parliament very wisely decided to put 
prudential regulation of banks and insurers together in one institution following the financial crisis.  I think this 
works very well, because there are many synergies.  Both sectors provide critical services to the real 
economy, bringing customers’ money directly onto their balance sheets.  And I would argue, for instance,  
that the basic qualities which make a good chairperson aren’t materially different between banking and 
insurance.  
 But there are also very big differences.  An annuity writer is nothing like a building society.  London Market 
underwriters I have sat next to do a very, very different thing to what goes on in banks.  The eighty actuaries 
we employ as part of our insurance division speak a different language from our risk specialists sat on the 
floor above them at 20 Moorgate.  
 Much of the time, this insurance activity goes on underneath the radar, relative to banking.  But in recent 
months, the spotlight of the Treasury Select Committee (TSC) has swung onto this area, and we have all 
been enjoying the debate!  Many hours have been spent highlighting the biblical scale of the reporting 
requirements, the wickedness of the risk margin calculations, the mystical nature of the  
Ultimate Forward Rate…I could extend this list tenfold.  Then we have had a rather more pointed exchange 
about whether we at the PRA have been over-zealous in our implementation of Solvency II, perhaps 
damaging competition, or making life too difficult for insurance companies, or denying the nation of vital new 
infrastructure by being too cautious about insurers’ investment strategies, or all three! 
 All of these are important topics, and in the course of the debate I am as guilty of focusing on them as 
anyone else.  Indeed, I will double-down by talking about some of them again today.  So for those of us 
inside the insurance beltway, this is a very useful and timely debate and I think it is a great thing that the TSC 
has taken an interest.  Can we make our implementation of Solvency II work better?  In my opinion, despite 
some inevitable differences of view, there is in fact a strong degree of agreement between us, the TSC and 
the industry about the answer to that question.  
 Where is the policyholder? 
 However, in all the blizzard of insurance and regulatory jargon, I think something has been missing from our 
discussions.  Where is the policyholder?  Through our statutory objectives, Parliament has asked us to look 
out for the policyholder – but in an environment where insurance is provided by private sector firms.  This 
means that other actors – particularly firms’ management, employees, shareholders and creditors – have an 
important role and a valid claim on our deliberations.  As the regulator we need somehow to balance these 
various interests as best we can, but we do have a particular duty to represent the interests of the 
policyholder. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  
 
 
How should we go about delivering this responsibility?  The best way into that question is to ask another one: 
why do we bother to regulate insurance companies at all? 
 We all in this room probably take for granted that we need prudential regulation of insurers; but every now 
and then I think it is worth reminding ourselves why this is so.  
 Insurance comes in many different forms and many people rely on insurance for their livelihoods.  Some rely 
on insurance proceeds to ensure they have a comfortable retirement.  Some rely on insurance pay-outs 
following a serious accident, for example from a workplace injury or a car crash.  Insurance allows us to go 
about our daily lives secure in the knowledge that there is a financial safety net should we get into trouble. 
And this is a huge business – for instance, in the UK there are around 6 million pension annuities in force 
and around 27 million motor insurance policies.1 
 We give money to insurance companies trusting that they will make good on their promise to us, in the event 
that an insured risk crystallises.  ‘Trust’ is the key word here, as many people cannot reliably assess whether 
an insurer will be able to fulfil its financial promise if the need ever arises.  It can be very expensive to switch 
insurers and so people can find themselves ‘locked in’ with the same insurer.  And depending on the nature 
of the contract and claim, it may be months or years before a claim either arises or is fully settled.  
 Even if they do have the right information, it would be unreasonable to expect individuals to be able to exert 
a strong disciplining effect on insurers.  Even the best-informed retail policyholder would not be able to make 
sure that an insurer holds adequate reserves to pay claims, that it does not grow excessively by taking on 
too much risk, or that it does not under-price in an unsustainable manner to attract new business.  
 We have seen the significant human cost that can be associated with insurance failures.  A prominent 
example is the fate of over a million policyholders when Equitable Life came to the brink of collapse in 2000. 
Equitable was forced to close to new business, after it found it could no longer honour its promises on 
offering guaranteed annuity rates on its products.  Many of its customers, aged 75 and over, had invested 
their life savings into these products but were left with significantly reduced retirement income.  Ten years 
later, the Government agreed to pay compensation amounting to £1.5 billion.  But many policyholders and 
their families suffered over the decade when their fate remained uncertain, and some of those affected were 
no longer alive to benefit personally from the compensation. 
 Another way to think about this is to consider the importance, at a human level, of what insurance companies 
do – and therefore, how we would feel about it if an insurer couldn’t make good on its promises.  Much of this 
is about the everyday business of work, family and home, and I have spent some time this year with 
policyholders to remind myself of this.  The most striking thing about talking to a group of policyholders is 
simply the vast range of insurance needs people have, from burst pipes to with-profits funds.  One is also 
                                                      
1 Based on ABI data, as at end 2016. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  
 
 
struck by how complex people find insurance, and some of the different experiences that can arise.  One 
person I spoke to had a really excellent experience with a UK home insurer.  Another’s family had been 
injured in a motorway pile-up, and was having terrible difficulty trying to find out if the non-UK insurer of the 
driver who had hit them is or is not solvent.  I also spoke to a group of small business owners, and was 
struck by how reliant many of them are on insurance for running their businesses.  One of them was held 
liable for another company’s goods damaged in transit, and would have gone bust if it wasn’t for the 
insurance pay-out.  
 I also remember another case.  A middle-aged woman suffered a brain tumour, and became unable to work 
as a result.  Her chief concern was not her own well-being, but a crushing fear that – given her lost income – 
her son would no longer feel able to go to university, without a bit of financial support from her.  It all hung on 
whether the insurance company would pay out on her term assurance policy.  It was a very, very intense 
moment when this insurance company called her to explain that they would indeed pay out.  When you hear 
the huge relief of people when an insurance company comes through in their hour of greatest need, you 
realise two things: how important this industry is, and how important it is that insurance companies are safe 
and sound.  
 But this is not only a life insurance issue.  General insurance also serves a very important role, and similarly 
when things go wrong the consequences can be severe.  A string of high-profile failures in the 1960s and 
1970s included the failure of Fire, Auto and Marine, which left 400,000 (mostly motor) policyholders 
uninsured, and an even bigger failure in 1971 when Vehicle & General, with 1.2 million policyholders, 
collapsed.  You can imagine the chaos this caused, even on the scale of the 1970s.  And a couple of 
decades later, many companies and individuals suffered when things went wrong in the Lloyd’s Market.  
Events like these, resulting in part from poor regulation, of course do great harm to the UK’s reputation as a 
good place to do insurance business. 
 A more extreme event still was the failure of HIH Insurance in 2001 in Australia.  About 200 permanently 
disabled people claiming on salary continuance policies with HIH stopped receiving their regular payments, 
which they often relied on for day-to-day living expenses.  Thousands of holders of professional indemnity, 
public liability, home warranty and travel insurance policies found themselves uninsured for claims made by 
or against them.  And almost AUD$ 2 billion of construction activity was put on hold whilst replacement 
builders’ warranty insurance cover was sought.     
 This illustrates the fact that we particularly need to be mindful of innocent third parties who don’t actually buy 
insurance policies, such as the victims of motor accidents and employees who suffer workplace injuries or 
illnesses.  Such covers are compulsory and the motorists and companies who buy them are even more likely 
to select the lowest price.  Without regulation, that would present an obvious opportunity for unscrupulous 
insurers.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  
 
 
You will notice that I have not mentioned the most spectacular insurance failure of all – that of AIG in 2008, 
which played a significant role in the financial crisis.  Of course we need to keep an eye on the financial 
stability of insurance activity, but this omission is deliberate.  Our chief day-to-day concern with insurers at 
the PRA is safety and soundness and policyholder protection.  
 Competition and competitiveness  
 In this context, let me turn to the one element of the current debate about Solvency II – whether we’ve been 
over-zealous in implementation and not taken enough heed of competition and/or competitiveness.  So what 
does our secondary competition objective require of us?  And what have we actually done?  
 In 2014, the PRA was given a secondary objective to facilitate effective competition.  This helps inform 
decisions about new regulation and supervision policies.  It influences how we choose between alternative 
ways of achieving our primary objectives, provides a useful check on whether prudential interventions are 
being applied proportionately, and guards against the risks of unintended consequences.  This is a useful, 
and very British, innovation.  
 In support of our competition objective on the insurance side, we have taken a number of steps to achieve a 
better fit between regulation and firms' particular business models, fostering a UK market which comprises a 
very wide range of businesses, by size and line of business.  For example: 
   We have approved many more internal models than any other EEA jurisdiction.  Small as well as large 
firms are able to use internal models: of the 23 internal models approved to date, 8 were for smaller 
firms.  
  More generally, we have issued over 700 approvals and waivers under Solvency II; many of these allow 
for alternative approaches to calculating technical provisions and capital requirements.  We have made 
full use of the flexibility within Solvency II to tailor regulatory requirements to the wide range of different 
insurance business models present in the UK.  
  We have set out our proposals to reduce the reporting burden on firms.  Of the part of the reporting 
package that is within the PRA’s gift to change, our proposals would reduce the required reporting by up 
to half. 
  We have implemented a streamlined and tailored regime for the smallest firms, representing 35% of the 
firms we regulate, that fall outside the scope of Solvency II. 
  We continue to support new firm authorisations, having authorised 26 new insurance firms since 2013. 
Furthermore, we are exploring how we might improve our current authorisations approach to facilitate 
the entry of new insurers.  
 Some have expressed concern that the PRA's focus on prudential matters may inhibit competition.  I would 
argue that the opposite is true.  Prudential regulation is integral to competition.  Without minimum standards, 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  
 
 
policyholders would be much more exposed to the risks presented by imprudently run firms.  An absence of 
prudent standards would enable less scrupulous firms to drive out better-managed firms by engaging in 
unsustainable pricing practices in order to gain a greater market share.  This perversion of competition could 
lead to the failure of insurers to pay out claims and reputational damage to the wider UK insurance market.  
 The collapse of a large insurer would also lead to higher prices for new consumers.  This is because the 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme would need to be replenished by the surviving firms, who would in 
turn pass on these costs to their customers.  Robust prudential standards underpin the sustainability of the 
fund and reduce the potential need for taxpayer funds to compensate policyholders following a failure, as we 
have seen in the past. 
 I am not therefore persuaded of the case for giving a primary competition objective to the PRA.  This would 
likely require the PRA to pursue competition as an objective in its own right and enable it to use its powers 
for that purpose alone. It's difficult to say what specific activities this would entail for the PRA.  Potentially, 
the PRA would be given the same competition powers that sit with the FCA, allowing the PRA to undertake 
market studies with a view to introducing new rules with the specific aim of promoting competition.  Given the 
potential for overlap with the FCA and the CMA, which both have specific objectives to promote competition, 
I would be wary of taking this route. 
 Our secondary competition objective refers to competition, not competitiveness.  This is an important 
distinction. Competitiveness is usually taken to mean a firm’s ability to compete on cost or quality grounds. 
Competition includes wider factors, for example: the range of firms competing in the market; barriers to entry, 
expansion or exit; and incentives to innovate and compete.  But the two concepts are linked; competition is 
what drives innovation and ultimately drives productivity and long-term competitiveness.  On the other hand, 
measures designed primarily to make one part of the market more competitive than another, through 
measures that favour one group of firms over another, will reduce innovation and productivity and be 
damaging in the long run. So facilitating competition brings the right type of competitiveness. 
 Fresh in the memory is an example of how we have had regard to competitiveness, as required in the 
Chancellor’s letter to the PRC2.  We worked closely with HMT, the FCA and industry to design a new, 
commercially viable framework for Insurance Special Purpose Vehicles (ISPVs).3  Given growth in the 
insurance linked securities (ILS) market, this is a good opportunity for the UK as we are one of the first 
Solvency II jurisdictions to have done this.  The framework went live in December 2017 and very shortly 
thereafter the PRA authorised its first ILS vehicle. 
                                                       
2 In March 2017, the Chancellor of the Exchequer sent a letter to the Governor of the Bank of England recommending that the PRA 
should have regard to considerations including: competition; growth; competitiveness; innovation; trade; and better outcomes for 
consumers.  
3 ISPVs are the vehicles central to the structure of insurance linked securities which provide (re)insurers an alternative, capital  
markets-focussed form of risk transfer to traditional reinsurance products.  It is a growing and particularly innovative market, often able 
to offer (re)insurers more attractive terms. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  
 
 
Solvency II reform  
 Even though insurance regulation is fun, I would love to finish this speech without a long technical section on 
Solvency II.  The good news for you here in the room is: we will set it all out in our report to the TSC, so I will 
spare you the detail.  
 When it comes to Solvency II, it pays to see the woods for the trees. Let me briefly address a couple of 
myths.   
 First, there is simply no evidence to suggest that the introduction of Solvency II has crushed the profitability 
or growth of UK insurance companies.  Over the two years following the introduction of SII, assets in the UK 
insurance sector grew by more than 10%.  Returns on equity for larger UK insurers have remained steady at 
above 9%, close to the levels seen on average since 2010.  And UK life insurers’ average credit default swap 
premium fell from 70 basis points on 1 January 2016 to 47 basis points on 6 February 2018.   
 Second, there is no convincing evidence that Solvency II has driven up prices for UK insurance 
policyholders.  On the general insurance side, average motor and household premiums and changes in 
premiums were not in our assessment affected by the introduction of Solvency II.  In both motor and 
household, rates hardened in 2015 due to greater loss experience, and UK motor insurers were particularly 
affected by the reduction in the ‘Ogden rate’4.  Risk-free market interest rates and corporate bond spreads 
continue to be the dominant driver of annuity prices – this relationship does not appear to have changed 
since Solvency II came into effect.  The limited impact of Solvency II on pricing should not surprise us, given 
that the running costs of the new regime represent 0.07% of insurance premiums5 in the UK, which you 
could think of (for instance) as 35p on an average motor policy premium last year of £493.  
 As we get more experience of operating Solvency II, however, it is right that we make our implementation of 
the directive work better.  That means, for example, reducing unnecessary costs and complications which 
have no prudential benefit.    
 We are therefore consulting on an extensive package of reforms for the part of the Solvency II framework 
over which we have discretion.  We are making a series of proposals to give firms greater confidence in 
using the MA.  We propose to reduce the amount of time firms (and we) have to spend on discussing and 
agreeing minor changes to internal models.  And we will cut reporting requirements, particularly for smaller 
firms.  On two further points – dynamic volatility adjustment and the risk margin – we are still working and will 
respond to the TSC in due course.  On the risk margin we will act to tackle the problems we, the industry and 
the TSC have agreed exist. 
                                                      
4 From 2.5% to -0.75%. The Ogden rate is used to discount future liabilities for personal injury and fatality claims. 
5 Based on 2016 data. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  
 
 
But let me be clear: we are not going to go soft.  We can tell the difference between feedback about a 
genuine technical flaw and generalised lobbying for lighter-touch regulation.  And we will continue with our 
forward-looking, judgement-based approach to supervision – which will inevitably mean that conflicts with 
firms sometimes arise.  This is inherent in a system in which a regulator is charged with pursuing the public 
interest through the activities of privately-owned firms. 
 In that spirit, let me say a few words about the Matching Adjustment (MA).  Allowing insurers to capitalise an 
illiquidity premium has long been a feature of the UK regime.  It makes sense and we fought hard to get it 
included in Solvency II.  It delivers a massive benefit to those insurers that use it – £66 billion in capital which 
is the difference between those firms being at 155% of their capital requirement and 65% of it.6  
 Given the size of the benefit, we should all want to handle this part of the regime very carefully.  We are 
applying particular scrutiny to two areas: first, the internal ratings and spreads on direct investments in illiquid 
assets, particularly the senior tranches of internal securitisations; and second, the use of financial 
restructuring to bring new assets within the MA.  We have accepted internal securitisations as a means to 
achieve fixed cash flows.  But that does not alter the requirement that the underlying assets must match the 
maturities of the annuity liabilities.  We will of course take a careful and prudent approach to all such activity. 
We have made a series of proposals to give firms greater confidence about which assets can attract MA, and 
how we will deal with any breaches.  But my message to the firms is: if we ended up in a position where the 
MA’s fundamental credibility was undermined for the sake of a few marginal items, we would all regret it 
immensely.  Collectively, we need to remain on a sensible path. 
 Conclusion 
 I began by making the claim, which might sound somewhat outlandish to the uninitiated, that insurance 
regulation is fun.  It is!  But it is also a deeply serious business, precisely because the insurance industry 
plays such a vital role in society. 
 I hope you will see from our response to the TSC that we at the PRA – right up to and including the 
Prudential Regulation Committee – have been putting a lot of effort into this package of reforms, which are 
needed in order to make Solvency II work better in the UK.  But we haven’t done this in a regulatory ivory 
tower.  We have always engaged closely with industry – through our membership on various ABI working 
groups, our frequent meetings with firms and our close analysis of comments we receive through public 
consultations.  However, we acknowledge that the challenge of Solvency II implementation may have 
crowded out space to engage with the industry and stakeholders on other strategic issues.  We have 
therefore decided to go further, and with Martin Gilbert’s agreement we are launching an insurance  
sub-committee of our Practitioner Panel in order to free up more space for discussion focussed on insurance 
issues.    
                                                      
6 Based on Solvency II data, as at end 2016. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
  
 
 
It’s important that we get insurance regulation right.  At this juncture, that means two things in particular. 
 First, the TSC has rightly highlighted aspects of Solvency II which are not working well.  We are taking 
forward reforms to address those issues at a good pace. 
 Second, we need to maintain high standards of safety and soundness for UK insurers – not primarily for 
financial stability reasons, but in order to ensure an appropriate degree of protection for policyholders.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
 