Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with Welt am Sonntag
Interview by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  Welt  am
Sonntag, conducted by Ms Anja Ettel and Ms Anne Kunz on 30 July 2018 and published on 5
August 2018.
 15 September marks the tenth anniversary of the collapse of the US investment bank
Lehman Brothers. You were then the chief banking supervisor at the Federal Financial
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). Do you remember that day?
Yes, I can remember it vividly. I was in the BaFin that weekend and participated in the crisis calls
with the international supervisors. I saw at first hand how things came to a head that weekend. In
the night from Sunday to Monday, the US colleagues decided not to rescue Lehman. Three of us
were holding the fort at the BaFin that night.
Were you immediately aware of the magnitude of what was happening?
We  knew  that  the  collapse  of  such  a  bank  would  not  leave  the  financial  world  unscathed.
Nonetheless,  we  all  underestimated  the  severity  of  the  fallout.  Nobody  foresaw  a  crisis  of
confidence that would bring whole markets to a standstill.
Would Lehman still be possible today?
I would never say that there will never be another crisis. But there’s no doubt that institutions and
supervisors  are  now  better  prepared.  Banks  hold  much  more  capital  and  liquidity.  Their  risk
management  and  corporate  governance  are  better  too,  albeit  not  yet  good  enough  at  every
institution.
One  theory  has  it  that  the  financial  crisis  would  not  have  unfolded  as  it  did  if  more
women had been on the banks’ boards. Is there some truth in that?
I don’t know about that – but there is good reason to believe that mixed teams come up with
better results. Unfortunately, women are still under-represented at board level.
Not in supervision though.
There have always been more women in supervision. But I would resist any attempt to attribute
certain  behaviours  solely  to  gender.  People  at  the  top  need  to  have  qualities  such  as
assertiveness and decisiveness – that goes for men and women. And that applies in supervision
too.
For example?
As a supervisor I have to state unpleasant truths and take tough decisions; I have to fight my
corner time and time again. And that leaves its mark. People are shaped by their profession.
How do you react to the criticism that supervision has become too strong – and is partly
why European banks are so weak compared with their US peers.
Do you think that’s true?
The profitable US banks are in any case leaving European banks further behind.
I find that idea quite amusing. Conversely, it means that the weaker the supervision, the stronger
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the banks. The truth is that strict supervision leads to strong banks. Institutions become more
resilient when supervisors require them to hold adequate capital to cover their risks and insist on
sufficient liquidity and better risk management.
The US institutions received comprehensive state aid during the crisis. And now the
United States is even rolling back regulation. Both of these represent a disadvantage
for domestic banks.
Up to now, the US authorities have generally only revoked rules that went beyond international
standards. But you do have a point. It’s important that large international institutions meet the
same  standards,  particularly  in  trading.  That  is  why  we  need  to  have  the  new  Basel  rules
implemented  in  all  major  financial  centres.  Moreover,  let’s  not  forget  that  the  United  States
managed to quickly return to a growth path. That has of course been of great benefit to the US
banking system too. We were much slower in that regard, also in tackling structural problems.
One  outcome  of  the  financial  crisis  was  the  ECB’s  controversial  asset  purchase
programme.  The  Governing  Council  has  indeed  decided  to  stop  purchases,  but  only
very slowly. Meanwhile German social security funds have been suffering enormously
from the negative interest rates for a long time. Shouldn’t you be moving more quickly?
Ending the asset purchase programme is a major first step. But I agree that the side-effects of
an  extraordinarily  loose  monetary  policy  increase  over  time  and  I  have  pointed  that  out
repeatedly. But after pursuing such an expansionary monetary policy, it would be wrong to now
move abruptly in the other direction. That wouldn’t help either the economy or price stability.
But rather?
I am very much in favour of normalising monetary policy. That implies that we should gradually
increase  interest  rates  again.  However,  we  can  only  do  that  if  we  are  on  a  sustainable  path
towards price stability. Moreover, we should not forget that the social security funds would be in a
much  weaker  financial  position  today  if  economic  growth  had  been  held  back  by  very  tight
monetary policy and higher unemployment. And German savers too sometimes forget that they
can only save if they have a job. The trick therefore is to move steadily towards the exit without
disrupting growth.
Non-performing  loans  are  another  problem.  There  are  in  fact  new  rules  for  reducing
them.  Compared  with  the  ECB’s  earlier  plans,  the  compromise  appears  very  half-
hearted.
Objection. The rules are definitely not half-hearted. Uniform expectations have been specified for
future non-performing loans (NPLs) and each bank will receive clear and ambitious supervisory
targets for the stock of existing NPLs. We need to bear in mind that the starting level of NPL
stock differs across banks.
Nevertheless, a single currency area needs uniform rules.
That’s exactly what there is now. We have found a yardstick for all loans which become non-
performing. And not only for newly arranged loans, but also for existing loans which will cease to
be serviced in the future. I considered that to be very important because it prevents institutions
from deferring too many loan loss provisions.
You don’t seem to be really satisfied with the outcome.
I think the concept is good. However, in some respects I would have liked to be somewhat more
ambitious.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Have the plans failed because of Italy?
The agreement now reached is a decision taken by the ECB’s Supervisory Board, in which 25
supervisors find a common position. The outcome is a very good package, all in all.
Institutions with long transition periods could be treated leniently.
Don’t  worry,  we  are  tough.  It’s  not  our  job  as  supervisor  to  prevent  banks  from  leaving  the
market. In other words, we aren’t here to ensure the survival of each bank. We are here to react
promptly to risks. And also to recognise when a bank is indeed no longer viable and has to be
resolved.
How can it be then that a bank such as Monte dei Paschi is still viable as far as the ECB
is concerned?
I cannot talk about individual institutions. In principle of course, banks hit by a crisis should also
be  given  a  new  chance  to  become  viable  through  appropriate  measures,  such  as  a  capital
injection or a change in the business model.
Are national champions still important?
I would like to see more euro area champions.
Companies in Germany have good credit lines, but banks hardly earn anything from their
lending activities.
Competition is indeed fierce. Too much competition can also bring disadvantages.
What can we do about that?
Supervisors have to work with the existing banking market. Consolidation is primarily a matter for
the market. What’s more, customers need to realise that they have to pay for good services.
Listening to you, that all sounds great. Is there anything that keeps you awake at night?
I always sleep very well. That’s probably one of my strengths [laughs]. But to be serious, what I
really  do  worry  about  is  the  threat  of  deregulation.  Not  only  in  the  United  States,  but  also  in
Europe.
Domestic banks haven’t noticed this yet.
That  may  be,  but  I  see  a  clear  movement  in  that  direction  in  current  proposals  to  change
European  legislation. Attitudes  towards  strong  supervision  are  no  longer  so  positive. After  the
financial  crisis,  politicians  reinforced  the  supervisory  function  and  gave  it  tools  to  pre-empt
looming risks. Prior to that, supervisors were often unable to react until the damage had been
done. We need to watch out for the pendulum swinging back.
Where do you see signs of that?
There are some proposals for the Capital Requirements Directive that I am concerned about. It
may become more difficult for supervisors to require more capital for certain risks. This would
weaken the supervisory tools.
Danièle Nouy’s term as Chair of ECB Banking Supervision finishes at the end of the
year. Could you imagine taking her place?
I have a great passion for banking supervision, and it will be a turning point for me when I stop
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
doing it. But I am convinced that job rotation is good, at all levels. It would be wrong to exclude the
Chair and Vice-Chair from this. A fresh perspective is also important in banking supervision.
And for you personally?
My ECB Executive Board mandate will then still have three years to run. I will take on new tasks
there in early 2019. I won’t get bored.
For example, what about heading the Bundesbank, a position which is likely to change
next year?
I’m not giving that any thought at present.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
