Yannis  Stournaras:  Challenges  and  prospects  for  sustainable
growth
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Second
Sustainability Summit for South-East Europe and the Mediterranean "Challenges and prospects
for sustainable growth", Athens, 1 October 2018.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and to have the opportunity to share my
thoughts on the challenges and prospects of sustainable growth.
The reason why central banks today have an interest in sustainable growth is, in my view, self-
evident: because financial stability without a sustainable growth model is simply inconceivable.
Economic  growth  has  come  at  a  growing  cost  to  the  environment.  It  is  characteristic  that  1
August 2018 marked the Earth Overshoot Day , by which humanity had exhausted all the natural
resources that ecosystems can renew in a year. At the current juncture, sustainability is highly
relevant for our generation as well as for generations to come, as the three pillars of sustainable
development,  i.e.  society,  the  economy  and,  of  course,  the  environment,  increasingly  come
under  pressure.  Therefore,  redefining  the  concept  of  growth  in  a  sustainability  context  will  be
crucial to our future path.
1
According to the United Nations, a sustainable future hinges on the achievement of 17 goals by
2030.  In  particular,  goals  such  as  global  prosperity  with  no  poverty  and  zero  hunger,  quality
education,  equality,  decent  work,  access  to  clean  water,  affordable  energy,  justice,  strong
institutions and climate action feature prominently on the sustainable development roadmap.
Global prosperity should be a priority for all, and the goals concern all nations, not only the less
developed ones. At a time when we are more interconnected than ever, the welfare of nations
and  their  citizens  is  also  interdependent  and  requires  a  holistic  approach  to  achieving  the
common sustainable development goals. Sustainability challenges, especially those relating to
climate change, are of a global nature and require cooperation from all countries. Unwillingness
to cooperate in climate action is totally unjustified and illogical, given that climate change affects
the entire planet.
The cooperation of all is crucial to the achievement of the goals, while public and private sector
synergies are necessary to finance this process, which entails considerable cost  but also huge
value. There are many challenges and risks along the way, as established growth models will
need to be adjusted in order to ensure long-term sustainability.
2
Under conditions of depletion of natural resources worldwide, a focus on more efficient use and
minimisation of waste emerges as the only and urgent option. The model of a “linear” economy
prevailing today (sourcing – manufacturing – usage – disposal), on which most economies since
the Industrial Revolution have relied, is no longer sustainable. Just like nature, which operates in
a  “circular”  manner,  business  activity  can  become  sustainable  by  switching  from  the  “linear”
model  to  a  “circular”  one.  Circular  economy  means  that  the  value  of  products,  materials  and
resources  is  maintained  in  the  economy  for  as  long  as  possible  and  waste  generation  is
minimised.
The  transition  to  a  circular  economy  requires  interventions  on  the  supply  side,  such  as  eco-
design and longer life cycles of products, as well as on the demand side, through a change in
consumption and dietary patterns and a more efficient management of waste, with appropriate
financial incentives and community engagement. This transition is expected to have a positive
effect on production, employment, climate, nature, natural resources and social well-being . For
3
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
example, our dietary habits have a devastating effect on the planet’s natural resources, land and
water reserves. A lower consumption of meat and dairy products would bring substantial savings
on cultivated land and water resources, reduce carbon emissions and gradually restore forests
and wildlife.
One major challenge in achieving the sustainable development goals relates to decarbonisation,
i.e.  the  removal  or  reduction  of  carbon  dioxide  from  energy  sources.  The  current  and  future
impacts  on  society  and  sustainable  development  are  such  that  make  the  use  of  fossil  fuels
prohibitive. Climate change and global warming are linked to anthropogenic activity, in particular
the use of fossil fuels and carbon emissions. We need to mitigate climate change by rapidly and
drastically  reducing  emissions,  adopting  the  right  energy  management  and  high  efficiency
practices, by financing green energy, fostering energy-saving investment and promoting a zero-
emission economy in the context of the respective European policies. Indeed, it seems that we
are  rapidly  approaching  the  point  of  no  return,  after  which  even  a  drastic  reduction  of  carbon
emissions will no longer be enough to reverse the trend and stop a global tragedy, for example
the accelerated melting of polar ice caps.
Along the road, there are clearly risks, as well as opportunities: physical risks arising from the
impacts of climate change, but also transition risks arising from the adjustment to a low-carbon
economy. In the process, businesses may face costs, valuation losses and disruptions. Yet, a
careful and timely transition will also open up opportunities, associated with the development of
new renewable energy and innovative products, investment in energy saving, new infrastructure
and  new  jobs.  The  transformation  of  the  global  economy  towards  decarbonisation  cannot  but
have a positive net outcome.
Long-term value creation is a matter of effective climate risk management and transition to a
zero-carbon economy . For this reason, central banks support transparency and the disclosure
of data that will enable markets to lead the transition  so that, with the right information, they can
price  in  the  cost  of  doing  business,  the  climate  risk,  and,  most  importantly,  evaluate  new
business opportunities.
4
5
The proper assessment and supervision of the financial risks stemming from the transition to a
zero-carbon  economy  are  important  factors  in  promoting  sustainable  development  and
safeguarding the smooth functioning of the financial system  . In addition, commercial banks can
play an important role in moving towards a low-carbon economy by reducing their exposures to
high-carbon  investment,  while  banking  supervisors  could  take  into  account  sustainability
7
considerations in the calculation of bank capital requirements .
6
The  transformation  of  cities  represents  another  significant  challenge  from  the  perspective  of
sustainability. As put by Amina Mohammed, UN Deputy Secretary-General, “It is clear that it is in
cities where the battle for sustainability will be won or lost” . Today, over 80% of the global GDP
is generated in urban areas, which are hubs of collaboration and progress, innovation, culture,
science, productivity, exchange of ideas, goods and services, and societal development.
8
Urban development in a manner that cities can continue to generate jobs, prosperity, social and
economic gains without drying up land and resources, is a crucial bet as it is projected that two-
thirds  of  the  world’s  population  will  be  living  in  urban  or  suburban  areas  by  2050.  This
concentration will exacerbate the existing problems and add new ones, unless best practices are
adopted that will make our cities sustainable and inclusive, with highly interconnected networks
and “smart” infrastructures, quality services and low environmental and energy footprint.
The  advances  in  technology,  innovation  and  science,  which  are  the  driving  force  of  growth
through  total  factor  productivity,  as  well  as  a  catalyst  for  a  sustainable  future,  also  pose  a
significant challenge. Technological progress and the digital age have created a new landscape,
that  of  the  4th  Industrial  Revolution,  in  which  digital  technology  helps  to  raise  productivity,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
reduces the costs of production – parts of which are now dematerialized, e.g. printed books are
replaced  by  e-books  –  increases  accessibility  and  supports  urban  governance. Although  the
9
impact of modern technology on employment and prosperity is expected to be overall positive ,
there are issues that need to be tackled, mainly relating to the structure of work and to social
cohesion. In this regard, policies to ensure that the benefits of technology are equitably shared
across society will be key to the achievement of sustainability goals in the long run.
Last  but  not  least,  on  the  path  to  sustainable  development  lies  the  environmental  challenge,
which is now more important than ever. According to the World Economic Forum’s report
 for
2018, among the top five global risks, three are environmental and all three are associated with
climate change .  In  this  light,  the  Bank  of  Greece  is  committed  to  invest  significantly  in  UN
sustainability goal no. 13, i.e. climate action, a horizontal goal that contributes to the achievement
of all other goals. Thus, over the past ten years, the Bank of Greece has been actively involved in
research, in-depth dialogue and the provision of scientific documentation through the activities of
the interdisciplinary Climate Change Impacts Study Committee (CCISC).
11
10
Ecosystem  goods  and  services  form  the  basis  of  the  global  economy.  Awareness  of  their
economic value and measuring that value in financial terms promotes the sustainable utilisation
of natural resources and management of natural systems. Within the CCISC, environmental and
energy  economists,  in  collaboration  with  climatologists,  physicists,  biologists,  engineers  and
social  scientists,  study  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  the  Greek  economy,  analyse  the
economic, social and environmental consequences of climate change in Greece, and suggest
ways for the transition of the Greek economy to sustainable growth models.
Overall, the studies highlight the wealth of Greece’s natural resources, but also the risks to the
country’s  natural  and  human  environment,  and  find  that  the  impact  of  climate  change  on  all
sectors of the national economy is adverse to extremely adverse. Under an inaction (“business
as usual”) scenario, the Greek GDP could, ceteris paribus, fall by 2% annually by 2050 and even
further by 2100, while the total cost to the Greek economy could reach a cumulative €701 billion
by 2100.
12 13
 According to a vulnerability assessment
, which quantifies and ranks the expected climate risks
for Greece, agriculture is the sector projected to be the most strongly hit by climate change in
Greece,  while  the  impact  on  tourism  and  coastal  systems  will  significantly  affect  household
income and the economy as a whole. Of particular importance are water reserves, on which
both agriculture and water supply depend.
14
The work so far undertaken by CCISC has highlighted the importance of a concrete adaptation
policy  as  a  necessary  damage  control  measure.  For  this  reason,  under  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding signed with the Ministry of Environment and Energy and the Academy of Athens,
we have drafted the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS) and we are currently
elaborating on its implementation. This strategy sets out the general objectives, guiding principles
and  implementation  tools  for  an  effective  and  growth-oriented  adaptation  strategy,  in  line  with
European directives and international experience. Moreover, it is the first step in a continuous and
flexible process for planning and implementing the necessary adaptation measures at national,
regional and local levels and aspires to leverage the capabilities of Greece’s public authorities,
economy and society at large, in an aim to address the impacts of climate change in coming
years.
More recently, last June, the Bank of Greece released a book entitled “The Economics of Climate
Change”, which provides a comprehensive, state-of-the-art review of the economics of climate
change  and  a  literature  review  in  the  emerging  area  of  environmental  macroeconomics  and
focuses on the design of economic policy aimed at controlling the climate externality. With this
publication, the Bank of Greece aims, among other things, to lay the foundations for addressing
the role of monetary policy under conditions of global warming and exploring the link between
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary  policy  and  climate  change,  a  topic  that  remains  high  on  our  research  agenda.  It
acknowledges, of course, that monetary policy is not the primary tool for tackling climate change
but rather plays a supplementary role alongside fiscal, environmental and structural policies.
Scientific research and current developments confirm the need for a dynamic strategy and an
action plan to address sustainability challenges. I am sure that the presentations during this first
day of the conference, and even more so tomorrow, will shed light on crucial aspects of the path
towards achieving the sustainable development goals by 2030 and beyond.
I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  taking  this  initiative  and  wish  them  the  best  of
success in this conference.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
See www.overshootday.org/newsroom/press-release-july-2018-english
According  to  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD),  the  achievement  of
sustainable development goals will cost between 5 and 7 trillion US dollars per annum.
European Commission, Implementation of the Circular Economy Action Plan, 2018 Circular Economy Package,
available  at:  ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/index_en.htm  και  Europa,  EU  law  and  publications,
Document 52017DC0623, available at: eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EL/ALL/?uri=CELEX:52017DC0623
Carney,  M.,  “A  transition  in  thinking  and  action”,  speech  at  the  International  Climate  Risk  Conference  for
Supervisors,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  Amsterdam,  6  Αpril  2018,  available  at: www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/speech/2018/a-transition-in-thinking-and-action-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf?
la=en&hash=82F57A11AD2FAFD4E822C3B3F7E19BA23E98BF67
According to Mark Carney (Governor of the Bank of England) and Michael Bloomberg (chair of the Task Force on
Climate-related  Financial  Disclosures),  “…  financial  disclosure  is  essential  to  a  market-based  solution  to
climate change. A properly functioning market will price in the risks associated with climate change and reward
firms that mitigate them. As its impact becomes more commonplace and public policy responses more active,
climate change has become a material risk that isn’t properly disclosed..”, The Guardian, 14.12.2016, available
a t
: www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-
information-investors-deliver-solutions
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.mepletter171010_Urtasun.en.pdf?
utm_medium=email&utm_source=nefoundation&utm_content=8+-+response&utm_campaign=banks-22-
Nov&source=banks-22-Nov
Financing  a  sustainable  European  Economy,  Interim  Report,  EU  High-Level  Expert  Group  on  Sustainable
Finance, July 2017, available at: ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/170713-sustainable-finance-report_en.pdf
See “Battle for Sustainability Will Be Won or Lost in Cities, Deputy Secretary-General Tells High-Level General
Assembly 
at:
www.un.org/press/en/2017/dsgsm1080.doc.htm
UN-Habitat”, 
available 
Agenda, 
Meeting 
Urban 
New 
on 
Interview of Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, with Christos Chomenidis for the newspaper Ta
Nea, 
at: www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=513&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  (in Greek)
17/03/2018, 
available 
World Economic Forum, The Global Risks Report 2018, 13th Edition, available at: wef.ch/risks2018
These risks are: (1) extreme weather events; (2) major natural disasters; and (3) failure to mitigate and adapt to
climate change (3).
GDP contraction relative to base year GDP at constant 2008 prices.
CCISC (2011), The environmental, economic and social impacts of climate change in Greece, Bank of Greece,
pp. 453–457, available at: www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/ClimateChange_FullReport_bm.pdf
Τhe vulnerability analysis is included in CCISC (2015), National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS),
pp. 7-13, available at: www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/National_Adaptation_Strategy_Excerpts.pdf
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
