November  7,  2018
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kochi 
Yukitoshi Funo 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Overseas Developments 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  speech  by  talking  about  overseas  economies.  The  business 
sentiment  of  manufacturing  firms  on  a  global  basis  has  maintained  its  improving  trend, 
although it recently has deteriorated somewhat, and the world trade volume has continued 
to  recover.  In  this  situation,  overseas  economies  have  continued  to  grow  firmly  on  the 
whole. 
 
In terms of the outlook, overseas economies are expected to continue growing firmly on the 
whole.  According  to  the  October  2018  World  Economic  Outlook  released  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global growth rate is projected to be 3.7 percent in 
both 2018 and 2019. 
 
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  expanding.  The 
European  economy  has  continued  to  recover,  although  its  growth  pace  has  decelerated 
somewhat. The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole. Other 
emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  been 
recovering 
moderately on the whole, reflecting in particular an increase in exports and the effects of 
those economies' stimulus measures. 
 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  U.S.  economy  is  expected  to  keep  expanding  and  the  European 
economy  is  projected  to  continue  recovering.  The  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  broadly 
follow a stable growth path as authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely 
manner.  Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  likely  to 
continue their moderate recovery on the whole. 
 
Risk factors to the overseas economic outlook are wide ranging, as exemplified by (1) the 
U.S.  macroeconomic  policies  and  their  impact  on  global  financial  markets,  (2)  the 
consequences of protectionist moves and their effects, (3) developments in emerging and 
commodity-exporting economies, including the effects of the two factors I just mentioned, 
(4)  negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom's  exit  from  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  their 
effects,  and  (5)  geopolitical  risks.  Uncertainty  is  particularly  high  regarding  future 
1 
developments  in  trade  policies  worldwide,  and  therefore  these  developments  warrant 
attention. I hold the view that it is important to stay vigilant regarding these risk factors, 
especially now that overseas economies are continuing to grow firmly on the whole. 
B. Japan's Economy and Prices 
1. Economic activity 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan. The economy is expanding moderately, 
with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate 
registered  minus  0.9  percent  for  the  January-March  quarter  of  2018  on  an  annualized 
quarter-on-quarter basis, and thereafter marked 3.0 percent for the April-June quarter, which 
was above the economy's potential growth rate.1  While the contribution of net exports on 
real  GDP  growth  has  remained  slightly  negative,  that  of  domestic  demand  has  turned 
positive.   
 
With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. In 
fiscal  2018,  the  economy  will  probably  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential. 
Namely, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income 
to spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, mainly against 
the  background  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the  underpinnings 
through  government  spending.  In  Kochi  Prefecture,  given  the  favorable  situation  in 
domestic demand, various measures have been taken such as events to commemorate the 
150th anniversary of the Meiji Restoration, and it is expected that these events will increase 
tourist numbers. In terms of Japan's exports, these are expected to continue their moderate 
increasing trend, with overseas economies expected to grow firmly on the whole. In fiscal 
2019 and 2020, Japan's economy is expected to continue on an expanding trend although 
the  growth  pace  is  projected  to  decelerate  due  to  a  slowdown  in  domestic  demand, 
reflecting the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, cyclical adjustments in capital 
                                                   
1  Under  a  specific  methodology,  Japan's  potential  growth  rate  is  estimated  to  be  in  the  range  of 
0.5-1.0  percent.  However,  the  estimate  of  the  potential  growth  rate  varies  depending  on  the 
methodologies employed and could be revised as the sample period becomes longer over time. Thus, 
it should be regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error. 
2 
stock, and Olympic Games-related demand peaking out.2  According to the October 2018 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) released by the 
Bank of Japan, the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts of the economic growth 
rate are 1.4 percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.8 percent each for fiscal 2019 and 2020. 
 
2. Prices 
Let me now explain price developments. Although the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  is  at  around  1.0  percent,  it  has 
continued to show relatively weak developments compared to the economic expansion and 
labor  market  tightening,  remaining  at  around  0.5  percent  excluding  the  effects  of  energy 
prices. 
 
With regard to the outlook, medium- to long-term inflation expectations are projected to rise 
gradually as firms' stance is likely to gradually shift toward further raising wages and prices 
with the output gap remaining positive. As a consequence, the year-on-year rate of change 
in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  is  likely  to  increase  gradually  toward  2  percent. 
Specifically, the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts of the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) presented in the October 2018 Outlook Report 
are  0.9  percent  for  fiscal  2018,  and,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  scheduled 
consumption tax hike, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2019 and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2020.3 
 
                                                   
2  It  is assumed that the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and that a 
reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages -- excluding alcohol and dining-out -- and 
newspapers. Policies concerning the provision of free education are also factored into the forecasts, 
based on information available as of October 2018. 
3  Assuming that the rise in the consumption tax will be fully passed on to prices of taxable items, 
excluding  those  to  which  a  reduced  tax  rate  will  be  applied,  the  effect  of  the  October  2019 
consumption tax hike on the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for 
October 2019 onward is estimated to be 1.0 percentage point; the effect for fiscal 2019 and 2020 is 
estimated  to  be  0.5  percentage  point  for  each  year.  It  also  is  assumed  that  the  effects  of  policies 
concerning the provision of free education will not be reflected in the CPI, as statistical treatment of 
these effects is not yet decided. 
3 
II. Keys to Assessing the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
In  what  follows,  I  would  like  to  discuss  several  points  that  I  think  deserve  particular 
attention in terms of realizing the outlook for economic activity and prices that I mentioned 
earlier. 
 
A. Supply-Demand Conditions in the Labor Market and the Income Situation 
Let  me  first  talk  about  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  and  the  income 
situation.  As  the  economy  has  continued  its  moderate  expansion,  the  output  gap  has 
widened within positive territory; the figure for the April-June quarter of 2018 -- the most 
recent data available -- was about 2 percent. Furthermore, supply-demand conditions in the 
labor  market  have  continued  to  tighten  steadily. The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
Labour Force Survey-based number of employees has been at around 2 percent, and against 
this backdrop, the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has been at a level that exceeds the 
peak marked during the bubble period. Moreover, a perception of labor shortage suggested 
by the employment conditions diffusion index (DI) in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan) has heightened, and the unemployment rate has been around 
2.5  percent  recently.  These  indicators  of  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market 
show that the degree of labor market tightness has been at around the level last seen in the 
first half of the 1990s or in the first half of the 1970s. In terms of the outlook, as Japan's 
economy is likely to continue on a growing trend at a pace above its potential, it is expected 
that the number of employees will keep increasing and that the supply-demand conditions in 
the labor market will continue to tighten steadily. 
 
Amid such supply-demand conditions in the labor market, the year-on-year rate of increase 
in  hourly  scheduled  cash  earnings  of  part-time  employees,  which  are  responsive  to 
supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market,  has  exhibited  relatively  high  growth  of 
around  2.0  percent  on  average.  On  the  other  hand,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in 
scheduled cash earnings of full-time employees has remained at around 0.5 percent. As a 
result, although total cash earnings per employee have been increasing moderately, albeit 
with fluctuations, the increases have remained relatively weak compared to the labor market 
tightening,  partly  due  to  the  high  wage  elasticity  of  labor  supply  in  recent  years,  mainly 
among  women  and  seniors.  With  regard  to  the  outlook,  overall  employees'  hourly  cash 
4 
earnings are projected to increase moderately at almost the same pace as labor productivity 
growth  in  nominal  terms,  and  their  rate  of  increase  is  expected  to  accelerate  thereafter. 
However, there is a risk that firms will remain cautious with their decisions on wage setting, 
and in this context, I am paying attention to their stance regarding wages going forward. 
 
B. Prices 
Next, I will turn to price developments, taking into account supply-demand conditions in 
the labor market and the income situation. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all 
items less fresh food and energy) has remained at around 0.5 percent. 
 
There are likely to be two main factors behind such weak developments. One is that the 
mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices will not increase easily 
have been deeply entrenched among firms and households, due mainly to the experience of 
prolonged low growth and deflation. The other is that the room to raise productivity and the 
technological  progress  have  allowed  firms  to  absorb  a  rise  in  labor  costs  by  increasing 
labor-saving investment and streamlining their business process, and thereby constrain price 
rises. 
 
On the other hand, although the pace of improvement in prices has remained slow, some 
changes have been seen amid the improvement in the economic and employment conditions. 
For example, moves to raise sales prices are starting to be observed at a wide range of firms, 
mainly in the services sector. According to the Tankan, the number of enterprises answering 
that the  output  prices  have  risen  has  been exceeding  the  number  of  those answering  that 
such prices have fallen. Also, with the aging of the population, labor market conditions are 
likely  to  tighten  further  and  the  pace  of  increase  in  hourly  scheduled  cash  earnings  of 
part-time  employees  is  expected  to  accelerate.  In  addition  to  such  moves,  if  full-time 
employees'  wages  increase  with  an  improvement  in  productivity,  this  will  lead  to  an 
increase in households' tolerance of price rises. 
 
While  price  developments  are  affected  by  various  factors,  I  consider  that  the  factor  that 
determines the underlying trend in prices is the aggregate supply-demand balance. As the 
output gap remains positive, various factors behind the weak developments in prices will 
5 
likely  be  resolved  gradually.  If  that  happens,  firms'  wage-  and  price-setting  stance  and 
households'  tolerance  of  price  rises  will  improve,  and  the  pace  of  increase  in  inflation 
expectations will accelerate gradually. 
 
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 
The Bank has set the price stability target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  and  has  been conducting  monetary  policy  to  achieve  this  target at the 
earliest possible time. To this end, the Bank has been pursuing powerful monetary easing, 
considering developments in economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions, 
under the framework of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield 
Curve Control introduced in September 2016. The Bank, under this framework, has been 
conducting  yield  curve  control,  in  which  it  controls  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates. 
Specifically, at present, according to the guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the 
short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  purchases  Japanese  government 
bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around 0 percent. By conducting 
this  operation,  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  have  been  stable  at  low  levels,  and  I 
consider that the highly accommodative financial conditions, brought about by yield curve 
control,  have  contributed  to  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap  by  stimulating  firms'  and 
households' spending activities. 
 
Meanwhile, prices have continued to show relatively weak developments compared to the 
economic expansion and labor market tightening. Following the discussion at the Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  July  30  and  31,  2018,  the  Bank  released  its  economic 
projections, which showed that it would take time to achieve the price stability target of 2 
percent.  It  also  judged  that,  while  the  momentum  toward  2  percent  inflation  had  been 
maintained,  it  was  necessary  to  persistently  continue  with  powerful  monetary  easing, 
thereby maintaining the output gap within positive territory for as long as possible. Based 
on this judgment, the Bank decided at the MPM to implement measures to strengthen its 
commitment to achieving the price stability target and to enhance the sustainability of QQE 
with Yield Curve Control. 
6 
This  set  of  measures  consists  of  two  major  components.  The  first  is  the  introduction  of 
forward  guidance  for  policy  rates.  Forward  guidance  is  a  measure  that  guides  the  future 
policy  path  in  order  to  strengthen  market  confidence  and  expectations  toward  monetary 
policy.  The  Bank  announced  in  its  July  policy  statement  that  it  "intends  to  maintain  the 
current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of 
time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices including the 
effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  scheduled  to  take  place  in  October  2019."  In 
consideration of these uncertainties and the price developments, the Bank will not reduce 
the degree of this powerful monetary easing for an extended period of time. 
 
The  second  component  is  the  implementation  of  several  measures  to  enhance  the 
sustainability of QQE with Yield Curve Control. For example, the Bank, while maintaining 
the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent, made clear that the yields might 
move  upward  and  downward  to  some  extent  mainly  depending  on  developments  in 
economic activity and prices. I believe that allowing the long-term yields to move to some 
extent will, in a broad sense, lead to maintaining market functioning. Meanwhile, it should 
be noted that the Bank does not intend to raise the level of yields -- this means that, in the 
case  of  a  rapid  increase  in  the  yields,  the  Bank  will  purchase  JGBs  promptly  and 
appropriately.  In  addition,  as  for  exchange-traded  fund  (ETF)  purchases,  from  the  same 
aspect of enhancing the sustainability of the monetary policy framework, the Bank made it 
clear  that  it  might  increase  or  decrease  the  amount  of  purchases  depending  on  market 
conditions, while maintaining the annual pace of increase at about 6 trillion yen. 
 
The  Bank  also  recognizes  the  risk  that  continuing  powerful  monetary  easing  will 
cumulatively  affect  financial  institutions'  strength,  mainly  through  a  decrease  in  their 
lending margins, and thus the functioning of financial intermediation will be stagnant. The 
Bank intends to continue paying careful attention to the risks considered most relevant to 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  With  a  view  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2 
percent,  the  Bank  will  continue  conducting  monetary  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner, 
taking  account  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial 
conditions. 
 
 
7 
IV. Challenges for Japan's Economy 
I  would  now  like  to  express  my  thoughts  regarding  the  current  situation  for  Japan's 
economy from a longer-term perspective. 
 
According to the Bank's estimates, the potential growth rate has been in the range of 0.5-1.0 
percent recently. Although the rate has risen compared to around 2010, it can be said that 
Japan's  growth  potential  has  been  sluggish.  That  said,  as  initiatives  toward  structural 
reforms and a growth strategy proceed among a wide range of entities, I consider that the 
boost  in  the  country's  growth  potential  would  be  accelerated  through  the  rise  in 
productivity. 
 
Looking at corporate activities, it has been a couple of years since the output gap turned 
positive. Although it differs by industry, firm size, and other factors, supply-side constraints 
have been the bottleneck in firms' growth on the whole. In this situation, mainly on the back 
of improved profits, firms have started to increase fixed investment aimed at expansion in 
supply capacity of products and services: firms often start to review their business strategy 
when planning fixed investment and can improve productivity through such efforts. At the 
same  time,  firms  have  been  making  plans  for  development  of  new  high  value-added 
products and services by increasing research and development investment. 
 
Moreover, firms have been taking various measures that reflect demographic changes and 
tight labor market conditions, on which I now would like to elaborate using five examples. 
 
The first is effective use of employees through initiatives including working-style reforms. 
In Japan, inefficiency borne from the lack of streamlining and the practice of working long 
hours are common; in my view, there is still considerable room to enhance work efficiency 
through such initiatives. 
 
The second is women's participation in the economy. In Japan, the labor force participation 
rate of women in the working-age population has reached 70 percent, which is considered a 
high level on a global standard. I expect that this trend will encourage firms to assign more 
women to value-added work and promote them to managerial positions from now on. 
8 
The third is employment of seniors. Although their employment has been progressing, there 
remains  considerable  room  for  improvement,  as  there  are  gaps  between  what  they  can 
accomplish through their ability and will, and what they actually are assigned to do. 
 
The  fourth  is employment  of  foreigners.  Although  their  employment  has  been  increasing 
gradually, it is still vital to further develop systems to accept them. 
 
Lastly,  the  fifth  example  is  labor-saving  efforts  through  utilization  of  information 
technology including the use of robots. Japan is a leading country in robotics, and I believe 
that we should expand its application from manufacturing operations to other kinds of work, 
including administrative work. 
 
As  these  initiatives  toward  structural  reforms  and  a  growth  strategy  bring  about  benefits 
including improvement in business efficiency, they may exert downward pressure on wage 
increases in the short term, but in the longer term, they will raise the productivity of the 
economy as a whole, thereby strengthening its growth potential. I believe that improving 
productivity  would  stimulate  price  rises  through  increases  in  wages  and  private 
consumption. Nevertheless, even now there are firms that maintain their cautious wage- and 
price-setting stance, as they are concerned, for example, about a shrinking of the domestic 
market size and the issue of succession for businesses; they also lack confidence in growth 
in  private  consumption.  Let  me  note  that  raising  productivity  and  growth  potential  is  a 
time-consuming  task.  Therefore,  while  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy  stimulates 
aggregate  demand  and  suitably  tight  supply-demand  conditions  are  being  maintained,  a 
virtuous  cycle  in  which  active  demand  encourages  progress  in  various  initiatives  should 
remain intact for a long  period of time. I believe that, with a view to achieving its price 
stability  target  and  realizing  sustainable  economic  growth  in  a  coordinated  manner,  the 
Bank  should  continue  with  its  monetary  easing  policy  and  firmly  support  the  various 
initiatives taken by a wide range of entities. 
 
 
9 
