   Climate Finance Day 2018 – Paris, 28 November 2018 
The role of finance: Anticipating climate risks, financing transition 
opportunities 
 Closing session: Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau 
Governor of the Banque de France 
         Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 6 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  to  conclude  this  fourth  edition  of  Climate 
Finance  Day.  This  event  gives  a  concrete  picture  of  what  I  like  to  call  the 
“powerful  coalition  of  the  willing”.  Each  and  every  one  of  us  –  public 
authorities;  academics,  NGO’s  and  think  tanks;  corporates  and  financial 
institutions – have a part to play in this coalition. It is a shared challenge that 
no one can tackle alone, and you have worked during these last three days to 
bring tangible solutions to quickly and effectively finance the transition.   
Paris,  chère  Madame  la  Maire,  has  been  a  driving  force  committed  to 
translating  momentum  into  concrete  action.  Let  me  mention  three  key 
milestones: the COP 21 back in 2015, the “One Planet Summit” in December 
2017, and this fourth edition of Climate Finance Day. 
To better address concretely the financial risks stemming from climate change, 
the  Banque  de  France  initiated  a  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial 
System  (NGFS) at the One Planet Summit, with eight founding members.i In 
less  than  one  year,  we  have  been  joined  by  13  other  members ii and  five 
observersiii from the five continents. They work together with great energy and 
enthusiasm.  
In my remarks today, I will (I) take stock of the NGFS’ achievements and then 
outline  the  decisive  steps  that  are  still  ahead  of  us  in  order  to  (II)  anticipate 
climate risks and (III) seize opportunities.  
I. The NGFS’ first achievements 
 As  highlighted  by  the  winner  of  the  2018  Nobel  Prize  in  economics, 
William Nordhaus, although “there is substantial uncertainty about the path of 
climate change and its impacts […] this does not reduce the urgency of taking 
strong climate-change policies today.iv”  
Tackling  climate  change  to  “prevent  the  airplane  from  crashing”  is  first  and 
foremost  the  responsibility  of  appropriate  public  policies  in  energy  –  as 
Page 2 sur 6 
 
announced yesterday for France –, transportation, housing or – yes – taxation 
and carbon pricing. Finance cannot substitute them, but finance can help; and 
as central bankers and supervisors, we are determined to help. I would even 
say  that  this  challenge  is  our  “new  frontier”,  comparable  to  the  financing  of 
growth  and  major  infrastructures  in  the  19th  century  or  the  management  of 
great financial crises in the last 100 years. 
The progress report of the NGFS, released in October is hence an important 
step. Indeed, for the first time, this coalition of the 21v willing central banks and 
supervisors, has unanimously agreed that climate-related risks – as a source 
of financial risk – are within a central bank’s mandate. The NGFS will not stop 
there  and  next  year  will  publish  its  first  comprehensive  report,  which  will 
provide  –  on  a  voluntary  basis  only  –  policy  recommendations  for  central 
banks  and  supervisors.  This  will  take  place  at  the  upcoming  NGFS 
Conference, at the Banque de France in Paris, on 17 April 2019: you are all 
most welcome! 
To  prevent  the  airplane  from  crashing,  we  can  help  by  shedding  light  on 
climate  risks in order to take accurate and timely decisions, and by seizing 
opportunities while aligning incentives and mobilising capital. 
II. Anticipating climate-related risks 
1/  Our  first  priority  should  be  the  disclosure  of  existing  exposures  in  the 
financial sector, what I call “the snapshot of risks”. The recommendations of 
the  Task  Force  on  Climate-related  Financial  Disclosures  (TCFD),  chaired  by 
Mr. Bloomberg with sponsorship from the Financial Stability Board (FSB), have 
been  groundbreaking  as 
framework  allowing 
companies  to  disclose  their  climate-related  financial  risks.  However,  an 
accurate and consistent vision of the risks requires a wider implementation of 
the TCFD’s recommendations.  
they  provide  a  practical 
Significant room for progress remains in this area. To enable markets to price 
risks,  we  need  comparable  metrics  –  thanks  to  a  common  taxonomy  –  and 
better  access  to  higher  quality  and  more  consistent  data.  I  therefore  fully 
 
support the work of the Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance of the 
European  Commission  which  is  concretely  developing  a  taxonomy;  our  first 
NGFS workstream is also working in this field. 
Page 3 sur 6 
We should then gradually move towards compulsory transparency based on 
a  “comply  or  explain”  principle.  Article  173  of  the  French  Energy  Transition 
Law  –  as  it  sets  the  Environmental  Social  Governance  (ESG)-Climate 
approach  as  a  new  market  standard  –  could  usefully  serve  as  a  reference 
studied at the European level.  
2/ Beyond the "snapshot of risks", the NGFS is working on a "video of risks", 
with  long-term  forward-looking  stress  tests  to  assess  the  dynamic  effects  of 
climate change on the economy and financial stability. The NGFS is currently 
developing economic scenarios based on climate change that could be used 
to  conduct  stress  tests.  Meanwhile,  the  ACPR  has  conducted  a  survey  on 
banks and insurance companies to evaluate how they integrate physical and 
transition risks in their risk management. The results will be published by early 
2019.  They  will  be  a  good  point  to  assess  the  progress  made  so  far  by  the 
industry  towards  taking  both  risk  factors  into  account.  I  would  at  this  stage 
suggest caution on some NGOs’ analyses concluding that French banks have 
a  “fossil  energy  bias”.  Their  large  exposures  to  the  oil  and  gas  sector  have 
indeed decreased between 2015 and 2017. This survey will also be valuable 
as  inputs  in  designing  the  new  framework  needed  to  perform  stress-test 
exercises  and  assess  climate  risk  across  the  French  financial  system  as  a 
whole. 
III. Financing transition opportunities 
Like any good pilot, we want our plane to “gain some altitude”. And our goal 
here  is  not  only  to  manage  climate  change-related  risks,  but  also  to  align 
incentives to make sure the transition is adequately financed.  
As  time  goes  by  and  our  ability  to  achieve  a  1.5  to  2°C  scenario  is  being 
seriously challenged, the amount needed to finance the transition is increasing 
steadily.  This  quantitative  challenge  is  linked  to  the  massive  investment 
Page 4 sur 6 
 
required  to  promote  further  development  of  technologies,  notably  carbon 
capture  and  storage  and  electricity  generation  from  renewable  sources.  The 
amounts at stake vary, but as an illustration, the last Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) report, published last October, estimates that until 
2050,  the  energy-related  mitigation  investments  to  limit  warming  to  1.5°C 
reach USD  900 billion per yearvi.  The  needs are so considerable  that  public 
financing alone will never be sufficient. But, per year this amount represents 
less than 1% of the 2017 gross world product. The burden is a heavy one, but 
it is far from insurmountable if we join forces. Let me turn to the private sector 
before coming back to central banks. 
1  /  Fortunately,  the  private  sector  is  already  showing  a  growing  interest  in 
green  finance.  I  could  cite  many  examples,  including  the  sharp  rise  in  the 
global climate-aligned bonds market which reached on outstanding amount 
of USD 1.45 trillionvii in 2018 or the success of the issuance  of France’s  first 
green sovereign bond in January 2017. All this looks very promising… but it is 
still insufficient.  The success of the transition will also depend on our ability to 
broaden the sources of financing: we should not rely solely on green bonds. 
We  also  need  more  green  loans,  and  more  green  financing  in  general, 
accessible to individuals, SMEs and start-ups. 
Mobilising  this  capital  raises  also  some  qualitative  challenges.  An  orderly 
scaling  up  of  green  finance  requires  keeping  markets  away  from  green 
washing  practices.  The  emergence  of  a  new  ecosystem  of  financial  “good 
products”,  such  as  green,  social,  impact  or  Sustainable  Development  Goals 
(SDG) bonds would appear to be great news. But we should be cautious not to 
create a confusing diversity of definitions that could undermine the reputation 
of green markets and impede progress. An EU-wide standard based on high 
level common principles regarding the management of the funds and impact 
assessments, articulated with a common green taxonomy is critical to protect 
market  integrity.  It  would  certainly  make  sense  to  build,  notably  on  the  two 
most widespread standards: the Green Bond Principles (GBP) and the Climate 
Bond Initiative (CBI). 
Page 5 sur 6 
 
2 / Central Banks must also send out the right signal and lead by example in 
their  investment  and  disclosure  policies.  We  at  the  Banque  de  France  have 
adopted  in  March  this  year  a  Charter  on  Responsible  Investment  for  the 
management  of  our  own  funds  and  our  pension  portfolios:  this  means 
allocating them to socially and environmentally responsible investment funds. 
With  respect  to  disclosure,  we  are  going  to  disclose  in  March  2019  the 
climate-risk exposures of our own funds and pension portfolios. We are 
also working to adopt in the near future a TCFD-like reporting which would fit 
the specificities of central banks.  
Regarding the role of monetary policy, some voices have been calling for a 
“green  quantitative  easing”.  But  monetary  policy has  to  be  broad  based  and 
remain neutral to ensure proper functioning through its transmission channels; 
it  cannot  be  targeted  towards  achieving  specific  social  or  sectoral  impacts. 
However,  this  does  not  preclude  the  Eurosystem  from  buying  green  assets 
when  they  fall  in  the  remits  of  the  eligibility  criteria  of  its  purchase 
programmes.  For instance, the ECB currently holds around EUR 79 billionviii  
of eligible green universe bonds from both the public and the private sector, 
which is already significant. 
It does not mean though that monetary policy should ignore the question 
of climate change. Within our price stability mandate, I really believe further 
analytical work is needed to better understand the medium to long-term impact 
of climate change on intermediate monetary policy objectives and ultimately on 
our  monetary  policy  strategy.  To  this  end,  a  substantial  research  agenda 
remains before us and I hope the NGFS can play a role in helping to bridge 
the “knowledge-gap” in that area. In addition, from an operational perspective, 
if evidence shows that transition and physical risks have an impact on the risk 
profile  of  certain  assets,  central  banks  should  draw  a  logical  conclusion  and 
incorporate these financial risks in their collateral framework.   
  Page 6 sur 6 
 
I  would  like  to  conclude  with  the  message  that  Paul  Romer  gave  during  his 
Nobel Prize speech: “Humans are capable of amazing accomplishments if we 
set  our  minds  to  it.”  On  climate-related  risks,  in  less  than  one  year,  central 
banks  and  supervisors  have  accomplished  concrete  steps  to  mainstream 
green  finance  in  all  their  activities.  Notwithstanding  the  political  progress  we 
would all wish for at international level, we are determined to follow our “flight 
plan” as financial authorities. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                              
i Banco de Mexico, Bank of England, Banque de France/Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution, De 
Nederlandsche Bank, Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary Authority of Singapore, People’s Bank of China, Swedish 
Finansinspektionen. 
ii BaFin,  Banco  de  España,  Bank  al  Maghrib,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  Bank  of  Finland,  Banque  centrale  du 
Luxembourg  (BCL),  Banque  nationale  de  Belgique  (BNB),  EBA,  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  Japan  FSA, 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB), Reserve Bank of Australia, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
iii Bank for International Settlements (BIS), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), OECD, 
Sustainable Insurance Forum (SIF), World Bank (Group) + World Bank (IFC/SBN). 
iv William  D.  Nordhaus,  “Projections  and  uncertainties  about  climate  change  in  an  era  of  minimal  climate 
policies”, NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES, 2016.  
v 8 founding members plus 13 new members (excluding 5 observers). 
vi Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2018.  
vii Climate Bonds Initiative, “Bonds and climate change the state of the market”, 2018.  
viii Roberto A. De Santis, Katja Hettler, Madelaine Roos and Fabio Tamburrini, “Purchases of green bonds under 
the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2018. 
