Philip R Lane: Trends and cycles in financial intermediation
Remarks by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Bank of Spain-
SUERF Conference “Financial Disintermediation and the Future of the Banking Sector”, Madrid,
30 October 2018.
Accompanying PowerPoint Slides
1. Introduction
 I welcome the invitation to speak at this conference: the topic is well chosen, since there are
many dimensions to the general theme of financial disintermediation; in turn, assessments about
the future of the banking sector critically depend on these forces, together with an array of other
factors  such  as:  the  dynamics  of  banking  union  in  Europe;  excess  capacity  in  some  banking
systems;  the  viability  of  bank  business  models;  and  the  management  of  non-performing
exposures.  In  truth,  these  are  not  independent  processes:  financial  disintermediation  closely
interacts with these other factors.
Both  cyclical  and  structural  forces  are  contributing  to  the  current  relative  decline  in  the
importance of banks in financial intermediation. At the cyclical level, the troubled state of many
banks as a result of the global, European and national financial crises has induced larger firms to
turn to bond markets to a greater extent for debt funding (Becker and Ivashina 2014). As a result,
the share of bonds in total debt financing for non-financial corporates has climbed from about 8
percent in 2008 to 12 percent today. The limited lending capacity of the banking system in the
wake  of  the  crisis  also  prompted  firms  and  households  (albeit  to  a  limited  degree)  to  turn  to
alternative  funding  sources  such  as  non-bank  credit  providers  and  new  technologies  such  as
peer-to-peer lending platforms.
In  addition,  the  accommodative  monetary  strategies  of  the  major  central  banks  has  facilitated
large-scale bond issuance by corporates (both to fund investment and for financial engineering
purposes) and sovereigns (especially those with major new fiscal obligations due to recession-
induced deficits and/or financial sector restructuring programmes). The surge in bond issuance
has featured an increasingly-prominent role for debtors in emerging and developing economies,
which entered the crisis period with less-leveraged balance sheets and posted stronger post-
crisis growth performance.
Of  course,  the  crisis  also  led  to  a  large-scale  increase  in  official  funding,  whether  through
traditional channels such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) or new channels such as the
European Stability Mechanism (ESM). For instance, the stock of outstanding ESM bonds stood
at  €89  billion  at  the  end  of  2017.  The  size  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  also  dramatically
expanded through liquidity operations (such as the long-term refinancing operations (LTRO) and
the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO)  programmes  of  the  ECB  and  the
emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  provided  by  some  national  central  banks)  and  asset
purchase programmes.
The banking sector itself has been an important driver of capital market activity as a result of the
crisis.  Some  banks  required  equity  recapitalisation,  while  the  drive  to  establish  ‘bail-inable’
buffers has seen an expansion in convertible bond issuance by banks. In parallel, the drive to
reduce the stock of non-performing loans on bank balance sheets has seen an expansion in loan
portfolio sales to non-bank intermediaries such as investment funds.
At a structural level, the combination of ageing populations, rising income levels and increasing
reliance on private provision for retirement and lifecycle insurance products has increased the
appetite among households to shift from plain-vanilla bank deposits towards higher-risk, higher-
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
yielding financial assets, which is a trend evident across advanced and, increasingly, emerging
economies.  Of  course,  this  trend  is  reinforced  by  the  low  interest  rate  environment  that  has
reduced  the  relative  attractiveness  of  holding  bank  deposits  as  an  investment  asset.  These
positions  are  intermediated  through  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and  the  investment
funds sector. In turn, the investment funds category includes a wide range of different types in
terms of portfolio strategies and organisational forms.
In  relation  to  non-financial  corporates  in  some  advanced  economies,  high  and  persistent
corporate  savings  rates  map  into  increased  participation  in  asset  markets  by  corporate
treasuries, especially in relation to short-term and medium-term securities. In addition, the global
footprint  of  multinational  firms  from  some  emerging  and  developing  economies  facilitates
international financial arbitrage by issuing bonds in low-yield, liquid markets in order to fund asset
holdings in higher-yielding locations (Avdjiev et al 2014). On the liability side, the increasing scale
of  some  firms,  some  degree  of  international  convergence  in  corporate  governance  standards
and improvements in public data availability has expanded the pool of corporates able to tap bond
1
markets.
The emergence of sovereign wealth funds and increasing stocks of foreign reserve assets also
means  that  national  governments  are  increasingly  important  actors  in  global  asset  markets.
State-controlled  investment  intermediaries  may  be  established  for  a  variety  of  reasons:  the
smoothing of income streams from non-renewable natural resource endowments; the pooling of
investment risk at a national level; pre-funding the public costs of an ageing population; and the
provision of self-insurance against international funding shocks. Taken together, this has resulted
in a significant role for national investment agencies in the global financial system.
Finally,  for  completeness,  it  is  also  necessary  to  acknowledge  the  potential  of  technological
innovations  to  enable  new  types  of  financial  intermediation  through  digitisation.  However,  it  is
beyond the scope of this speech to evaluate the potential of fintech.
A  more  diversified  financial  system  in  which  banks  play  a  relatively  smaller  role  has  many
positive features in terms of improved efficiency and risk sharing. The availability of alternative
intermediaries means that firms and households are less exposed to banking-sector risk: in turn,
the amplitude of a banking crisis is likely to be milder if there are circuit breakers that weaken
doom-loop dynamics between a weak banking sector and a weak real economy.
Furthermore, risks in the banking sector can be mitigated if there is a pool of alternative bearers
of credit risk and funding risk, especially in scenarios in which the banking sector must undergo
an adjustment phase of reducing the size and risk profile of its balance sheet. This is currently
evident in the sales by banks of portfolios of troubled loans to investment funds.
However, these shifts in financial intermediation do raise important analytical and policy issues,
especially  in  relation  to  financial  stability.  In  particular,  there  is  an  established  playbook  for
addressing systemic risks in the banking sector both through ex-ante macroprudential policies
and ex-post liquidity, resolution and restructuring policies. No such playbook exists for tackling
financial stability risks in non-bank financial intermediation. Furthermore, the banking and non-
banking  sectors  are  closely  intertwined,  such  that  disruption  in  market-based  financial
intermediation could also trigger instability in banking systems.
In what follows, I examine this set of issues along two dimensions. In Section 2, I examine the
intermediation  of  cross-border  financial  flows.  In  Section  3,  I  examine  intermediation  by  the
investment funds sector. Some final remarks are offered in Section 4.
2. Cross-Border Financial Flows
Since the global financial crisis, global financial flows declined from over 20 percent of global
GDP to the more moderate levels previously seen in the early 2000s (McQuade and Schmitz
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
2017, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2018,). There has also been a geographical shift, with a sharper
pull back by advanced economies and a steady increase in the international financial activities of
emerging and developing economies.
Traditionally, banks have intermediated a large proportion of cross-border debt flows. In addition,
foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  in  banking  sectors  has  constituted  an  important  source  of
international risk sharing, with multi-country banking groups an important source of equity capital
for  national  banking  systems  and  a  provider  of  cross-border  liquidity  through  intra-group
transactions.
Since  regulators  and  national  statistical  agencies  know  less  about  the  balance  sheets  and
transaction accounts of non-bank intermediaries, the analysis of the stability and risk distribution
properties of cross-border financial flows is more complicated in an environment in which bank
intermediation  is  relatively  less  important.  In  addition,  there  is  a  wide  range  of  possibilities  in
terms of how the funds allocated through non-bank intermediaries might react under stressed
scenarios. In particular, a financial stability analyst must weigh the likely responses of sovereign
investors, 
the  various
subcomponents of the investment funds sector and the treasury operations of multinational firms
2
to different crisis scenarios, in addition to tracing out the impact on banks.  
insurance  corporation  and  pension 
fund  (ICPF)  category, 
the 
The  degree  of  complexity  is  further  elevated  by  the  geographic  configuration  of  non-bank
intermediation,  with  some  international  financial  centres  acting  as  a  provider  of  intermediation
services to an array of investors and funders in source and destination countries. The group of
international  financial  centres  now  accounts  for  about  half  of  all  external  assets  and  liabilities
(Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2018). A by-product is that traditional analyses of international balance
sheets need to be supplemented by a series of adjustments to take into account indirect linkages
through financial centres (Avdjiev et al 2018). For instance, Chinese external financial flows can
only be properly understood by joint analysis of the flows running directly to and from Mainland
China as well as vis-à-vis the Hong Kong special administrative region (SAR).
These  shifts  in  the  composition  of  external  balance  sheets  imply  that  international  financial
stability  analysis  needs  to  take  into  account  the  cross-border  propagation  of  shocks  in  bond
markets. For instance, a freeze in dollar funding markets would have global implications, given
the  large  increase  in  dollar  bond  issuance  by  firms,  banks  and  sovereigns  in  emerging  and
developing economies. By way of contrast, the pull back of some domestically-focused banks
from international financial activity may provide a buffer in the event of an international financial
shock to the extent that entities that are shut out of international funding markets can turn to the
domestic financial system as an alternative source of funding. In this way, sufficient diversity in
business  models  across  banking  groups  can  contribute  to  financial  stability,  in  contrast  to  a
3
scenario in which banks follow highly-correlated credit and funding strategies.
In relation to emerging and developing countries, the capacity of the domestic financial system to
act in a counter-cyclical manner also depends on the degree of stabilisation that can be provided
by national authorities through sufficient access to foreign-currency resources, whether through
self-insurance or access to international official funding facilities. This was vividly illustrated in the
global financial crisis, with those emerging economies holding dollar assets benefiting from the
valuation  gains  associated  with  the  sharp  dollar  appreciation  in  2008  (Milesi-Ferretti  2009,
Gourinchas, Rey and Truempler 2012, Benetrix, Shambaugh and Lane 2015).
The expansion in FDI positions means that the international financial activities of multinational
firms  constitute  a  potentially  important  international  financial  transmission  mechanism.  In
particular,  a  shock  in  any  funding  market  for  a  multinational  firm  may  influence  its  production
activities across all its locations through the impact on its consolidated financial balance sheet,
even  if  this  common  exposure  mechanism  has  to  be  counter-balanced  against  the  potential
gains from geographically-diversified treasury operations.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  a  general  comment,  tracing  out  the  cross-border  impact  of  a  financial  shock  requires
information  on  the  matrix  of  linkages  between  ultimate  investors  and  ultimate  investment
destinations.  This  is  made  more  complicated  by  international  financial  intermediation  chains
which make it difficult to identify ultimate exposure patterns. While there has been progress in
sharing  information  on  the  exposures  embedded  in  globally-significant  banks,  no  such
information  sharing  mechanism  is  available  for  non-bank  intermediation  chains.  While  reports
such as the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report and the
European Systemic Risk Board’s (ESRB) EU Shadow Banking Monitor are extremely helpful in
indicating the scale and characteristics of non-bank intermediation, the scope of such reports
does not extend to uncovering the full matrix of end-to-end exposures. As indicated above, an
additional  layer  of  complexity  is  generated  by  the  inter-connections  between  non-bank
intermediation chains and banking systems, both through the direct participation of banks and
indirect channels such as through asset pricing dynamics.
Accordingly, it is important that each country disclose as much as possible about the nature of
cross-border intermediation that runs through its financial system. The sharing of information on
the  matrix  of  financial  linkages  would  also  be  facilitated  by  more  rapid  and  more  universal
adoption of common data standards such as protocols for legal entity identifiers (LEIs), unique
transaction identifiers (UTIs) and universal product identifiers (UPIs).
There is a special responsibility to provide information on international financial transactions for
those  countries  that  host  international  financial  centres.  In  particular,  international  financial
centres tend to have relatively larger non-bank sectors, mainly comprising of investment funds
and/or captive financial institutions (FSB, 2018).
For  instance,  Ireland  is  an  important  host  location  for  a  range  of  international  financial
intermediation transactions that link foreign issuers and foreign investors in different locations. In
Ireland, like many other similar hubs, the largest and fastest growing group are investment funds.
Latest figures show that Irish domiciled investment funds have grown 11 per cent year on year to
€3.4 trillion (Q2 2018). In general, investment funds are primarily financed through equity, and
invest in a mix of equities and bonds. Ireland also hosts about 10 per cent of the world’s money
market  funds.  Currently  valued  at  €491  billion  (August  2018),  these  funds  are  an  importance
source of financing for banks and are part of the treasury operations of corporates. Ireland is also
an important centre for a range of special purpose vehicles. At the Central Bank of Ireland, we
are committed to analysing and publishing information on these intermediation activities, in order
to contribute to the public good of a shared knowledge base in relation to the mechanics of the
international financial system (Lane and Moloney 2018).
3. Financial Stability and Investment Funds
Investment  funds  play  an  important  role  in  market-based  financial  intermediation.  Such  funds
pool  the  resources  of  individual  institutional  and  retail  investors,  thereby  facilitating  lower-cost
portfolio diversification. Still, to the extent that such funds hold illiquid assets and are perceived to
offer liquid liabilities to end investors, a run risk exists that is similar to the classic run risk facing
banking  systems.       The  amplification  of  shocks  via  investment  funds  also  depends  on  the
degree  of  leverage  taken  on  by  these  funds,  both  directly  and  synthetically  through  derivative
positions.   It also depends on the availability of market providers that are capable of providing
6
market liquidity under stressed scenarios.
4
5
The  expansion  in  the  investment  fund  sector  both  in  absolute  terms  and  as  a  percentage  of
global financial assets since the financial crisis is striking. Recent figures indicate the sector is
worth US$43 trillion, more than double its 2008 value of US$18 trillion.
It  is  a  global  trend  with  a  number  of  significant  features.  Particularly  significant  has  been  the
growth of exchange-traded funds (ETFs), both as a destination for long-term investment funding
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and as an increasing focus for liquidity management planning. Closely linked to the growth of
ETFs as a product, which has relatively low overheads, has been the growth of very large asset
managers.  We  also  see  the  rise  of  automated  trading  which  has  led  to  a  small  number  of
algorithmic traders originating large portions of overall trades in key securities. Putting these two
trends together, we are seeing a significant concentration in parts of the sector in new types of
liquidity provider.
We  have  also  seen  a  move  away  from  active  management  strategies  to  more  rule-based
investment strategies, but these rule-based investment strategies are less passive than in the
past and their likely behaviour in stressed market conditions has become more difficult to predict.
Greater concentration in key roles and less predictability of flows in periods of stress are overall
themes.
At  the  same  time,  the  key  feature  of  the  investment  funds  sector  continues  to  be  the  ‘open’
nature of most funds. That means that these are capable of experiencing a run and the historical
record  of  low  propensity  to  run  is  not  as  reassuring  as  it  might  once  have  been,  given  the
patterns of change both in the scale and structure of the sector. This is why regulators at global
and European level have concentrated their attention on the quality of the data being received
from the investment funds sector, the quality of liquidity management within the sector and, in
particular, on the potential role of leverage.
While it is in the nature of investment funds that investors take equity risk and do not necessarily
expect  all  their  money  back,  leverage  can  add  significantly  to  the  risk  being  taken  and,
consequently  to  the  fragility  of  the  sector.  Leverage,  both  direct  and  synthetic,  needs  to  be
monitored carefully both at a global and European level.
We  all  understand  that  rising  leverage  is  not  necessarily  a  sign  of  rising  risk.  Leverage  data
figures  can  include  a  significant  amount  of  hedging  activity,  which  may  reduce  risk  while
nominally  raising  the  leverage  level.  But  the  fact  that  hedging  can  limit  the  effectiveness  of
leverage indicators as indicators does not make it ineffective to collect the data. It is the better
course to collect leverage data and then to analyse it to understand both where we are in the
leverage cycle and to understand the different factors influencing the overall scale of leverage.
For  this  reason,  I  look  forward  to  the  forthcoming  consultation  on  leverage  measurement  by
IOSCO on foot of a recommendation from the FSB to collect such data. In addition, the ESRB
continues to work on synthetic leverage.
If leverage can enhance the risks of investment funds being open-ended, as so many of them
are, the fundamental risk facing investment funds remains the risk of runs by investors, whether
seeking  first  mover  advantage  against  other  investors  or  because  they  are  unwinding
investments to escape expected declines in market prices or simply because they need the cash
for margin calls or other purposes. IOSCO and the FSB have rightly emphasised the importance
of the quality of both liquidity risk management and contingency planning. High standards in these
regards will lessen the potential impact of instability in the investment fund sector on the wider
financial sector.
A crucial instrument available to us is encouraging higher standards in liquidity stress testing, so
that  sufficiently-severe  stress  scenarios  are  considered.  I  also  particularly  welcome  the
additional proposals by the ESRB to extend the collection of data from undertakings for collective
investment in transferable securities (UCITS) and to pay particular attention to those of funds,
which invest in the least liquid assets. We cannot make the assumption that UCITS do not need
to be monitored and we certainly need to have close regard to those investment funds which are
tempted to focus on less liquid assets to boost returns.
All that said, it remains the case that we do not currently have effective counter-cyclical tools
available  to  us  in  relation  to  liquidity.  We  do  have  an  important  tool  in  Europe  in  relation  to
leverage, where we can intervene to cap leverage if it is becoming significantly risky. Once the
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
ESRB  recommendations  have  been  implemented  in  Europe,  I  would  hope  that  further  work
would be done to enhance the regulatory took kit in this regard, using the data that will then be
available.
Looking back, in the immediate aftermath of the crisis it seemed as if money market funds were
one of the main risks in the funds sector, sitting as they do in such a close relationship to the
banking sector and with the strongest risks of investor runs. As we have formulated our post-
crisis approach, we have dealt in the EU and the US and elsewhere with the money market funds
issue. But we have also come to see that the issue is somewhat wider. There is further work to
be done within central banks, particularly as the way liquidity is provided to markets changes, to
develop  better  models  of  the  interaction  of  different  elements  of  the  financial  market  to
understand  better  the  potential  amplifying  role  of  investment  funds  and  the  key  signs  of
increasing and decreasing risk from this sector.
In the Central Bank of Ireland, the granularity of our data allowed the IMF to implement one of the
first stress tests of investment funds in 2016. The results highlighted certain areas of robustness
(for  example  the  ten  largest  money  market  funds  were  able  to  withstand  large  negative
redemption flows) and areas for further analysis (a small portion of bond funds were highlighted
as being highly leveraged and emerging market and high yield funds were given special attention
with respect to liquidity). We continue to analyse and monitor these vulnerabilities today.
Liquidity  management  is  different  in  the  non-bank  sector  to  the  bank  sector.  The  majority  of
investors  are  investing  in  equity  and  there  is  no  direct  access  for  non-banks  to  central  bank
liquidity  facilities.  Funds  generally  depend  on  liquidity  within  their  portfolios,  repurchase
agreements or short-term credit facilities to meet liquidity requirements. They also have access
to  liquidity  management  tools  but  we  find  these  are  rarely  used  (Daly  and  Moloney  2017).  In
terms  of  future  directions,  national  competent  authorities  may  consider  imposing  liquidity
management tools, leverage limits, margins or haircuts to mitigate the systemic effects of these
entities. Many agencies including the ESRB are looking at these options with a view to developing
macro-prudential tools beyond the banking system and we welcome these initiatives.
Like  the  ESRB,  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  and  many  of  our
international  colleagues,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  developing  liquidity  stress  testing  at
present. We have shown that a bank-type stress test – such as the High Quality Liquid Assets
approach  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  does  not  work  well  for  all  funds
(Metadjer and Moloney 2017). We will need to customise stress testing to fit the sector. We are
particularly interested in reverse stress testing. As this analysis will illustrate the thresholds of
vulnerability in this growing system. It is clear that cross-jurisdictional interconnectedness is a
defining  characteristic  of  this  type  of  intermediation  and  thus  any  policies  to  mitigate
vulnerabilities  will  need  to  be  operationalised  at  least  in  part,  at  an  international  level.  We  are
active contributors to the international initiatives in this regard.
4. Conclusion
In closing, the rise in non-bank financial intermediation only further reinforces the importance of
both  banking  union  and  capital  markets  union  for  a  robust  European  financial  system.  While
there are important trend factors underpinning the expansion in non-bank intermediation, cyclical
factors are also at work. Moreover, a sound banking system can play a stabilising role in the
event of any future shock that disrupts market-based financial intermediation.
Financial integration – underpinned by regulatory and supervisory convergence and reinforced by
the required European-level institutional framework – is the most effective strategy to obtain the
benefits of a diversified financial system that is populated by robust intermediaries (both banks
and non-banks), while safeguarding financial stability.
Furthermore,  cross-system  (EU27;  UK;  US;  Japan;  Switzerland;  emerging  and  developing
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies) intermediation by banks and non-banks is only set to expand further, in view of the
economic and technological forces driving global financial trade. Financial integration at the EU
level will also enable Europe to maximise its influence and take an appropriate co-leadership role
in the governance of the global and regional financial systems.
Finally,  my  focus  in  this  address  has  been  on  the  financial  stability  dimensions  of  non-bank
intermediation. In parallel, the international regulatory community needs to ensure that consumer
protection  regulatory  frameworks  are  sufficiently  broad  so  that  consumers  are  protected
regardless of the identities or locations of the firms providing financial services to households.
Acknowledgements: I thank Valerie Herzberg, Kitty Moloney, Martin Moloney and Paul Reddan for
assistance in preparing this speech.
References
Avdjiev,  Stefan,  Michael  Chui  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2014),  “Non-Financial  Corporations  from
Emerging Economies and Capital Flows,” BIS Quarterly Review (December), 67-77.
Avdjiev,  Stefan,  Mary  Everett,  Philip  R.  Lane  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2018),  “Tracking  the
International Footprints of Global Firms,” BIS Quarterly Review (March), 47-66.
Becker,  Bo  and  Victoria  Ivashina  (2014),  “Cyclicality  of  Credit  Supply:  Firm-Level  Evidence,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 62(C), 76-93.
Benetrix,  Agustin,  Philip  R.  Lane  and  Jay  C.  Shambaugh  (2015),  “International  Currency
Exposures, Valuation Effects and the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal of International Economics
96(S1), 98-109.
Cominetta,  Matteo,  Claudia  Lambert,  Anouk  Levels,  Anders  Ryden  and  Christian  Weistroffer
(2018), “Macroprudential Liquidity Tools for Investment Funds – A Preliminary Discussion ,” ECB
Macroprudential Bulletin 6.
Daly,  Pierce  and  Kitty  Moloney  (2017)  “Liquidity  &  Risk  Management:  Results  of  a  Survey  of
Large Irish-Domiciled Funds” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 3(July), 48-62.
Dick-Nielsen,  Jens  and  Marco  Rossi  (2018),  “The  Cost  of  Immediacy  for  Corporate  Bonds,”
mimeo, Copenhagen Business School and Texas A&M University.
Di  Maggio,  Marco,  Amir  Kermani  and  Zhaogang  Song  (2018),  “The  Value  of  Trading
Relationships in Turbulent Times,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Galstyan, Vahagn, Philip R. Lane, Caroline Mehigan and Rogelio Mercado (2016), “The Holders
and  Issuers  of  International  Portfolio  Securities,”  Journal  of  the  Japanese  and  International
Economies 42, 100-108.
Galstyan,  Vahagn  and  Adnan  Velic  (2018),  “ International  Investment  Patterns:  the  Case  of
German Sectors,” Open Economies Review 29(3), 665-685.
Goldstein, Michael and Edith Hotchkiss (2018), “Providing Liquidity in an Illiquid Market: Dealer
Behavior in U.S. Corporate Bonds,” mimeo, Babson College and Boston College.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey and Kai Truempler (2012), “The Financial Crisis and the
Geography of Wealth Transfers,” Journal of International Economics 88(2), 266-283.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2018), “The External Wealth of Nations Revisited:
International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,” IMF Economic
Review 66(1), 189-222.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
McQuade,  Peter,  and  Martin  Schmitz  (2017),“The  Great  Moderation  in  International  Capital
Flows: A Global Phenomenon?,” Journal of International Money and Finance 73, 188-212.
Metadjer, Naoise and Kitty Moloney (2017), “Liquidity Analysis of Bond and Money Market Funds”,
Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter 17-10.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria (2009), “A $2 Trillion Question,” VOXEU (28 January).
O’Sullivan,  Mary A.  (2016), Dividends of Development: Securities Markets in the History of US
Capitalism, 1866-1922, Oxford University Press.
Timmer, Yannick (2018), “Cyclical Investment Behaviour Across Financial Institutions,” Journal of
Financial Economics 129(2), 268-286.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
Differences across countries in the size of bond markets are also rooted in the histories of individual financial
systems (O’Sullivan 2016).
See, amongst others, Galstyan et al (2016), Galstyan and Velic (2018) and Timmer (2018).
See also Herzberg and McQuade (2018) on the interaction between bank business models and international
bank flows.
For a recent overview, see Cominetta et al (2018).
While beyond the scope of this speech, the robustness of market-intermediated financial flows also depends
on the integrity of securities markets and the supporting infrastructural platforms, including the operation of
CCPs. It follows that the quality of regulation and supervision of these markets and entities is crucial to the
underpinning of financial stability. 
Recent academic contributions to this topic include Dick-Nielsen and Rossi (2018), Di Maggio et al (2018) and
Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2018).
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
