  MONETARY POLICY REPORT  
PRESENTATION BEFORE THE HONORABLE 
SENATE OF THE REPUBLIC
  Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
5 September 2018 
                                                  
The  September  2018  Monetary  Policy  Report  can  be  downloaded  at  http://www.bcentral.cl.  The  Spanish 
original prevails. 
   Introduction 
 
Mr. President of the Senate, senator Carlos Montes, honorable senators, ladies, gentlemen,  
 
On behalf of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile (CBC), I am grateful for your invitation 
to present the Monetary Policy Report (IPoM). As usually in September of each year, this 
coincides with the report that, according to the Organic Law of the CBC, we must submit 
annually to the Senate. In compliance with this obligation, the Monetary Policy Report that 
I  will  be  summarizing  in  a  moment  contains  our  view  of  the  recent  macroeconomic  and 
financial developments in the Chilean and international economy, as well as their prospects 
and implications for the  conduct  of monetary policy.  It  also  includes the  Bank’s  financial 
results of the first half of 2018, the results of the management of international reserves and a 
summary of the main decisions adopted by the Board this year to date. 
 
The Monetary Policy Report  
 
Incoming  data  this  year  has  been  showing  greater  than  expected  economic  growth,  and 
inflation  consolidating  its  prospects  of  convergence  to  the  target,  in  a  context  of  positive 
surprises in several areas, an upward revision of potential growth and a faster closing of the 
activity gap.  
 
Annual headline Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation remains below 3%, although it has 
sped up in recent months, reaching 2.7% in July. Core inflation, meanwhile, which excludes 
the more volatile prices in the consumer basket (ie. food and energy), remains below 2%. 
Both figures are in line with expectations.  
 
Globally, the US-China trade conflict has intensified which, together with the cyclical state 
of the US economy and its divergence from that of other developed economies, has led to a 
global appreciation of the dollar and a fall in commodity prices. All this has affected hardest 
the emerging economies that are perceived as the most vulnerable. For now, global growth 
projections have had limited changes. In Chile, the exchange rate has again acted as a cushion 
that has protected the local financial market.  
 
The  Board  of  the  CBC  has  continued  to  apply  a  clearly  expansionary  monetary  policy, 
keeping  the  monetary  policy  interest  rate  (MPR)  at  2.5%  since  May  of  last  year.  At 
yesterday’s  monetary  policy  meeting  we  held  the  rate  unchanged  and  announced  that  the 
evolution  of  macroeconomic  conditions  makes  it  less  necessary  to  maintain  the  current 
monetary stimulus, so that if the current scenario continues, the rate should begin to fall in 
the coming months. This will allow both headline and core inflation to converge to the target 
during 2019.  
 
Because the normalization process is expected to proceed gradually, it can be anticipated that 
monetary policy will remain expansionary still for some time, probably making it the longest 
period of continued monetary expansion since the adoption of the current monetary policy 
regime. The CBC will be prepared to act countercyclically if downside risks materialize in 
the external sector. 
 
1 
   
Let me now turn to the details of our baseline scenario and the related risks we see. 
 
In the second quarter, economic activity grew 5.3% annually, giving an important upward 
surprise with respect to June expectations (Figure 1). By sectors, the greatest differences were 
observed  in  non-mining  activity,  particularly  trade,  business  services  and  manufacturing. 
Domestic  demand  also  grew  above  expectations,  reflecting  a  greater  expansion  of  private 
consumption, an increase in inventory build-up and more dynamic investment in machinery 
and equipment. 
 
This  dynamism  was  largely  maintained  in  July’s  monthly  index  of  economic  activity 
(Imacec). The non-mining component of this indicator posted an annual increase of around 
4%,  while  its  mining  counterpart  dropped  by  nearly  2%  annually,  due  to  some  one-off 
adjustments in some operations. 
 
About  the  labor  market,  for  several  quarters  its  recovery  seemed  to  lag  behind  activity, 
mainly  because  private  salaried  employment—which  typically  has  a  closer  link  with  the 
business cycle—was stagnant. This phenomenon was not entirely unexpected given that the 
lags with which activity affects employment are variable, but anyway advised some caution 
regarding the strength and durability of the economic recovery. In recent months we have 
been reviewing this diagnosis. On the one hand, private salaried employment is increasing at 
annual rates above 1%, something not seen for several quarters, and shows some dynamism 
in important sectors, such as construction and trade. On the other hand, evidence has been 
emerging that suggests that the effective growth of employment would be somewhat greater, 
since the labor market has been able to absorb a significant influx of immigrant workers. This 
figure  is  not  yet  captured  by  the  employment  surveys,  which  are  based  on  population 
projections that have not yet been updated according to the 2017 Census. This leads us to 
evaluate that the lag we observed between employment and activity is beginning to dissipate 
(Figure 2). 
 
At the same time that private salaried employment has increased, the unemployment rate has 
increased  too,  as  exemplified  by  the  figures  from  the  National  Statistics  Institute  (INE) 
employment survey for the May-July moving quarter. This is so because during the phase of 
low growth of 2015-2017 many people became self-employed, others worked fewer hours 
than desired and others simply quit the labor market because they could not find what they 
were  looking  for.  In  recent  months,  this  process  has  been  reversed,  with  the  workforce 
growing around 2.5%, more than the 1.5% of the period 2015-2017. It is important that in 
the next few months the speed of job creation, especially salaried jobs, match and hopefully 
surpass the workforce’s growth. 
 
Every September, the CBC revises its potential growth estimates. This concept refers to the 
level  of Gross Domestic Product  (GDP) that  is  consistent with  stable inflation around the 
target and, therefore, it is adequate for measuring the activity gap associated with short-term 
inflationary pressures. Along with this, from time to time we also make estimates of trend 
growth, a concept  that is  related to  the medium-term  growth  capacity of the economy. At 
long terms, potential and trend growth rate converge to the same number; however, they tend 
  
2 
 to diverge in the short term due to transitory factors that alter productive capacity, such as 
temporary shocks to productivity and limitations to factor utilization.  
 
On  this  occasion,  our  potential  growth  estimate  has  been  revised  upwards,  which  is  to  be 
expected in a context of recovering investment, higher growth and still well-contained core 
inflation. For 2018, the potential growth of non-mining GDP stands at 3.1%, which compares 
with  our 2.7% estimate a  year  ago. For 2019, the potential growth of non-mining GDP is 
3.2% (2.9% a  year ago). Trend growth  remains within the 3% to 3.5% range estimated in 
2017 and will be reviewed next  year, once the updated demographic projections from  the 
Census  are  released.  With  this,  potential  and  trend  growth  should  converge  sooner  than 
expected. 
 
Growth  accumulated  up  to  the  second  quarter  of  the  year—even  considering  the  higher 
potential growth—has narrowed the activity gap with respect to the forecast, and we estimate 
that it is near zero in absolute level (Figure 3). We must bear in mind that the activity gap is 
a non-observable variable, so calculating it will give an approximation that may vary over 
time.  Every  now  and  then  a  re-estimation  may  yield  important  differences  with  previous 
values, including different readings of its level and direction. A Box in our Report identifies 
the elements that explain these adjustments and consider both the revision that is made to the 
published data—until they are considered definitive—and the changes in the parameters and 
estimation methods.  
 
For this reason, we consider other antecedents to assess the state of the capacity gaps. They 
all coincide that slack has been reduced but suggest that they still persist to some degree. For 
example, installed capacity utilization indicators continue to show space and core inflation 
has remained below 2% over the last year. On the other hand, the labor market may contain 
additional degrees of slack due to migrant inflows and increased labor participation of women 
and elderly workers. All considered, we evaluate that the inflationary pressures are consistent 
with the convergence of inflation to the target under our working assumption for the MPR. 
 
The behavior of economic activity in the first half and underlying factors lead to an upward 
revision  of  the  GDP  estimate  for  2018.  In  the  baseline  scenario  of  this  Report,  GDP  will 
increase between 4% and 4.5% this year, which compares with the 3.25% to 4% range we 
estimated in June. This is consistent with lower 12-month growth rates in the second half, 
which respond largely to a tighter comparison base. For 2019 and 2020, the forecast ranges 
are similar to those considered in June. Thus, GDP will grow between 3.25% and 4.25% next 
year, and between 2.75% and 3.75% in 2020 (Figure 4). The lower growth expected in 2020 
stems  from  the  economy  closing  the  gaps  somewhat  faster  than  expected  and,  therefore, 
growing around potential. Moreover, the impulse from abroad will contribute somewhat less 
growth at that horizon. 
 
These projections represent a somewhat less favorable external scenario than in the previous 
Report, an MPR that will remain below its neutral level for several more quarters, investment 
outgrowing GDP, no major macroeconomic imbalances and the economy growing around its 
trend trajectory towards 2020.  
 
  
3 
 Compared with June’s Report, the baseline scenario adjusts the gross fixed capital formation 
(GFCF)  of  2018  upwards  but  maintains  the  same  gradual  reduction  in  its  expansion  rates 
over  the  rest  of  the  projection  horizon.  On  the  consumption  side,  we  expect  private 
consumption to grow at a similar pace as GDP during 2018, 2019 and 2020. This assumes 
that the durable component—largely its imported part—will decelerate from the first half of 
the  year,  affected  by  the  depreciation  of  the  peso.  The  support  that  household  spending 
receives in the baseline scenario from the recovery of the labor market should help offset this 
effect (Figure 5). 
 
One  positive  recent  surprise  has  been  the  greater  dynamism  of  investment,  especially  in 
machinery and equipment, which outperforms GDP growth in our projections for the period 
2018-2020. The greater contribution that is foreseen for mining investment stands out, in line 
with the near 40% growth that it showed in the first quarter of this year. The new five-year 
plan announced by Codelco is added as background. In any case, generating conditions for 
the development of larger projects remains a challenge if we are to sustain high growth rates. 
This  is  especially  relevant  if  one  considers  that  the  observed  and  projected  currency 
depreciation  in  the  baseline  scenario  will  reduce  spending  on  tradable  goods,  and  that  an 
important part of this greater investment is explained by capital replacement needs. On the 
construction side, activity shows more limited dynamism. With this, GFCF as a percentage 
of GDP—in both nominal and real terms—will reach 21.7% this year and will border 22% 
next year (Table 1).  
 
Regarding fiscal policy, our working assumption is that in 2018 the economy will receive a 
fiscal impulse consistent with the current budget. From then on, we assume that the structural 
deficit will follow the path of gradual reduction defined by the authority.  
 
Although  the  CBC  is  an  independent  organization  and  does  not  coordinate  its  monetary 
policy decisions with the government, it does need to anticipate the evolution of the fiscal 
position as part of the macro framework within which it makes its decisions. The operation 
of a structural rule and the establishment of a path with annual goals for it helps to provide 
more certainty to the formulation of monetary policy, while allowing the budget’s automatic 
stabilizers to operate, letting monetary policy assume the main countercyclical role. 
 
In the projections I have just presented, we estimate that the impulse the Chilean economy 
will receive from abroad will fall somewhat short of our June estimates, particularly because 
of lower terms of trade. In recent weeks, copper has approached its long-term levels faster 
than we thought. Therefore, our projections are down from June, to US$2.95 per pound this 
year, 2.85 in 2019 and 2.8 in 2020. For its part, the oil price has moved kind of erratically, 
but  is  still  above  the  prices  of  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Going  forward,  in  our  baseline 
scenario a downward trajectory is  still considered, in  line with  market  price futures. With 
this, the terms of trade will post a decrease of 1.2% this year, not the slight rise we expected 
in June. In 2019 and 2020, they will decline further. 
 
Regarding  financial  conditions,  in  the  developed  world  the  divergence  of  their  monetary 
policies  persists,  because  of  dissimilar  evaluations  of  capacity  gaps  and  the  inflationary 
pressures that each face. While the Fed raised the fed funds rate by 25 basis points in June 
and  has  signaled  two  more  increases  this  year  and  three  the  next—while  continuing  to 
 
4 
  downsize  of  its  balance  sheet—the  European  Central  Bank  extended  its  asset  purchasing 
program and signaled that the benchmark rates will stay put for a while.  
 
The  trade  dispute  between  the  US  and  China  has  continued  to  escalate.  So  far,  the  tariffs 
applied by the US and the reprisals have been limited, but the conflict has not subsided, and 
the measures adopted are already having an impact on risk perceptions, and the markets are 
more sensitive to them. As detailed in a Box in this Report, the effects that these measures 
may have on the global economy are difficult to quantify, as they depend on the number of 
countries  that  would  be  directly  and  indirectly  involved,  the  amounts  levied,  the  sectors 
affected and the time during which the higher tariffs would be applied. However, there are 
some  qualitative  dimensions  and  certain  transmission  channels  common  to  the  different 
possible scenarios. For the economies directly involved, there would be a negative impact 
due to lower external demand and greater uncertainty, which would affect local consumption 
and investment decisions. The size of the impact is related to the importance of trade among 
those directly involved and their ability to divert it to other economies. In China, for example, 
the share of its exports to the US in terms of the growth of its overall economy has fallen by 
half (Figure 6).  
 
In any case, we must consider that certain automatic stabilizers are at play. For example, the 
reduction in external demand induces a depreciation of the currency of the economy facing 
higher tariffs, making its products relatively more competitive. Conversely, in the economy 
imposing  the  tariffs,  an  appreciation  of  the  currency  should  be  observed.  Except  if  this 
appreciation compensates the increase in tariffs, the higher prices of imported goods would 
temporarily push inflation up. In the case of the US, this greater pressure of imported costs 
would be added to the scarce gaps that the economy already presents, which could lead to 
greater current-account imbalances, higher inflation and additional pressures to speed up the 
pace of monetary normalization.  
 
Special  attention  deserves  the  effects  on  financial  markets  and  asset  prices,  especially  in 
circumstances where the Fed continues to progress in normalizing its monetary policy. The 
uncertainty associated with the trade conflict contributes to reducing risk appetite,  making 
capital flow out of emerging economies. So far, this adjustment has been selective and major 
effects have materialized in  only a few vulnerable economies. For an economy with  good 
fundamentals,  such  as  Chile,  one  possible  risk  comes  from  a  synchronized  adjustment  of 
emerging  economies’  asset  prices,  as  it  happened  in  the  late  1990s  or  during  the  Global 
Financial  Crisis.  A  scenario  of  greater  uncertainty,  tight  financial  conditions  and  an 
appreciated dollar is particularly negative for the prices of commodities, especially copper. 
 
Fears about the effects of the trade war have been heightened by the further moderation of 
China’s  economic  activity  figures.  The  Chinese  authorities  again  intensified  fiscal  and 
monetary stimuli, reversing some of the measures adopted during 2017 to limit indebtedness 
and  promote  more  balanced  growth.  About  the  monetary  stance,  its  Central  Bank  has  led 
interest  rates  downward  and  granted  liquidity  to  the  banking  market  by  cutting  reserve 
requirements twice during 2018. In turn, it has allowed the currency to depreciate—close to 
10%  since  March—without  major  interventions,  partially  offsetting  the  higher  tariffs  on 
Chinese  goods.  At  the  fiscal  level,  they  have  relaxed  the  limits  of  indebtedness  of  local 
governments, allowing them to issue debt at lower interest rates and eliminating restrictions 
 
5 
  on public-private partnerships with the aim of stimulating investment in infrastructure. Tax 
reductions have also been applied to companies and households for an amount of roughly 
1.3%  of  GDP  and  the  easing  of  environmental  constraints,  which  already  resulted  in  a 
rebound in industrial production during the first quarter.  
 
How much room do the Chinese authorities have to further stimulate demand? One doubt 
refers to their level of indebtedness, which is three times their GDP, too high for an emerging 
economy, and originated in a poorly regulated segment of the financial industry. The same 
is true of their fiscal side, with a deficit that is high and would grow more if local governments 
were included. Finally, in a currency scheme that is still relatively rigid, expectations of a 
greater depreciation of the currency could trigger capital outflows, which in the past have 
caused  significant  losses  of  international  reserves.  Although  some  of  these  risks  look  less 
pressing  than  they  did  a  couple  of  years  ago,  additional  doses  of  stimulus  applied  to  an 
economy  that  has  accumulated  imbalances,  in  a  more  uncertain  context  and  with  more 
stringent financial conditions, amplify the risks in medium-term horizons.  
 
The effects of such a scenario could be brought home in Chile through several channels. An 
escalation of the conflict would certainly threaten our trading partners’ growth, particularly 
China, by increasing medium-term risks, beyond the particular effects it may have on specific 
exporting sectors of our economy—depending on whether its products are complements or 
substitutes of the taxed products. It could also deteriorate financial conditions significantly 
in the emerging world. In addition, it could pull the price of copper below its long-term level. 
This  external  framework  would  worsen  the  terms  of  trade,  depreciate  the  peso  and  lower 
prospects for growth, especially due to a downward adjustment in investment. The effects on 
inflation  are  not  entirely  evident.  A  depreciation  would  generate  short-term  upward 
pressures, while lower growth would widen the gap, generating disinflationary pressures in 
the medium term, a horizon that is more relevant to the calibration of the monetary impulse. 
The appropriate monetary policy response to this scenario depends largely on the magnitude 
and relative persistence  of these shocks  and their impact  on inflation expectations.  In any 
case,  the  Chilean  economy  has  an  economic  policy  framework  that  allows  it  to  absorb 
external shocks and reduce their negative effects, particularly a flexible exchange rate and a 
monetary  policy  regime  that,  being  based  on  a  two-year  inflation  target,  can  act 
countercyclically. 
 
In the current external picture, those economies perceived as having weaker macroeconomic 
fundamentals may undergo abrupt changes in the financial conditions they face. The recent 
experience of Argentina and Turkey are good examples of this. In particular, the currencies 
of these countries have lost more than a third of their value in the last month and a half. Both 
economies share high inflation, monetary policy making with less credible targets, in a still 
highly  dollarized  economy  and  a  fragile  external  position,  resulting  from  a  high  current-
account deficit and limited reserves. One Argentina-specific vulnerability is its high fiscal 
deficit at 6% of GDP in 2017, which is difficult to contain with a public debt denominated in 
dollars  that  exceeds  30%  of  GDP  and  whose  service  becomes  complex  in  the  current 
circumstances. Turkey, for its part, became highly dependent on external financing to sustain 
growth above its potential for several years. By 2019, the overall Turkish economy’s needs 
are estimated to approach 30% of GDP.  
 
 
6 
  In  Chile,  the  biggest  reaction  has  come  from  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  while  long-term 
interest rates have not been affected. At the statistical close of this Report (28 August), the 
peso/dollar  parity  was  somewhat  above  CLP660,  5.5%  higher  than  at  the  close  of  the 
previous  Report.  In  the  days  that  followed  the  peso  has  depreciated  further  vis-à-vis  the 
dollar.  However,  in  multilateral  terms  the  depreciation  has  been  milder,  even  with  an 
appreciation  against  other  emerging  and  commodity  exporters'  currencies,  reflecting  the 
greater relative strength of the Chilean economy. The real depreciation of the peso has been 
lower (near 1% since the previous Report). As a working assumption, the baseline scenario 
of this Report continues to assume that, in the course of the policy horizon, the real exchange 
rate will go back to its averages of the last fifteen to twenty years (Figure 7). 
 
As  for  domestic  credit,  local  financial  conditions  are  still  good,  in  line  with  the  ongoing 
expansionary stance of monetary policy.  Accordingly, the interest rates of many segments 
stayed  low  and  credit  growth  remained  limited.  However,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that 
commercial rates increased again, in a context where qualitative indicators report increased 
demand and more accommodating supply (Figure 8). 
 
For the moment, the higher risk perception has translated into a limited revision to global 
growth prospects, with decelerating growth rates in 2019 and 2020. By blocs, the outlook for 
developed countries does not differ from that in the June Monetary Policy Report. Instead, 
in the emerging countries the downward adjustment in Latin America stands out, especially 
Argentina and Brazil. Add the expected slowdown in China (Table 2).  
 
As I said at the beginning, the annual variation of the Consumer Price Index excluding Food 
and  Energy  (CPIEFE)—our  measure  of  core  inflation  that  deletes  the  prices  of  food  and 
energy from the CPI—has remained below 2%, with annual inflation still negative for goods 
and persistently around 3% for services. The CPI has approached 3%, mainly driven by the 
behavior of the more volatile prices (Figure 9).  
 
The peso depreciation has an effect on the revision of the short-term inflation outlook. By 
the end of this year, the annual variation of the CPIEFE is forecast to be at 2.7% (2.3% in 
June)  and  that  of  the  CPI,  at  3.1%  (2.8%  in  June).  Once  both  indicators  converge  to  3% 
during 2019, they will remain in  the neighborhood until the end of the projection horizon 
(Figure  10).  It  is  very  likely  that  in  September  the  annual  CPI  inflation  rate  will  be 
temporarily above 3%, because of the low basis for comparison left by the unusual behavior 
of some foodstuffs in 2017. 
 
Regarding monetary policy, we think that the evolution of macroeconomic conditions makes 
it  less  necessary  to  maintain  the  current  monetary  stimulus.  Therefore,  our  working 
assumption for the MPR is that it will begin to increase in the coming months and by 2020 it 
will stand near its neutral level—ie. between 4% and 4.5%. This assumption is not essentially 
different from the forecast a few months ago, as it implies gradual increases in the policy rate 
associated  with  the  recovery  of  the  domestic  economy.  However,  the  fact  that  the  figures 
confirm  that the economy is  expanding with  relative strength  for several  quarters already, 
makes the start of the normalization process more imminent. 
 
  
7 
 As  always,  this  trajectory  does  not  mean  a  commitment,  as  it  is  conditional  on  the 
materialization  of  the  baseline  scenario  outlined  here.  New  information  modifying  the 
projected inflation trajectory will entail changes in monetary policy implementation. 
 
I wish to emphasize how important the work of monetary policy in recent years has been. As 
from  2013,  we  are  facing  a  scenario  of  less  favorable  external  conditions  and  where  our 
economy has lost dynamism. A significant depreciation of the peso put pressure on inflation 
pushing it above 4%. The inflation-targeting scheme that guides our monetary policy and the 
credibility  that  the  CBC  has  gained  allowed  us  to  think  prospectively  and  apply  a  highly 
expansionary monetary policy to mitigate the lost dynamism of domestic and foreign demand 
and thus ensure that inflation would converge to 3 % within two years. Today, almost five 
years into the process, the evolution of macroeconomic conditions indicates that, finally, the 
economy no longer needs such an expansionary monetary stance, which is very good news, 
no doubt.  
 
As usual, there are internal and external elements that could modify these projections. From 
the point of view of its impact on local activity, the balance of risks in the external scenario 
remains biased downward. The main risk continues to be an abrupt deterioration of financial 
conditions facing emerging economies, especially because markets seem to be more reactive 
to negative news. In this area, what happens in the US is still relevant, in terms of both the 
evolution of inflation and its outlook and the unfolding of the trade conflict. This situation 
has revived the fears about China, especially the risks implicit in the imbalances it maintains 
in several of its markets. In Europe, among other issues, the uncertainty surrounding Brexit 
is cause for concern. 
 
In the context of normalizing global financial conditions, investors have drawn a line between 
the  emerging  economies  they  perceive  as  more  vulnerable  and  those  with  more  solid 
fundamentals. Chile meets the current situation with good macroeconomic indicators in terms 
of growth, inflation and the balance of its fiscal and external accounts. Moreover, our floating 
exchange  rate  makes  it  possible  to  cushion  external  shocks,  and  the  monetary  policy 
framework permits us to act countercyclically. This is feasible due to the low exposure to 
interest rate and exchange rate risks by the main economic agents.  
 
On financial matters, one issue drawing attention in this conjuncture is the external debt. The 
Box in this Report, entitled “Financial Volatility and External Debt”, provides an in-depth 
analysis of this issue, particularly with regard to corporate debt. This analysis concludes that 
the risks of refinancing and exchange rate volatility for companies are limited, either because 
of  the  type  of  creditor  (matrices  of  foreign  investors),  loan  maturities  or  the  absence  of 
significant currency mismatches. Additionally, it should be kept in mind that an important 
part  of  the  group  of  companies  that  report  to  the  Financial  Market  Commission  have 
investments abroad that are financed with debt taken in Chile. Therefore, analyzing Chile’s 
external debt as a proportion of GDP can be distorting, because part of the added value is 
produced outside the country. Using of financial indicators such as assets and net worth is 
more recommended for a financially more integrated economy such as Chile and a modern 
productive sector (Figure 11).  
 
  
8 
 And, the flexible exchange rate plays a role in cushioning external shocks in Chile, unlike 
other emerging countries, precisely because both the corporate and the financial sectors have 
adequate hedging—and are monitored by their respective regulators on a permanent basis. In 
fact, since the adoption of exchange rate flexibility in 1999, the Chilean economy has lived 
through several periods of significant peso depreciation, like in 2008, 2013 and 2015, without 
causing any problems of mismatching in the corporate sector with dollar-denominated debt. 
In this way, our inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, floating exchange rate and 
deep  financial  markets  are  the  key  pillars  of  our  country's  macroeconomic  design.  In  any 
case, the bias and probabilities of external risk scenarios reinforce the need for a small and 
open  economy  such  as  Chile  to  maintain  deep-rooted  macroeconomic  foundations, 
particularly a path of fiscal consolidation, sustainable debt levels and adequate capitalization 
of the country’s banking system.  
 
At  home,  we  estimate  that  the  risks  to  activity  are  unbiased.  The  economy  has  brought 
positive surprises in  good measure because the possibility of a more dynamic behavior of 
investment identified in previous reports has materialized, short only of a more significant 
response from large-scale projects and the real estate sector. For its part, although the labor 
market  could  take  a  little  longer  than  expected  to  recover,  the  latest  data  tend  to  provide 
greater robustness to the employment, wage bill and consumption projections. 
 
As for inflation, we estimate that the risks are unbiased. Although the risks in the international 
scenario  and  their  negative  implications  have  increased,  the  economy  has  shown  more 
dynamism than expected and the short-term outlook for headline inflation has been corrected 
upwards.  In  this  context,  we  consider  that  the  current  level  of  monetary  stimulus  is  less 
necessary  and  may  begin  to  withdraw  it  in  the  coming  months.  Thus,  we  reaffirm  our 
commitment to conduct monetary policy with flexibility, so that projected inflation stands at 
3% over the two-year horizon. 
 
Institutional advances and challenges 
 
As I pointed out at the beginning, this presentation to the full Senate has a special connotation. 
Indeed, the Constitutional Organic Act mandates the CBC Board to present at this time of 
the  year  an  evaluation  of  the  progress  of  the  policies  and  programs  of  the  current  year,  a 
report of those proposed for the following calendar year, the overall economic projections 
that sustain them, and a recount of the factors that can affect its balance sheet. In other words, 
it is not just about presenting the Monetary Policy Report, but a more complete account about 
the evolution of our institution. 
 
However, today I wish to go beyond the usual institutional account. I would like in particular 
to recount the content and progress of the Bank’s Strategic Plan that  I anticipated on this 
same venue last  year, as well as share some additional steps that we intend to take on the 
issue of institutional transparency. 
 
Our Strategic Plan 2018-2022 was prepared during the better part of last year and is currently 
in  full implementation. Although this type of exercise was not  new to  our institution, this 
time  it  relied  on  an  extensive  process  of  external  consultations,  gathering  of  relevant 
information and internal  deliberation unprecedented in the  CBC, which is very innovative 
 
9 
  for the central banking community in general. This exercise was completed at the end of 2017 
with the approval of the Plan. Below I summarize its main contents and advances. 
 
This  Strategic  Plan  2018-2022  updated  the  basic  definitions  of  the  CBC’s  institutional 
mission and vision. The latter in particular is defined as “being a reliable institution because 
of its technical nature and excellence in achieving the mandated objectives.” This expresses 
the need for the CBC to be prepared to respond to the opportunities and challenges that are 
presented  to  it  at  the  macroeconomic  and  institutional  level,  in  the  understanding  that  in 
today’s world and society the citizens’ and markets’ confidence have to  be earned day by 
day, beyond our past achievements. 
 
Based on these definitions, the plan identifies five areas of priority: 
 
Maintain  intellectual  leadership  in  the  areas  related  to  the  institutional 
Strengthen  the  understanding  and  dialogue  of  the  organization  with  its 
Strengthen  its  corporate  governance  to  balance  out  risk  tolerance  and  the 
Improve ability to understand and incorporate technological changes into its 
 
mandates of the CBC; 
 
 
environment; 
 
 
efficiency of its business processes; 
 
 
tasks; and 
 
 
engaging the best talent. 
Consolidate the CBC as an employer of excellence, capable of attracting and 
 
Accordingly, twenty-one lines of action were defined that will be developed over this five-
year period, all of them described in the document in your hands. Below I summarize those 
that may be of greatest interest for you honorable senators, with their corresponding progress 
status. 
 
Intellectual leadership. Since last January, we apply a new monetary policy communication 
scheme. To date, we have held six monetary policy meeting under this scheme, three of them 
accompanied by the respective publications of the Monetary Policy Report and subsequent 
presentation to the Senate. In addition, the CBC published the Financial Stability Report in 
May  separately  from  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  presented  it  to  Senate’s  Finance 
Committee.  This  has  allowed  for  a  better  communication  of  the  messages  of  each  report, 
which  have  been  complemented  with  deeper  analysis  of  issues  of  macroeconomic  and 
financial relevance, such as trend growth (September 2017 Monetary Policy Report) and the 
new information  technologies applied to  the  financial  industry (Financial  Stability Report 
first half 2018). In December of this year we will continue with this work, including a new 
offprint of the Monetary Policy Report that will analyze in detail several aspects of the labor 
market. 
 
  
10 
 Institutional  relations.  During  the  first  quarter  we  created  a  new  Institutional  Affairs 
Department  in  charge  of  diversifying  and  improving  the  quality  of  the  CBC’s 
communications,  developing  support  programs  for  the  community  on  issues  of  its 
competence and implementing the active transparency agenda of the CBC. It is worth noting 
here that the CBC began publishing the minutes of the monetary policy meetings of ten years 
back. In April we published the minutes of all the meetings from 2000 to 2007. 
 
Governance.  The  new  work  scheme  between  the  Board  and  senior  management  was 
developed and implemented as of March for the discussion and decision making of monetary 
and financial policy matters, as well as the separate inclusion of institutional administration 
issues.  Additionally,  in  the  second  quarter,  we  approved  a  change  in  the  organizational 
structure  designed  to  generate  greater  flexibility,  empowerment  and  responsibility  of  the 
CBC’s divisions and areas. This adjustment also involved the creation of the strategic- and 
technological-risk Department. 
 
Technology.  A  technological  observatory  was  created  intended  to  act  as  catalyst  for 
enhancing knowledge and adopting important innovations for the CBC’s fulfillment of its 
functions. The main objectives of the observatory are: (i) to agree on common principles and 
contribute, inside the CBC, to the coordination of the treatment of disruptive technologies, 
(ii)  create  networks  with  the  external  community  to  enhance  know-how  and  identify 
opportunities and threats, and (iii) agree on the pillars of innovation to promote and contribute 
to knowledge in those areas. The pillars of interest that have been defined include: digital 
currencies  of  central  banks,  cryptoassets  and  financial  stability,  development  of  digital 
payments and technology of distributed records and their applications, technology and data 
management, cybersecurity and risks for the financial system, among other issues. 
 
Employer of excellence. We have been working on strengthening the organizational culture 
and  improving  the  value  proposition  for  our  staff  in  order  to  achieve  effectiveness  in 
attracting and retaining employees and developing their careers. To strengthen the internal 
career, we are developing an exercise to improve job description and assessment. 
 
Hand  in  hand  with  the  strategic  initiatives  just  defined,  the  CBC  has  continued  with  its 
projects linked to the fulfillment of its permanent functions. These include, among others, 
the  delivery  of  new  statistical  products,  improved  management  of  the  cash  cycle, 
modernization  of  the  technological  platform  that  supports  the  investment  cycle  of  the 
International Reserves and the Sovereign Funds, and the incorporation of computer security 
measures based on high international standards. 
 
Particularly noteworthy is the progress we have made in implementing Basel III regulations, 
mainly in terms of liquidity standards for the banking system and support for the discussion 
of  the  new  General  Banking  Act.  The  latter  will  pose  additional  demands,  particularly 
concerning the implementation of regulatory measures and macroprudential policies, such as 
the countercyclical capital reserve and the charge to systemic banks, for which the CBC has 
been preparing in recent months, reviewing international experiences and their applicability 
to Chile. 
 
  
11 
 We intend to continue informing the Senate and the general public about the progress of our 
Strategic Plan and the operational  agenda in  the coming  years. This  is  an expression of a 
broader will to increase the transparency of the operation and performance of the CBC, as an 
essential ground for the confidence in our institution that we wish to maintain and reinforce. 
 
Let  me  stress  here  that  the  CBC’s  commitment  with  transparency  involves  not  only 
compliance with the obligations mandated us by the Constitution and laws but has expanded 
further by way of agreements adopted by the Board throughout the years.  
 
The  CBC  is  governed  by  the  principle  of  transparency  in  exercising  its  public  function, 
enshrined in Article 8 of the Constitution, the bylaws of its own Constitutional Organic Act 
and the relevant legislation that has expressly included the CBC, such as Law No 20285 on 
Access  to  Public  Information  (2009),  Law  No  20730,  which  regulates  the  lobbying  and 
management of private interests (2014), and Law No 20880 on public service probity (2016). 
 
Still, the Board has added several transparency standards that go beyond the aforementioned 
norms. For example, last March we made available to the public a total of 96 minutes of past 
monetary  policy  meetings  held  during  the  period  2000-2007,  a  practice  that  will  continue 
into the future years. We have also included as passive subjects of transparency all division 
directors, area managers and heads of departments that may have relevant decision-making 
powers, and we have supplemented the obligations of the Lobby Law with the publication 
on the CBC’s website the weekly agenda of the Governor and all Board members. In addition, 
we have established an external Audit and Compliance Committee and an internal reporting 
channel to denounce situations of harassment or abuse. 
 
From the perspective of using the powers inherent to an autonomous institution to strengthen 
transparency in more specific areas that are not covered by general legislation, the CBC is 
preparing some additional initiatives to implement over the next twelve months. 
 
One,  we  want  to  raise  the  levels  of  information  and  guidance  we  give  to  the  community 
regarding monetary policy decisions. In the coming months we will publish a manual with 
the  macroeconomic  projection  models  used  by  the  CBC  in  formulating  monetary  policy. 
With this, the analysis carried out by the Board can be better understood and the sensitivity 
of  the  projections  to  certain  key  variables  can  be  measured.  Also,  we  will  improve  our 
communication about the future trajectory of the monetary policy rate in the Monetary Policy 
Report, in order to provide a clearer orientation to the market on how monetary policy can 
materialize in the baseline scenario of the Report. On the other hand, we will strengthen the 
risk analysis, articulating with more clarity alternative scenarios and their implications for 
monetary policy. In this way, we hope that the CBC will be at the forefront of the central 
banks  in  terms  of  transparency  and  quality  of  its  orientation  to  economic  agents  and  the 
overall population. 
 
Two, in the next few months we also plan to take two essential steps in terms of financial 
stability. The first one implies broadening the analysis of risks facing financial stability, in 
order to input sources and areas of risks not yet considered in the Financial Stability Report 
analysis, including operational risks, particularly computer safety. The second step will be 
associated with the approval of the new General Banking Act and involves announcing in the 
 
12 
  course of 2019 the variables and parameters with which the countercyclical capital reserve 
requirement  will  be  applied,  which  will  become  the  most  important  instrument  of 
macroprudential policy in Chile. 
 
Three, in 2019 the Bank will prepare its first Social and Environmental Sustainability Report, 
examining  how  it  complies  with  obligations  of  every  entity  forming  part  of  a  broader 
community. This Report will also give an account of the CBC’s progress and challenges in 
terms of gender equality. 
 
Lastly,  notwithstanding  the  aforementioned  initiatives,  the  Board  of  the  CBC  will  hire  an 
independent  assessment  of  its  performance  in  compliance  with  the  two  mandates  of  its 
Organic Act, that is, price stability and financial stability. For this purpose, a panel composed 
of  four  world-renowned  experts  in  central  banking  will  be  convened.  This  panel  will 
accumulate the relevant background in the course of the next  few months and will issue a 
report with its assessments and recommendations in time to be presented in this same instance 
next year. This will be a concrete form of accountability for the way the CBC and its Board 
have complied with its legally-mandated obligations and responsibilities to society, which 
will acquire special connotation at the end of 30 years of autonomy of our institution. 
 
This recount that I have presented before the Honorable Senate of the Republic, without being 
exhaustive, gives us a broad and general approach to the steps we are taking. It also expresses 
our ability to adapt to more uncertain and challenging scenarios, as well as the commitment 
we have to relieve the meaning and purpose of the CBC. In short, it is about fully assuming 
the responsibility with which we honor our constitutional mandate in the eyes of our country. 
 
Thank you. 
 
     
13 
       
14 
       
15 
       
16 
       
17 
       
18 
       
19 
    
20 
