Zoja Razmusa: Payments in the 22nd century - future starts today?
Introductory  statement  by  Ms  Zoja  Razmusa,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Lativa,  at  the
annual conference of the Bank of Latvia "Payments in the 22nd Century: Future starts Today?",
Riga, 3 October 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am pleased to welcome you to the annual conference of Latvijas Banka.
I would like to note that mentioning the 22nd century in the title of the conference is not a typing
error. Our conference this year is special because we are celebrating the 100th anniversary of
Latvia. We are proud of our country and would like to take a longer-term perspective and try to
think about payments over the next 100 years. As economists we, of course, understand that the
longer the forecast term, the less accurate they are likely to be.
Central banks are first and foremost about money and that is also reflected in the title of our
today’s conference. Since 2014 the euro has been our money.
One of the key functions of money is to be a store of value. Euro area monetary policy is aimed
at ensuring that the euro remains a reliable store of value as reflected in the aim to keep annual
inflation close to but below 2% over the medium term.
However, another equally important function of money is to be a medium of exchange. Payments
play a key role in the smooth functioning of the economy and this area has greatly evolved in the
recent decades and, in particular, the last several years. Central banks are playing a fundamental
role  in  facilitating  a  secure,  efficient  and  innovative  payment  system.  This  is  the  focus  of  our
today’s conference.
Instant payments provide a good notion of what modern financial services should be like. The
21st  century  consumer  expects  any  service  to  be  available  online,  here  and  now.  Paying
invoices, making purchases or transferring funds to an individual or company can take place at
any hour of the day or night and from any location with internet access. It only requires a couple
of  clicks  and  seconds  for  the  money  to  reach  the  recipient.  Instant  payments  are  quick,
convenient, secure and user-friendly.
The  progress  that  has  been  reached  in  the  domain  of  interbank  transfers  during  the  last
generation is impressive. Just a bit more than 20 years ago in Latvia there was one interbank
clearing  cycle  a  day,  it  was  paper-based  and  the  transactions  between  clients  of  different
commercial  banks  at  that  time  took  a  few  days  to  be  completed.  Today  instant  interbank
transfers can be executed within a matter of seconds 24 hours a day 7 days a week.
The 28th of August 2018 marks one year since Latvijas Banka became the first euro area central
bank to introduce the instant payments infrastructure based on SEPA Inst. scheme. This is an
infrastructure for commercial banks and other payment service providers, which have the task of
providing this service to their customers.
The Eurosystem will launch the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS) service on the 30th
of November 2018, enabling payment service providers to offer fund transfers in real time and
around the clock, 365 days a year in secure central bank money.
At  the  same  time  today’s  conference  is  about  much  more  than  instant  payments.  Today  we
would like to discuss the key trends shaping the industry and understand what the path forward
is.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The conditions for new developments are very favourable, especially in the payments market. On
the one hand, consumers are increasingly looking for fast, convenient and affordable services
that  suit  their  changing  habits.  On  the  other  hand,  the  advances  in  technology  facilitate  the
creation  of  innovative  solutions  with  the  potential  of  causing  fundamental  digitalisation-led
changes  in  the  sector.  It  will  result  in  a  significant  switch  to  contactless,  mobile  and  instant
payments  solutions  available  around  the  clock  in  the  near  future.  Latest  generations  of
smartphones offer several options to access payments applications using biometrical identity:
fingerprint,  eye  screening  and  face  recognition  technologies.  Innovations  such  as  distributed
ledger technology, cloud computing and artificial intelligence will transform the marketplace over
time.
It is clear that in the future further improvements in payment services will not be about speed
anymore. In a few years’ time, when the completion of payment transactions within seconds will
have become the new standard, for all practical purposes further improvements in speed are
unlikely  to  be  of  importance.  Instant  payments  are  now  being  implemented  at  pan-European
level.
It is equally clear that payments continue to migrate away from cash and become less visible to
the  customer  as  consumers  shift  purchases  to  online  and  mobile  channels.  While  we  are
unlikely to move to a 100% cashless society in the near future, the incompatibility between cash
and digital marketplaces or digital platforms means that payments will continue to move towards
cashless solutions.
An  overview  of  payment  trends  would  be  incomplete  without  mentioning  crypto-assets,  even
though they remain controversial and are still being debated. The high volatility of crypto-asset
value shows that they cannot be a reliable store of value, and their global use as a means of
payment remains marginal.
Nevertheless, they have demonstrated the potential of the blockchain technology behind it. The
technology is now being studied and tested by many financial market participants. Central banks
are no exception, primarily testing the possibility of adopting the technology in financial market
infrastructures and payment systems.
Even considering the short and medium term outlook, it is impossible to say with certainty how
the landscape of the financial services sector will evolve. Digitalisation and fintech, as well as the
possibilities  offered  by  big  data  and  artificial  intelligence  are  attracting  new  providers  to  the
market  and  fostering  the  introduction  of  novel  business  models.  The  new  Payment  Services
Directive (PSD2) has initiated a shift in the way payment services are offered and by whom they
are offered. The increased competition between Fintech firms, BigTechs and banks contributes
to the disaggregation of the established value chains. These developments can clearly have a
disruptive impact on the payments market.
When discussing the ample opportunities of payments in the future, we should not forget the
challenges  that  arise  concerning  regulation  and  supervision.  The  increasing  digitalisation  and
technological  advancements  pose  more  complex  risks,  particularly  in  terms  of  cybersecurity,
financial crimes and data protection. There is a fine line between stifling innovations by regulating
too  early  and  failing  to  protect  the  customers  by  regulating  too  little  and  too  late. A  balanced
approach is needed to ensure a level playing field for all market participants, at the same time
remaining  technology-neutral.  Closer  cooperation  between  industry  participants  and  regulators
across different sectors could be the answer for ensuring the challenges brought about by the
digital world are handled in the best possible way.
I’m  sure  that  there  are  other  keywords  besides  “secure",  “instant”  and  “cashless”  that  will
characterise the payments of the future. However, we have an excellent keynote speaker and
two fantastic panels of experts, therefore I would now like to hand over to them to explore further
the domain of payments.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I wish us all a day full of interesting presentations and fruitful debates.
Thank you very much for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
