Olli  Rehn:  Future  proofing  your  bank?  Digital  transformation  and
regulatory reform in the financial sector
Closing  keynote  address  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  The  Financial
Times Middle East Banking Forum, Dubai, UAE, 11 November 2018.
Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Many  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  the  FT  Middle  East  Banking  Forum,  which  has  provided  an
excellent opportunity for substantive dialogue on the future of banking and finance. My task – both
exciting and difficult – in this closing keynote is to discuss what future-proofing of your bank could
mean, with the perspective of next 10 years.
Futurology is often associated mostly with technology. Yes, digital technology is quite profoundly
changing the operating environment of banks. But it would still be a mistake to think the future is
all digital, and nothing else. Future-proofing a bank is as much about a sound business model
and the ability to adapt to a changing environment, as it is about utilising the best technologies
available.
As we look at the next ten-year time horizon, there are three major forces challenging banks:
digital  technology,  bank  resilience,  and  climate  change.  Since  my  experience  stems  from
Europe, I refer here to European banks, but this largely applies to banks in general.
Embracing digital technology is an essential part of future-proofing a bank. The financial industry
is going through a major transformation, driven by the whole range of digital technologies and the
explosive  growth  of  data.  Regulators,  including  central  banks,  are  aiming  at  finding  the  right
balance between regulation and innovation, so that consumers and businesses can benefit from
new possibilities, while maintaining financial stability and a level playing field.
We  want  to  make  sure  society  remains  inclusive.  This  requires  us  to  look  at  digital
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
transformation from the citizens’ point of view. Therefore, we have to identify what is real and
what is hype.
We can divide the developments in three categories:
1.  those that clearly increase societal welfare and should be benefitted from, such as mobile
and real-time payments – as long as we also take care of enhancing financial literacy;
2.  those  that  should  be  watched,  or  even  prevented,  such  as  booms  and  busts  related  to
crypto-assets; and
3.  those that can be further developed, such as machine learning and artificial intelligence.
Let me highlight two developments in the European banking sector, which may set an example
for the rest of the world.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first one is PSD2, and its related concept of Open Banking.
In the EU, the revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) is an important regulatory framework
to clarify payment legislation and make it better suited to a digitalising economy. The Directive
aims  at  promoting  competition,  which  will  lead  to  better  services  and  lower  prices  for
consumers. It will open the payments market to third-party providers, and banks will be obliged to
provide technical interfaces for accessing bank accounts. For some ears, this may sound daring
– but the industry is currently working together with supervisors to make this as safe and secure
as possible.
PSD2 is very much part of the broader trend of Open Banking. Banks all around the world are
partnering with start-ups, and financial services are being rebuilt using the latest technology. In
practice, it means that the customer experience can be provided by some party other than the
bank itself, while the bank is providing the plumbing in the background.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 The second development I would like to highlight is the instant payments system TIPS, which will
be  launched  by  the  European  Central  Bank  this  month.  TIPS  will  enable  account-to-account
transfers from one bank to another, in real-time, 24/7, every day of the year.
Why  do  I  specifically  want  to  highlight  these  two  developments?  Because  when  they  work
together, in synergy, they will have an impact which is greater than either would have on its own.
Whereas  PSD2  will  help  create  a  better  payment  experience  for  consumers,  TIPS  will  make
sure  the  money  moves  instantly.  This  will  make  the  digital  payments  as  close  to  cash  as
possible.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second major force is the continuing work to make banks more resilient.
This  is  particularly  important  as  we  are  also  moving  towards  a  normal  monetary  policy
environment, although normalisation does not mean returning to a pre-2008 world. Instead, we
are moving towards a new equilibrium.
Since some global imbalances and vulnerabilities remain, the European economy continues to
need a degree of monetary policy support. This is a balancing act, since we must ensure the
sustainable  convergence  of  inflation  to  our  definition  of  price  stability,  while  simultaneously
protecting  the  on-going  recovery  of  employment  and  the  repairing  of  balance  sheets.  An
important lesson from the financial crisis is that the financial industry, including banks and other
financial institutions, are special and have a huge impact on macroeconomic stability in the broad
sense.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The most important regulatory steps taken in Europe to make the banking sector more resilient
are the creation of the banking union and the development of a new macroprudential framework.
It may seem surprising that the development of the banking union only started as late as 2010–
12, more than a decade after the founding of the euro. Today, the banking union makes a lot of
sense, and it clearly strengthens the euro area – but regrettably it took a financial and debt crisis
to really get the ball rolling.
Since  2014,  the  banking  union  consists  of  two  main  building  blocks,  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). However, the banking union is
not  yet  complete. A  third  building  block,  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  System  (EDIS),  still
needs to be implemented.
As  for  the  macroprudential  work,  in  2010  the  European  Commission  proposed  a  union-level
body, with a mandate to oversee systemic risk in the financial system. A year later, the European
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  was  founded  and  became  responsible  for  the  macroprudential
oversight of the EU financial system.
Macroprudential policies are like taking away the punch bowl when the party is at its best. They
help  prevent  the  excessive  build-up  of  risk,  smoothen  the  financial  cycle,  and  limit  contagion.
Some  of  the  macroprudential  tools  are  additional  capital  buffers,  others  are  borrower-based
tools,  such  as  Loan-To-Value  (LTV)  caps.  These  have  proven  quite  effective  in  many  EU
member states, e.g. by calming down the housing markets in Ireland, Norway and Sweden.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now  let  me  move  to  the  third,  and  probably  biggest  challenge  of  all.  How  can  we  transform
banking  so  that  it  contributes  responsibly  to  an  ecologically  sustainable,  yet  growing  and
employing economy, in the face of climate change?
Let  me  be  clear,  climate  change  is  very  relevant  for  banks.  That’s  because  it  is  the  biggest
market  failure  of  all  times.  Its  impacts  are  already  felt  today,  in  the  form  of  extreme  weather
events,  hurricanes,  flooding,  and  extended  heat  waves,  leading  to  loss  of  lives  as  well  as
financial  damages.  Climate  change  is  expected  to  increase  their  frequency  and  severity.  The
negative impact is further amplified by long-term effects, such as rising sea levels, changes in
rainfall patterns, and potential mass migrations.
As  the  world  moves  from  talk  to  action,  climate  policies  start  having  an  effect  on  the  real
economy.  More  stringent  building  regulation,  subsidies  for  renewables,  stricter  emission
standards – all these and many other measures will change the dynamics of economic growth.
For a financial institution, climate change poses two particular types of risks. There are physical
risks, related to climate change itself, and transition risks, related to climate policies.
Physical  risks  lead  to  financial  losses  as  a  consequence  of  extreme  weather  events.  To  the
extent that property is insured, this burden falls on insurers and re-insurers. Without insurance, it
is the property itself that is suffering the loss. However, it is also possible that the debt servicing
ability of a borrower, or the collateral for a loan, are damaged as a result of a weather event. In
those cases it may be a bank that will book losses.
Financial  losses  from  weather  events  can  also  extend  beyond  the  initial  damages,  if  the
valuations of all properties near the damaged one are affected. We already have examples of this
in some flood-prone areas, where insurance has become more expensive, and it has become
more difficult to get a mortgage.
Transition risks materialise when a company with a carbon-intensive business model is unable
to  adjust  quickly  enough  to  new  policies,  competing  technology,  or  changing  customer
preferences. Investors may also need to adjust their portfolios, leading to financial losses. Such
losses are amplified if all investors act simultaneously.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The famous management scientist Peter Drucker is credited with the phrase “you can’t manage
what you can’t measure", and the same applies here. Data plays a key role in managing these
risks.  Data  is  needed  on  businesses  and  their  dependencies  on  carbon-intensive  processes
throughout the value-chain. We also need more data on the potential impact of extreme weather
events. As of today, much of this data is incomplete.
Since climate change knows no borders, global efforts are needed. Regulators, central banks
and supervisors around the world are starting to take action. First, on getting financial institutions
to manage their own climate change related risks. The next step is to get them to adjust their
balance sheets, and support a transition towards a more sustainable economy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
As the excellent presentations and panels today have proven, banks are living in a time of change
and transformation. Change in itself is inevitable, but transformation can be for the better – and
by future-proofing our banks and perhaps also our personal choices – we can create not a grave
but a braver new world, which is more inclusive, more responsible, more sustainable, and more
prosperous.
Technology  will  provide  the  means,  but  a  more  liveable,  sustainable  planet  will  provide  the
purpose.
Thank you.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
