Luis de Guindos: Integration and convergence - from the peseta to
the euro
Remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at an event in
honour of the 40th anniversary of the Spanish constitution, organised by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy, Madrid, 18 December 2018.
 1
This month marks 40 years since Spain began writing the most optimistic chapter of its history .
On  6  December  1978  the  Spanish  people  did  more  than  just  vote  in  favour  of  a  democratic
country  that  would  uphold  the  values  of  the  rule  of  law  and  equality.  Our  support  for  the
constitution  also  laid  the  foundations  for  Spain  to  modernise  its  economy  and  become  an
integrated part of the European family.
In addition to safeguarding fundamental rights and civil liberties, Section 38 of the constitution
states  that  “free  enterprise  is  recognised  within  the  framework  of  a  market  economy”  and
confirms that the public authorities guarantee its exercise. In practical terms, this meant Spain
would  align  itself  with  the  western  model  of  parliamentary  democracy,  based  on  a  market
economy and free competition and underpinned by the social rule of law. A little more than a year
later,  negotiations  began  for  Spain  to  join  the  European  Economic  Community,  a  historic
milestone that would be achieved in 1986.
But  this  wasn’t  an  easy  road  to  follow.  The  first  years  of  our  democracy  were  marked  by
economic  difficulties,  partly  resulting  from  the  international  crises  linked  to  sharp  oil  price
increases and the lack of an anchor for inflation expectations in most developed countries.
Nevertheless,  this  new  Spain,  democratic  and  integrated  into  Europe,  never  stopped  looking
outwards.  Trade  and  financial  flows  and  the  movement  of  capital  increased,  and  exports  and
imports rose from accounting for roughly 35% of GDP in 1986 to 66% in 2017.
These steps towards modernisation would never have been possible without a society that was
convinced  of  the  fact  that  Europe  represented  prosperity  and  the  future.  The  pro-European
nature of civil society united Spaniards more strongly than their ideologies or political affiliations,
and this sentiment has held firm despite the difficulties people experienced during the financial
crisis.
A recent survey by the Elcano Royal Institute shows that eight out of ten Spaniards believe that
opening up markets provides Spanish businesses with good opportunities . This is resounding
proof that Spain benefits from the European Union in general, and the Economic and Monetary
Union created by the euro area in particular.
2
The annual growth in per capita income between 1977 and 1985, one year before Spain joined
the EU, was 0.7%, well below the 1.8% enjoyed by the countries that would go on to form the
euro area. However, between 1986 and 1998, before the euro was introduced, Spain’s per capita
income  grew  at  an  extraordinary  annual  rate  of  2.7%,  above  the  average  for  future  euro  area
countries of 2.1%.
The  arrival  of  the  euro  also  had  a  positive  effect  on  growth,  in  spite  of  the  serious  difficulties
during the crisis. Since 1999, GDP per capita has been growing at 1.2%, which is 0.1% higher
than  in  the  other  euro  area  countries  and  much  higher  than  during  the  early  years  of  our
democracy.
Recently, some people have tried to blame the euro for the length of the financial crisis in Spain
and have advocated control over monetary policy interest rates and exchange rates. What they
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
often  forget  is  that  being  a  member  of  the  euro  area  enables  Spanish  households  and
businesses  to  benefit  from  lower  real  interest  rates,  lower  inflation  rates  and  reduced
macroeconomic volatility, all of which boost productive investments and make a vital contribution
to the sustainability of public finances.
Furthermore,  it  is  not  true  that  structural  currency  devaluations  solve  economic  crises.
Devaluations are short-term measures. In the long term, the competitive boost they provide is
eroded by the higher inflation they cause. And, in a complex system of global production chains
like the one we have today, devaluations can make it harder for businesses to plan. The euro is
also  the  second-most  important  currency  in  the  international  monetary  system ,  which
strengthens Spain’s credibility in a global context.
3
It’s  true  that  the  crisis  revealed  significant  institutional  shortcomings  in  the  structure  of  the
monetary union, but it’s equally true that European countries have taken this on board and carried
out  substantial  reforms.  The  banking  union  represents  one  of  the  greatest  achievements  of
European integration. Banks are now supervised at the European level, which enables risks that
transcend national borders to be identified. Completing the banking union, in particular by setting
up a European deposit insurance scheme, should be a priority for national governments.
If we look back 40 years, it’s clear that Spain today is a more prosperous and modern country.
However, we must not forget that much remains to be done. Improving the functioning of the
labour market is still an outstanding issue – more than 3 million people remain unemployed, and
the youth unemployment rate is still above 30%. But there are grounds for optimism.
Following  the  collapse  in  GDP  during  the  hard  years  of  recession,  Spain,  supported  by  the
European Central Bank’s measures, has reached an annual growth rate of 2.8% over the last
five years, well above the European average. Spurred by the need to search for new markets
during the years in which domestic demand tightened , Spanish businesses have managed to
find opportunities overseas and many are now global leaders in their sectors.
4
Spanish  society  has  worked  very  hard  to  return  to  economic  growth  after  almost  a  decade
marked by the crisis, and it has done so while remaining true to its commitment to Europe. 40
years ago the Spanish people voted for a better country – one that was democratic, open and
modern. The 1978 constitution and the process of European integration have enabled us to make
this better country a reality.
1
2
3
4
The text was published as an op-ed in Expansión on 6 December 2018.
See the survey entitled “Europe as seen from Spain and France” (Europa vista desde España y Francia), Elcano
Royal Institute, March 2018.
See “The international role of the euro”, ECB interim report, June 2018.
See Almunia, Miguel, Pol Antràs, David Lopez-Rodriguez, and Eduardo Morales. 2018. “Venting Out: Exports
during a Domestic Slump”.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
