  09.10.18 
 Banking business model: challenges and opportunities 
IX Financial Meeting. “Transformation of the banking industry in a new setting 
of digital innovation” 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good morning. 
It is a pleasure to participate in this ninth edition of the Financial Meeting, a classic in our 
calendar widely acknowledged for its prestige and which gathers together a large number 
of banking industry leaders. I thank the organisers for their kind invitation to me to speak at 
the start of the event. And it is a pleasure to follow on from Ramón Quintana, my “brother-
in-arms” over the course of intense years of work, first at the Banco de España and then at 
the European Central Bank. 
Indeed, in connection with Ramón’s words, and in this my first address as Deputy Governor 
of the Banco de España, I wish to focus on the banking business model and the need to 
adapt it to a changing environment.  
Like all private companies, banks can only survive in a stable fashion over time if they are 
profitable.  And,  set  against  the  current  transformation  of  the  banking  industry,  ensuring 
profitability over time calls for a comprehensive, strategic and individualised reflection on 
the business model.  
Allow me to develop this idea of “comprehensive, strategic and individualised”. In doing so, 
I will perforce refer to some of the findings included by the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM)  in  its  recently  published  thematic  review  of  the  determinants  of  profitability  and 
business models.1 
A comprehensive reflection  
Taking the first adjective, when I say a comprehensive reflection is necessary I refer to the 
fact that a bank should examine its income and costs at the greatest level of detail possible: 
by product and not by customer, by business line and by geography. It should seek to gain 
detailed  knowledge  of  which  activities  generate  recurring  profits,  and  which  occasional 
profits or even losses, delving into the reasons that may explain each of these results.  
This will allow the bank to identify whether there is scope to turn the profitability of certain 
activities around, or whether it is better to change tack or abandon such activity.  In addition, 
the bank will be in a position to judge whether the reality of its business, understood as its 
assets/liabilities mix, and the decisions taken in and bearing on such activity are appropriate 
or need adjusting.  
In  short,  if  the  bank  has  advanced  tools  to  improve  profitability,  it  can  develop  an 
appropriate, consistent and comprehensive price-setting policy to ensure that the price it 
charges for a product or service matches its total cost, including the risk premium.  
I should like to highlight this latter aspect of price-setting policy at the level of products or 
services  since,  traditionally,  services that  are  not explicitly  charged  and  whose cost  has 
been covered by the net interest margin have been provided to customers. I believe it is 
important to introduce transparency and rigour into price-setting. Without it, the reality of 
the business is distorted as is, consequently, the attendant analysis, and informed decision-
                                                                                              
1 “SSM thematic review on profitability and business models. Report on the outcome of the assessment.”, September 
2018. 
 3/8 
 making  is  hampered.  Not  in  vain,  in  the  aforementioned  thematic  review  price-setting  is 
included among the areas where the SSM recommends making improvements.   
I  would further  stress  that,  in  this  comprehensive analysis of  the  bank’s  accounts,  there 
should  be some  thought on  the weight  of operating  expenses. Unquestionably,  Spanish 
banks have made a great effort in terms of capacity adjustment in recent years. Numbers 
of staff and offices have fallen approximately by 32% and 40%, respectively, from their 2008 
peaks. It is necessary to continue paying attention to these expenses, so as to ensure they 
are in step with developments in lending activity and in revenue.  
Against this background, progress in new technologies, and the alternatives these offer to 
the traditional means of providing bank services, may prove an opportunity to cut costs and 
come into line with the change under way in the customer-bank relationship. However, the 
digitalisation path should be pursued after a cost-benefit analysis, having regard to the risks 
and additional costs that are taken on. It should, moreover, be accompanied by processes 
that allow for the identification, monitoring and mitigation of such risks, in such a way that 
ensures they are included in price-setting models.  
In sum, any effort geared to obtaining comprehensive knowledge of the profitability of the 
activity being pursued and to refining price-setting processes with a long-term vision will be 
time well spent.  
That  said,  while  the  foregoing  condition  is  necessary  for  ensuring  sustained,  profitable 
activity  over  time,  it  is  not  however  a  sufficient  one.  The  analysis  must,  moreover,  be 
strategically oriented to anticipating future changes. Reflection is needed on the capacity of 
banks to manage and strategically focus the business.  
A strategic reflection  
Reflection on the business model should allow medium and long-term objectives to be set 
and  a  path  plotted  towards  attaining  these  objectives.  Appropriate  business  models  are 
those  that  generate  recurring  and  sustained  profitability  over  time,  this  being  the 
fundamental pillar for the organic generation of capital. This is the virtuous circle that must 
be  drawn  and,  to  do  this,  banks’  management  bodies  will  have  to  take  the  necessary 
measures enabling them to face a changing and demanding future.  
This task will involve taking into account all factors that may affect how the bank pursues 
its business, and everything that defines its environment which, by definition, is a changing 
one. By way of example: geopolitical considerations, present and future macroeconomic 
scenarios, regulatory and supervisory developments, technological developments and the 
emergence of new competitors.  
The bank must also take into account its starting point, its strengths and weaknesses, and 
how it compares with its peers.  
As  you  all  know,  new  competitors  need  not  be  other  banks,  but  the  so-called  fintech 
companies,  which  are  destined  to  exert  pressure  on  and  accelerate  the  ongoing 
technological  renewal  of  financial  institutions.  Undoubtedly,  therefore,  part  of  banks’ 
strategic drive should focus on how to face this challenge and the competition.  
4/8 
  I  would  next  like  to  address  four  key  aspects  from  the  strategic  standpoint:  capital;  the 
legacy of non-productive assets; liquidity; and governance.  
As  regards  capital,  while  Spanish  banks  have  strengthened  their  capital  base  and, 
consequently,  have  improved  their  ratios  in  recent  years,  duly  meeting  the  minimum 
requirements, there are no grounds for complacency.  
Firstly, although the current situation is that Spanish banks have, on average, high asset 
density (measured by their risk-weighted assets) and low leverage levels, it is also a fact 
that they continue to have lower capital ratios than their European peers. On EBA data for 
March 2018, Spanish institutions’ CET1 solvency ratios are below the EU average at that 
date (14.4%).  
This shows that Spanish banks must continue making headway in one of the key elements 
of the new rules of play, namely that they must have more and better-quality capital than 
before the financial crisis.  
Secondly, while there is now greater certainty than some years back about regulatory and 
supervisory capital requirements, some factors continue to put pressure on capital ratios. 
These include the end of phase-in periods, which have enabled certain requirements, such 
as the capital conservation buffer, to come into force gradually over the course of several 
years.  
Thirdly, regarding resolution regulations, compliance with loss absorption-related minimum 
requirements  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL)  poses  a  far  from  negligible 
challenge, especially for that segment of banks that finds it most difficult to tap the markets 
for funds. Part of the challenge lies in the low profitability of banking activity and in the high 
cost of issuing eligible liabilities.  
In  this  scenario,  it  is  essential  that  Spanish  institutions  pay  due  attention  to  the  organic 
generation of capital in the design of their strategy and contemplate the steps needed to be 
well-prepared for the future regulatory scenario and to improve their relative position in the 
European banking industry.  
Another key element in the design of Spanish banks’ strategies should be to persevere with 
the efforts made to date to reduce non-productive assets.   
Having  regard  to  the  figures  for  business  in  Spain,  the  resident  private  sector’s  non-
performing loans have fallen by 60% from their end-2013 peak. At that time, they accounted 
for close to €190 billion. This figure was practically €75 billion as at June 2018.  
In terms of the NPL ratio, the early-2014 peak was 13.9%. As at June 2018, the figure stood 
at 6.4%.  
The effort is clear to see. It is too in terms of foreclosed assets, which have fallen by almost 
40% from their 2012 peak, and stood, as at June 2018, at around €60 billion.  
Nonetheless, the foregoing figures remain high in historical terms and dynamic management 
of these types of assets by banks remains necessary. They must set ambitious but credible 
objectives.  
 5/8 
 In  designing  these  objectives,  banks  should  bear  in  mind  the  supervisory  expectations 
defined over the past 18 months. In particular, they should be very mindful of the guidelines 
the SSM published in March 2017 and the addendum thereto released in March 2018. 
The guidelines are predominantly qualitative. They describe measures, processes and best 
practices in the management of non-performing exposures, with a view to banks defining 
strategies that enable them to reduce the accumulated volume of such exposures.  
The addendum complements the guidelines and sets supervisory expectations as to the 
prudential provisioning levels for new non-performing exposures, considering as new those 
classified as such as from 1 April 2018. These expectations set a timeframe of two years for 
100% provisioning of unsecured exposures, and one of seven years for 100% coverage of 
secured exposures. In this latter instance, moreover, provisioning is expected to be gradual, 
such that it is not left until the last year to set aside the provision.   
Both documents, the guidelines and the addendum, clearly demonstrate the attention the 
supervisor has been paying to credit risk in general, and to non-performing exposures in 
particular, and they represent the benchmark supervisory tool in the supervisory dialogue 
with banks. In July 2018, the ECB announced that, along with the foregoing, and with the 
aim of achieving similar coverage of the flows and stock of non-performing loans, the setting 
of bank-specific supervisory expectations in respect of prudential provisioning levels for the 
stock of non-performing loans would also form part of the supervisory dialogue. The better 
prepared institutions are for this dialogue, the more fluid it will be.  
Before addressing the last of the key strategic aspects I wish to talk about today, namely 
governance,  I  believe  it  should  be  said  that  any  strategic  reflection  should  also  include 
appropriate liquidity planning. This should take into account those elements that may most 
affect it, with particular attention to monetary policy implementation decisions.  
To  conclude  these  considerations  on  strategic  reflection  by  banks,  I  shall  refer  to 
governance and risk management.  
The crucial element for being able to properly manage and attain profitable business models 
over  time  is  to  have  suitable  governance  structures.  Governance  structures  shape  the 
decision  framework  on  risks.  They  are  thus  determinants  of  how  a  bank’s  risk  profile 
develops and, ultimately, of its medium and long-term sustainability. They are a necessary 
and basic element without which success in any project cannot be expected. 
As many of you know, governance is an area in which I have been working for some time 
and with which I am very familiar. Let me recall for you the areas of improvement banks still 
have to tackle and which decisively influence the business model and future challenges.  
Admittedly, considerable progress has been made in recent years in relation to governance. 
But I would like to highlight two areas where we must continue working: i) the functioning of 
boards; and ii) the implementation of risk appetite frameworks. 
On  boards  there  is  scope  for  improvement  in  terms  of  independence,  dedication  and 
succession  planning.  Many  institutions  have  carried  out  self-assessments  of  how  their 
board works, but more still needs to be done as regards the time dedicated to preparing 
meetings and board oversight of control functions.  
6/8 
  The  oversight  of  managers  and,  in  particular,  internal  control  functions  must  be 
strengthened, especially in risks and compliance. And let us not overlook the quality of data 
and information on risks that are pivotal to determining strategy and decision-making.  
In  addition,  work  remains  to  be  done  on  integrating  the  risk  appetite  framework  into 
management,  as  a  key  instrument  of  risk  control.  For  example,  at  many  banks  the 
involvement  of  the  risks  function  in  the  limit-setting  process  is  still  poor  and  lacking  in 
ambition. 
In  risk  management,  structured  decision  processes  are  needed,  with 
incentive 
arrangements that are conducive to sustainable risk-related decisions. How these decisions 
materialise, which in the literature is known as “risk culture”, is particular to each bank and 
the responsibility of each one. Supervisors observe and assess but, ultimately, this is one 
of the idiosyncratic aspects of banks’ DNA.  
In short, governance structures should be capable of measuring, heading off and analysing 
current risks and those that are arising. While there are no strong signs of any easing, for 
activity as a whole, in lending conditions and of aggressive pricing that might suggest that 
risk is not sufficiently reflected, banks must be careful to retain a suitable profitability/risk 
trade-off that is sustainable over the cycle in all business segments.   
An individualised reflection, adapted to the characteristics of each institution.   
I  shall  conclude  with  a  brief  but  nevertheless  important  reference.  In  addition  to  being 
comprehensive  and  strategic,  reflection  on  the  business  model  should  also  be 
individualised, i.e. adapted to the idiosyncratic characteristics of each institution. Indeed, 
the findings of the SSM thematic review of profitability and business models show that there 
is no one single approach and that, even among those banks with better profitability results, 
there are differences in strategies.  
Some  pursue  strategies  geared  to  obtaining  high  income,  which  counter  relatively  high 
costs.  Others  place  an  emphasis  on  low  costs  that  are  compatible  with  relatively  low 
income. And others strike a balance between a medium income-generating capacity and 
medium or low-level costs.  
These differences in strategies are reflected in different action plans, some aimed at growth 
in  loans  or  commissions,  others  at  streamlining  costs  through  various  means,  including 
digitalisation or externalisation. 
The options are varied and should be adapted to the actual circumstances of each bank. 
Conclusions 
In  conclusion,  my  address  has  focused  on  the  importance  of  reflecting  on  the  banking 
business model as a cornerstone for being able to achieve a sustainable level of profitability 
over  time.  I  have  stressed  certain  elements  central  to  this  reflection,  such  as  detailed 
knowledge of the reality of the business, a price-setting policy that reflects the risk and cost 
of each product, a strategy geared to strengthening capital and reducing non-productive 
assets, sound governance and an individualised and tailor-made strategic approach.  
 7/8 
 Banks are preparing for the future and the new times ahead, although nobody knows for 
sure what this will be like. What is clear is that only banks that are proactive and better 
prepared  from  the  strategic  standpoint  will  be  capable  of  exerting  influence  over  their 
profitability and sustainability over time.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 8/8 
 