Benoît  Cœuré:  The  role  of  the  European  Union  in  fostering
convergence
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 26 November 2018.
 1
This  conference was renamed 14 years ago to reflect the “growing together of Europe”.  In my
remarks  today  I  would  like  to  focus  precisely  on  these  three  topics:  growth,  Europe  and
togetherness. I will argue that these three elements are needed to accomplish what the Treaty on
3
European Union promises: economic and social cohesion.
2
I will focus my remarks today on the economies of central, eastern and south-eastern Europe
(CESEE), covering both those that are already part of the European Union (EU) and those that
4
are EU candidate countries or potential candidates.
I will start with a brief review of the current state of convergence of CESEE economies, and then
explain how three key European policy areas – the completion of the Single Market, the launch of
a  true  capital  markets  union  and  the  targeted  use  of  EU  funds  –  can  help  accelerate
convergence and thereby also foster cohesion in Europe.
The current state of convergence
CESEE  economies  have  seen  significant  improvements  in  living  standards  over  the  past  two
decades, in both absolute and relative terms.  Since 2000, growth in real GDP per capita has
averaged 3.8% in the region as a whole, compared with 1.4% for the EU-28. As a result, we have
seen  these  economies  make  measurable  and  welcome  progress  in  catching  up  to  the  EU
6
average.
5
But  this  catching-up  process  has  been  neither  linear  over  time  nor  homogeneous  across
countries. You can see this on my first slide.
 1 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly, for most countries, convergence towards the EU-28 average has practically stalled since
the outbreak of the financial crisis in 2008 – this is the difference between the yellow dot and the
upper end of the blue bar.
And before the crisis, convergence was noticeably faster in economies that were already part of
the euro area. In many of these economies, relative living standards increased by half, from 40 to
50% of the EU average in 2000, to around 70% in 2016. But the further one moves to the right on
this slide, and contrary to what neoclassical growth theory would suggest, the less compelling
strong convergence becomes.
In  the  Western  Balkans,  for  example,  while  relative  income  levels  have  increased,  they  have
done so at a much slower pace. At current growth rates, fast convergence towards the EU-28
average will remain illusory for many EU candidate countries or potential candidates.
These economies, and this you can see on my next slide, would need much higher GDP growth
rates than in previous years to even reach half of the EU-28 average within the next 20 years or
so, with the possible exception of Montenegro.
 2 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly, this pace of convergence is disappointing. It implies that living standards in Europe will
remain highly varied and uneven for a considerable period of time, even within the EU. And if
there is no credible prospect of lower-income countries catching up soon, there is a risk that
people living in those countries begin questioning the very benefits of membership of the EU or
the currency union. Such doubts would be particularly worrisome in the unstable world we are
currently living in.
We  need  the  EU  to  remain  a  force  for  change,  a  source  of  growth  and  development  and  an
anchor of stability. Action is therefore needed on two main fronts: first, to bring convergence in
EU Member States back onto its pre-crisis path and, second, to jump-start convergence in EU
candidate countries and potential candidates.
To understand what needs to be done to tackle both challenges, it is useful to look at the drivers
of growth and the factors that have recently been holding them back. You can see this on my
next slide.
 3 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
What you can see here is that, since the crisis, growth in all CESEE economies has essentially
slowed because of two main factors: a sharp drop in total factor productivity (TFP) growth and, to
a lesser extent, in the contribution of capital to growth.
There are two things worth highlighting here.
The  first  is  that  it  is  highly  unusual  that  pre-crisis  convergence  largely  reflected  technological
progress and innovation. During  the  transition  phase,  growth  is  typically  based  on  capital  and
labour accumulation, and only later on TFP growth.  Or, to borrow the words of Paul Krugman, it
8
is based first on perspiration and only later on inspiration.
7
The flipside is that these economies are now faced with a notable capital shortfall. The capital
stock per person employed remains substantially below the EU-28 average in almost all CESEE
economies. You can see this on my next slide on the left-hand side.
 4 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  CESEE  euro  area  Member  States,  it  also  remains  well  below  other  emerging  economies,
such as South Korea, with similar per capita income levels. And, worse, investment rates have
fallen further since the crisis in all CESEE economies. You can see this on the right-hand side.
The second fact worth highlighting is that the remarkable contribution of productivity to growth,
both in the upswing and in the downturn, is likely to be an artefact of the growth model adopted by
most CESEE economies. This growth model relies, by and large, on deep integration in global
production chains.
You can see this clearly on my next slide. CESEE economies are some of the world’s most
integrated. They are far more integrated in global value chains than their EU peers, for example.
Sizeable foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows in the pre-crisis period – which you can see on
the  right-hand  side  –  have  promoted  the  role  of  CESEE  economies  in  global  production
processes. These inflows accounted for around 6% of GDP in the run-up to the crisis. In the EU-
28 as a whole, FDI inflows accounted for just 3.4% of GDP over this period.
 5 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The role of FDI in supporting TFP growth is well known.  By integrating local firms into global
value chains, it facilitates the transfer of technology and expertise. The transfer of technology,
moreover, does not stop at firms directly integrated into global value chains, but also extends to
their domestic suppliers via local production networks.
10
9
Empirical evidence shows that, in the case of central and eastern European (CEE) economies,
this transfer of technology has contributed to both strong TFP growth in the run-up to the crisis
and to its more recent slowdown.
11
You can see this more clearly on my next slide. There is a very close link between TFP growth in
CEE economies and TFP growth in non-CEE EU countries. This link likely reflects the scale and
scope of technology spillovers.
 So, as FDI inflows decelerated and participation rates in global
value chains levelled off, TFP growth in CESEE economies abated too.
12
 6 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Global value chains as a source of TFP growth in the future
In  sum,  therefore,  this  diagnosis  highlights  two  key  facts:  CESEE  economies  have  a  lack  of
capital, and a strong reliance on global production processes.
The  easy  answer,  of  course,  is  to  brush  away  weakness  in  FDI  inflows  as  a  temporary
phenomenon. After all, if the law of declining marginal returns on capital continues to hold, we
should still expect capital to flow into catching-up economies, rebooting TFP growth.
I would be somewhat more cautious, however. It is true that weakness in trade and investment,
worldwide,  has  been  part  of  the  collateral  damage  from  the  crisis.  As  we  leave  this  legacy
behind, headwinds should fade too.
But the recent shift is also likely to reflect developments of a more structural nature – that is, the
slowdown in global value chain formation may well persist.
13
There  are  three  main  reasons  for  this.  First,  natural  disasters  and  increasing  climate-related
disruptions have led firms to rethink the length and design of their value chains to mitigate the
risks of costly supply disruptions.
 This is becoming increasingly visible and may still amplify as
climate change takes its toll on our economies.
14
Second,  in  the  past  sizeable  wage  differentials  for  unskilled  labour  made  the  international
fragmentation  of  production  processes  worthwhile.  Some  of  these  wage  differentials  have
narrowed  considerably  as  emerging  economies  have  grown  richer.  In  the  EU  CESEE
economies, for example, real wages have increased by slightly more than 50% since 2000. In the
EU-28, real wages grew by 18% over the same period.
 7 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
And, third, the increased use of robots and artificial intelligence has the potential to turn global
value chains on their head and cause firms to reconsider offshoring practices.
15
The second and third factors may be the most pressing ones.
Put simply, if robots can deliver the same output more cheaply, more efficiently and closer to the
consumer, then firms may have fewer reasons to spread production across countries. By some
estimates, the average price of industrial robots has declined by about 40% over the past ten
years and is projected to fall considerably further.
 A survey by the Boston Consulting Group
revealed that more than 70% of senior manufacturing executives in the United States think that
robotics improve the economics of local production.
16
17
The implication is that, to the extent that growing automation and narrowing wage differentials
make  the  outsourcing  of  production  processes  less  profitable,  policymakers  in  CESEE
economies,  and  in  emerging  market  economies  more  generally,  will  need  to  think  about
developing other growth models.
To  reboot  TFP  growth  and  deepen  capital  accumulation  they  will  need  to  stimulate  domestic
investment spending and help new, innovative industries to grow and develop. Only in this way
will convergence towards the EU-28 average accelerate.
These  should  be  joint  efforts,  however,  which  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  my  remarks.
Europe can and should help, in three main ways. First, by providing the market that makes the
development of new industries profitable. Second, by channelling funds to sectors and countries
where capital can be used most productively. And, third, by providing direct financial assistance
to foster convergence and support national reform efforts.
Reaping the benefits of the Single Market
Let me take each of these points in turn, starting with the market dimension.
The EU’s Single Market can be a valuable source of competitive advantage for firms located in
CESEE  economies,  in  particular  when  competing  with  other  economies  at  similar  stages  of
development.
It is the largest market in the world, offering the benefits of enormous economies of scale, and
has helped establish product and safety standards that are used worldwide. There is compelling
evidence that the Single Market has had a positive impact on exports, investment, innovation and
productivity.
18
To exploit its full potential, and to accelerate convergence, two things need to be done.
First,  Member  States  need  to  strengthen  its  enforcement  so  that  Single  Market  initiatives
translate into concrete and positive effects on the ground.
A key ingredient for this is efficient administration at all levels of government. Indeed, a lack of
real convergence in income levels is, more often than not, the result of a lack of convergence in
institutional quality.
 You can see this on my next slide – a slide I like to show because I think it
makes a compelling point, notwithstanding the usual caveat on the two-way causality between
institutional quality and income levels.
19
20
 8 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Most  CESEE  economies  are  still  in  the  lower  left-hand  corner,  meaning  there  remains  a
significant gap in overall institutional quality compared with the average level observed in the EU
as a whole.
Some  EU  Member  States  have  recently  renewed  their  interest  in  the  process  leading  to
participation in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) and the adoption of the euro. This could
become a fundamental catalyst for institutional reforms in the years to come.
Second, the scope of the Single Market must be broadened.
For the EU, this means expanding its reach into industries that are prime drivers of innovation
and catalysts for future growth.
This is particularly relevant for CESEE economies. As you can see on my next slide, most of
these countries are still classified as modest or moderate innovators. There have been some
notable  improvements  in  certain  countries  over  time,  but  in  others  the  process  of  gradually
catching up with their EU peers appears to have stalled, or even to have backtracked, in recent
years.
 9 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first priority is therefore to complete the Single Market for services, which already account for
two-thirds of global GDP and employment, and represent many of the potential growth sectors in
the age of digitalisation and automation.
Research by the ESCB’s Competitive Research Network (CompNet) shows, for example, that
many  firms  in  the  EU  services  sector  are  far  behind  the  productivity  frontier,  particularly  in
CESEE economies.
 Reallocating capital and labour to more productive firms would help boost
overall competitiveness and support employment.
21
22
A second, and more direct, avenue is to increase efforts to build a “European data economy”, or
a digital single market, as also advocated by the European Commission in its communication
last week.
 Digitalisation offers a particularly promising opportunity for catching-up economies
to leapfrog more advanced economies and adopt new technologies faster than them, thereby
mitigating the risk of being hurt by reshoring and premature deindustrialisation.
Convergence and the role of the capital markets union
The second key area where Europe can help – which is close to the heart of this conference – is
by channelling funds to where they can be used most productively.
There  is  compelling  evidence  of  the  importance  of  finance  for  technological  innovation  and,
ultimately, long-run growth rates.
 Differences in the quality of financial intermediation across
countries have been found to have significant implications for economic growth.
23
24
In particular, research is increasingly challenging the view that bank and market-based finance
tend to support economic development and living standards in similar ways.
 10 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Evidence is growing globally that large banking systems are associated with more systemic risk
and lower economic growth, in particular as countries grow richer.
 In addition, recent work by
ECB  staff  highlights  that,  during  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis,  capital  misallocation
increased substantially among firms that were more reliant on bank finance.
25
26
Other research suggests that deeper equity markets are more effective in promoting innovation
and productivity and, hence, in bringing economies closer to the technological frontier.
 Recent
ECB research, for example, suggests that if an EU Member State were to increase its ratio of
stock market capitalisation to bank credit from the 25th to the 75th percentile, the average growth
rate  of  its  most  high-tech  industry  could  be  expected  to  increase  by  3.1  percentage  points,
everything else being equal.
27
28
None of this is to say that banks will become redundant. They will continue to play their key social
role of pooling savings and engaging in maturity and risk transformation.
But  recent  findings  are  increasingly  reflected  in  the  ongoing  policy  discussion.  The  European
push  towards  a  capital  markets  union,  for  example,  reflects  not  only  the  need  for  increased
cross-border risk-sharing in a currency union, but also the hope that deeper and better-integrated
equity markets will support innovation and productivity growth in the European Union.
29
This also includes making new innovative financial technologies available to firms and ensuring
they are as safe as conventional technologies. Europe is spearheading this process. Europe’s
Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2),  for  example,  has  been  revised  to  introduce  more
competition in financial intermediation by requiring banks to share account information with new
contenders.
China,  of  course,  is  a  prime  example  of  new  financial  technologies  supporting  growth  in  the
transition towards higher income levels. Although EU data requirements are more stringent – for
good reason – there is considerable scope for such technologies, if used prudently, to also foster
growth and convergence in the EU.
On my next slide you can see that in Europe more generally, and in most CESEE economies in
particular,  these  technologies  have  not  yet  gained  much  traction.  In  other  words,  progress
towards  a  true  capital  markets  union  can  both  support  the  funding  of  investments,  thereby
helping overcome the current lack of capital accumulation, and, at the same time, foster the use
and  distribution  of  new  financial  technologies  that  may  themselves  become  a  source  of
growth.
30
 11 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Using EU funds to foster convergence
The  third  area  where  Europe  can  help  is  arguably  the  most  contentious  one.  It  relates  to
transfers between Member States to foster convergence in the EU.
Such transfers are already happening, of course. Cohesion policy, designed to reduce structural
disparities among regions and Member States, was the second largest item in the EU’s 2014-20
budget.  Over  this  period,  and  this  you  can  see  on  the  left-hand  side  of  my  last  slide,  the
cumulated available funds for CESEE countries range from 8 to 21% of average annual GDP,
with the allocation of resources linked to prevailing income levels. In other words, these funds are
not negligible.
 12 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
One problem, however, is that not all countries are equally successful in accessing them. One
reason for this is linked to the importance of institutional quality, which I mentioned earlier. You
can see this on the chart on the right-hand side, which suggests there is a positive correlation
between institutional quality and a country’s ability to effectively absorb available transfers and
secure new funding opportunities.
Such  patterns  are  even  more  visible  when  considering  EU  funding  opportunities  for  social
policies, education and training.
 Under the European Fund for Strategic Investments plan, for
example,  CESEE  economies  have  only  been  able  to  attract  less  than  5%  of  total  funding
allocated to social infrastructure projects.
31
This means two things.
First, we need to strengthen the ability of receiving economies to access and absorb funds. This
should be part of the broader effort to improve institutional quality.
Second, EU allocation rules should be made as simple as possible. The European Commission
has already made several important suggestions in this respect, with a single rulebook planned
to  cover  several  EU  funds,  less  red  tape  and  lighter  control  procedures  for  businesses  and
entrepreneurs benefiting from EU support.
 Such initiatives are essential if we want people and
companies to take full advantage of the opportunities that the EU provides.
Conclusion
32
Let me conclude.
 13 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Achieving  similar  standards  of  living  across  our  continent  should  speak  to  our  highest
aspirations.  It  is  a  recognition  of  history  that  economic  prosperity,  opportunity  and  peaceful
societies are closely linked and mutually reinforcing. The prospect that relative income levels in
Europe,  without  further  action,  will  remain  unacceptably  large  for  the  foreseeable  future  is
therefore  a  warning  sign.  It  should  urge  policymakers  to  think  in  new  ways  about  how
convergence can be accelerated, and what role Europe itself should play in this process.
I have highlighted today that we must begin by acknowledging that convergence requires joint
efforts  and  responsibility. 
initiatives  and
recommendations into concrete and positive effects on the ground, and candidate countries and
potential  candidates  to  achieve  institutional  excellence  as  early  as  possible  in  the  transition
process.  Convergence  must  be  built  on  strong  institutions.  And  adhering  to  standards,  EU
standards, is a powerful vehicle for growth.
It  requires  Member  States 
translate  EU 
to 
Accelerating  convergence  also  requires  the  EU,  and  the  euro  area  in  particular,  to  help
underwrite this process. This includes completing the Single Market, building a new digital market
and  being  serious  about  developing  a  true  capital  markets  union.  Transition  economies  need
both the market and the capital to nurture and feed domestic growth initiatives.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
I would like to thank Alessandro Giovannini for his contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for
the opinions contained herein.
See  Liebscher,  K.  (2004),  “Opening  Remarks”, Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration,  Vienna,  29
November.
Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union states that “[The Union] shall promote economic, social and territorial
cohesion, and solidarity among Member States.”
EU  members  comprise  Bulgaria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Estonia,  Croatia,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Hungary,  Poland,
Romania, Slovenia and Slovakia. EU candidate countries or potential candidates comprise Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia (also referred to here as the
“Western Balkans”). Kosovo is also included subject to data availability (without prejudice to positions on status,
in line with United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 and the International Court of Justice’s opinion on
Kosovo’s declaration of independence).
See also Nowotny, E., D. Ritzberger-Grünwald and H. Schuberth (2018), “Structural Reforms for Growth and
Cohesion – Lessons and Challenges for CESEE Countries and a Modern Europe”, Edward Elgar Publishing.
See Zuk et al. (2018), “Real convergence in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe”, ECB Economic Bulletin
Article, Issue 3.
See,  for  example,  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  (2017), Transition  Report  2017–18,
November.
See Krugman, P. (1994), “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle”, Foreign Affairs, November/December.
See,  for  example,  Girma,  S.  (2005),  “Absorptive  capacity  and  productivity  spillovers  from  FDI:  a  threshold
regression analysis”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 67(3), pp. 281–306; Amann, E. and S. Virmani
(2014),  “Foreign  direct  investment  and  reverse  technology  spillovers:  The  effect  on  total  factor  productivity",
OECD  Journal:  Economic  Studies,  Vol.  2014/1;  Alfaro,  L.,  S.  Kalemli Ozcan  and  S.  Sayek  (2009),  “FDI,
productivity and financial development”, World Economy, 32(1), pp. 111–135; Kimura, F. and K. Kiyota (2006),
“Exports, FDI, and productivity: Dynamic evidence from Japanese firms”, Review of World Economics, 142(4), pp.
695–719; and Arratibel, O., F. Heinz, R. Martin, M. Przybyla, L. Rawdanowicz, R. Serafini and T. Zumer (2007),
“Determinants  of  growth  in  the  central  and  eastern  European  EU  Member  States  –  a  production  function
approach”, ECB Occasional Paper No 61.
See, for example, Kee, H. L. (2015), “Local intermediate inputs and the shared supplier spillovers of foreign
direct investment”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 112, pp. 56–71.
 14 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
See, for example, Bas, M. and V. Strauss-Kahn (2014), “Does importing more inputs raise exports? Firm-level
evidence from France”, Review of World Economics, Vol. 150(2), pp. 241–275; and Bustos, P. (2011), “Trade
Liberalization,  Exports,  and  Technology  Upgrading:  Evidence  on  the  Impact  of  MERCOSUR  on Argentinian
Firms”, American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No 1, pp. 304–340.
See  Chiacchio,  F.,  K.  Gradeva  and  P.  Lopez-Garcia  (2018),  “The  post-crisis  TFP  growth  slowdown  in  CEE
countries:  exploring  the  role  of  Global  Value  Chains”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No  2143.  This  research  also
suggests that sectoral TFP growth in CEE countries depends roughly equally on technology creation at the
global value chain frontier and on the ability of national firms to absorb the new technology.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “Trade as an engine of growth: Prospects and lessons for Europe”, speech at the NBRM
High Level International Conference on Monetary Policy and Asset Management, Skopje, 16 February.
See also Cœuré, B. (2018), “Monetary policy and climate change”, speech at a conference on “Scaling up Green
Finance: The Role of Central Banks”, organised by the Network for Greening the Financial System, the Deutsche
Bundesbank and the Council on Economic Policies, Berlin, 8 November.
See  also  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (2016),  “Robots  and  Industrialization  in
Developing Countries”, Policy Brief No 50.
See, for example, Sirkin, H., M. Zinser and J. Rose (2015), “How Robots Will Redefine Competitiveness”, Boston
Consulting Group, September.
See  Boston  Consulting  Group  (2015),  “Made  in  America,  Again:  Fourth  Annual  Survey  of  U.S.-Based
Manufacturing Executives”, December.
See, for example, Monteagudo et al. (2012), “The economic impact of the Services Directive: A first assessment
following  implementation”,  European  Commission  Economic  Papers  No  456;  Blind,  K., A.  Mangelsdorf,  C.
Niebel and F. Ramel (2018), “Standards in the global value chains of the European Single Market”, Review of
International  Political  Economy,  Vol.  25(1),  pp.  28–48;  and  Pelkmans,  J.  and A.  Renda  (2014),  “Does  EU
regulation hinder or stimulate innovation?”, CEPS Special Report No 96.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Convergence matters for monetary policy”, speech at the Competitiveness Research
Network  (CompNet)  conference  on  “Innovation,  firm  size,  productivity  and  imbalances  in  the  age  of  de-
globalization” in Brussels, 30 June.
See Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 5, pp. 1369–1401.
See ECB (2017), “Firm heterogeneity and competitiveness in the European Union”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2.
See  European  Commission  (2018),  “The  Single  Market  in  a  changing  world  – A  unique  asset  in  need  of
renewed political commitment”, Brussels, 22 November.
See  Levine,  R.  (2005),  “Finance  and  Growth:  Theory  and  Evidence”,  in Aghion,  P.  and  S.N.  Durlauf  (eds.),
Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 865–934, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
See  Boyd,  J.H.  and  B.D.  Smith  (1992),  “Intermediation  and  the  equilibrium  allocation  of  investment  capital:
Implications for economic development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 30(3), pp. 409–432.
See Langfield, S. and M. Pagano (2016), “Bank bias in Europe: effects on systemic risk and growth”, Economic
Policy, Vol. 31(85), pp. 51–106; and Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E. Feyen and R. Levine (2013), “The evolving importance
of banks and securities markets”, World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 27(3), pp. 476–490.
See Bartelsman, E., P. Lopez-Garcia and G. Presidente (2017), “Factor reallocation in Europe”, ECB, mimeo.
See Hsu, P., X. Tian and Y. Xu (2014), “Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence”,  Journal
of Financial Economics, Vol. 112(1), pp. 116–135.
See  ECB  (2018),  “Financial  development,  financial  structure  and  growth:  evidence  from  Europe”, Financial
integration in Europe, May. Moreover, higher growth in value added has been found to be driven by faster growth
in labour productivity than in capital accumulation, supporting the idea that equity markets play an important role
in the financing of innovation and TFP growth.
 15 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
29
30
31
32
See ECB (2015), Building a Capital Markets Union – Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s
Green Paper; and ECB (2017), ECB contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on Capital Markets
Union mid-term review 2017.
See also Stern, C. (2017), “Fintechs and their emergence in banking services in CESEE”, Focus on European
Economic Integration, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Issue Q3/17, pp. 42–58.
Here most of the EU funds are allocated via tenders and competitive calls, not via pre-allocated grants on the
basis of quotas at Member State level.
See European Commission (2018), “EU budget: Regional Development and Cohesion Policy beyond 2020”,
press release, 29 May.
 16 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
