2nd Workshop on Behavioural Financial 
Regulation and Policy  
Herbert Simon Society and Bank of Italy
Opening remarks by Salvatore Rossi  
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
and President of the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance (IVASS)
Rome, 11 December 2018
Today  we  mark  the  second  edition  of  the  Workshop  on  Behavioural 
Financial Regulation and Policy here at the Bank of Italy. Part of it will be 
dedicated to the presentation and discussion of the BeFAIRLY report, which is 
ambitiously titled “The Behavioural Finance Revolution: A New Approach to 
Financial Policies and Regulations” (edited by Viale, Mousavi, Alemanni and 
Filotto). 
The remaining part of the workshop will be dedicated to issues that are 
very dear to us regulators: financial education and risk literacy. Subjects that, 
in the wider context of a consumer protection framework, have seen in recent 
years some growing and fascinating research advancements, as well as an ever 
increasing body of evidence coming from implemented policies around the 
world.
In introducing the first edition of this workshop one year ago I suggested 
that  behavioral  economics  had  irrevocably  modified  the  way  we  frame 
the  real-world  economic  phenomena  in  our  thinking. And  that  the  debate 
between those – like you – more eager to integrate or replace the “standard” 
theory and those that are resisting it, has been beneficial to all its participants, 
whichever the field of allegiance.
I  stand  by  this  view.  The  more  an  agreed-upon  body  of  knowledge  in 
behavioral economic sciences consolidates1, the more defined and robust would 
be the set of non-traditional regulatory tools. Especially when considering the 
workings of the banking and insurance markets, any policy intervention should 
be well understandable by the industry and the general public. 
1 
See  for  example  the  survey  contributions  to  the  recent  Handbook  of  Behavioral  Economics  – 
Foundations and Applications, (October 2018), Elsevier, Bernheim D., S. DellaVigna and D. Laibson 
Eds.
It  is  in  this  context  that  an  open-ended  discussion  between  regulators, 
independent  academics  and  the  industry,  such  as  the  one  we  are  going  to 
experience today, is so valuable. On the one hand the drive of the industry 
towards value-creating innovations produces what in some instances could be 
labelled “facts before the theory”. On the other hand the findings of behavioral 
theorists helps making sense of such data.
For example, recent research in behavioral corporate finance has greatly 
expanded our understanding of managerial conducts. It has shown that even 
top managers, a rather sophisticated group of individuals, are not immune to 
biases and seemingly irrational decision making, and that their traits and life 
experiences are priced by the markets2.
Even more relevant are behavioral traits in household finance decisions. 
Actual  investment  and  consumption  decisions  that  are  based  on  mental 
accounting3,  present  bias4  and  reference  point  consumption5,  have  been 
recurrently mentioned as possible explanations for “non-traditional” agents’ 
behavior that is found in the data. 
We at the Bank of Italy and IVASS (the Italian regulation and supervision 
authority  for  insurance),  in  our  consumer  protection  activity,  consider  now 
attentively the insight of behavioral economics.
Years ago we were relying mainly on transparency requirements. But full 
disclosure, while responding to information asymmetry, was not addressing 
behavioral bias. 
In the real world consumers have behavioral weakness and difficulty in 
processing a vast amount of information. On top of that, households’ financial 
2 
3 
4 
5 
See for example Schoar, A. and L. Zuo, (2016), "Does the Market Value CEO Styles?", American 
Economic Review, 106 (5), and Malmendier U., (2018), “Behavioral Corporate Finance”, in Bernheim 
D., S. DellaVigna and D. Laibson, Eds.
See Thaler, R.H., (1985), “Mental accounting and consumer choice”, Marketing Science, 4 (3), and the 
descending literature.
For example, Laibson, D., (1997), “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting”, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 112 (2).
See Koszegi, B. and M. Rabin, (2009), “Reference-dependent consumption plans”, American Economic 
Review, 99 (3).
4
decisions are taken so rarely that in fact seldom people learn from their direct 
experience.
Therefore our policy approach has been re-oriented, in both regulation and 
enforcement. Formal compliance has given way to a more substantial approach, 
requesting producers to be fair in their relations to customers.
We  have  also  promoted  the  creation  of  alternative  dispute  resolution 
procedures,  simple,  rapid  and  effective. Arbitro  Bancario  e  Finanziario  has 
been a success: last year over 30.000 complaints were received; the analogous 
entity for insurance, Arbitro Assicurativo, will be established presumably in 
the early 2020.
However, financial regulation and good supervision could be not enough 
if consumers do not really understand their financial needs and cannot operate 
properly their rights: effective financial education is a crucial life skill in order 
to make financial decisions consistent with personal and family needs.
In today’s digital age, financial markets offer everybody easy access to a 
wide range of financial services and products. But digitalization is two-faced: it 
can emphasize some behavioral biases, such as short-termism and impatience, 
but could nudge people into specific virtuous action. The final balance will be 
positive only if consumers are financially literate.
Building a sound financial education is complex, as it requires a long-life 
approach on three challenging dimensions: knowledge, attitude, and behavior. 
Financial education goes beyond than just providing information, it is meant 
to change those three dimensions, in order for people to achieve their financial 
well-being. 
Best practices around the world show that experiential learning (such as 
games, simulations and role plays) helps acquire, retain and put in practice 
new information.
Since 2008 in our main program for students, “Educazione finanziaria a 
scuola”, we have progressively moved from information to capability, fostering 
a  value-driven  approach  to  economic  issues,  stimulating  the  participants’ 
interest by suggesting “I need it because...”. We have been using movies as 
5
a  trigger  for  debating  financial  issues  and  behavioral  biases.  We  have  also 
introduced  contests  and  prizes.  Our  competition  “Let’s  design  a  banknote” 
invites Italian primary and secondary school students to design an imaginary 
banknote on a given theme; for the current edition, the theme is “money and 
emotions”. The prize-winning classes receive an amount of money for their 
school. We will also contribute to the First edition of the Italian Economic and 
Finance Olympiad. 
Adults are more challenging: they tend to acquire just the knowledge 
and skills they need for a specific purpose and their behavior tend to be 
well-rooted. Furthermore, adults are an extremely heterogeneous population. 
For example, some immigrants grew up where saving food meant wasting 
it. Thus the concept of saving must be explained to them with a special care.
Let  me  also  add  that  IVASS  is  now  planning  an  exercise  to  measure 
insurance literacy, a still underexplored dimension of financial capability; even 
if it is a novel concept, it could become an international benchmark.
I  would  like  to  stress  that,  as  international  experience  shows,  single 
institutions  cannot  fill  all  the  gaps:  a  nationally-coordinated  approach  to 
financial education is a key factor for success. Financial education needs an 
interdisciplinary approach and strong cooperation among many stakeholders, 
including academia, private sector and civil society, as well as the public sector, 
so  that  all  the  points  of  view  can  be  taken  into  account,  from  pedagogy  to 
neuro-economy.
Last  October,  some  preliminary  evidence  of  the  Survey  of  financial 
education initiatives in Italy in the years 2015-17 was released. The Survey 
shows a very fragmented offer of financial education initiatives. 
As authorities involved in the diffusion of financial literacy, over time we 
advocated the implementation of a national strategy for financial education, 
recognizing its crucial role in ensuring a more inclusive growth and gender 
equality. We therefore strongly welcomed the establishment of the Committee 
on financial education in August 2017.
Since its inception, the Committee has been very active, also thanks to the 
energy of its Director Annamaria Lusardi, whom I want to thank on behalf 
6
of all of us, and the forward-thinking choice to make the most of the existing 
experience in financial literacy, in Italy and abroad. So far the Committee has 
achieved many important results.
Among  them,  the  Committee  defined  the  Italian  National  Strategy 
for  Financial  Education  (NSFE),  which  defines  vision,  mission,  goals  and 
guidelines. The strategy promotes a holistic approach to financial well-being, 
also including insurance and social security perspectives. In the strategy, the 
Committee has been able to take advantage from international experiences – as 
Annamaria says quoting Isaac Newton “standing on the shoulders of giants” – 
and building on all information available for our country, such as Bank of Italy 
survey on adult financial literacy6. 
We are confident that the Committee will play a constructive and pivotal 
role in coordinating all efforts in the field of financial education. The Financial 
Education Month, which took place last October, included over 350 initiatives 
nationwide: it was a good starting point.
There is a further element to keep in mind: we need robust evaluations 
to identify areas for improvement and to be sure that we make good use of 
resources.  Indeed,  evaluation  is  a  crucial  aspect  for  making  good  financial 
education.
In sum, we need to exploit all available theories, empirical evidence and 
points of view. Much work still needs to be done, which requires a joint effort 
by all the actors involved: this conference is an excellent opportunity to lay the 
foundation of such a collaboration.
6 
See A. di Salvatore et al, (2018), “Measuring the financial literacy of the adult population: the experience 
of Banca d’Italia.” Occasional Papers, N°435, Banca d’Italia,
7
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
