BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks by Dr. Louis Kasekende,  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda,  
 As Guest of Honour  
At the 24th Graduation Ceremony of Uganda Martyrs 
University (UMU) Nkozi  
  November 8, 2018 
 Nkozi Main Campus 
   1 
The  Chancellor,  Most  Rev.  John  Baptist  Odama,  Chairman  of  the 
Uganda Episcopal Conference 
The  Patron  of  UMU  Nkozi,  Most  Rev.  Dr.  Cyprian  Kizito  Lwanga, 
Archbishop of Kampala 
The Vice Chancellor, Prof. John C. Maviiri 
The Council, Management and Staff of UMU Nkozi 
Distinguished invited guests 
The Student Leadership 
Dear Graduands and your Parents and Guardians 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good afternoon. 
I am delighted to be part of this twenty-fourth graduation ceremony, 
and  more  so  when  this  august  institution  is  commemorating  its 
silver jubilee.  
 Along with the rest of the country, I would like to congratulate the 
fraternity  of  Uganda  Martyrs  University  (UMU)  Nkozi  for  the  25 
years of dedicated service in the education sector. Special tribute is 
owed  to  those  who  had  the  vision  to  establish  UMU  Nkozi  and 
nurture it through its infancy to become one of the best institutions 
of higher education in Uganda today.  
 2 
I congratulate the graduands for their successful completion of their 
studies and also thank the parents and guardians for their sacrifice 
to support the students, throughout their school life. Investment in 
building  our  country’s  human  capacity  is  the  most  valuable 
contribution  which  parents  and  guardians  can  make  to  the  future 
of our nation. Everyone that has cared for our graduands deserves 
a thunderous round of applause. 
 My  remarks  today  will  highlight  the  dynamic  environment  in 
Uganda  and  what  that  entails  for  our  education  system  and  the 
competitiveness of our graduates.  
 First,  the  competitiveness  of  our  graduates  in  the  labour  market 
depends  on  multiple  qualities.  Obviously  the  specific  knowledge 
that  graduates  have  acquired  in  their  degree  courses  is  a  major 
attraction  for  prospective  employers.  But  beyond  this,  most 
employers  in  Uganda,  just  as  in  other  countries  around  the  world, 
will  be  attracted  by  graduates’  attitude  to  work,  integrity,  writing 
skill,  ability  to  work  cooperatively  within  the  team  and  such 
attributes  like  good  time  management.  Unfortunately,  this  non-
academic  area  is  not  adequately  addressed  within  our  school 
system, yet it contributes significantly to who succeeds in the work 
place. These attributes are important whether one is employed by a 
company or institution or is running their own enterprise.  
 3 
More effort should be devoted by our institutions of higher learning 
to ensuring that graduates acquire these competencies.  
 The  theme  for  the  silver  jubilee  commemoration  is  “Celebrating  25 
years of Excellence in the Footsteps of the Uganda Martyrs”. One of 
the lessons we can draw from the life of the Uganda martyrs is the 
value of believing and adhering to what you consider the truth and 
the right way and sticking to this principle, no matter the cost. This 
is even more instructive for you who are fortunate to be educated in 
a  faith-based  institution  like  UMU  Nkozi  where  values  such  as 
honesty and integrity are so important. 
 My  second  issue  is  that  of  the  changing  global  economy  in  which 
our graduands  will be starting their careers. We are now in an era 
that  has  been  labeled  by  such  entities  like  the  World  Economic 
Forum  as  the  “Fourth  industrial  revolution”,  characterized  by 
artificial  intelligence  and  the  advent  of  robots.  In  a  nutshell,  this 
fourth  industrial  revolution  means  that  human  effort  in  a  growing 
number  of  processes  is  being  complemented  and,  in  some  cases, 
replaced, by computing power and robots. For example, drones are 
delivering blood units to hospitals and parcels in far distant places 
where previously  human beings would have been needed to do the 
job.  You  will  have  heard  of  the  driver-less  vehicles  or  even  the 
virtual assistants deployed in customer service centres.  
 4 
This  digital  revolution  has  implications  for  the  form  of  training  we 
give our students and the type of jobs that will be applicable.  
 One  of  the  implications  of  this  fourth  industrial  revolution  is  that 
the  speed  of  change  is  very  high  in  the  business  world,  and  this 
means  that  the  skills  required  of  employees  can  rapidly  change. 
Also, low skill white collar jobs are being eliminated by automation.  
 The  rapid  change  in  skills  needs  and  plausible  loss  of  jobs  to 
automation  means  that  competition  for  available  employment 
opportunities will be more intense. For instance, a large number of 
services  which  were  known  as  non-tradable  have  become  tradable 
because  of  technology,  and  this  has  implications  for  protection  of 
jobs which hitherto faced competition only within  one geographical 
jurisdiction.  Graduands  therefore  must  be  keen  to  take  advantage 
of  the  various  development  programs  and  financing  schemes 
instituted by the Government of Uganda to create their own jobs. 
 Another  consequence  of  the  fourth  industrial  revolution  is  that 
learning  new  skills  may  become  a  permanent  and  indispensable 
feature  of  a  successful  career.  The  importance  of  continuous 
learning  was  put  succinctly  by  Alvin  Toffler,  “The  illiterate  of  the 
21st century will not be those who cannot read and write, but those 
who cannot learn, unlearn, and relearn”. 
 5 
This  also  has  profound  implications  for  the  role  of  tertiary 
institutions.  Traditionally  these  institutions  have  focused  most  of 
their efforts at educating people who have yet to begin their careers, 
but  in  the  future,  the  provision  of  training  for  students  who  have 
already  advanced  in  their  careers  but  need  to  upgrade  their  skills 
may  become  an  important  requirement  of  the  higher  educational 
system. 
 Second, it is also paramount that our education system encourages 
critical  thinking  by  students,  based  on  rigorous  analysis  and 
respect for the facts.  
 My third point relates to the use of technology and its impact on the 
way  we  live.  We  are  in  an  era  where  data  on  individuals  and 
businesses  is  being  created  through  use  of  services  such  as 
internet.  As  such,  data  is  being  collected  by  statutory  means,  by 
application owners and third parties like marketing agencies. While 
this  technological  advancement  is  easing  the  way  of  life  and 
facilitating  efficiency  in  business  or  service  operations,  it  entails 
risks  like  hacking,  cyber-crime  such  as  forgery  of  an  individual’s 
profile  or  online  activities  with  the  intent  to  malign  them.  This 
therefore  calls  for  the  need  to  strengthen  cyber  laws  and  other 
regulatory  aspects  like  data  ownership  to  protect  the  users  of 
services.  
 6 
For  the  academia,  we  need  a  formula  for  finding  the  right  balance 
between  fostering  innovations,  guaranteeing  freedoms,  holding 
people responsible for any excesses and protecting privacy. 
 Finally,  I  wish  all  the  graduands  success  in  the  life  ahead.  I  urge 
you  to  follow  your  passion,  stay  focused,  work  hard  and  in  every 
situation  seek  wisdom  from  God  almighty.  To  the  university 
administration, congratulations once again for the twenty-five years 
of  distinguished  service!  The  challenge  to  remain  relevant  over  the 
next  quarter  century  lies  squarely  on  how  you  adapt  to  meet  the 
changing demands of industry and society.   
 I thank you for listening. 
 7 
