Peter  Praet:  Preserving  monetary  accommodation  in  times  of
normalisation
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, on
"Herausforderungen für die Europäische Geldpolitik 2019" at 33. Internationales ZinsForum 2018,
Frankfurt am Main, 26 November 2018.
Introduction
 In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  have  successfully  fended  off
deflationary forces and supported economic recovery.  They have brought down policy rates to
their  effective  lower  bound  and,  importantly,  have  made  use  of  a  broad  set  of  unconventional
monetary  policy  measures  in  pursuit  of  their  statutory  objectives.  In  advanced  economies,
monetary policies have borne fruit, but their monetary policy cycles clearly differ substantially,
reflecting  different  stages  of  recovery  and  degrees  of  progress  towards  achieving  the  central
bank’s statutory objectives.
1
In  a  number  of  places,  central  banks  have  already  tightened  their  monetary  policy  stance;
unconventional monetary policy measures have been wound down and policy rates have been
gradually  increased.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still
needed  to  support  the  further  build-up  of  inflationary  pressures  and  headline  inflation
developments over the medium term. At the meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council in June, we
gave an important signal  of  a  normalisation  of  our  policy  instruments.  We  communicated  our
anticipation  that,  subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  our  medium  term  inflation  outlook,  we
would end net purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) after December 2018.
Today I would like to address our key challenge in normalising our monetary policy instruments:
preserving monetary accommodation, while switching back from net asset purchases to forward
guidance on policy rates as the main instrument to steer our monetary policy stance. While this
rotation  proceeds,  we  will  continue  to  operate  with  multiple,  complementary  instruments,
including our policy of reinvesting the principal payment of securities purchased under the APP.
The state of the euro area economy
Following  more  than  five  years  of  increasingly  broad-based  economic  expansion  in  the  euro
area, recent developments point to some loss of growth momentum. Preliminary data show that
euro area real GDP expanded by 1.7% year on year in the third quarter of 2018, down from 2.2%
in the second quarter. The slowdown in euro area economic growth since the start of the year
has reflected in no small part a retreat from the strong growth of 2017. One-off country-specific
or  sector-specific  factors  have  also  contributed  to  slowing  production  in  recent  months.  But
factors related to protectionism, financial market volatility and vulnerabilities in emerging markets
are  creating  headwinds  that  are  becoming  increasingly  noticeable.  Surveys  of  euro  area
business activity and sentiment indicators have softened perceptibly relative to their earlier highs,
although they remain in expansionary territory and are still above long-term averages for most
sectors and countries.
Overall, domestic demand continues to be supported by favourable financing conditions, as well
as by the robust labour market and steady income and profit growth that these conditions have
fostered.
Indeed,  since  we  announced  a  combination  of  unconventional  measures  to  provide  additional
monetary  policy  accommodation  in  June  2014,  financial  conditions  have  eased  considerably.
Risk-free  interest  rates  have  shifted  downward  at  all  maturities  (Chart  1),  reducing  the  basis
 1 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
used by banks and financial markets in determining financing conditions.
Chart 1: EONIA forward curves estimated from OIS (percentages per annum)
This has been reflected in the sizeable reduction in bank lending rates for euro area non-financial
corporations  (NFCs)  and  households  since  June  2014  –  which  have  declined  by  around  130
basis  points  and  110  basis  points,  respectively  –  as  well  as  in  the  decline  of  NFCs’  cost  of
market-based debt financing (Chart 2).
Chart 2: Nominal cost of debt financing for euro area NFCs by component (percentages
per annum)
 2 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
  NFCs  have  also  benefited  from  an  increasingly  diversified  financing  structure,  with  debt
securities  issuance  and  other  forms  of  market-based  financing  substituting  for  bank-based
sources of financing (Chart 3 and Chart 4).
Chart 3: Share of bank and non-bank financing in total non-financial corporation debt
financing in the euro area and the United States (outstanding amounts; percentages)
 3 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
  
Chart 4: Total debt financing of NFCs and MFI loans to NFCs in the euro area (annual
changes in percent)
 4 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Such diversification in financing sources is good for the economy, making business investment
more resilient throughout business cycles.
The underlying strength of the euro area economy continues to support our confidence that the
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed. Euro area annual HICP inflation has
continued to increase and stood at 2.2% in October 2018, mainly reflecting higher energy price
inflation. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to hover around
current levels in coming months. While measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted,
they have been increasing from earlier lows, amid high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening
labour  markets.  Looking  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  increase  further  over  the
medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  economic  expansion
 5 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
and rising wage growth.
Overall,  though,  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still  needed  to  support  the  build-up  of
domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over the medium term.
The rotation from the asset purchase programme to forward guidance on rates
At our June monetary policy meeting, we initiated a rotation of our policy instruments from the
asset  purchase  programme  towards  more  conventional  instruments  of  monetary  policy  –  the
policy interest rates and forward guidance on their likely evolution. We expressed our anticipation
of  a  gradual  winding-down  of  net  asset  purchases,  subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  our
outlook for inflation. And we updated and enhanced our forward guidance on the path for interest
rates, which is now expressed in terms of the expectation that key ECB interest rates will remain
at their present levels “at least through the summer of 2019 and, in any case, for as long as
necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below,
but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term”.  In  addition,  we  re-affirmed  our  intention  to  reinvest
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP “for an extended period of
time  after  the  end  of  our  net  asset  purchases  and,  in  any  case,  for  as  long  as  necessary  to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation”.
This combination of policy measures aimed to preserve the degree of monetary accommodation
that is necessary to ensure sustained convergence of inflation towards our aim. Clearly, the end
of net asset purchases is not tantamount to a withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation.
The rotation from net asset purchases towards our conventional monetary policy instruments,
together with our stock of assets and the related reinvestment policy, ensure an ample degree of
monetary policy accommodation. In particular, our enhanced rate forward guidance provides a
strong  anchor  for  policy  rate  expectations.  And  the  reinvestment  policy  will  ensure  that  the
favourable liquidity conditions and duration extraction associated with the large stock of assets
on our balance sheet remain in place for a long period and thereby exert downward pressures on
term premia.
The  mechanisms  underlying  the  combination  of  instruments  are  duration  extraction,  liquidity
creation and expectation management.
Starting  with  duration  extraction,  our  reinvestment  policy  implies  that  the  bonds  we  have
purchased will remain on our balance sheet for an extended period of time after the end of net
purchases. Asset  purchases  affect  interest  rates  mainly  through  the  market  price  of  duration
risk, which is the interest rate risk borne by price-sensitive investors holding long-term bonds. If
the  central  bank  wants  to  exert  downward  pressures  on  long-term  interest  rates,  then  it  can
absorb duration risk from the market by purchasing securities with a relatively longer maturity.
This frees up more risk-bearing capacity for investors, which they can re-allocate towards other
types  of  risk,  including  investment  in  productive  capacity.  For  a  central  bank  to  set  this
mechanism  in  motion,  it  needs  to  hold  a  large  portfolio  of  long-dated  securities  embodying
duration risk. Chart 5 shows that we have built a sizeable portfolio estimated at around 20% of
the duration-equivalent stock of public debt. Maintaining such a sizeable portfolio will exert lasting
downward pressure on term premia.
Chart  5:  Outstanding  quantity  of  duration:  PSPP  portfolio  and  other  investors (EUR
billions, 10-year equivalents)
 6 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Turning to liquidity creation, the roll-over of the portfolio resulting from our reinvestment policy will
also  continue  to  preserve  abundant  liquidity  over  the  coming  years.  In  the  absence  of
reinvestments,  and  assuming  that  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  are
repaid at maturity, the level of excess liquidity would decline significantly over the coming years
(Chart 6).
Chart 6: Evolution of excess liquidity under no re-investment counterfactual hypothesis
 7 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
(EUR billions)
 Our  reinvestment  policy  will  contribute  to  maintaining  favourable  liquidity  conditions  for  an
extended period of time, which helps anchor expectations regarding the evolution of very short-
term interest rates at the deposit facility rate. Ample volumes of excess reserves ensure that the
overnight interest rate stays close to the floor of the interest rate corridor, which is provided by
the deposit facility rate. This, together with forward guidance on the expected evolution of our
policy  interest  rates,  reduces  rate  uncertainty  across  maturities  and  thus  adds  to  the
 8 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
compression of term premia brought about by the duration extraction channel.
Of  course,  our  portfolio  –  even  if  kept  constant  –  will  tend  to  lose  duration  over  time,  as  the
securities held gradually mature. At some point, this passive loss of duration will begin to exert
increasing upward pressures on the term premia. Over time, this gradual process will tend to
steepen the yield curve, with our forward guidance on policy rates keeping the front end of the
curve well-anchored.
Our  enhanced  rate  forward  guidance  is  a  two-pronged  statement.  There  is  the  date-based
element that interest rates are expected to remain at their present levels “at least through the
summer  of  2019”.  In  addition,  there  is  a  state-contingent  element  that  rates  will  remain
unchanged  “in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”. The
date-based element ensures that our stimulus is not weakened by premature expectations of a
rate hike. The state-contingent element, in turn, ensures that the stance will continue to evolve
gradually and in a data-dependent manner.
The  anchoring  effect  of  our  enhanced  rate  guidance  was  highly  visible  in  June,  when  the
Governing  Council  announced  that  we  anticipated  a  gradual  winding-down  of  our  net  asset
purchases. Our enhanced forward guidance helped reduce the uncertainty around future short-
term  rates  (Chart  7  and  Chart  8).  Rate  expectations  aligned  immediately  to  the  Governing
Council’s rate guidance; no financial market volatility ensued.
Chart  7:  EONIA  forward  curves  around  June  2018  Governing  Council (percentage  per
annum)
 9 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
  
Chart  8:  Standard  deviation  of  three-month  EURIBOR  option-implied  density  in  one
year’s time (percent)
 10 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
 But  let  me  turn  to  the  next  steps  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  The  latest  surveys  of
market participants’ expectations regarding the most likely date for a first rate increase indicate
that  the  “at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019”  formulation  has  been  solidly  internalised  by
market participants.
Looking ahead, the rotation implies that our key policy rates and forward guidance about their
evolution will become an anchor for monetary policy as the end of our net asset purchases is
nearing. Our communication, and the rate path itself, will be calibrated to ensure that inflation
remains on a sustained adjustment path. Our policy will remain predictable, and we will proceed
at a gradual pace that is most appropriate for inflation convergence to consolidate. In addition, as
proved in the past, our forward guidance remains an effective firewall to insulate the euro area
from unwarranted tightening pressures originating elsewhere. This protection will be crucial to
ensure  that,  as  we  move  along  the  normalisation  path,  euro  area  financial  conditions  remain
consistent with continued progress towards our policy objective. Finally, our APP portfolio and
our  unconstrained  provision  of  liquidity  will  continue,  for  the  time  being,  to  provide  an
accommodative environment.
 11 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would like to make a final comment on the effects of our APP portfolio on bond yields. While,
overall,  our  APP  portfolio  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  euro  area  long-term
interest rates, other factors such as economic fundamentals and the creditworthiness of issuers,
as assessed by market participants, remain key determinants of the levels of bond yields and
spreads.
Conclusion
The winding-down of net asset purchases is not tantamount to a withdrawal of monetary policy
accommodation.  The  ongoing  rotation  from  net  asset  purchases  towards  enhanced  forward
guidance  on  key  ECB  interest  rates  has  preserved  the  ample  degree  of  monetary  policy
accommodation that is necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Prudence, patience and persistence will continue to inform our policy decisions. The sizeable
stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated  reinvestments,  as  well  as  the  strong  anchor  for
policy rate expectations provided by our enhanced forward guidance, will continue to deliver the
monetary  policy  stimulus  necessary  for  inflation  convergence.  In  any  event,  all  our  policy
instruments  can  be  adjusted  to  ensure  that  inflation  moves  towards  our  aim  in  a  sustained
manner.
1
This speech builds on my remarks at the UBS Conference, London, 13 November 2018.
 12 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
