Arthur  Yuen:  Regtech  in  the  smart  banking  era  -  a  supervisor's
perspective
Remarks by Mr Arthur Yuen, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at
HKIB Annual Banking Conference 2018, Hong Kong, 27 September 2018.
 Financial  Secretary,  Dr  Patrick  Fung,  Ms  Carrie  Leung,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and
gentlemen, good morning to you all.
1.Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Bankers  on  its  10th
Annual  Banking  Conference.  In  2009,  banking  professionals  came  together  at  the  inaugural
Conference  to  discuss  responses  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Over  the  past  decade,
Conference  participants  have  also  examined  other  important  strategic  issues,  including
opportunities arising from RMB internationalisation, transformation of the banking sector amid a
rapidly  changing  macro  and  regulatory  landscape,  and  the  implications  of  accelerating
digitalisation. I am sure you all agree that the Conference is an important flagship event for the
industry, and it offers a constructive platform for exchanging views on topical issues.
2.The HKMA has long supported the Conference, because it gives us an opportunity to share our
views  on  significant  regulatory  issues  and  policy  initiatives,  with  our  seven  Smart  Banking
initiatives  being  the  latest  ones. As  the  Financial  Secretary  mentioned  earlier  in  his  keynote,
substantial progress has been made in each of the seven Smart Banking initiatives since they
were announced last year. The Financial Secretary has already highlighted the progress made
by the HKMA in respect of those initiatives and therefore I won’t repeat it. I would nevertheless like
to demonstrate how the Smart Banking initiatives are re-shaping the banking sector landscape.
Industry responses to the Smart Banking initiatives
3.I have always looked at the Smart Banking Initiatives as a journey. And I am glad to say that we
have  made  good  progress  with  our  relevant  policy  measures  throughout  this  journey.  I  am
particularly  excited  about  the  encouraging  responses  from  the  banking  industry  and  tech
community, which share a common goal of transforming Hong Kong’s financial ecosystem by
creating better synergy between banking and technology. Let me highlight some of the positive
responses we have observed in respect of these Smart Banking initiatives.
4.First, from the perspective of the banking industry,
   - We have seen the launch of more than 70 major digital banking and fintech initiatives from
various banks since the announcement of the seven initiatives last year. There were more than
20  projects  related  to  mobile  payments;  12  biometric  authentication  initiatives  using  different
biometric  attributes,  such  as  fingerprint,  finger-vein,  voiceprint  and  facial  features;  7  software
security  tokens;  and  30  others,  including  chatbots  powered  by  artificial  intelligence,  and
enhanced financial services leveraging distributed ledger technologies and social media platform
integration.
    -  In  addition,  we  already  had  the  successful  launch  of  remote  onboarding  services  in  Hong
Kong, and more than 10 banks are preparing to launch similar services. Also, around 10 banks
plan to launch online personal lending services that leverage machine learning technologies and
data analytics. Banks are now able to reach out and deliver more financial services with good
user experience to a wider spectrum of customers via mobile phones and other online channels.
5.Secondly, if we take a closer look at the tech community’s involvement, it is not difficult to see
that many of the initiatives I just mentioned are the result of collaboration between the banking
industry and the tech community. Since the upgrade of our Supervisory Sandbox last November,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
tech firms have directly accessed the Sandbox’s Chatroom in more than 110 cases to seek the
HKMA’s  early  regulatory  feedback  on  their  projects  and  ideas.  This  means  they  are  better
prepared to collaborate with banks to launch fintech products and services. These uses of the
Chatroom are on top of around 50 cases used by banks. The rollout of the Open API Framework,
and the phase one implementation roadmaps submitted by banks to the HKMA, show there will
be an even higher level of integration and collaboration between the banking industry and the tech
community.
6.Thirdly, more than 70 firms, including local and overseas technology and financial firms, have
expressed interest in establishing virtual banks in Hong Kong. As of 31 August, we have received
about  30  applications  to  operate  a  virtual  bank.  Some  of  those  applications  are  already
“substantially  complete”,  so  we  would  include  them  in  the  first  batch  of  applications  for
processing. We expect to start granting licences to virtual banks around the end of this year or
early next year. I believe establishment of virtual banks will provide further traction to the growth
of the Smart Banking ecosystem in Hong Kong.
7.Fourthly, the Smart Banking ecosystem is not complete without support from the general public
and customers. I am glad to see that a large number of bank customers have signed up with the
Faster Payment System (FPS) since the launch of customer registration on 17 September for
registration.
Growing significance of Regtech in the Smart Banking Era
8.As we watch the positive development of the Smart Banking ecosystem, it is also important
that we maintain momentum. This year, the conference’s theme, “Banking for a Smart Society”,
reminds us not to be complacent. We should continue to work collectively to further develop the
ecosystem.
9.While  we  naturally  pay  more  attention  to  new  or  innovative  digital  financial  services  that
become available to bank customers as a result of the Smart Banking initiatives, let’s not forget
that Fintech is not only about the interface between banks and customers. The importance of a
key  Fintech  segment,  Regtech  –  regulatory  technology  –  in  supporting  and  facilitating  the
interface between banks and the regulators, should not be understated nor overlooked. I would
like to therefore provide a supervisor’s perspective on Regtech in the Smart Banking era.
10.When we look at Regtech, some may immediately start to envisage the substitution of us,
banking  supervisors,  with  technologies  such  as  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  or  “robo-regulators”.
While  some  of  you  might  indeed  prefer  a  robo-regulator  delivering  this  speech,  this  is  not
something that Regtech is intended or able to deliver at this point, unfortunately. Frankly, I hope
that you would still prefer listening to my sharing, rather than from a tall and handsome robo-
regulator,  even  if  such  a  robot  were  a  reality  today.  Joking  aside,  Regtech  does  offer  a
tremendous potential to complete the Smart Banking ecosystem.
11.Before I discuss our plan for Regtech, I would like to reiterate what Regtech means. As I have
mentioned, from the perspective of banks, there are two interfaces that they have to address:
one between banks and customers, and the other between banks and the HKMA. The general
priority  of  banks  under  the  Smart  Banking  initiatives  so  far  has  been  to  concentrate  on  the
interface  between  banks  and  customers  to  offer  better  digital  financial  services  to  users.
However, some meaningful progress has been made to streamline the interface between banks
and their regulators, such as the work under the Banking Made Easy initiative and the Balanced
and Responsive Supervision Programme that I explained at this Conference last year. We do
see  a  need  to  further  facilitate  banks’  use  of  technologies  for  compliance  with  regulatory
requirements of the HKMA and other regulators and for risk management purposes. Regtech,
which  essentially  means  the  use  of  innovative  technologies  by  banks  to  achieve  regulatory
compliance  or  better  risk  management  in  a  more  effective  and  automated  manner,  is  well
positioned to further enhance the interface between banks and regulators.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
12.Regtech developments are growing rapidly particularly in the areas of transaction monitoring,
regulatory reporting, risk management and compliance. According to a recent report, investment
in  Regtech  companies  reached  US$1  billion  globally  in  2017.  But  why  is  Regtech  gaining
popularity? I believe there are three key drivers:
1.  First is the increase in the complexity and scope of more stringent regulations globally such
as Basel III and enhanced standards for combating money laundering. A few recent studies
have suggested that the volume of global regulatory changes went up by at least five-fold in
the past decade. Hence, there has been a growing desire of the banking industry, particularly
in  jurisdictions  with  more  daunting  regulatory  requirements,  to  explore  the  use  of  new
technologies to enhance the effectiveness and lower the cost of their compliance efforts.
2.  The second driver is the sheer volume of transactions and data that many banks need to
handle as the economy and business continue to grow. If we take the mobile wallet market
as  an  example,  research  predicts  cumulative  annual  growth  of  32%  in  global  e-wallet
transactions between 2017 and 2022. Such a scale of transactions means it would simply
be  impracticable  for  some  banks  and  e-wallet  operators  to  effectively  manage  the
associated risks using traditional or manual risk management approaches.
3.  The third and final driver is the higher availability of Regtech solutions. Increasing computing
powers,  together  with  accessibility  of  data  and  applications  of  new  technologies,  have
contributed to an increased commercialisation of Regtech solutions available to the banking
industry.
13.Recognising the growing need for, and developments of, Regtech solutions, we at the HKMA
consider  it  timely  to  work  with  the  banking  industry  and  the  technology  community  to  further
facilitate the adoption of Regtech in Hong Kong. To help develop the Regtech ecosystem here,
the  HKMA  will  open  the  Fintech  Supervisory  Sandbox  to  Regtech  projects  or  ideas  raised  by
banks  or  tech  firms.  I  am  also  pleased  to  say  that  the  HKMA  will  soon  launch  a  series  of
Regtech-specific projects, through its Banking Made Easy initiative, focusing on four areas:
          (a) AML/CFT surveillance technologies;
          (b) Regtech for prudential risk management and compliance;
          (c) Study on machine-readable regulations; and
          (d) HKMA’s exploration of Suptech.
14.Let me explain each initiative in greater detail.
AML/CFT surveillance technologies
15.About AML/CFT surveillance, one should bear in mind that the financial system is the gateway
through which criminals must pass to make crime pay. The reality is that financial system is
becoming  more  efficient  because  of  technology.  Efficiency  brings  enhanced  services  to
customers, which are delivered through channels and at speeds we could have only dreamed of
a few years ago. But these developments can equally be attractive to criminals.
16.This is where banks should come in. Banks are expected to be on the frontline of combatting
financial crimes given Hong Kong’s role in the global economy. As our knowledge of the size of
the threat improves, expectations of how banks should perform this role have also increased.
This  also  means  that  managing  financial  crime  risk  has  become  a  significant  compliance
undertaking, particularly in the area of transaction monitoring.
17.But the ability for banks to work in a sea of data and fund flows is indeed very challenging. It is
not that our systems do not produce results, judging from an average annual growth of 40% in
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the past five years in suspicious transaction reports. Rather, it is the degree of success by which
those results contribute to the objectives of our AML system – to deter, disrupt and detect – that
are increasingly under scrutiny
18.To  improve  our  work,  Regtech  solutions  are  increasingly  being  recognised  as  highly
applicable  in AML.  Data  analytics  and  machine  learning  are  seen  as  having  huge  potential  to
complement  banks’  processes 
improve  efficiency  and
effectiveness of the process.
in  AML/CFT  surveillance,  and 
19.For example, the generation of huge numbers of alerts by transaction monitoring systems,
which can sometimes require armies of analysts to process, is a pain point for banks. We note
that  some  banks  use  machine  learning  and  artificial  intelligence  to  help  detect  and  recognise
suspicious behaviours and patterns, as well as to facilitate the closing of low-risk alerts. This
helps free up precious analysts resources to focus on investigating high-risk cases, and in turn
enhance the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the transaction monitoring process.
20.Let me be clear that this is not technology at any cost. We must fully understand the pros and
cons of what these changes will mean to banks’ AML systems and controls. At the same time
we cannot outsource this responsibility to technology firms. Some of you will know from our work
with  a  Regtech  firm  specialising  in  testing  screening  systems  that  we  expect  banks  to
understand why a machine makes the recommendations it does.
21.Going  forward,  if  we  are  going  to  address  the  challenges,  we  need  to  be  ambitious.  The
HKMA  plans  to  move  in  the  coming  months  from  a  one-to-one  type  engagement  in  our
Chatroom,  to  a  many-to-many  type  engagement  where  banks,  stored  value  facility  (SVF)
operators, technology specialists and the regulator come together to tackle AML pain points. This
will initially target one or two challenges, but will aim to build momentum and turn the successes
into mainstream AML solutions that contribute to effectiveness and efficiency.
22.But that perhaps is still not enough. New technology comes at the right time not only for the
regulatees, but also for regulators. With the advice from technology experts, we will embark upon
a study to enhance the timely retrieval and transmission of AML/CFT related information and data
from banks and SVF operators in a digitalised and efficient way, as opposed to the old-fashioned
way of regulatory returns and surveys. At the same time, we will also explore data analytics tools
for processing the data collected in order to generate useful analyses for furthering our capability
to understand and assess the ML/TF risks at the sectoral level, as well as to provide feedback to
individual regulatees where appropriate. These will hopefully lead to an evolution and re-shaping
of  regulatory  interface  between  the  HKMA  and  market  practitioners  to  enhance  AML/CFT
surveillance capability of all.
Regtech for prudential risk management and compliance
23.Another area of focus is on Regtech for prudential risk management and compliance. The
often-analytical nature of prudential risk management has created room for technology to im
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
