François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Monetary  policy  in  the  present
environment  -  reconciling  clarity  and  flexibility,  as  well  as
independence and cooperation
Remarks by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Group of
Thirty's annual International Banking Seminar, Bali, Indonesia, 14 October 2018.
 Good morning. Let me begin by thanking the organisers of this seminar for the opportunity to
speak on such a distinguished panel.
I’d like to elaborate on two challenges. The first is domestic and concerns how we, as Euro-area
central bankers, decide and communicate about the gradual normalisation of our monetary policy
in uncertain times. The second challenge is a collective one: how we co-ordinate facing diverging
economic paths.
 1.  Our domestic challenge in the euro area: combining clarity and flexibility
The  Euro-area  is  experiencing  a  broad-based  economic  expansion.  Q2  2018  was  the  21st
successive quarter of economic growth. 9.2 million jobs have been created since 2013 and the
unemployment rate has fallen from 12.1% to 8.1%, although this figure is still too high. There are
increasing signs that the labour market is tightening and nominal wage growth is picking up: the
Phillips  curve  is  back  to  work,  albeit  a  bit  later  than  expected.  The  output  gap  was  probably
closed  by  the  end  of  last  year.  We  are  increasingly  confident  in  the  sustained  adjustment  in
inflation  back  to  our  objective,  with  our  forecast  for  1.7%  in  each  of  2018,  2019  and  2020,
vindicating our unanimous decision in June to pursue a course of gradual normalisation.
There are, however, growing uncertainties: protectionism could weigh on business confidence
and investment; many EMEs are struggling with the US policy-mix – a warranted monetary policy
normalisation,  having  to  cope  with  a  less  warranted  fiscal  stimulus;  and  financial  market
valuations that remain stretched despite the recent correction. Within Europe, Italian fiscal policy
is  under  investor  scrutiny.  And  there  is  Brexit,  although  its  direct  effect  on  the  euro  area
macroeconomy is likely to be small.
How should we respond to this uncertainty? By combining two apparently contradictory aims,
clarity and flexibility:
Clarity – Our first duty as policymakers is to provide markers to help guide economic actors and
financial markets in the increasing fog of uncertainties. For our guidance to be reliable, we need
to be as clear, credible and consistent as possible. We cannot be clear like a train timetable but
more like how a captain sets a course and adapts to the wind and the waves. So our sequence
of steps for policy normalisation is very predictable: first, we halved our net asset purchases to
15 billion this month and will very probably end them in December. Second, we set down a guide
post with our long-dated forward guidance: we will maintain interest rates at current levels until at
least through the summer of 2019. And third, we will retain our stock of assets for as long as
necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.  Moreover,  this  sequence  doesn’t  depend  on  the  fiscal  uncertainties  that  can
appear in member states. The Governing Council is clear about the fact that there is no fiscal
dominance  in  the  euro  area  and  no  influence  of  any  national  fiscal  policy  on  our  common
monetary policy.
Flexibility  –  Our  sequence  is  clear  but  the  details  of  implementation  are  flexible  and  state-
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
dependent. We have included several options to deal with incoming data. Let me illustrate this on
two points:
One frequent focus of speculation is the precise timing of the first increase in interest rates
and  the  path  of  policy  rates  thereafter.  Obviously,  we  have  to  consider  here  the  trade-off
between more clarity today and flexibility tomorrow. It is true that forward curves beyond the
second half of 2019 are somewhat volatile. But for the time being, this volatility is relatively
modest,  and  certainly  so  for  interest  rates  that  matter  for  the  economic  decisions  of
households  and  corporates.  Therefore  the  trade-off  currently  favours  keeping  our  options
open. I wouldn’t see any value in trading off our flexibility tomorrow against more clarity today
but  as  we  approach  the  summer  of  2019,  the  balance  will  shift  in  favour  of  detailing  our
forward guidance.
We also have flexibility over reinvestment. We will soon discuss, as Mario Draghi said, the
technicalities of our 2019 reinvestments to ensure market neutrality. But we should keep our
options open about the timing of our reinvestment in the following years.
In the face of uncertainty, one often hears reference to the celebrated Brainard  ‘conservatism
principle’ (as reinterpreted by Alan Blinder . This is not, as the impression is sometimes given, a
general  warning  to  move  cautiously  when  the  world  is  uncertain.  The  Brainard  ‘conservatism
principle’ says only that you should move cautiously if you are uncertain about the effect of your
policy instrument on your objective. But we should go beyond a static view of Brainard’s principle
[which focuses on one single small step] a dynamic view would include the time dimension and
consider how to manage and communicate a sequence of incremental steps.
2
1
2.  Our collective challenge facing divergence: combining independence and co-operation
The global economy continues to expand strongly but we are now seeing a strong divergence in
performance.  We  have  used  a  lot  in  the  latest  IMF-WEO  forecasts,  the  nice  French  word
« plateau » to describe global growth. But this “plateau” is not even: a strong acceleration in the
US, even if it is temporary and fragile, offset by a moderation in growth in the rest of the G7.
Some prominent emerging market economies are either expected to slow down rapidly or record
only modest growth. In short we are moving from synchronized growth to economic divergence.
In  many  cases,  this  divergence  reflects  differences  in  the  economic  cycle  and  idiosyncratic
shocks. More worryingly, from a systemic point of view, however, is that some countries might
3
be  suffering  from  the  ongoing  rise  in  US  interest  rates.  Helene  Rey’s  famous  paper  in  2013
argued that floating exchange rates are not sufficient to give countries independence from US
monetary policy if they have an open capital account. If the trilemma is in fact a dilemma, then
countries  will  have  to  choose  between  monetary  independence  and  closing  their  capital
accounts.
I would contest the generality or starkness of her dilemma. For example, I think the euro area can
determine  its  own  course.  Our  asset  purchase  programme  has  contributed  to  a  spread
exceeding 250 basis points between the 10 year yields in the US and in Germany. Likewise, the
gap between policy rates in the US and the euro-area is the widest since 2009. More technically,
an  estimated  Taylor  rule  for  the  euro  area  that  includes  US  monetary  policy  as  one  of  the
explanatory factors finds only a very modest co-movement between the two.
Countries  instead  seem  to  be  arranged  along  a  continuum,  with  some  exhibiting  total
independence  at  one  end  to  those  with  exchange  rates  pegged  to  the  US  dollar  at  the  other.
Countries  don’t  have  to  choose  one  of  the  two  polar  positions  but  can  pick  an  intermediate
position. For example, putting some temporary restrictions on cross-border movement of capital
could give some but not complete independence of monetary policy.
But  is  there  more  that  we  can  do  to  manage  the  tensions  created  by  these  economic
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
divergence?  Put  another  way,  how  do  we  reconcile  yet  another  paradoxical  couple:
independence and co-operation?
Obviously the question is not to go back to a world of accords negotiated in hotel suites. But we
can and should act to enhance co-operation between central banks. Such co-operation includes
four elements:
Mutual predictability of policy making. We will achieve the closest to a co-operative solution if
we  avoid  large  surprises  between  policy  makers.  While  trade  multilateralism  is  at  risk,
monetary  and  financial  multilateralism  stands  fast,  fortunately.  This  means  continuing  to
favor dialogue and exchange of information among central banks, and to be very clear about
our  monetary  policy  regime  choice.  We  should  cherish  the  “great  convergence”  of  policy
objectives  of  the  last  fifteen  years.  Among  major  advanced  economies,  we  now  have
domestic inflation targeting around a 2% medium-term objective.
We are ruling out any currency war, as clearly stated in our unanimous Bali communiqué: 
``We will not target our exchange rates for competitive purposes’’.
On capital flow management (CFM) measures, we should support the ongoing reflections
undertaken  within  the  relevant  international  bodies  and  give  priority  to  practical  and
pragmatic solutions – IMF type – rather than dogmatic purity.
Last, I can only quote you, Tharman, and your impressive EPG report: “It is critical that we
put in place a reliable Global Financial Safety Net before the next crisis” and co-ordinate its
different layers. This should include “an IMF standing liquidity facility.’’ The global financial
safety  net  is  the  best  insurance  we  can  get  against  the  risks  created  by  economic
divergence and it comes at a limited cost.
 So, in conclusion, we as central bankers should be predictable without being pre-committed. In
other words, we should give clarity without pretending to certainty. Voltaire summed this up nicely
in 1770:  “Doubt is an uncomfortable condition, but certainty is a ridiculous one.”  In these times
of doubt, the Governing Council of the ECB is committed to give as much clarity as possible;
clarity, not certainty, which is neither possible nor desirable. Thank you for your attention.
4
1
2
3
4
Brainard, W. (1967), « Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy » the American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No.
2, Papers and Proceedings of the Seventy-ninth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, May, pp.
411–425.
Blinder, A. (1999), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, the Lionel Robbins lectures, MIT Press, Cambridge
Massachusetts.
Rey, H. (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”, Jackson
Hole conference proceedings, Kansas City Fed.
Letter to Frederick William, Prince of Prussia (28 November 1770).
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
