Luis  de  Guindos:  Promoting  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  EU
financial markets beyond Brexit
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Deutsche
Bundesbank reception on the occasion of the Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt, 13 November 2018.
 It’s a pleasure to be speaking to you here today. In my intervention this evening, I am accepting
the  challenge  set  by  the  organisers  to  address  the  topic  that  has  been  on  everyone’s  minds
lately, and which I am sure will figure prominently in this week’s discussions: Brexit. This is a
difficult matter to tackle given all the uncertainty around it: we do not know what kind of Brexit we
will eventually have.
We are all waiting to see whether a deal will be struck in the coming days, or whether we should
prepare for a hard Brexit in March 2019. But I will not comment on the ongoing negotiations. As
you know, we at the ECB have already expressed our views on the immediate cliff-edge risks in
the  financial  sector. And  we  will  provide  more  insight  on  these  risks  in  our  Financial  Stability
Review, to be published later this month.
I  rather  see  Euro  Finance  Week  as  an  occasion  to  take  a  step  back  from  the  day-to-day
discussions and make a clear-eyed assessment of the issues and challenges that will shape the
future of the financial sector. And Brexit is certainly one of these defining issues.
So today I am going to take a broader perspective and discuss the longer-term challenges that
Brexit poses for the EU. I will cover three issues that I believe need to be addressed through
long-term innovation in the EU’s architecture.
First, Brexit accentuates the need to develop and integrate the EU’s capital markets to prepare
for the likelihood that the City of London will play a reduced role in the future. We should therefore
renew our ambition for the capital markets union (CMU) project.
Second,  Brexit  means  that  the  EU’s  future  relationship  with  the  United  Kingdom  in  financial
services needs to be defined. We will need to balance reaping the benefits of financial integration
with safeguarding financial stability.
Third,  Brexit  reminds  us  that  we  should  continue  to  deepen  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU) and bolster the Single Market beyond its financial dimension.
Renewing the ambition for the CMU project
Financial services are an area where the EU-27 and the United Kingdom have strong and deep
ties. To date, in some areas, the EU has relied on the City of London to provide key financial
services which are necessary to support investment and growth.
But let me first put matters into perspective, notably in terms of financial services provided to the
euro area economy. The direct provision of credit from the United Kingdom is extremely limited,
not exceeding 1% of credit to firms and 2% of credit to households in the euro area. Lending
through loan syndicates is also small: around 10% of syndicated loans granted to euro area firms
involve UK banks. Turning to securities issuance, the share of total debt and equity issued by
euro area firms listed on UK exchanges ranged from 5% to 15% over last decade.
Other areas, such as securities underwriting activity, are more meaningful – with UK-domiciled
banks or subsidiaries accounting for about 40% of top book-runners in debt securities issued by
euro area firms. These might be relatively easy to relocate, however. Derivatives transactions
conducted in London also account for about one-fifth of the euro area real economy’s hedging
1
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
activities.  Finally, UK-domiciled central counterparties play an important role in clearing euro-
denominated  transactions,  notably  over-the-counter  derivatives  and  repos.  Admittedly,  cross-
border clearing of derivatives contracts is one area where financial stability risks may arise in a
cliff-edge Brexit scenario without sufficient mitigating actions.
The transition to a new equilibrium therefore requires the financial sector to make appropriate
preparations. But a reduced role for the City of London also underlines the need for revitalising
the  CMU  project,  which  will  improve  the  efficiency  of  credit  allocation,  facilitate  private  risk-
sharing and diversify sources of financing for the real economy. This would also contribute to
enhancing the attractiveness of our markets internationally.
I see two areas where progress is needed in promoting a consistent framework of supervision
and rules that underpin the functioning of capital markets.
First, further harmonising insolvency rules and consumer protection laws is essential to protect
rights and contracts, create a level playing field and promote cross-border investment.
Second,  cross-border  holdings  of  equity  and  debt  seem  to  be  the  most  effective  way  of
smoothing consumption and fostering cross-border private risk-sharing.  Reducing or removing
the taxation bias that favours debt over equity would help equity markets develop.
2
But neither of these steps will be enough on their own. As continental Europe’s financial markets
adapt  to  the  new  post-Brexit  reality,  we  could  see  one  or  several  financial  centres  emerge,
possibly  in  competition  with  each  other,  or  perhaps  not  competing  but  rather  specialising  in
certain areas.
If  the  EU-27  financial  markets  deepen,  diversify  and  expand  across  borders,  there  is  a  clear
flipside:  these  developments  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  sufficient  oversight  and  tools  to
3
avoid the build-up of risks in certain parts of the system. That is why, in my speech yesterday,
 I
called  for  the  macroprudential  toolkit  to  be  expanded  to  address  potential  risks  around
interconnection, liquidity, leverage and cross-border activities of non-bank financial institutions –
in particular, investment funds. I also argued that we should consider elevating the responsibility
for  supervising  these  institutions,  and  potentially  activating  macroprudential  tools,  to  the
European level.
More  consistent  market  oversight  and  enforcement  of  the  relevant  regulations  will  level  the
playing field. It will also facilitate cross-border integration because market participants will know
they  will  be  subject  to  the  same  rules  across  borders.  At  the  same  time,  more  centralised
supervision would prevent harmful regulatory arbitrage. Ultimately, as a long-term goal we could
also consider creating a single supervisor for capital markets.
Reaping the benefits of financial integration after Brexit while safeguarding stability
Developing a sound institutional framework to ensure sustainable financial integration is also at
the core of my second point – the EU’s future relationship with the United Kingdom in the field of
financial services.
To be clear, the ECB does not participate in Brexit political negotiations. So I will only be outlining
considerations  from  the  perspective  of  our  monetary  policy  mandate,  our  supervisory
responsibilities and our role in promoting financial stability.
The  Single  Market  includes  a  common  rulebook  for  financial  services  and  an  institutional
framework  of  supervisory  and  oversight  authorities.  This  framework  allows  European  and
national  authorities  to  cooperate,  exchange  information  and  manage  opportunities  and  risks
arising  in  the  Single  Market.  It  is  a  careful  balancing  act  between  integrating  Member  States’
financial markets on the one hand, and safeguarding national and European financial stability on
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the other.
The United Kingdom’s decision to leave the Single Market and its institutional framework means
we  have  to  perform  an  additional  balancing  act  –  one  where  we  balance  ensuring  that  EU
financial markets are integrated  and  can  interact  efficiently  with  a  non-EU  country  against  the
need to safeguard financial stability. There are benefits in maintaining a high level of integration
with the United Kingdom after Brexit, and indeed, trade openness is in the DNA of the EU. But
Brexit  also  entails  making  important  policy  choices  regarding  how  open  the  EU’s  financial
markets need to be, and what measures need to be in place to ensure financial stability, protect
EU consumers and investors and safeguard the Single Market.
While not confirmed, current discussions indicate that the way in which we will interact with the
United Kingdom in the area of financial services will be based on the EU’s existing equivalence
regime, with some expected enhancement. The aim would be to ensure sufficient regulatory and
supervisory  cooperation,  information  exchange  and  mechanisms  to  minimise  unwarranted
disruption in the functioning of markets linked to a potential loss of market access. This will of
course  be  vital  for  the  UK-EU  situation  after  Brexit,  but  also  provides  an  opportunity  for  our
relations with other key non-EU countries.
However, a key principle underpinning third-country regimes needs to be maintained: we should
avoid a situation in which non-EU firms are able to operate across the Single Market on the basis
of  a  different  rulebook  and  without  a  proper  institutional  framework.  We  cannot  permit
opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and let risks build up in the financial system.
It is also crucial that Brexit does not lead to a race to the bottom in regulatory and supervisory
standards, and that the efforts that have been made to strengthen the financial architecture of the
EU following the crisis do not unravel.
The framework thus needs to provide sufficient safeguards for maintaining financial stability. And,
as risks differ across financial services, this in turn implies that different financial services may
need to be regulated by different third-country models.
In the short term, a number of proposals should be adopted.
First, on the review of the prudential framework for banks (the Capital Requirements Regulation
and  Directive)  the  European  Commission  proposed  that  non-EU  headquartered  banks  with
subsidiaries in the euro area would establish an intermediate parent undertaking within the EU.
This would bring certain non-EU branches under the umbrella of European banking supervision,
as  is  established  practice  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  United  States.  Going  forward,  further
harmonisation of the regulatory and supervisory framework of third-country branches in the Union
would be of the essence.
Second,  we  need  to  adapt  how  large  investment  firms  are  supervised  to  reflect  the  many
similarities between their activities and those of banks. It therefore makes sense to supervise
these  investment  firms  as  if  they  were  banks,  in  line  with  the  principle  that  similar  risks  are
treated in a similar manner.
Last  but  not  least,  we  need  to  finalise  the  review  of  the  European  Market  Infrastructure
Regulation.  Currently,  the  system  is  not  designed  to  cope  with  major  systemic  central
counterparties operating from outside the EU. We therefore need to adapt it to the post-Brexit
reality  and  enhance  the  role  for  the  central  banks  to  monitor  and  address  risks  to  the  EU’s
financial system.
Creating a prosperous and stable macroeconomic environment: reducing and sharing
risks in our monetary union
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit is, or at least should be, acting as a catalyst to modernise the architecture of the EU’s
capital markets and safeguard their stability. These markets have to be embedded in a resilient
EMU across all its dimensions – which is my third point today.
Given that the EU financial system will remain predominantly bank-based, completing banking
union in all its dimensions is certainly a key priority.
For this, we need to continue to forcefully address the legacy issues which are still weighing on
the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  damaging  trust  among  Member  States.  This  includes
addressing the stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) and Level 2 and 3 exposures. Progress
has been made: over the past three years, the NPL stock of significant banks decreased by one-
third, supported by our supervisory action. The proportion of significant institutions’ total assets
accounted for jointly by Level 1, 2 and 3 assets has also fallen from over 30% to 23%.  However,
further efforts are needed from banks, supervisors and regulators.
4
At the same time, we should establish a credible common backstop to the Single Resolution
Fund and create a European deposit insurance scheme. And, yes, this implies risk-sharing. But
as I have argued before, a complete banking union is also a confidence-building mechanism that
contributes  to  risk  reduction,  for  example  by  enabling  the  credible  and  effective  resolution  of
5
banks.
As  demonstrated  by  the  financial  crisis,  financial  markets  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum.  Their
strength and resilience can lift economic growth and shield sovereigns. But the dependence also
runs 
financial  markets  depend  on  a  stable
macroeconomic environment. That is why further steps to reduce and share risks in the fiscal
and economic spheres are critical.
flourishing  and  resilient 
the  other  way: 
Without fiscal policy space or sound economic policies, even well-functioning financial markets
can be adversely impacted during downturns as growth slows, banks’ balance sheets weaken
and  financial  integration  goes  into  reverse.  To  underpin  the  financial  and  fiscal  spheres  with
strong growth, we need to reflect on how to bolster the implementation of structural reforms – an
area which has seen lacklustre progress in recent years.
As  we  look  for  ways  to  increase  potential  growth,  Brexit  also  reminds  us  of  the  opportunities
available  by  deepening  the  Single  Market  –  the  “E”  in  EMU.  With  the  departure  of  the  United
Kingdom and its 66 million citizens, the Single Market will obviously shrink, but it has always had
two dimensions which can be leveraged to increase its benefits. One is its geographical size; the
other is its depth.
So it is crucial that we complete the Single Market for services and expand its reach into new
areas, especially those that are relevant for innovation, such as the digital economy. This is an
essential driver of economic progress that benefits consumers, businesses and the economy as
6
a whole and will also provide a healthy ecosystem for financial services.
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude.  The  unifying  theme  of  the  three  priorities  I  have  outlined  today  can  be
summarised  by  looking  at  the  nature  of  the  Single  Market.  In  a  nutshell,  the  Single  Market  –
including for financial services – provides a framework in which integration is accompanied by
supervisory  and  regulatory  convergence  through  common  rules  and  institutions.  It  is  this
landscape  of  rules  and  institutions  which  provides  the  necessary  protection  for  people  and
businesses to engage in cross-border activities. It is a framework that has delivered tremendous
benefits to its members. It is extremely valuable and needs to be protected.
Whatever the outcome of the negotiations with the United Kingdom, the integrity of the Single
Market must be ensured. And we should constantly show the public how our reforms will benefit
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ordinary people.
Brexit underscores the need to move ahead with securing all facets and institutional foundations
of our Union. A Union which has led to peace on the Continent. A Union which has provided great
benefits for the people of Europe, increasing living standards across Member States and bringing
them closer together. But this great European project has to do more than just reflect on its past
achievements. It needs to continue improving itself to deliver visible benefits for people’s day-to-
day lives. I am confident Europe will once again rise to the challenge.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See, ECB (2017) Financial Stability Review, May, Box 1. Figures relate to financial services provided to the non-
financial corporate sector.
See Cimadomo, J., Furtuna, O. and Giuliodori, M. (2018), “Private and public risk sharing in the euro area”,
Working Paper Series, No 2148, ECB, May.
See de Guindos, L. (2018), “Coming to the forefront: the rising role of the investment fund sector for financial
stability in the euro area”, Speech at Opening Conference, 21st Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 12
November.
Level 3 assets decreased from €188 billion to €132 billion, constituting less than 1% of significant institutions’
total assets.
See de Guindos, L. (2018), “Building a resilient Economic and Monetary Union”, Lectio magistralis opening the
XXIX Edition of the Masters Programme in European Union law of the University Carlos III of Madrid, 5 October.
See: www.europarl.europa.eu/EPRS/EPRS_STUDY_536353_CoNE_Single_Market_I.pdf
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
