Norman Chan: Hong Kong's pivotal role in infrastructure financing
Keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the Forum-cum-Dialogue on “Belt and Road Initiative: Infrastructure Financing”, Hong Kong, 15
October 2018.
 Carrie (Leung), Susie (Cheung), Tony (Neoh), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
1.  I am pleased to be invited to attend today’s Forum.  Before I talk about what role Hong Kong
can play in facilitating the financing for infrastructure projects, it would be useful if I refer to
the  enormous  gap  between  the  gigantic  funding  needs  of  infrastructure  projects  in  the
emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  and  the  huge  pool  of  global  capital  looking  for
investment opportunities. 
2.  It is beyond doubt that many EMEs do have a desperate need to bring in foreign investments
in infrastructure, such as power plants, ports, airports, roads, railways, etc., all of which will
certainly help them raise not only their living standards but also their capability in production
and external trade.  There is also no doubt that on the other side, there are billions or trillions
of  dollars  eagerly  looking  for  investment  opportunities,  especially  those  that  can  bring  in
steady long-term returns to the investors.  When I ask investors or bankers why they are not
putting their money into infrastructure projects that are waiting to be built and financed, the
answer is there is a lack of “bankable” or “investible” projects.  This may well be the true
answer or reality, but it is rather disappointing if not frustrating that the wide gap between
demand and supply has continued to exist.
3.  So the natural question for us would be how we can close that gap and bring about a win-
win  outcome  for  project  proponents  and  operators  on  the  one  hand  and  financiers  or
investors on the other.  And in this connection, I should say that Hong Kong is uniquely well
positioned to play a pivotal role in facilitating and catalysing investment flows to infrastructure
projects  in  the  region.    We  have  well-developed  capital  markets  and  a  deep  pool  of
professional  talents,  in  addition  to  Hong  Kong  being  a  leading  centre  in  arbitration  and
dispute  resolution,  all  of  which  are  essential  building  blocks  in  support  of  infrastructure
investments and their financing.  It was against this background that the HKMA set up the
Infrastructure  Financing  Facilitation  Office  (IFFO)  in  July  2016.    IFFO  has  the  following
mission:
              (a) provide  a  platform  for  the  key  stakeholders  to  get  to  know  each  other  and  share
experiences;
  (b) enhance  the  capacity  of  the  investing  and  recipient  countries  in  infrastructure
financing; and
(c) facilitate infrastructure investment and financing flows.
4.  IFFO now has 90 stakeholders from Hong Kong, Mainland China and overseas joining as
Partners.  They include project developers or operators, commercial and investment banks,
multilateral development financial institutions, asset owners and managers and professional
service firms.  In the last two years, IFFO has accomplished a lot.  IFFO has organised 12
workshops and events in collaboration with top experts in the field such as the International
Finance  Corporation  and  the  Multilateral  Investment  Guarantee  Agency  under  the  World
Bank Group, Harvard Kennedy School, and key industry associations on risk mitigation and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
capacity  building.    Two  high  level  roundtables  for  debt  and  equity  investors  were  held  in
March 2017 to discuss innovative ways of making projects more bankable and investible.  A
reference  term  sheet  for  infrastructure  investments  was  also  developed  in  the  equity
roundtable, listing out various factors to be considered in equity investment in infrastructure
projects.  The next high level roundtables will be held later this month.  We also held a high
level  roundtable  two  months  ago  with  10  major  Mainland  China  enterprises  which  have
extensive investments in EMEs.  The theme of that roundtable was the pivotal role that Hong
Kong could play in facilitating the financing and management of infrastructure investments in
the  region.    Separately,  the  HKMA  is  exploring  the  opportunity  of  co-investment  in
infrastructure projects with some like-minded investors.  This is still work in progress and we
hope we can say more on this later on. 
5.  Apart  from  the  work  of  IFFO,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  what  the  Hong  Kong
Mortgage  Corporation  (HKMC),  which  is  fully  owned  by  the  HKMA,  is  doing  in  promoting
infrastructure financing.  The HKMC’s key mandate, as many of you are aware, is to develop
commercially  viable  financial  products  that  would  facilitate  market  developments.    It  has
spearheaded with great success mortgage securitisation and mortgage insurance in Hong
Kong.  It has launched credit guarantee for SMEs as well as retirement protection solutions
such as the Reverse Mortgage Programme and, more recently, the Life Annuity Scheme. 
The HKMC is now considering a new line of business entailing the purchase of infrastructure
loans for the purpose of securitisation. 
6.  It is generally acknowledged that infrastructure investments are probably the most difficult
and complex amongst different asset classes.  The typical infrastructure projects normally
involve larger investments and for a longer period than many other types of investments. 
They  also  involve  complicated  land  acquisition,  environmental,  labour  and  other  social
issues that require strong support or facilitation by the host government in their resolution. 
However, infrastructure investments, if properly designed and run, can bring about steady
and long-term cash flow and good return to the invested capital.  Moreover, the space of
infrastructure in the developed world is getting increasingly crowded, with yields or returns
steadily declining as there is an abundance of capital chasing after limited opportunities.  In
contrast,  there  is  enormous  headroom  and  potential  for  infrastructure  investments  in  the
EMEs.    The  crucial  issue  is  how  to  channel  the  capital  to  the  investments  or  turn  more
projects into “bankable” or “investible” projects.
7.  In this context, banks and multilateral development institutions play a crucial part.  They have
the necessary technical expertise in the relevant fields and the requisite local knowledge to
underwrite greenfield projects.  This is a riskier phase of an infrastructure investment but
banks are good at doing this.  However, the new capital standards for banks do not make it
attractive for them to hold on to these loans on a long term basis, even though the projects
at  the  brownfield  stage  are  operating  smoothly.   At  the  same  time,  there  are  many  other
investors,  including  insurance  and  pension  funds,  which  may  be  looking  for  less  risky
investments  that  can  produce  steady  long-term  cash  flow.    Therefore  I  can  see  a  good
opportunity for banks to offload their loans to these long-term investors.  However, it is easier
said than done.  There are many issues that need to be tackled.  Just to name a few:
              (a)
the  large  transaction  size  of  infrastructure  loans  makes  concentration  risk  of
collateral  a  more  prominent  issue  to  be  addressed,  say  as  compared  to  the
securitisation of a portfolio of mortgage loans comprising a large number of loans
but with each being relatively small in size;
 (b)
apart  from  being  large  in  size,  infrastructure  loans  tend  to  be  significantly  less
homogenous than the other types of asset for securitisation. In fact, infrastructure
loans tend to be “unique” rather than “common”, and each can have its own risks
and  corresponding  mitigation  structures,  which  would  pose  challenges  to  the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
structuring, rating and assessment processes;
  (c)
given  such  unique  nature  of  infrastructure  loans,  originating  and  managing  an
infrastructure loan portfolio require the asset manager to possess highly specialized
skillsets  and  experience,  and  the  track  record  of  the  asset  manager  is  a  key
assessment criterion of rating agencies as well as prospective investors;
(d)
the risk appetite of many long-term investors may need to adjust over time. Over the
past few years, we have seen an increasing interest among conventional long-term
investors  like  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  in  infrastructure-related
assets, possibly because the conventional fixed income instruments have failed to
provide a decent return amidst the long-depressed yield environment. However, the
appetite  of  such  investors  tended  to  focus  on  the  small  set  of  prime  quality,
investment  grade-tranche  of 
loan  assets,  whereas  many
infrastructure loans may fall in the sub-investment grade domain.
infrastructure 
8.  Ladies and gentlemen, the reputation of financial derivatives was badly damaged during the
Global Financial Crisis. The mortgage-backed securities, CDO, CDO2 and CDO3, etc. all
got a bad name, for good reasons. While there are still widespread skepticism and even
resentment to the label of financial derivatives or financial engineering, I think it is important
for us to be able to differentiate between those structured finance products that are linked to
and supportive of the real economy from those that have no useful links to the real economy.
Clearly ordinary mortgage-backed securities with proper underwriting standards, not the kind
of  sub-prime  mortgages  in  the  US,  are  one  of  this  kind  of  useful  financial  derivatives.
Infrastructure  loan  backed  securities  can  be  another  kind  of  useful  structured  finance
because, if properly organised, they can bring about a win-win outcome for the investors, the
recipient  countries,  the  intermediaries  and  the  capital  markets.  As  I  said  earlier,
infrastructure investments are one of the most difficult kind of asset class and to create a
structured finance for these investments is not going to be an easy or short process, but as
the Chinese saying “千里之行，始於足下” goes, no matter how long the journey is going to
take, one has to make a start somehow. So here we are, the HKMC is going to take the first
step in pursuing the securitisation of infrastructure loans in order to facilitate a more efficient
flow of capital into infrastructure investments.
9.  I note that in the afternoon there will be a session focusing on the prospects of structured
finance in infrastructure investments. This is highly relevant and timely and I look forward to
hearing the perspectives and insights from the experts on this subject. Finally, let me thank
the Forum for inviting me and wish all the participants a very fruitful and productive day.
10.  Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
