Sharon Donnery: Citizenship, participation and diversity
Remarks by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the launch
of the €15 Silver Proof Commemorative Coin, marking 100 Years since Irish women won the
right to vote, Dublin, 27 November 2018.
 Ceann Comhairle, Ministers, Teachtaí Dála, Senators, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to
be here at Leinster House today to launch this commemorative coin. The coin was designed by
Michael Guilfoyle and marks 100 years since Irish women won the right to vote.
The  Central  Bank  acts  as  an  agent  for  the  Minister  for  Finance  and  Public  Expenditure  and
Reform in issuing all Irish coin – both the circulating coins we use every day and commemorative
ones.
Our commemorative coins aim to recognise figures and mark moments of national importance.
Recognising that 100 years have passed since women first gained the right to vote in Ireland
most certainly fits these criteria. And this coin is the latest in a series of coins marking centenary
events from the Lockout commemorative coin launched in 2013 to the 2016 coin marking the
centenary  of  the  Proclamation.  In  a  few  short  months,  we  will  mark  the  centenary  of  another
significant event with a coin to commemorate 100 years since the First Dáil.
Today, I would like to discuss three themes that applied to the suffrage movement and which still
resonate today: citizenship, participation and diversity.
But first, if I may, a word about coins themselves.
 When we use our coins on a daily basis – to buy a cup of coffee, to pay for parking, to contribute
to a charitable collection – we rarely dwell on their wider significance.
Throughout history, in addition to their functional role, coins - and currency more broadly - have
had important political, social and cultural dimensions.
Politically, for example, currency and coin can act as a “vector for the construction of a … polity
and political community”.  Currency and coin can thus play a role for citizenship. Take the role of
the euro in building European identity and citizenship, for example.  This is true at national level,
too.
1
2
For  many  of  us  as  children,  we  first  came  to  recognise  the  emblem  of  the  State,  the  Harp,
because it was on every coin we used growing up. We could touch and feel the emblem – our
emblem  – in our hands. The same is true of our own children today who still see the Harp on
Irish euro coins. While we share a common currency with the other 18 members of the euro
zone, the retention of our own emblems on the national side of all euro coins conveys that in a
very  real  sense,  coins  serve  as  an  essential  reminder  of  our  history  and  identity,  and  a  link
between generations.
Citizenship
  In thinking about the launch of this coin today I was struck by the words of the first woman ever
honoured on a coin in the United States. The dollar coin minted in the late 1970s commemorated
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Susan B. Anthony who was a driving force in the suffrage movement in the United States. In
1887, she said “there never will be complete equality until women themselves help to make laws
3
and elect lawmakers.”
It seems hard to believe now but at that time, there was a fundamental debate about women’s
capabilities, competence and state of mind. This is despite the fact that for example, just a few
years later in 1903, Marie Curie would be (jointly) awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics – and
would win a second Nobel, this time in chemistry, in 1911.
Inconceivable  or  quaint  as  that  debate  may  seem  now,  this  is  not  ancient  history.  My  late
grandmother,  who  was  born  one  hundred  and  one  years  ago  tomorrow,  was  born  into  this
society and grew up in a time in which women were thoroughly second-class citizens.
Now it is also important to highlight that progress did not happen in a linear fashion. Rather, as
everyone in this room knows all too well, progress has to be constantly fought for, and there are
setbacks along the way.
As Countess Constance Markievicz said in 1909:
“All great things are made up of much that is obvious and dull, and much that in the beginning is
4
small, but that will be found to lead out into fields that are broader and full of interest.”
And the 1918 Representation of People Act, important as it was, represented just one step on the
road – because only some, rather than all, women were allowed to vote.
It applied in the beginning only to women over the age of 30 who owned a certain amount of
property or were university graduates.
This  Act  was  followed  by  the  Parliament  (Qualification  of  Women)  Act  which  would  allow
Countess  Markievicz  become  the  first  women  elected  to  the  UK  Parliament,  although  as  we
know she never took her seat. It would be 1922, however, before all men and women over the
age of 21 could vote when, following the establishment of the Irish Free State, universal adult
suffrage was granted.
Which means we can rightly celebrate key moments in history such as women earning the right
to vote. But we can never grow complacent that the work is done.
Participation
Which brings me to the issue of participation.
 Earning  the  vote,  which  Hanna  Sheehy  Skeffington  called  the  “keystone  of  citizenship”,  has
5
indeed led to “fields that are broader and full of interest”.
Whilst there are many dimensions to the achievements of women, I am sure you will appreciate
that as an economist by training and a central banker by profession, I’m fond of using statistics to
tell a story.
For economists a key metric is labour force participation.
Just 30 years ago, for example, the labour force participation rate for women in Ireland was 34.4
per cent. This meant that two thirds of the female working age population were not in any way
6
engaged in the labour market.
The comparative figure for men was 70.8 per cent.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This was a staggering difference.
In 2017, the female participation rate stood at 55.7 per cent, above the EU (15) average of 52.5
per cent. The male participation rate was still above the EU average, at 68.6 per cent, and more
importantly, the gap between men and women had narrowed to 16.1 percentage points.
Still a large gap I know, but the trend has certainly moved in the right direction.
These  numbers  may  seem  abstract,  but  they  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  economy.
Economic research has highlighted the importance of the rise in female participation through the
7
late 1990s and early 2000s in Ireland.
It is important that social policies support this. Recent research from the San Francisco Federal
Reserve for example, found that altering parental leave policies in the US to encourage female
participation to rise to levels observed in neighbouring Canada could add as many as 5 million
8
prime-age workers to its labour force.
Diversity
 Of  course,  women  participating  in  the  labour  force  is  one  matter,  equality  of  opportunity  is
another matter again.
In the ‘world I work in’ we have a long way to go.
In 2017, the Central Bank first published data on the level of gender diversity at senior levels of
financial  services  firms  we  regulate,  and  we  have  committed  to  publishing  these  data  on  an
9
annual basis.
The results were glaring, but unfortunately unsurprising, in that female applicants, for so-called
pre-approval control functions, made up just 20 per cent of applications for senior roles since
2012.
10
We expect to see the firms we supervise taking steps to increase diversity levels.
We  are  focused  on  this  issue  not  just  for  diversity’s  sake,  but  because  of  the  important  and
positive  effects  diversity  can  bring.  And  diversity  goes  beyond  the  number  of  women  in  the
workplace,  and  in  leadership.  It  also  means  diversity  of  age,  ethnicity,  sexual  orientation,
education, nationality, disability, beliefs and more.
11
Central banks are evidence-based organisations. And there is a growing body of evidence that
shows diversity can guard against groupthink by bringing a heterogeneity of values, beliefs, and
 Other studies suggest that a higher female presence in top management could help
attitudes.
  Furthermore,  reducing
develop  better  types  of  leadership  behaviour  across  organisations.
gender  differences  between  management  and  staff,  can  enhance  worker  productivity.
  More
broadly, research from the IMF shows a positive association between corporate return on assets
and the share of women in senior positions.
12
13
14
Of course, as a State institution and indeed, if the Central Bank is demanding certain standards
of the firms we regulate, we must also lead by example.
When I joined the Central Bank in 1996, it had just under 600 full-time staff, 13 divisions and a
senior management team of just eight people. There were no women on the senior management
team and not even one woman at head of division level.
Today,  the  Bank  has  a  much  broader  mandate  and  almost  2,000  staff.  In  terms  of  gender
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
diversity  our  total  staff  is  split  50:50.  Our  Board,  the  Central  Bank  Commission,  has  ten
members of which three, including myself, are female. About 40% of our senior leadership are
female and half of our heads of divisions. Earlier this year, we published our first Gender Pay
Gap Report as part of our commitment to both transparency and to becoming a more diverse
and inclusive workplace.
 At 2.7 per cent in favour of men, our pay gap is less than the national
average of 14 per cent, however, we believe there’s room for continued improvement.
 Our new
Strategic Plan for 2019 -2021 reflects that view and includes a commitment to ensure we have a
positive  culture  reflecting  our  One  Bank  ethos  of  working  together,  our  commitment  to  public
service, and to diversity and inclusion.
15
16
17
Conclusion
 In  concluding,  I’d  like  to  congratulate  the  Oireachtas  on  its  extensive  commemoration
programme to mark the centenary of the women’s vote. Progress continues but it doesn’t take
care  of  itself.  We  can  draw  on  the  examples  of  the  suffragettes  for  inspiration  as  we  strive
towards full equality today.
They took matters into their own hands and didn’t wait for others to advance their goals for them.
They showed the strength and courage to follow their convictions, and while they did not witness
full equality in their lifetimes, they traversed some of the most difficult parts of the journey. And for
that, we remember them and owe them a debt of gratitude. In 1908, the suffragette movement
adopted the colour scheme of purple for loyalty and dignity, white for purity and green for hope.
Orange  was  added  to  represent  all  Irish  women.  The  four  colours  represent  all  suffrage
movements. And maybe this coin, which in its design show these colours, can in its own small
way represent these values in society.
I’ll finish with one final quote, again from Countess Markievicz, giving some general advice for
women making their way in the world.
“Take up your responsibilities and be prepared to go your own way depending for safety on your
own courage, your own truth and your own common sense, and not on the problematic chivalry
of the men you may meet on the way.”
18
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See Moro, G. ed., 2013. The single currency and European citizenship: unveiling the other side of the coin. A&C
Black pp. 18.
Ibid., pp. 162.
See the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, further information here.
See  Markievicz,  C.,  1995.  Women,  Ideals  and  the  Nation. M.  Ward,  In  Their  Own  Voice:  Women  and  Irish
Nationalism. Attic Press Ltd.
The full quote reads, “Until the Parliamentarian and the Sinn Féin woman alike possess the vote, the keystone
of citizenship, she will count but little with either party, for it is through the medium of the vote alone that either
party can achieve any measure of success.” See Sheehy-Skeffington, H., 1995. Bean na h-Éireann. M. Ward, In
Their Own Voice: Women and Irish Nationalism, Attic Press Ltd.
The Participation Rate is the number of persons in the labour force expressed as a percentage of the total
population aged 15 or over. The Labour Force comprises Persons in Employment and Unemployed Persons.
Further information from the Central Statistics Office available here.
See Bercholz, M. and FitzGerald, J., 2016. Recent trends in female labour force participation in Ireland. Quarterly
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Economic Commentary Autumn 2016. Also see Byrne, S. and O’Brien, M.D., 2017. Understanding Irish Labour
Force Participation. The Economic and Social Review, 48 (1, Spring), pp.27–60.
See Daly, M.C., Pedtke, J.H., Petrosky-Nadeau, N. and Schweinert, A., 2018. Why Aren’t US Workers Working?.
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 2018–24.
See ‘The importance of diversity in central banks and supervised entities,’ address by Sharon Donnery, at the
Central Bank of Malta 50th Anniversary Conference, 2018.
See  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  report,  2017, Gender  breakdown  of  applications  received  for  certain  roles  in
regulated firms: 2012 to 2016.
See Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development report, 2012, Closing the Gender Gap: Act Now.
Also, see Daily, C.M., Dalton, D.R. and Cannella, A.A., 2003. Corporate governance: Decades of dialogue and
data. Academy of management review,  28(3),  pp.371–382. Also,  see  Robinson,  G.  and  Dechant,  K.,  1997.
Building a business case for diversity. Academy of Management Executive, 11, pp. 164–177.
See McKinsey & Company report, 2009, Women Matter 3: Women leaders, a competitive edge in and after the
crisis for results of a global survey of almost 800 business leaders conducted in September 2009.
See Giuliano, L., Levine, D. I, and Leonard, J. (2006). ‘Do Race, Age, and Gender Differences Affect Manager-
Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm.’ UC Berkeley:
Institute for Research on Labor and Employment.
See Christiansen, H., Lin, H., Pereira J., Topalova, P. and Turk, R., 2016. Gender Diversity in Senior Positions
and  Firm  Performance:  Evidence  from  Europe. IMF  Working  Paper,  WP/16/50.  For  other  analysis  see  The
Gadhia  Report  produced  for  the  UK  Treasury  entitled ‘Empowering  Productivity:  Harnessing  the  Talents  of
Women in Financial Services’, which notes that companies in the top quartile for gender diversity are 15 per cent
more likely to have financial returns above their respective national industry medians. The report also notes that
in the UK, for every 10 per cent increase in gender diversity, earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) rose by 3.5
per cent.
See Central Bank of Ireland Gender Pay Gap Report 2018.
See Central Statistics Office report Women and Men in Ireland 2016.
See Central Bank of Ireland Strategic Plan 2019–2021.
See Markievicz, C., 1995. Irish Citizen. M. Ward, In Their Own Voice: Women and Irish Nationalism. Attic Press
Ltd.
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
