BANK OF UGANDA 
  Keynote Address read by Mr. Elliot Mwebya,  
Acting Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda,  
  To the National Payment Systems Bill Stakeholder Consultative Workshop 
   Golf Course Hotel 
   October 1, 2018 
  1 
  The PS/ST, MOFPED, 
  Officials from the EAC Secretariat, 
  Representatives  from  the  MoFPED,  other  Government  Agencies, 
[SFIs],  the  Mobile  Network 
Supervised  Financial 
Operators (MNOs) and Payment System Providers (PSPs), 
Institutions 
  The  Chief  Executive’s  and  Representatives 
from  the  Partner 
Regulatory Authorities (UCC, CMA, USE, IRA, UMRA to mention but 
a few),  
  The ED Uganda Bankers Association, 
  All stakeholders present in your respective capacities, 
  Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you all to this very important stakeholder 
consultation event on the long awaited National Payment Systems Law.  
As we have explained in the past, both the Bank of Uganda Act 2000 and 
the Financial Institution Act 2004  have limitations on the  regulation and 
supervision  of  Payment  Systems  in  Uganda.    Section  4  of  the  Bank  of 
Uganda Act which stipulates the mandate of Bank of Uganda is silent on 
the  regulation  and  supervision  of  payment  systems.    Similarly  the 
provisions  in  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  2004  pose  limitations  on  the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  payment  systems  since  the  Act  applies  to 
deposit-taking institutions only.  
from 
the  benefits  accruing 
Recognizing 
technological 
developments in the financial sector, and being mindful of the need not to 
stifle  innovations,  Bank  of  Uganda  put  in  place  interim  oversight 
measures  to  promote  the  development  of  payment  systems  in  Uganda.  
These  measures  were  benched-marked  with  the  Regional  Central  Banks 
and included: 
the  recent 
  The  issuance  of  no  objection  letters  to  some  Commercial  Banks  to 
partner  with  the  Telecommunication  Companies  to  provide  mobile 
money services since 2009. 
  Issuance of Mobile Money Guidelines in 2013. 
  Setting  up  of  a  technical  working  group  constituted  by  technical  staff 
from Bank of Uganda and the Uganda Communications Commission. 
 2 
  Signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  two 
regulatory authorities (BoU and UCC), in 2016 to clarify the respective 
roles and responsibilities. 
However,  we  have  now  made  a  significant  progress  towards  the 
development of the legal framework for the regulation of payment systems 
in Uganda.  Cabinet in December 2017 approved the Policy and Principles 
for  National  Payment  Systems  Bill  which  covers;  the  regulation  of 
Payment  Systems,  Payment  Service  providers  and  payment  instruments.  
Following  approval  by  Cabinet,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  Planning  and 
Economic  Development  requested  the  Office  of  the  Attorney  General  to 
draft the Bill. 
Before  us  today  is  the  first  draft  of  the  NPS  Bill  2018  which  has  been 
circulated  to  the  various  stakeholders,  many  of  whom  have  submitted 
their  comments.    It  is  therefore  a  good  opportunity  for  us  to  go  through 
the  Draft  Bill,  to  clarify  on  the  comments  received  and  to  receive 
additional inputs from the stakeholders. We hope that the draft bill will be 
submitted to the Minister this month (October 2018). 
In  addition,  in  February  2018  Cabinet  approved  amendments  to  the  BOU 
Act;  to  empower  Bank  of  Uganda  to  regulate  and  oversee  the  payment 
systems. The draft Bank of Uganda amendment bill is being  reviewed by a 
select  technical  team.    The  passing  of  the  two  (2)  draft  bills  will  greatly 
enhance the BoU supervisory oversight on the National Payment Systems.    
 While most of the payment systems in Uganda are provided by the Central 
Bank, the market has recently experienced an upsurge of systems operated 
by the private sector with powers to control access and set prices. Examples 
of  systems  operated  by  private  providers  include:  Points  of  sale  (POS)  for 
debit  and  credit cards, Automated  Teller Machines (ATMs),  the  Switch  and 
mobile  payment  systems.    The  mobile  money  services  have  especially 
experienced an exponential growth. 
 At  the  regional  level,  the  East  African  Payments  System  (EAPS)  has  been 
implemented  to  facilitate  cross-border  payments  within  the  East  African 
Community  (EAC)  Region.  Under  the  Common  Market  for  East  and 
 3 
Southern  Africa  (COMESA),  the  Regional Payments  and  Settlement System 
(REPSS) has also been implemented to facilitate regional payments.   
 Although  the  legal  issues  were  partly  addressed  by  the  above  mentioned 
measures  implemented  by  the  Central  Bank,  a  comprehensive  NPS  law  to 
provide  an  oversight  framework  for  payment  services  providers,  operators 
and instruments is urgently required. 
 The  Payment  systems  are  a  vital  part  of  the  economic  and  financial 
infrastructure.  The  law  is  therefore  intended  to  provide  an  overall 
framework for ensuring safety and efficiency of the payment systems. 
 The  NPS  law  will  provide  for  the  licensing,  regulation,  and  oversight  of 
payment systems by specifying:  
  The licensing criteria and procedure.  
  The regulatory power of the BoU concerning the imposition of norms and 
standards, rules and regulations on operators of payment systems, and  
  The BoU’s power to call for information, to conduct on-site examinations, 
and take enforcement actions. 
  The administrative sanctions in case of violations of the law, regulations 
or orders from the Central Bank.  
 
We  believe  that  your  contributions  will  help  in  the  finalisation  of  this  long 
awaited bill.  
 Specifically,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  following  ministries  and  government 
institutions  for  the  efforts  put  in  the  drafting  process;  the  Ministry  of 
Finance Planning  and  Economic  Development,  The Ministry  of  Justice  and 
Constitutional  Affairs,  the  Uganda  Communications  Commission,  The 
Capital  Markets  Authority,  the  Uganda  Bankers  Association  and  the 
technical  staff  from  Bank  of  Uganda.    In  a  special  way  we  would  like  to 
thank the EAC and the African Development Bank for the support provided 
under the EAC-Payment and Settlements System Integration Project. 
  The Next Steps after the Stakeholders Workshop will be as follows: 
  To incorporate comments from the workshop. 
 4 
  The  draft  Bill  will  be  submitted  to  Parliament  through  the  Minister  of 
Finance  Planning  and  Economic  Development  for  the  enactment  of  the 
Payment Systems Law followed by the President’s assent. 
  Bank of Uganda will then operationalize the law. 
 With  these  remarks,  I  wish  the  Stakeholders  interactive  and  fruitful 
deliberations. 
    5 
