    
 
Cyborg supervision – the application of advanced analytics in 
prudential supervision 
 
Speech given by 
James Proudman 
Executive Director, UK Deposit Takers Supervision 
 
 
Workshop on research on bank supervision 
Bank of England 
19 November 2018 
 
 I am grateful to Sian Besley, David Bholat, Charlotte Bull, Stephen Denby, Ryan Lovelock, Clair Mills, 
Philip Sellar, Pete Thomas and Sam Woods for their assistance in preparing these remarks and 
conducting background research and analysis. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 1 
  I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recognising faces comes instinctively to humans. Until fairly recently, however, it proved beyond the 
ability of computers. Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) - the use of a machine to simulate human 
behaviour – and its subset, machine learning (ML) – in which a machine teaches itself to perform tasks – 
are now making facial recognition software much more widely available. You might even use it to access 
your bank account.   
Because it is so easy for us but so hard for computers, facial recognition is a good illustration of the 
challenges faced in developing AI. Enabling a machine to teach itself to recognise a face requires 
sophisticated algorithms that can learn from data. Advances in computational power and algorithmic 
techniques are helping machines become more human and super-human like. ML also requires lots of 
data from which to learn: data are the fuel that powers it – the more data used to train the algorithms, the 
more accurate their predictions typically become. Hence advances in AI are often associated with Big 
Data and the recent huge advances in the volume and variety of data available (see Figure 1).   
As the sophistication of algorithms and volume of data rise, the uses of AI in every-day life are 
expanding. Finance is no exception. In this speech I want to explore the impact of AI and advanced 
analytics more broadly, on the safety and soundness of the firms we supervise at the PRA, and how we 
are starting to apply such technology to the supervision of firms. In particular, I want to explore the 
seeming tension between the PRA’s supervisory regime that is firmly centred on human judgment, and 
our increasing interest and investment in automation, machine learning and artificial intelligence. 
II. 
CHANGING THE NATURE OF THE RISKS WE SUPERVISE 
Like many other firms, banks are looking to harness the power and speed of AI. If you were to take some 
parts of the media at face value you might be tempted to conclude that a revolution is underway. There 
are plenty of examples of innovation to point to – from the use of ML-driven financial-market trading 
algorithms; to the introduction of online banking platforms that generate alerts to customers on trends 
and irregularities in their spending habits; to new apps that suggest switching utility providers to the 
cheapest provider.1 
On closer inspection, however, the situation seems rather less revolutionary and more evolutionary. No 
hard data on industry-wide uptake are available but intelligence from supervisors is that the scale of 
adoption of advanced analytics across the industry so far is relatively slow. There is clearly, however, the 
potential for usage to accelerate. At the macroeconomic level, changes in technology, including AI, 
could, over time, profoundly affect the nature of the financial services consumed and may result in 
changes to the structure of the financial services industry. This set of issues is being explored at the 
Bank of England by Huw Van Steenis in his review of the future of the financial system. What matters to 
                                                      
1 McWaters, J (2018) 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 2
 us as prudential supervisors is the extent to which the development of advanced analytics changes the 
risks to the safety and soundness of the firms we supervise.  
Increasing levels of automation, machine learning and AI could improve the safety and soundness of 
firms in some ways. For example, until recently, most firms were using a rules-based approach to anti-
money laundering monitoring. But this is changing and firms are introducing ML software that produces 
more accurate results, more efficiently2, by bringing together customer data with publicly available 
information on customers from the internet to detect anomalous flows of funds.3  
ML may also improve the quality of credit risk assessments, particularly for high-volume retail lending, for 
which plenty of data are available and can be used for training machine learning models. Recent 
research, for example, analysed more than 120 million mortgages in the US written between 1995 and 
2014 and identified significant non-linear relationships between risk factors and mortgages becoming  
non-performing. These ‘jumps’ in the chance that a loan defaults – sometimes with just a small change in 
circumstances – are precisely the kind of non-linear relationships for which machine learning models are 
well suited.4 
ML is also starting to influence how wholesale loans are arranged. In contrast to retail lending, the 
idiosyncratic risks and limited data available for corporate lending make typical automated underwriting 
more difficult. But ML can still be used to improve the quality of underwriting by making use of non-
traditional data. For example, natural language processing of annual reports and social media can give 
firms useful information on the quality of the credit.5   
But the increased use of ML and AI may also increase some risks to the safety and soundness of firms. 
Implementing ML and AI at scale is likely to require considerable investments by firms in their data and 
technology capabilities. While in the long-run these investments could increase revenue, in the short-
term they are likely to increase costs. They will also amplify execution and operational risks. And even if 
firms eventually are successful in embedding new tools and techniques, these may make their 
businesses more complex and difficult to manage. For example, while ML models could alter banks’ 
trading and retail businesses – enabling them to make better decisions more quickly – the opacity, 
however, of these models may also make them more difficult for humans to understand. Boards, senior 
management and staff in firms may consequently need different skills to operate an effective oversight, 
risk and control environment. 
                                                      
2 Breslow, S., Hagstroem, M., Mikkelsen, D., Robu, K (2017) 
3 Arnold, M (2018) 
4 Sirignano, J., Sadwhani, A., and Giesecke, K (2018) 
5 Institute of International Finance (2018)  
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 3
 III. 
CHANGING THE METHODS BY WHICH WE SUPERVISE 
Advanced analytics are also likely over time to lead to changes to the way we do our jobs as 
supervisors. To see how, it is perhaps easiest to go back to the basics of what prudential supervision 
actually is. 
Our approach to promoting safety and soundness is based upon forward-looking judgement-based 
supervision, in which we identify the key risks facing firms and set supervisory strategies to mitigate 
them. Described as a business process, it can be broken down into a number of simple steps: 1) rule-
setting and reporting; 2) analysis and monitoring; and 3) setting and communicating a supervisory 
strategy to mitigate identified risks. Each of these aspects of supervision is amenable to automation, 
machine learning or AI to some extent. 
With respect to rule setting, for example, a project is underway to use advanced analytics to understand 
the complexity of the PRA rulebook.6 We hope to use the results to identify ways to simplify our rules to 
make them easier to comply with. 
The PRA Rulebook contains 638,000 words –77,000 words longer than War and Peace in English 
translation. The complexity of the language used can make the text difficult to read. Another layer of 
complexity is added because of cross-references and links between different parts of the Rulebook, 
requiring the reader to refer backwards and forwards, disrupting reader flow.  
Figure 2 is a visualisation of the Rulebook. Each node is a part the PRA Rulebook. Each line between 
the nodes is a cross-reference in the text. When parts of the rulebook are linked together, tweaking one 
part can have unintended consequences for others. We can quantify the interconnectedness of different 
parts of the rulebook using the PageRank algorithm, the same algorithm used by Google’s search 
engine. A higher score implies greater connectivity of a particular part to other parts. Happily, most parts 
of the rulebook are self-contained and ‘‘structurally simple’. ‘Looking further into the future, a bigger win 
might be to automate the rulebook entirely.  
Regulated banks are required to submit large quantities of data to regulators. The cost of collecting and 
reporting data to meet regulatory requirements is a significant burden to both regulators and regulated 
firms.  Regulatory data collections also have significant time lag s, normally 4 to 6 weeks. 
One solution is to make the data reporting process better tailored to the needs of supervisors. Digital 
regulatory reporting (DRR) is the automation of regulatory data collection, and could potentially lead to 
significant improvements in both the cost and timeliness of data. The idea is based on machine readable 
reporting requirements that firms’ systems could automatically interpret and satisfy via a secure 
regulator-firm digital link. This would allow regulators to collect data on an ad hoc basis from firms as 
required, in close to real time without any manual intervention at either end. That would enable 
                                                      
6 Amadxarif, Z, Brookes, J., Garbarino, N., Patel, R., and Walczak, E (n.d) [forthcoming] 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 4 
 4
 supervisors to specify the data they needed to solve a particular puzzle – exposures to a particular 
country, for example – and transmit that data request to firms in a machine readable form. The data 
would then be ‘grabbed’ directly from firms’ systems and sent back to supervisors automatically. The 
FCA and Bank of England are currently undertaking a DRR pilot with participants from a number of 
regulated firms. It is too early to say what the outcome of this early pilot will be, but initial findings 
suggest it is feasible. There remain significant technical challenges to be overcome. And regulators 
would need to guard against the moral hazard that could arise if firms perceived that responsibility for the 
accuracy and congruence of data had transferred from regulated entities to regulators. 
Setting regulatory standards and collecting data is only the start of the supervisory process. Working out 
what the data mean is a second stage. Recent research has demonstrated how machines can now 
outperform doctors in the diagnosis of certain forms of skin cancer: machines can be taught to recognise 
cell clusters more accurately than the human eye can. This does not, however, imply there is no role for 
doctors in the treatment of cancers; quite the opposite. By using technology to perform certain roles, 
doctors can free up time to focus on cancer treatment and patient care7. This is an example of what is 
sometimes referred to as human-centred automation “… which considers where humans can often do 
tasks or make better judgements than machines, and designs automation around these strengths”8. 
In a similar way, by introducing ML to perform complex tasks, we ought to be able to free up and focus 
supervisors’ time where it is most needed.  
Take the case of credit unions. Of the 570 or so U.K. domiciled credit institutions, about 450 are credit 
unions. These are very small and simple providers of credit facilities that between them account for 
0.07% of the assets of the UK deposit taking sector. Because none of these lenders is sufficiently 
significant to the stability of the financial system as a whole, we supervise these entities in a 
proportionate manner. That is to say, we only intervene intensively in the event of likely failure, to ensure 
that insolvency is orderly and that depositors are paid out promptly. 
Recent work at the Bank investigated the predictive power of the regulatory returns for these firms.9 It 
found a significant and stable correlation between simple explanatory variables and the probability of 
default one, two and three years later. In most banking data sets, this structural relationship is obscured 
by the intervening hand of supervision - leaving few if any observable banking failures.   
The research has the practical application for focusing our scarce supervisory resources in a systematic 
and efficient way on those credit unions where they are most likely to be needed. The tool cannot yet be 
classified as ML, as there is no learning involved. But it does demonstrate how more advanced analytics 
can be used to enhance effectiveness of supervision, and we are beginning to experiment with 
introducing genuine ML into this tool.  
                                                      
7 I am grateful to Hermann Hauser for first bringing this argument to my attention. 
8 Professor Peter Gahan, University of Melbourne 
9 Coen, J., Francis, W B., Rostom, M (2017) 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 5 
 5
 The task that lies at the heart of supervision – the third step I referred to above – is setting strategies to 
reduce prudential risks. For each firm that the PRA deems sufficiently critical, we form an assessment of 
the key risks to its safety and soundness. From that, we articulate a strategy of actions by the bank to 
mitigate the likelihood and the consequence of those risks. The nature and intensity of the supervisory 
strategy for a firm – and the resources we allocate – are proportional to the scale of the risks to its safety 
and soundness, and to the threat the firm poses to the wider economy. We then monitor progress 
against the delivery of the strategy, as well as the underlying risks themselves. 
This approach relies on judgement – about where the key risks lie, the supervisory strategy required to 
mitigate those risks, and how to respond to risks crystallising. It is a matter of debate how far and how 
fast AI will be able to move in the direction of making complex judgements. It seems to me to be highly 
unlikely in the foreseeable future. Perhaps the main contribution it will make is to improve the efficiency 
and productiveness of strategy-setting. A typical problem faced by supervisors, for example, is the 
‘needle-in-a-haystack’ problem: if something is going wrong in a firm, it can be necessary to find out who 
in the firm made relevant decisions, based on what information, and why the checks and balances of the 
firm – the board, and second and third lines of defence – did not work. 
Advanced analytics can assist.  The information to investigate would likely come in many forms – 
spreadsheets, regulatory returns, management information, e-mails, meeting agendas and minutes. And 
the information sources may evolve – firms’ definitions of products, business lines, risks, committees and 
so on do not stay the same. So – along the same lines pursued by law firms for example – one big win is 
the ability to produce structured data from a range of sources, the analysis of which traditionally required 
significant manual effort. Over time it may be possible, for example, to train tools to recognise business 
lines via their numerical characteristics and patterns, and their unstructured data alongside structured 
regulatory returns. ML also allows documents with similar characteristics to be classified together and 
analysed, either within or across banks. For example, it could be used to follow the escalation trail from 
the most junior to the most senior committees. This sort of work is labour intensive when performed by 
humans: aided by machines, supervisors could in future devote time to those areas where humans have 
a comparative advantage. 
Setting a supervisory strategy without effective communication is pointless, as we rely on the firms to 
take actions to mitigate the risks. To achieve complex supervisory outcomes – which often require 
significant, multi-year remediation by firms – boards and senior management of firms have to understand 
the context and rationale for what we are trying to achieve, as well as what we would deem to be a 
successful outcome. So getting our communications right is key. But how clear are those 
communications?  
Firms have developed a wide range of more-or-less polite methods for providing us with feedback on the 
letters we write to them. But letter writing is an art rather than a science, and evaluating objectively how 
clear we are does not lend itself easily to traditional forms of quantitative methods. Advances in ML, 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  6 
 6
  however, are helping. We recently analysed the letters we write to firms on the key risks they face and 
our supervisory strategy. We quantified a number of qualitative features of these letters, for example, 
how blunt we are in our messaging, how personal we are in terms of to whom we address the letter, and 
the overall sentiment expressed by the letter. We then used an ML model called random forests to detect 
whether, for example, the PRA writes to firms differently than the prior regulator, the FSA. (We do.)10  On 
the back of that project, we have built an app that now enables supervisors to analyse their written 
communications. Supervisors can use the app to analyse any of their draft documents before they are 
sent to firms. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Advanced analytics, machine learning and AI seem to be everywhere now – from image and voice 
recognition software to driverless cars and health care. Banks too are also seeking to apply these tools 
and techniques to the range of their activities, many of which used to be seen as the preserve of experts: 
from risk assessment, to financial crime prevention and trading in the financial markets. These trends are 
likely to accelerate. 
Banking supervisors need to adapt to technology too. Supervisors need to stay abreast of how 
technology is changing the risks the banks are running and how they are being controlled. And just as 
advanced analytics are opening an ever wider range of banks’ activities to automation, so too are they 
creating new possibilities for us to supervise banks more efficiently and effectively. But until machines 
can fully replicate human cognition – a remote possibility for the foreseeable future – supervisory 
judgment will still have a central role to play. My central expectation is that over coming years the PRA 
will develop a form of ‘’cyborg supervision’ ‘ involving humans and machines working ever more closely 
together and leveraging their comparative strengths.  
                                                       
10 Bholat, D., Brookes, J., Cai, C., Grundy, K., and Lund, J (2017)  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 7 
 7
 
 
 
Figures 
 
Figure 1: The quantity and cost of data 
Source: Financial Stability Board (2017)  
 Figure 2: Textual complexity of the PRA rulebook 
 Source: Amadxarif et al. (n.d.)  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  8 
 8
 
 
 
References 
 
Amadxarif, Z., Brookes, J., Garbarino, N., Patel, R., and Walczak, E (n.d) Textual complexity in UK 
prudential regulation. 
 
Arnold, M (2018), HSBC brings in AI to help spot money laundering, FT available here:  
https://www.ft.com/content/b9d7daa6-3983-11e8-8b98-2f31af407cc8 
 
Bholat, D., Brookes, J., Cai, C., Grundy, K., and Lund, J (2017), Sending firm messages: text mining 
letters from PRA supervisors to banks and building societies they regulate. Bank of England Staff Working 
Paper 688, available here: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/working-paper/2017/sending-firm-messages-text-mining-
letters-from-pra-supervisors-to-banks-and-building-societies 
 
Breslow, S., Hagstroem, M., Mikkelsen, D., Robu, K (2017), The New Frontier in anti-money laundering, 
available here: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/risk/our-insights/the-new-frontier-in-anti-money-laundering 
 
Coen, J., Francis, W B., Rostom, M (2017), The determinants of credit union failure in the United Kingdom: 
how important are the macroeconomic factors? Bank of England Staff Working Paper 658, available here: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2017/the-determinants-of-uk-credit-union-failure 
 
Financial Stability Board (2017), Artificial intelligence and machine learning in financial services, available 
here: 
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P011117.pdf 
 
Institute of International Finance (2018), Machine learning in credit risk, available here: 
https://www.iif.com/file/24725/download?token=FFv8Lhl1 
 
McWaters, J (2018), The New Physics of Financial Services, available here: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_New_Physics_of_Financial_Services.pdf 
 
Sirignano, J., Sadwhani, A., and Giesecke, K (2018), Deep learning for mortgage risk, available here: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.02470 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  9 
 9
