Ahmed Naseer: Financial inclusion within the Maldives
Keynote speech by Mr Ahmed Naseer, Governor of the Maldives Monetary Authority, at the 35th
Asian Bankers Association General Meeting and Conference, hosted by the Bank of Maldives,
Malé, 16 November 2018.
 Asian Bankers Association Chairman, Mr. Daniel Wu;
Managing Director and CEO of the Bank of Maldives Mr. Andrew Healy;
Distinguished experts and participants;
Assalaamu Alaikum, and a very good morning to you all.
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  35th  Asian  Bankers
Association General Meeting and Conference. I am very pleased to be here today, in this unique
gathering, bringing together industry players and financial experts from every corner of the Asia
region. In fact, the theme of this conference speaks to the heart of the imminent challenges that
central  banks  are  facing  today:  How  will  the  digital  revolution  transform  the  economic  and
financial  landscape?  How  can  we  gain  the  potential  socio-economic  benefits  of  the  financial
technology or fintech, while mitigating possible risks?
Ladies and gentlemen,
While  innovations  in  the  financial  sector  are  not  new  phenomena,  the  speed  and  broad
consequences  of  these  innovations  have  drawn  our  attention  in  recent  times.  The  rapid
improvements in computer technology such as quantum computing, innovations in cryptography,
big data, artificial intelligence and the increased use of mobile phones have taken the traditional
banking industry to a whole new level. It has enabled financial institutions to be in the financial
lives  of  their  customers  at  any  time,  any  place,  using  any  device  or  channel.  In  a  nutshell,
financial services are at our finger tips. In a few years from now, it is possible that the millennials
and future generations will not see the need to step inside a bank during their lifetime.
Fintech has not only reshaped customer experience. It has paved the way for achieving financial
inclusion,  especially  for  a  geographically  dispersed  country  like  the  Maldives,  to  break
geographical barriers and reach underserved populations within the islands. With the nation-wide
telecommunication  coverage  and  high  mobile  penetration  in  the  country,  these  innovative
payment solutions have the potential to reduce cash usage and achieve financial inclusion in the
country.
At the end of last year, we reached an important milestone in advancing financial inclusion within
the Maldives. Both telecommunications service providers now deliver easy and secure access to
mobile payment services across the country. As a result, we have seen a significant increase in
the  volume  and  value  of  transactions  being  processed  through  mobile  wallets.  This  mainly
stemmed from the increased extent of the e-money distribution network and the availability of
online cash-in facilities in the country.
However, the journey remains long and challenging. If we look at the current statistics, around
33% of the Maldivian adult population still do not hold a bank account. Even though the level of
penetration in the formal banking sector is relatively high in the country, providing easier access
to finance and acquiring payment services in most of the islands remain as main challenges in
the country. Looking at payment methods, cheques are still the dominant mode of making inter-
bank transactions although the volume of transactions carried out through RTGS and ACH have
increased  over  the  past  two  years.  Among  electronic  payments,  card  payment  is  the  most
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
common payment method in the greater Male’ area and the usage of mobile payment is still not
very common across the country.
For example, if we look at how pension and social benefits payments are made, these payments
are deposited to a bank account wherein around 96% of the beneficiaries hold bank accounts at
one particular bank. And this bank makes regular trips to islands to facilitate account holders to
withdraw  cash.  This  is  mainly  because  of  the  gaps  in  the  financial  infrastructure  and
inefficiencies in the banking system. Some of them include;
Unavailability of a common platform to connect banks and mobile service providers
Lack of an efficient payment system infrastructure
Lack of a comprehensive legal framework to support the payment infrastructure
The low level of automation in the banking sector; For instance, there is no proper IT setup in
some of the banks and a lot of payments are still processed manually
Ladies and gentlemen,
In  spite  of  these  hurdles,  we  do  have  a  very  ambitious  plan  to  upgrade  and  modernize  the
national payment system in our country. Promoting financial inclusion has, and will always be, a
key  priority  of  the  MMA  in  its  function  of  fostering  the  development  of  the  financial  sector.
Therefore, one of the foremost priorities in the MMA’s strategic plan for 2018–2022 is to develop a
safe and robust payment infrastructure. Because we understand that If we were to embrace the
promise  of  fintech  and  foster  the  benefits  of  these  innovations,  we  need  to  invest  in  the
supporting  infrastructure.  Well!  That  is  just  one  key  component.  We  also  need  to  strengthen
institutional  capacity  by  investing  in  human  resources  as  it  is  a  key  ingredient  in  catalyzing
benefits from the much needed local fintech solutions for a country like the Maldives
Since the financial landscape of the Maldives is unique and differs from the mainstream financial
markets  in  many  ways,  we  need  to  be  more  creative  in  adopting  and  embracing  these
technologies. It should be tailored towards local needs. We need to bring together local flavors
when creating a more enabling environment for innovations. Therefore, it is essential to put in
extra effort to build relevant expertise and necessary skills. This is because such investments
will serve as the bedrock to provide a level playing field in terms of providing access to finance
and succeeding in our journey to close the financial inclusion gap in the nation.
If we look at it in a global context, many countries are also struggling to keep up with the ever-
evolving financial system and to adopt fintech solutions through the formal financial channel. One
area  that  I  want  to  shed  light  is  the  risks  and  threats  to  financial  integrity.  There  are  rising
concerns  regarding  customer  as  well  as  investor  protection,  and  even  the  adequacy  of  the
financial  safety  net.  Well!  We  can  always  amend  or  supplement  the  existing  regulatory
framework  to  address  many  fintech  driven  risks.  But  how  far  can  we  go?  Some  of  the
unprecedented issues arisising from new financial products and activities may not even lie in the
current  regulatory  perimeter.  Therefore,  in  order  to  adopt  these  new  technologies  such  as
cryptocurrencies and blockchain in the formal banking system, we require a major overhaul in
the regulatory framework to contain risks and to maintain trust and confidence in the system.
Distinguished guests,
Certainly, fintech has opened up new paths to help bridge existing gaps, and to shine a guiding
light towards a more financially inclusive future. However, every journey comes with its own set
of risks and uncertainties. Treacherous terrains may lie ahead, and as such, we must remind
ourselves of the mistakes we have made in the past, which resulted in events such as the Asian
financial crisis, the dot-com bubble and the most recent global financial crisis. In fact, much of
the  on-going  narrative  about  the  emergence  of  crytopcurrencies  and  blockchain  alludes  to  a
growing lack of trust and confidence in the existing financial system. In light of these, I would like
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to stress on the importance of maintaining financial integrity and fostering a culture of trust and
confidence in the system. The financial sector, as a whole, requires of itself to be more vigilant to
the potential risks arising from new technologies and innovations.
Let  me  conclude  by  offering  my  humble  gratitude  to  the  Bank  of  Maldives  for  hosting  this
excellent conference and inviting me for the conference. I would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the Asian Bankers Association and to thank them for choosing the Maldives to host
the general meeting and conference. I’m sure that we are in for a highly informative day, full of
fruitful discussions and presentations. I wish the best to all the speakers! Welcome and thank
you once again.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
