  18.10.2018 
 Welcome Address 
Conference “The New Bank Provisioning Standards: Implementation 
Challenges and Financial Stability Implications”/ Banco de España, FSI and 
CEMFI 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor of the Banco de España  
 
  Good morning to everyone. It is my pleasure to welcome you all to the conference:  “The 
new  bank  provisioning  standards:  implementation  challenges  and  financial  stability 
implications”,  hosted  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  co-organised  with  the  BIS  Financial 
Stability Institute and CEMFI. 
Let me first thank these two institutions for their participation and active involvement in the 
conference. The invaluable work and expertise of the FSI and the ever-necessary academic 
rigour  provided  by  CEMFI  combine  perfectly  with  the  Banco  de  España’s  long-dated 
experience in banking supervision and create the sufficient conditions for this event to be a 
fruitful one. These three elements should be the ideal ingredients to ensure a promising and, 
hopefully, successful conference.  
Furthermore,  the  presence  of  leading  international  figures  from  academia,  the  banking 
industry and supervisory, accounting and auditing organisations as chairs and panelists, are 
an effective guarantee that a lively and enlightening debate over the next two days will arise 
and  retain  the  interest  of  the  audience  and  ultimately  meet  the  organisers’  original 
aspirations for the conference.  
As a starting point, we should recall that credit risk is, by far, the most important type of risk 
universal banks face, as their customary activity is based on granting loans. As a result, the 
relevance  of  how  credit  institutions  deal  with  this  type  of  risk  and  how  they  identify  and 
handle it is of paramount importance.  
In this regard, the precise calculation of provisions plays a crucial role in how banks manage 
appropriately their credit risk. An adequate level of provisions according to the risk profile 
of each bank is the basis for fairly dealing with the expected future losses that are intrinsic 
to  the  credit  business.  To  put  it  bluntly,  the  recent  crisis  showed  that  the  way  banks 
traditionally measured their credit risk was far from suitable. In fact, the huge level of credit 
impairments and the low level of provisions accumulated led to a depletion of capital and 
created a significant need in many advanced economies for banks’ recapitalisation plans. 
Many of those plans were funded by taxpayers’ money. 
Looking back, we may remember that the new approach of recognition of credit losses and 
its  materialisation  in  banks’  provisions  emerged  as  one of  the  responses  to  the  financial 
crisis. In that respect, G20 leaders urged accounting standard-setters to reconsider and, 
most importantly, overhaul the then-prevalent incurred loss model by assessing alternative 
approaches for recognising and measuring loan losses. Accordingly, the FASB and the IASB 
reacted by issuing two new accounting standards to determine credit impairment and how 
to  measure  credit  risk.  In  particular,  the  IASB  issued  the  IFRS  9  based  on the  expected 
current  loss  model  while  the  FASB  issued  its  own  Standard  introducing  the  notion  that 
provisions should cover the whole expected loss of the loan from inception. Regardless of 
the  technical  differences between  the two,  the  crucial  element  is  that  both use  as  a  key 
element the expected loss concept to account for credit losses.  
In any event, it is fair to say that the new provisioning standards introduce major changes 
compared to pre-crisis practices. One important change refers to the way that credit loss 
provisions  should  be  recognised  in  a  timely  fashion  because  it  was  perceived  that  the 
incurred loss model, in force when the crisis took place, considered credit losses “too little 
 3/7 
 and too late in the cycle”, and that affected directly the amount of provisions set aside by 
banks (deemed very small and highly insufficient). 
A direct consequence of the implementation of the expected loss model is a more timely 
recognition of credit losses together with an envisaged improvement in banks’ credit risk 
management. These two elements are expected to positively and significantly contribute to 
the stability of the banking system. Nonetheless, this assumption largely depends on banks’ 
awareness and commitment in terms of their ability and willingness to appropriately capture 
the risk embedded in their loan portfolio. All in all, to understand the performance of the loan 
book,  one  has  first  to  look  at  the  specific  process  of  granting  loans.  Here,  the  following 
elements  are  crucial:  (i)  setting  appropriate  credit  standards,  (ii)  proper  valuation  of 
collaterals and (iii) development of sound credit risk models.  
As to credit standards, pricing policies are crucial as they should be oriented to cover, at 
least, the costs of financing, structure and credit risk inherent to each type of operation. 
Banks should calculate the cost of the credit risk for different homogeneous risk groups in 
a manner consistent with their history of recognition of defaults and associated losses and 
recoveries,  as  well  as  with  expected  economic  developments.  Data  integrity,  reliable 
documentation of losses and adequate modelling to project expected losses ahead all play 
a key role in this respect.  
The  setting  of  global  limits  to  credit  as  a  means  of  controlling  the  volume  of  the  risks 
incurred,  their  evolution  over  time,  their  maturity  and  the  application  of  conservative 
conditions  whenever  refinanced  credits  are  negotiated,  are  all  integral  elements  of  the 
general lending standards that banks should observe and keep up to date as part of their 
credit risk management policy. 
Moreover, rapid credit growth usually has a negative impact on lending standards which, 
down the road, translates into increased needs for provisions, as non-performing loans start 
to pop up. We saw this clearly, and on a large scale, during the lastest banking crisis in 
Spain1  and  elsewhere,  and  it  is  our  responsibility  to  remain  vigilant  to  prevent  this  from 
recurring with the appropriate supervisory tools.  
Regarding  collateral  valuation,  it  cannot  be  ignored  that  provisions  apply  to  the 
uncollateralised  part  of  each  loan.  Consequently,  guarantees  pledged  to  each  loan 
represent a central element in the new approach for measuring credit risk.  
To fulfill their role, guarantees have to be effective, that is to say, they need to be validated 
as  a  mitigant  of  credit  risk.  For  this  to  be  true  they  must  subject  to  strict,  rigorous  and 
verifiable valuation criteria. To facilitate this last point, banks should have procedures for the 
valuation of the collateral with updated information based on revised appraisals adapted to 
changes in the macroeconomic situation and reliable analysis of trends of market prices, 
particularly for real estate collateral.  
Finally, estimates of credit losses and provisions should rely on credit risk models developed 
on  a  sufficiently  quantitative  basis  where  prudence  should  be  reinforced.  In  any  case, 
                                                                                              
1  See G. Jiménez  and J.  Saurina: “Credit  Cycles,  Credit  Risk,  and  Prudential  Regulation”, International Journal  of  Central 
Banking, 2006. 
4/7 
  estimates  should  be  based  on  credible  assumptions  that  are  sufficiently  justified  and 
consistent over time. 
The  methodology  used  must  be  readily  understandable  and  the  results  intuitive.  Also, 
consistency  should  be  an  objective.  Banks  should  establish  procedures  for  periodically 
testing  the  reliability  and  consistency of  the  results  obtained.  The  periodic testing  of  the 
calculation of provisions should be done regularly through, for example, back-testing the 
estimated credit losses with those actually observed in finalised credit operations. 
For  a  successful  implementation  of  the  new  loss-measure  approach,  banks’  forecasting 
capacity in respect of economic downturns and anticipation of significant deterioration of 
both credit standards and credit risk are key. As such, banks should strive to apply and use 
the appropriate procedures to ensure the timely determination of future significant increases 
in credit risk and, more generally, they should be able to properly adjust their models and 
predictions  to  the  existing  macroeconomic  conditions  at  any  time,  regardless  of  how 
frequently they may change.  
Let me briefly review what may be considered the main challenges for this new paradigm of 
provisioning, rightly following the content of each of the conference panels. 
Panel  I  of  the  conference  will  enlighten  us  with  relevant  background  information  to  fully 
understand why and how the new provisioning model has changed, the potential pros and 
cons of alternative approaches, the differences between models and the reasons behind 
those differences.  
As  briefly  commented,  modelling  expected  losses is  a  challenge.  In  Panel  2,  views  from 
academia, practitioners and auditors will no doubt help us to broaden our perspective on 
issues such as the existing differences between the models needed to calculate the new 
provisions  and  those  already  in  use  for  regulatory  purposes,  or  for  internal  credit  risk 
management. 
Implementation issues, apart from the pure modeling challenges, such as compliance costs, 
reliable  reporting  under  the  new  standards,  comparability  of  financial  statements  across 
institutions,  internal  organisation,  etc.  are  highly  interesting  aspects  that  will  also  be 
presented from the industry and supervisory viewpoint in Panel 3. 
The  time  dimension  of  bank  provisions,  particularly  potential  pro-cyclicality  and  financial 
stability implications of the new approach, sets the stage for an exciting Panel 4. Admittedly, 
there is still little evidence gathered so far, given the short period of time over which the 
expected loss model has been in force, to arrive at definitive conclusions; intuitively, moving 
from  the  incurred  loss  paradigm  to  the  expected  loss  model  should  reduce  the  pro-
cyclicality  of  provisions  in  the  future.  I  am  sure  that  this  issue  will  attract  interest  from 
academics, supervisors and practitioners not only during this conference but far beyond it 
as more evidence and data are gathered. Whether provisions are pro-cyclical or not is a key 
matter for financial stability. 
Finally,  learning  from  the  implications  and  interactions  between  the  new  provisioning 
standards and other types of regulations to which banks are subject – most notably financial 
market regulations and micro- and macro-prudential regulations – will prove a perfect topic 
 5/7 
 for the final panel of the conference. In this regard, the Banco de España experience2  with 
the setting-up of so-called dynamic provisioning3 , which shares many characteristics of the 
current countercyclical capital buffer and is close to the concept of the expected loss model, 
serves  as  a  good  example  of  how  closely  linked  provisioning  standards,  capital  and 
macroprudential policies are.  
From a financial stability perspective, the fact that supervisors are given macroprudential 
tools should allow us to deal better with lending expansions and contractions in order to 
protect the economy from financial excesses.  
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  arsenal  of  macroprudential  tools  has  expanded 
significantly. Apart from the countercyclical capital buffer we have the systemic risk buffer, 
the  buffers  for  globally  and  domestically  systemic  banks,  the  possibility  to  limit  large 
exposures,  increase  capital  or  revise  risk-weighted  assets  to  residential  and  commercial 
real  estate  exposures.  This  is  a  significant  improvement  that  will  allow  us  to  develop 
macroprudential policies that interact with microprudential ones as well as with monetary 
policy. 
But  it  is  not  enough  to  create  macroprudential  tools.  They  must  be  properly  allocated 
institutionally in order to avoid inaction bias by policy-makers and counteract misalignment 
of incentives with the financial sector, in particular at certain points in the lending/financial 
cycle where taming is needed. In a sense, the dilemmas and incentives that policy-makers 
will  face  regarding  macroprudential  policy  decisions  will  not  be  far  different  from  those 
encountered in the past when setting monetary policy (i.e. interest rates). For the latter, the 
optimal institutional design is to enshrine monetary policy in an independent central bank. 
For  the  former,  a  very  similar  solution,  intuitively,  should prevail,  although the  theoretical 
framework  and  the  empirical  research  to  support  it  is  much  less  advanced  than  in  the 
monetary field. 
Needless to say, macroprudential policy is particularly relevant for a country like Spain, part 
of  a  monetary  and  banking  union where,  as  seen  in  the  past,  the  financial  and  business 
cycles of the member countries may  be in different positions. With a common monetary 
policy  and  (micro)supervisory  policies,  and  a  fiscal  policy  with  almost  no  room  for 
manoeuvre, the macroprudential policy becomes a much-needed ‘degree of freedom’ to 
deal with the lending cycle, a task that traditionally has been allocated to central banks too. 
As  the  recent  article  IV  visit  of  the  IMF  made  clear,  Spain  is  one  of  the  few  countries  in 
Europe  still not  to  have  a  macroprudential  authority.  Given  the  role  that macroprudential 
policy will play in the future, it is probably high time that we all reflect on the optimal design 
of this authority in order to enhance financial stability. 
                                                                                              
2 See J. Saurina and C. Trucharte: “The countercyclical provisions of the Banco de España 2000-2016”. Banco de España, 
2017, for an account of dynamic provisions in Spain, why they were introduced, their impact and lessons drawn for prudential 
policy.  
 
3 See G. Jiménez, S. Ongena, J.L. Peydró and J. Saurina: “Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers, and 
Credit  Supply:  Evidence  from  the  Spanish  Dynamic  Provisioning  Experiments”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  2017,  for  a 
thorough quantitative analysis of the countercyclical impact of dynamic provisions in Spain. For a broader discussion of the 
interaction of dynamic provisions with monetary, fiscal and regulatory policy, see A. Estrada and J. Saurina “Spanish Boom-
Bust and Macroprudential Policy”, Financial Stability Review, Banco de España, May, 2016. 
 
6/7 
  Let me conclude by stressing the relevance of the conference, given the importance of the 
correct measurement of credit risk. In this regard, the correct calculation of provisions plays 
a crucial role in the way banks manage appropriately their credit risk. A consistent level of 
provisions according to the risk profile of each bank will prevent any undesired impact on 
solvency  levels,  which  would  be  the  final  resource  to  absorb  any  loss  arising  from  the 
ordinary activity of banks that has not been eliminated before by the correct application of 
provisions.  In  addition,  appropriate  macroprudential  tools  in  the  hands  of  policy-makers 
might help reduce the volatility of credit and business cycles. 
 Allow  me  to  express  once  again  my  gratitude  to  the  co-organisers  of  the  event  for  their 
excellent work, and to wish all the participants a fruitful conference and a pleasant stay in 
Madrid. 
We are all looking forward to hearing from the experts on the different challenges that the 
new  provisioning  paradigm  entails,  so  without  further  ado  I  give  the  floor  to  Fernando 
Restoy, Chair of the Financial Stability Institute (FSI), to start with the first panel. 
    7/7 
