  16.11.2018 
 Welcome address at the Conference “Economic Policies, Trade 
Integration and Sustainable Job Creation. A View from the Mediterranean 
Countries” 
Banco de España and European Institute of the Mediterranean with the 
support of the Central Bank of Tunisia 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Tunis to welcome you all to this Conference on 
Economic Policies, Trade Integration and Sustainable Job Creation, jointly organised by the 
Central  Bank  of  Tunisia,  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  European  Institute  of  the 
Mediterranean (IEMed). 
Let me start by thanking Governor El Abassi for his kind words and our colleagues from the 
Central  Bank  of  Tunisia  and  the  European  Institute  of  the  Mediterranean  for  their 
cooperation in organising this Conference.  
I would also like to congratulate Governor El Abassi and all the staff of the Central Bank of 
Tunisia  for  the  60th  anniversary  of  this  institution,  created  just  two  years  after  the 
independence of Tunisia. I wish to convey my best wishes for the future of this institution 
which, through the attainment of its of macroeconomic and financial stability objectives, can 
make a decisive contribution to the prosperity of the country and its citizens.  
Governor El Abbasi, I hope that this Conference will be an initial step towards permanent 
cooperation between our respective institutions. 
This  is  the  fourth  edition  of  this  Conference  organised  by  the  European  Institute  of  the 
Mediterranean, with the support of the Banco de España, to discuss economic and financial 
matters in the Mediterranean region. The three previous editions were in Barcelona, in 2014 
and 2017, and in Rabat in 2015, on that occasion with the support and hospitality of Bank 
Al-Maghrib.  This  conference  is  therefore  beginning  to  take  root  as  a  successful  meeting 
point between different actors with interests in the economic and financial developments in 
these countries. The exchange of ideas among a wide and diverse range of participants –
including central bankers, public officials, academics, and representatives from the private 
sector and international organisations– in a friendly environment proved enormously fruitful 
in  previous  editions,  as,  I  am  sure,  will  be  also  the  case  this  time.  Let  me  also  add  that 
forums like this are particularly relevant for central banks, which in recent years have had to 
face  deep-seated  transformations  in  economic  and  financial  relations  globally.  This  new 
environment forces us to re-think the design and implementation of economic policies in 
order to better contribute to the progress of our society. 
I would also like to inform you that the Banco de España is preparing a seminar on central 
bank  communication,  the  first  of  which  is  aimed  at  Mediterranean  and  Latin  American 
countries, to be held in the spring of 2019. Allow me to take this opportunity to invite you to 
join this exchange of experiences in one of the aspects that is increasingly relevant to our 
institutions.   
The theme of this Conference, Economic Policies, Trade Integration and Sustainable Job 
Creation,  is  particularly  timely  at  this  current  juncture  of  the  world  economy.  The  world 
remains  in  an  expansionary  phase  although  there  are  some  signs  pointing  to  a  gradual 
change in the global economic landscape. Some of the risks that had been the focus of our 
attention are beginning to materialise. In particular, we are witnessing a re-emergence of 
protectionist  measures  with  pernicious  effects  on  international  trade.  Beyond  the  impact 
that  this  can  have  on  growth  in  the  short  term,  its  potential  impact  on  the  diffusion  of 
technological advances and on improving the welfare of individuals is more worrisome. In 
 3/4 
 order to preserve the benefits derived from globalisation and technological innovation, it is 
now more important than ever to work towards a fairer and stronger global trade system. 
To this end, it is necessary to work on the reform of the rules governing international trade 
to ensure that all countries compete on a level playing field. But also, and not least, domestic 
policy-makers  have  a  responsibility  to  design  the  right  policies  for  stimulating  innovation 
and  job  creation,  and  creating  opportunities  for  all.  I  am  sure that  the  participants  in  the 
different  sessions  scheduled  today  will  elaborate  more  on  the  best  economic  policies  to 
ensure  that  globalisation  and  technological  innovation  will  continue  contributing  to 
economic growth and prosperity in an increasing number of countries. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I leave the floor now to the President of the Executive Committee of 
the  European  Institute  of  the  Mediterranean,  Mr.  Senén  Florensa,  thanking  him  for  the 
cooperation  in  the  organisation  of  this  event  and,  of  course,  thanking  you  all  for  your 
presence here today.  
 4/4 
 