Bank of Italy – CEPR – EIEF Conference
Firm Dynamics and Economic Growth
Opening remarks by Salvatore Rossi  
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
and President of the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance (IVASS)
Rome, 19-20 December 2018
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  Bank  of  Italy,  and  to  open 
this workshop, which was jointly organized with the CEPR and the Einaudi 
Institute of Economics and Finance.
Over today and tomorrow, 29 original papers will be presented, selected 
from  more  than  150.  These  works  have  been  produced  by  distinguished 
scholars  from  academia  and  research  institutions  around  the  world.  They 
cover a wide variety of topics relating to firm dynamics and its effects on 
economic growth. Two keynote lectures will also be delivered, and I would 
like to thank the internationally renowned speakers, Professor Ufuk Akcigit 
from the University of Chicago and Professor Gian Luca Clementi from New 
York University.
There is no need for me to underline the importance of studying firm 
dynamics  today.  The  recession  which  followed  the  global  financial  crisis 
hit the whole world almost simultaneously ten years ago, though to varying 
degrees in different countries. 
Firm  dynamics  is  key  to  explaining  the  differences  in  its  impact. 
Country-specific frictions to the physiological exit and entry of firms in the 
market may severely limit growth prospects for an economy. Italy is a case 
in point, as I will discuss later. In the short run, they affect and are affected 
by business cycle fluctuations and financial shocks.
At  this  moment  in  time,  after  years  of  recovery,  economic  growth  is 
slowing down somewhat all over the world. Forecasts made by international 
organizations are currently reflecting the decline shown by conjunctural data. 
Growing trade tensions, political uncertainty, and expectations that monetary 
stimulus will gradually be reduced in the main economic areas of the world are 
the most cited facts. In many advanced economies, the economic slowdown 
is raising concerns about potential output, since the recovery of recent years 
has not been accompanied by as buoyant an increase in productivity as we 
might have expected.
That’s why firm dynamics is more important than ever before. Innovation 
and technology adoption by as many firms as possible is the main source of 
growth and jobs in the economy, and they depend very much on the process 
of firm entry, survival, growth, and exit through which the market selects 
the most efficient and innovative players. New and young firms are those 
which drive input accumulation and output growth. If the most productive 
firms thrive and the less productive ones exit smoothly from the market, the 
economic system works well. 
These ideas are very old, dating back at least to Joseph Schumpeter’s 
‘creative destruction’ and they are now an intrinsic part of empirical analyses 
from all around the world. Indeed, thanks to the efforts of several scholars and 
research centres, among which I would like to thank the OECD researchers 
that conducted the seminal FirmDyn project, we now have a lot of comparable 
data on firms’ entry, growth and exit from the market, over their entire age 
distribution, in each national system.
These country-level indicators are of course deeply affected by business 
environments and policies. For instance, entry barriers and direct or indirect 
public subsidies to firms in trouble can alleviate the welfare costs of crises 
in the short term, but may have long-term negative effects on firm selection 
and  economic  growth.  To  take  another  example,  if  the  judiciary  works 
badly and private contracts are difficult to enforce, incumbents have a clear 
advantage over entrants. Finally, if the political system works badly, some 
firms may escape competition thanks to their political connections.
Finance also plays a role in shaping firm dynamics. New businesses need 
money, which can’t always be provided by banks, because of the riskiness 
of the venture and the scarcity of collateral. Venture capitalists are the right 
answer, yet their contribution is quite varied across countries. Technological 
improvements, for which the Fintech label is a proxy, are now filling these 
gaps,  but  the  process  is  uncertain  and  uneven.  For  now,  at  least  in  some 
countries, new and young firms have to rely on bank credit and face tight 
capital constraints. 
If  we  leave  aside  cross-country  differences  and  do  some  time-series 
analyses, we notice a decline in business dynamism since the early 2000s 
all  over  the  world:  for  most  OECD  countries,  new  firms’  entry  rates  are 
now significantly lower than at the beginning of the century. What are the 
causes  of  this  phenomenon?  One  may  be  the  possible  increased  market 
power of incumbents. Another may be the fact that technological change and 
globalization increase the ability of more productive firms to gain market 
4
share.  These  two  possible  explanations  have  markedly  different  policy 
implications.  The  scientific  debate  is  currently  ongoing,  and  during  this 
workshop other possible explanations will be discussed in depth by several 
presenters.
Recent  research  has  highlighted  how  firm  dynamics  may  have  a  role 
in  explaining  not  only  long-term  potential  growth  but  also  business  cycle 
fluctuations. The procyclicality of entry rates could be driven by a tighter 
selection  of  new  firms  during  downturns,  and  slacker  entry  requirements 
when the economy is doing well. While this phenomenon is a stylized fact, 
its implications for the propagation and persistence of aggregate shocks have 
only been studied quite recently. Moreover, the impact of recessions induced 
by  financial  rather  than  real  shocks  is  still  comparatively  underexplored. 
Today’s  presentations  will  also  cover  these  important  issues,  which  have 
clear implications for policies to stabilize the business cycle.
Let me conclude with a few words on Italy. Its lack of business dynamism 
has been an important determinant of the sluggish productivity growth over 
the last 20 years according to most research in this field, much of which has 
been conducted by the Bank of Italy’s economists.
From the mid-1990s onwards, aggregate productivity in Italy has grown 
at a significantly slower pace than in the rest of the euro area. Total factor 
productivity (TFP) has been virtually flat, and yet at the same time the ICT 
revolution  and  the  ensuing  globalization  of  production  were  exploding, 
helping  most  other  economies  to  reap  enormous  benefits  in  terms  of 
productivity and growth.
The inability of Italian firms to do the same is normally attributed to the 
large share of micro and small firms in the system: those firms invest less 
in innovation and technology adoption, and are more vulnerable to global 
competition. Yet the small size of most firms is a dynamic malaise of the 
system, not a static one, and is caused by the lack of business dynamism. 
Italian  startups  grow  less  and  for  a  shorter  period  of  time  than  new 
businesses in other OECD countries. They are poorly selected over their early 
years of life: exit rates are generally flat over the age distribution, meaning 
that less productive firms are not wiped out from the market when they are 
young. As a result, Italian firms are older, smaller and less productive than 
those from other developed countries. 
5
The  causes  of  this  lack  of  business  dynamism  are  manifold.  Italy 
holds negative records for some of the frictions I discussed before: judicial 
efficiency  is  particularly  low  and  financial  leverage  is  among  the  highest 
by  international  standards.  We  have  several  specific  dysfunctions,  such 
as widespread tax evasion, the political connections of entrepreneurs, and 
cronyism, all of which distort competition in the economy, and slow down 
creative  destruction  and  firm  churning,  with  negative  consequences  for 
aggregate growth. The structural reforms that are needed to put Italy back on 
track should address these diverse and complementary issues in a bold and 
coherent framework.
 Ladies and gentlemen, I believe the discussions you are going to have 
today  and  tomorrow  will  provide  important  insights  for  addressing  these 
issues too.
I would like to thank the organizers of the workshop: Francesca Lotti 
and  Francesco  Manaresi  from  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Salomé  Balsandze  from 
the Einaudi Institute of Economics and Finance and the CEPR, and Luigi 
Marengo  from  LUISS-Guido  Carli  University.  I  also  thank  Alessandra 
Piccinini from the Bank of Italy for taking care of the logistics.
I welcome you once again and wish you a fruitful exchange of ideas, as 
well as a pleasant stay in Rome.
6
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
