    
 
Finding the right balance 
 
Speech given by 
Dave Ramsden, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking 
   Society of Professional Economists Annual Conference, London 
28 September 2018 
  With thanks to Amy Lee and Tom Smith for their assistance in preparing these remarks and to staff across 
Markets and BPFR and elsewhere in the Bank for their many contributions, as well as to my colleagues on 
the MPC and among the Governors for their helpful comments and suggestions. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
Introduction  
 It’s an honour to be invited to talk here for the Society for Professional Economists (SPE) today, and I’m very 
grateful to Bloomberg for the opportunity to speak again in their fantastic HQ. Although I’ve spoken many 
times at the Society’s events over the years either in my previous role at the Treasury or in in my ongoing 
role as President of the SPE this is the first time I’ve spoken at the Society in its new guise as the Society for 
Professional Economists and in my role as the Bank of England’s Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking.  
 This week is national inclusion week in the UK. And in that spirit I do think the SPE’s new moniker, which 
Kevin Daly has championed, is more inclusive and speaks to a wider group of economists. That is borne out 
by the excellent turn-out today. At the same time we need to improve diversity in today’s economics 
profession, in central banking and in finance more generally.1 Sustaining recent progress is a key priority for 
the Bank of England as I know it is for the SPE.  
 People often ask me what my professional responsibilities in the Bank are. The most formal description is 
contained in the Bank’s Senior Managers and Certification Regime return. The SM&CR is a critical element 
of the post-crisis regime for accountability in the whole financial sector, ensuring there is a clear public line of 
sight running from the senior leadership through to every key function carried out by a financial institution.2 
The SM&CR is an essential part of the soft infrastructure underpinning improved conduct and therefore fairer 
and more effective financial markets in the UK and globally.  
 
The SM&CR entry for me is long, and so I will just flag a few of my key responsibilities.3 What these boil 
down to is that among the Governors I have operational responsibility for the Bank of England’s balance 
sheet.  
 It is the Bank’s balance sheet that is going to be the focus of my talk today. The balance sheet is integral to 
the operations undertaken in the areas I oversee, Markets and Banking, Payments and Financial Resilience. 
And it is central to the Bank’s mission for monetary and financial stability: the balance sheet is the hard 
infrastructure that supports much of the Bank’s policy activity. For most of the time it may not be as 
newsworthy as some of the tools it supports, like Bank Rate, QE or “lender of last resort”. But it is 
foundational: were it not to be of sufficient size or usability, that would quickly make headlines at times of 
financial stress.  
                                                      
1 Gender diversity in central banking was discussed at the excellent recent conference that the Bank, together with the Federal Reserve 
and the European Central Bank, hosted on Gender and Career Progression: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/events/2018/may/gender-and-career-progression, while the Treasury’s Women in Finance Charter 
encourages gender diversity in the financial industry more generally: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/women-in-finance-
charter. Of course, gender is just one important element in the broader drive to improve diversity in the economics profession. 
2 For more information on the SM&CR, see Allen, T. (2018), “Strengthening the link between seniority and accountability: the Senior 
Managers and Certification Regime”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2018Q2, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/quarterly-bulletin/2018/senior-managers-certification-regime. 
3 These include: responsibility for management of the Bank’s capital and the Bank’s funding and liquidity operations; responsibility for 
the Bank’s treasury management functions; responsibility for the Bank’s proprietary trading activities; responsibility for the protection of 
clients’ assets. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
In my remarks today I want to account for how we’ve got to where we are and what the balance sheet of 
today is used for. I’ll then give some pointers on where it might go, drawing on a discussion paper we 
published in August 2018. And I’ll conclude with some remarks on the current policy environment, which the 
balance sheet is supporting.  
 
The 11th anniversary of the start of the global financial crisis 
 But I couldn’t give a speech in September 2018 without marking an anniversary – though the one I’m most 
interested in is an 11th anniversary – the year before the collapse of Lehman Brothers – which I will use to 
frame my comments today.   
 
On 9th August 2007, BNP Paribas froze three of its investment funds, citing lack of liquidity in sections of the 
US securitised debt market. Fear spread. First the cost of interbank funding spiked, and then the interbank 
funding markets effectively froze, as credit concerns and liquidity hoarding spread amongst firms.  
Northern Rock, with a business model depending on its ability to access funding markets, experienced what 
started as an electronic run. In September 2007 the Bank announced it was providing emergency financial 
support to Northern Rock, and shortly after that we saw the first physical run on a bank in the UK in over a 
century.  
 There are two key strands evident in these events, both related to the increasing interconnectedness of the 
financial system. The first was the valuation of the underlying assets in many derivatives and securitisations. 
The US subprime mortgage market, we now know, was overvalued. It might have been a containable 
problem, had these mortgages not been packaged up into ever more complicated transactions, distributed 
around the banking system, allowing a domestic US housing  crash to become a global problem of the first 
order. And the second was what crystallised as a result – a loss of confidence in wholesale funding markets. 
Banks became uncertain of how creditworthy their peers were, and as a result they stopped lending to one 
another, and couldn’t fund themselves – a crucial need. The vulnerability in banks’ balance sheets sparked a 
crisis of liquidity and funding.  
 These events prompted a wide-ranging set of back-stopping actions by the Bank of England and other 
authorities, both across the Bank’s own balance sheet, as well as deploying the Government’s. But despite 
these actions, we now know that the funding crisis, or “credit crunch”, helped push the US into recession in 
December 2007, with the UK following in summer 2008.4  
 The financial crisis has left an indelible mark on financial markets; the hard lessons learned have changed 
the shape of finance for the better. Our banks are well-capitalised, with appropriately prudential liquidity 
                                                      
4 See for example Ben Bernanke’s new paper: Bernanke, B. 2018. “The Real Effects of the Financial Crisis” BPEA Conference Draft, 
Fall, available at https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-real-effects-of-the-financial-crisis/ and summarised at 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2018/09/13/financial-panic-and-credit-disruptions-in-the-2007-09-crisis/.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
requirements. In the UK we are completing the ringfencing of our banks, to protect UK deposit takers from 
riskier investment banking activities. Resilience has been further strengthened by the increasingly central 
role of central counterparties (CCPs) for the trading of OTC derivatives, a global post-crisis reform. That has 
made these firms systemically important components of financial markets, and we have responded 
accordingly by strengthening the prudential framework around them, and by extending them access to our 
liquidity facilities. 
 There have also been more organic changes: the proliferation of non-bank sources of finance, the 
emergence of many new, small banks, and the growth of the fintech sector. These changes are driving new 
interconnections across a more diverse and genuinely distributed financial system, which, appropriately 
managed and regulated, is leading to real gains in resilience for the system as a whole.  
 Over this 11 year period central banks have changed too, no more so than in the size and reach of their 
balance sheets, which are unrecognisable from the pre-crisis period. The Bank of England’s balance sheet 
has grown tenfold from around £60bn to over £600bn, equivalent to 30% of GDP. And the story is similar in 
many other economies.  
 Developments in monetary policy 
 In September 2008 the conduct of monetary policy could still be summarised as follows. The central bank 
produced a forecast of the likely paths for inflation and the degree of spare capacity. 5 Based on that forecast 
and the trade-off between the two variables it decided whether monetary policy needed to be incrementally 
tighter, looser or unchanged. In the UK case the MPC voted on one proposition every month, whether to 
adjust its policy rate to deliver the appropriate stance of policy and meet its remit of maintaining price 
stability. And it used its balance sheet to keep money market rates, which served as an anchor for rates in 
the wider economy, close to its policy rate.6  
 The rest is monetary history. Ten years on, central banks now use a much wider range of tools than just the 
policy rate in setting monetary policy. Once Bank Rate hit 0.5% in March 2009, which at the time was seen 
as its effective lower bound, the MPC turned to what were then thought of as unconventional monetary policy 
tools to stimulate demand and help bring inflation back to target. These tools used our balance sheet in new 
and different ways. And together they account for a large part of the increase in the size of the Bank’s 
balance sheet. 
                                                      
5 As part of the MPC’s continuing efforts to make our thinking more transparent, we published our estimate of excess supply (or slack) in 
the economy for the first time in the May 2018 Inflation Report. 
6 The last Bank Rate change to follow this practice was arguably the 50bp cut on October 8th 2008. I say arguably because this cut was 
itself unconventional: it was coordinated across the major central banks and, due to differing international schedules, actually took place 
early on a Wednesday afternoon rather than the usual Thursday at noon.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
Quantitative Easing (QE) involved buying gilts in exchange for newly-created reserves, via a specially 
created account called the Asset Purchase Facility (APF) which carries an indemnity from the Treasury.7  
The goal was to reduce the yield on gilts, and so to reduce yields – and therefore borrowing costs – on other 
financial assets, which would in turn feed through to support the economy. This created a large additional 
quantity of central bank reserves – currently £445bn worth – matched by an equally large loan to the APF on 
our balance sheet.8  
 Importantly, QE also changed the quantity of reserves from being determined by the quantity demanded by 
financial institutions to being determined by the quantity supplied by the Bank on behalf of the MPC. To 
accommodate this change, and to deal with the volatility of money market rates which had emerged as 
liquidity patterns changed, we also changed our framework for controlling interest rates. In 2009 the Bank 
moved from a corridor system, in which banks’ reserve balances were remunerated at Bank Rate up to a 
limited amount, to a floor system, in which we remunerate all balances, no matter how large, at Bank Rate.  
 As well as QE, the MPC has used the Bank’s balance sheet to lend directly to banks, via the Term Funding 
Scheme (TFS) in 2016. 9 The Scheme was designed to reinforce the transmission of the August 2016 cut in 
Bank Rate to 0.25%, thereby helping to lower the effective lower bound from 0.5% to close to 0%. It also led 
to a significant increase in the size of the Bank’s balance sheet, again via the APF, peaking at £127bn.  
 Acting in support of liquidity 
 While operations to meet our monetary policy remit might take the biggest share of our balance sheet, they 
are by no means the full extent of it. The Bank is the sole provider of sterling central bank money – the most 
liquid sterling asset. Because of this, our balance sheet has an important role to play in financial policy, 
through the provision of liquidity insurance.  
 The core business of a commercial bank is to lend money by making loans to households and firms; to 
facilitate this it often needs to borrow money, by taking in retail deposits or by seeking funding from investors 
                                                      
7 There were also some smaller-scale initial purchases of private sector assets, partly financed by Treasury bill issuance; in August 
2016 the MPC also voted to purchase £10bn of corporate bonds. 
8 The APF itself currently holds £435bn of gilts and £10bn of corporate bonds, as well as the loans created via the TFS. For an overview 
of the estimated effects of QE and the mechanisms through which it works, see Haldane, A. G., Roberts-Sklar, M., Wieladek, T. and 
Young, C. (2016), “QE: The story so far”. Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 624, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2016/qe-the-story-so-far. The debate about the precise effects of QE continues; for two 
recent contributions by my MPC colleagues, see Vlieghe, J. (2018), “The yield curve and QE”, speech at Imperial College Business 
School available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2018/the-yield-curve-and-qe-speech-by-gertjan-
vlieghe.pdf, and Broadbent, B. (2018), “The history and future of QE”, speech at the Society of Professional Economists available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/ben-broadbent-society-of-professional-economists.  
9 For more on the TFS see the information on the Bank’s website at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/quantitative-easing-and-
the-asset-purchase-facility. The Bank also lent directly to banks via the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) in 2012, a scheme designed 
to incentivise banks to lend to the real economy at a time when bank lending growth had been persistently very weak, not least because 
of spillovers from the euro area crisis. But this was a fully collateralised scheme, classified as off balance sheet under a collateral swap 
arrangement. For more on the FLS see Churm, R. et al (2012), “The Funding for Lending Scheme”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 
2012Q4, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/quarterly-bulletin/2012/the-funding-for-lending-scheme.pdf. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
in wholesale markets.10 The latter is typically at a shorter term than the former, so this activity exposes banks 
to funding liquidity risk. Banks need to be able to take on this risk to execute their economic function. But it 
remains a risk nonetheless. Under ordinary circumstances, banks should largely be able to self-insure 
against this risk; indeed, that is a core part of effective bank risk management. But ordinary circumstances 
can’t be guaranteed, and in the events of 2007 that I outlined earlier we saw unprecedented circumstances.  
 It is in such unprecedented circumstances that the Bank’s role of providing liquidity insurance to solvent but 
illiquid banks is most apparent. But what has emerged from the experience of 2007 and 2008 is a liquidity 
policy framework and set of tools which can be applied in good times as well as bad. It is a framework which 
is consistent with Walter Bagehot’s advice to the Bank in the Victorian era – that the Bank should seek to 
avoid reaching the panic points of no return with its banks by lending to them “quickly, freely, and readily”.11  
 In 2006, the Bank had two facilities for providing liquidity insurance, both of which functioned in the course of 
monetary policy implementation.12 Now, in 2018, the tools in our kit – the Sterling Monetary Framework - are 
much expanded. Some crisis tools, such as the Special Liquidity Scheme13, have been superseded by this 
more comprehensive framework. In an important review published six years ago in October 2012, Bill 
Winters took stock of the progress made in reforming the SMF.14 The Bank refined the framework further in 
response, and five years ago the Governor emphasised that we were “open for business”.15 Today our toolkit 
contains three specific liquidity insurance facilities offering money and/or high quality collateral for variable 
terms and prices as well as the liquidity insurance offered in the course of implementing monetary policy. 16 
 But there’s little point opening the door to our business more widely if only a narrow range of shapes fit 
through it. So as well as expanding the quantity of our tools at our disposal, over the years we 
have worked to extend the access to them by making our facilities cheaper and making them available 
against a wider set of collateral and to a larger number of counterparties. 
                                                      
10 An excellent description of how banks operate is given in McLeay, M. et al (2014), “Money creation in the modern economy”, Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin 2014Q1, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/quarterly-bulletin/2014/money-
creation-in-the-modern-economy.pdf.  
11 Bagehot, W. (1873), “Lombard Street” 
12These were the ability to vary reserves demand both intra-day and day-to-day, and the Standing Facilities which provided overnight 
liquidity insurance, allowing banks to borrowing reserves  in unlimited quantity, secured against very high quality collateral  or deposit 
excess reserves directly with the Bank.   
13 The Special Liquidity Scheme operated as a ‘collateral swap’, allowing banks to exchange their illiquid assets (principally packaged as 
an ABS or covered bonds) for liquid UK T bills. 
14 Winters, B. (2012), “Review of the Bank of England’s framework for providing liquidity to the banking system”, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/news/2012/november/the-banks-framework-for-providing-liquidity-to-the-banking.  
15 The Bank’s response to the Winters review can be found at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/news/2013/march/response-of-the-boe-to-the-three-cort-commissioned-reviews. The quote from the Governor is taken 
from Carney, M. (2013), “The UK at the heart of a renewed globalisation”, speech at an event to celebrate the 125th anniversary of the 
Financial Times, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2013/the-uk-at-the-heart-of-a-renewed-
globalisation.pdf.  
16 The three liquidity insurance facilities are: (I) Indexed Long Term Repo– for predictable/regular need for term collateral transformation; 
(II) Discount Window Facility – for firm-specific liquidity shock requiring liquidity in bespoke size and timing, with lagged disclosure; and 
(III) Contingent Term Repo Facility – for actual or prospective market-wide stress meaning SMF participants need cheap, plentiful cash 
at term. More information on the Bank’s facilities can be found in the ‘Red Book’ https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/markets/sterling-monetary-framework/red-book . 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
Prior to 2006, the Bank had just 17 members of its Sterling Monetary Framework. But liquidity needs are not 
just for the biggest banks & building societies. In recognition of this, we had already increased the number of 
members to 106 by 2012; today it stands at 207. 17  
 The crisis also revealed that liquidity shortages can materialise far beyond the banking system; and the 
financial system has continued to evolve since then. And so in 2014 we widened access to our facilities to 
include central counterparties and broker-dealers as well as banks and building societies.18 In today’s global 
banking system UK liquidity shortages can also arise in other currencies than just sterling: to that end we 
maintain and regularly test a network of swap lines with other central banks, enabling us to provide liquidity 
in a  wide range of currencies: US and Canadian dollars, euros, Swiss francs and renminbi as well as 
pounds sterling. 
 And back in 2006, our liquidity facilities were only offered against high quality, liquid assets – predominantly 
government bonds. That list had to expand quickly in the face of the financial crisis. We now take a much 
broader range of collateral, accepting asset-backed securities and a range of raw loans, suitable to the wide 
range of activities undertaken by our member firms. 
 What does this add up to? The 2018 SMF annual report sets out that, as of February 2018, the Bank could 
lend an additional £295bn against the amount of pre-positioned collateral available: around 50% again of our 
current balance sheet size. 19 
 The Bank’s Independent Evaluation Office review, published in January 2018, emphasised the importance of 
business as usual as well as the unprecedented or unusual.20 In response we are refining our 
communications efforts to ensure market participants understand our facilities, as well as thinking about how 
we work and communicate within the Bank – across its operational, policy, and supervisory functions – to 
make the most of our facilities. Of course the last ten years have, thankfully, not seen any further liquidity 
crises, but this progress was tested with the preparatory and contingency work conducted around the  
EU Referendum in June 2016 – where our approach helped firms plan with confidence.21 
                                                       
17 As well as opening up the SMF, the Bank has expanded access to Settlement Accounts for its Real Time Gross Settlement system 
(which allows account holders to settle payments real time in sterling central bank money)  from 21 in 2006 to 201 today. These now 
include to new entrants in payments – non-bank payment services providers. We are currently renewing our RTGS system, and a core 
feature of the new system will be the ability to interface with new and innovative payment systems, designed to encourage a more 
diverse and resilient financial system.  
18 Before widening access to new classes of institution, the Bank considered three key criteria to ensure usage of the facilities remained 
appropriate; whether they were systemically important, whether they were exposed to sterling liquidity risk, and whether they were 
appropriately prudentially regulated. 
19 The 2017/18 SMF Annual Report can be found at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/sterling-monetary-
framework/annual-report-2017-18.pdf. 
20 The IEO report on the Bank’s approach to providing sterling liquidity, together with the Bank’s response, can be found at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/2018/january/ieo-evaluation-of-the-boe-approach-to-providing-sterling-liquidity.  
21 See Shafik, M. (2016), “Small is Beautiful but Big is Necessary”, speech at the Bloomberg Markets “Most Influential” Summit, 
available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2016/small-is-beautiful-but-big-is-necessary.pdf.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   
 
One of the lessons of the crisis and the ensuing ten years was that we need to continuously challenge 
ourselves to ensure that we are prepared for the future. The Bank has taken that to heart. Today I want to 
highlight two innovations. First, the Bank has recently supplemented the ability to provide liquidity to our 
expanded set of members by ensuring that we are operationally capable of accepting equity collateral, 
should the need ever arise. And, second, in pursuit of a more diverse and resilient financial landscape in the 
UK, we have been progressing work to enable Islamic banks to hold Bank of England reserves to meet their 
regulatory requirements for holdings of high quality liquid assets in a way consistent with Islamic commercial 
jurisprudence. And as a result, today I can announce that we will shortly be establishing a new subsidiary of 
the Bank, to house the Shari’ah Compliant Facility; this will be a special purpose vehicle, called the  
Bank of England Alternative Liquidity Facility (BEALF). This will also be the first non-interest based liquidity 
facility to be offered by a major Western central bank, providing important structural support to the UK’s 
Islamic finance sector, and further strengthening the UK’s position as an international financial centre.22   
 Enhancing our policy readiness 
 With all of this capability comes the need for accountability. We are running a much larger balance sheet 
than ever before. But holding billions of pounds worth of collateral over a variety of asset classes, and big 
exposures to SMF members, means that we are exposed to risk. And as responsible public servants, we 
must manage that risk carefully. We have developed the sophistication of our own risk management 
alongside the growth in our balance sheet. In 2015 we established for the first time a rigorous second line 
financial risk division23, organisationally distinct from our well-established and highly professional first line 
financial risk management division. In addition to managing our own risks, these functions are also integral to 
the risk management arrangements that we have with the Treasury. 
 Our readiness to act for both financial and monetary stability purposes was enhanced further this year, when, 
on the back of the latest five year review of the Bank’s financial framework, we agreed a ground-breaking 
new capital and income framework for the Bank with the Treasury.24 This reinforces our independence and 
institutionalises our ability to react with our balance sheet in order to meet our remit. The Treasury has 
committed to increasing the quantity of loss absorbing capital the Bank holds by £1.2bn to £3.5bn by the end 
of the 2018/19 financial year. This will give us the financial backing to react at greater scale and more quickly 
than in the past.25 
                                                       
22 See the Shari’ah-compliant liquidity facilities section of https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/funding-for-lending-and-other-
market-operations for more information.  
23 Second line risk provides challenge to first line risk functions. See Hauser, A. (2017), “Watching the Watchers”, speech at the GARP 
18th Annual Risk Management Convention, New York. Available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/speech/2017/watching-the-watchers-forward-looking-assessment-and-challenge-of-a-central-banks-own-financial-
risk.pdf.  
24 The details of the capital framework are contained in a Memorandum of Understanding between the two institutions, available at 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/718481/The_Financial_Relationship_
between_the_Treasury_and_the_Bank_of_England_-_MoU_web.pdf.  
25 See Carney, M. (2018), “New Economy, New Finance, New Bank”, Mansion House Speech 2018, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2018/new-economy-new-finance-new-bank-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   
 
Where are we heading? 
 Where does all this leave policy and the balance sheet through which it is implemented? 
 In August 2018 the MPC voted to raise Bank Rate from 0.5% to 0.75%. That was based on our Inflation 
Report forecast, which showed that absent an increase in Bank Rate, the economy was likely to move into 
excess demand, and that the resulting wage pressures would push inflation above our 2% target. In 
September we then voted to leave Bank Rate unchanged at 0.75%. And looking ahead we expect that, if the 
economy continues to evolve, as it has done so far, broadly in line with our August forecast, then further 
limited and gradual rises in Bank Rate will be appropriate to return inflation sustainably to the target.  
 As well as being the collective view of the committee, this is also my personal view, which is why I voted for 
an increase in Bank Rate in August. The signal I take from the labour market indicators is one of labour 
market tightness and rising pay pressures, which I expect to support inflation in the medium term.  
 Stepping back, I have to recognise that we have predicted higher nominal wage growth in the past, and have 
been serially disappointed. Since the Referendum, downside news on nominal wages has been augmented 
by the inflationary effect of the fall in sterling, meaning real wage growth has been strikingly weak. Over the 
two years to 2018Q2 real wages fell by 0.5%, more than 4pp below the MPC’s May 2016 forecast of 3.8% 
cumulative growth.26 But we are now forecasting both nominal and real wage growth to pick up from here.   
 Given our forecasting history it would be foolish of me to rule out being disappointed on wage growth again – 
although developments over the past year have so far broadly matched our expectations, with private sector 
regular pay in particular now growing at 3%, a little stronger than our forecast of a year ago. One additional 
important factor to bear in mind here is that our past downside errors on wages have largely come from 
weaker productivity. But what matters for businesses’ costs and so for inflation is wages relative to 
productivity, that is to say, unit labour costs; and here our forecast errors have been somewhat smaller. So 
while there is certainly still a risk that productivity will disappoint again – even conditional on a smooth 
transition to an average of possible Brexit outcomes, as in our central forecast – and that wages will again 
turn out weaker, even in that case it seems likely to me that, given the gradual move into excess demand 
that we expect, unit labour costs and inflationary pressure would still pick up as in our August forecast.27  
 That said, a range of outcomes for Brexit are clearly still possible, not all of which are captured in our central 
forecast. Consistent with that it is noteworthy that option pricing implies that market participants are insuring 
to a greater degree against tail outcomes: FX implied volatilities have increased in recent months, implying 
                                                      
26 Other forecasters were similarly surprised – for instance the OBR were predicting 3.7% cumulative real wage growth over the same 
period in the March 2016 Economic and Fiscal Outlook (available at http://obr.uk/efo/economic-fiscal-outlook-march-2016/).  
27 I set out my views on the economic outlook and the labour market in detail in a speech in June: Ramsden, D. (2018), “What’s Going 
On?”, speech at the Barclays Inflation Conference, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2018/whats-
going-on-speech-by-dave-ramsden.pdf.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
   
 
greater weight on the tails of the distribution, while risks reversals have fallen to their lowest levels in over a 
year, suggesting a greater increase in relative weight on downside outcomes. But the moves are still small 
relative to those we saw ahead of the Referendum.  
 On a day-to-day basis, we continue to use our balance sheet in support of monetary policy and financial 
stability. Our regular market operations will continue to keep market rates anchored to Bank Rate, and we 
will continue the programme of gilt reinvestments that maintains the stock of APF purchases at its target 
level for as long as the MPC choose to maintain it there. And our monthly Indexed Long-Term Repo liquidity 
facility continues to see regular usage, with £785mn allocated in September’s operation.  
 Looking further ahead, the TFS is now closed to new drawings, and will gradually unwind in the coming 
years as banks repay their loans. In June the MPC gave updated guidance that it will not reduce the stock of 
asset purchases until Bank Rate reaches around 1.5%, and any decision on what happens then will of 
course be a decision for the MPC of the time and will depend on the economic circumstances prevailing at 
the time.28  
 As and when our balance sheet shrinks, it is likely that its size will return to being determined by the level of 
SMF participants’ demand for reserves (as well as the amount of banknotes in circulation), rather than by the 
quantity supplied. Given its proven success at maintaining market rates in line with Bank Rate, as well as the 
benefits of operational continuity, the Bank is minded to keep using a variant of the current floor system for 
controlling market rates. And, as the quantity of reserves supplied falls towards the quantity demanded by 
market participants, we will stand ready to meet SMF participants’ demand for additional reserves through 
regular open market operations. In addition, there is a strong case for holding some longer maturity assets, 
such as gilts, to back the stable portion of demand for banknotes, and indeed we had already started to do 
this ahead of the financial crisis.29  
 How large a quantity of reserves SMF participants will demand, and therefore how large our future balance 
sheet will be, is an open and difficult question. As well as changing our own monetary policy toolkit, the 
financial crisis has changed the behaviour of financial institutions, including in ways that are significant for 
the size of our balance sheet. In particular their demand for reserves and for liquid assets more generally, is 
much greater than it was before the crisis. That reflects a combination of tighter regulation which requires 
them to hold larger buffers of liquid assets, and more prudent management which means that banks have 
learnt the lessons of the crisis and the value of maintaining liquidity, as well as the fourfold increase in the 
number of SMF participants. This change was not caused by QE and the expansion of our balance sheet. 
                                                      
28 For further details, see the minutes of the June 2018 MPC meeting. 
29 See for example the consultation paper, archived at 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20170726163822/http:/www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/documentation/
consult_bond_purchases.pdf, and the Market Notice archived at 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20170726163816/http:/www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/documentation/
061124.pdf. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
   
 
But it happened alongside it. And, since it seems likely to persist, it means our balance sheet is also likely to 
remain materially larger than pre-crisis.30  
 Exactly how much larger that means is likely to depend on a range of factors: risk appetites, perceptions of 
the nature of future liquidity shocks, and developments in regulation. And some of these factors may well 
vary over time. Understanding the net effect of these factors on aggregate reserve demand is an important 
question for implementing monetary policy, as well as for our risk management of the balance sheet. 
Reflecting this, we launched a Discussion Paper in early August which examines the different factors in more 
detail, and have begun a series of discussions with market participants to help us understand them further, 
framed around these six questions.31 We will continue gathering inputs until the end of October – and if 
anybody here would like to contribute they would certainly be very welcome – and will provide further 
information as our thinking develops. 
 Conclusion 
 In conclusion, what do these developments mean overall? They mean that the Bank’s balance sheet is a key 
part of the infrastructure for securing monetary and financial stability for the good of the people of the UK. 
And that infrastructure is future-proofed. We regularly execute a variety of operations. We test facilities that 
we are not actively using, and encourage firms to be sure of their operational capability to use them. We 
have banks’ collateral pre-positioned with us so we stand ready to lend at short order, if needed. And we 
support all of this with the appropriate risk management framework, to ensure that as well as supporting 
firms and markets, we aren’t unduly jeopardising public resources. And all this means that our balance sheet 
is fit for purpose to underpin whatever policy decisions, covered by the Bank’s remit, are made in the future. 
                                                      
30 See also Carney, M. (2018), “New Economy, New Finance, New Bank”, Mansion House Speech 2018, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2018/new-economy-new-finance-new-bank-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf. 
31 The Discussion Paper is available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2018/boe-future-balance-sheet-and-framework-for-
controlling-interest-rates. Comments should be sent to balancesheetDP@bankofengland.co.uk by 31st October 2018. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
 