Mario  Draghi:  Exchange  of  views  with  members  of  the  Irish
Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, during his
exchange of views with the House of Representatives, Dublin, 8 November 2018.
 Thank you, Chairman. I am happy to be back in Dublin and honoured to be invited to speak at the
Oireachtas.  On  this  occasion,  I  am  joined  by  my  colleague,  Philip  Lane,  whom  you  meet
regularly in his capacity as Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland.
While the ECB is accountable to the European Parliament, we greatly value our exchanges with
national parliaments. In September, some of you already met the Chair of the Supervisory Board,
Danièle Nouy, in Frankfurt and discussed the ECB’s supervisory policies. In full respect of the
functional separation between the ECB’s monetary policy and its supervisory tasks, today is an
opportunity to discuss our monetary policy and policies to make the euro area economy and its
constituent parts more resilient. In this respect, I expect an open exchange from this meeting,
which  will  give  us  a  chance  to  listen  to  and  better  appreciate  each  other’s  positions.  I  am
conscious that I am speaking in a country that went through a severe crisis. The Irish people
made tremendous efforts, for which I have great respect. And these efforts are now paying off.
The euro area economic outlook
Ten years after the start of the global financial crisis, the euro area economy is performing well –
and has been for some time. We have now seen 22 consecutive quarters of economic growth,
while over 9 million jobs have been created and the unemployment rate has declined to 8.1%, its
lowest level since November 2008.
The  Irish  economy  has  seen  a  particularly  strong  expansion  in  recent  years.  Ireland  is  now
growing at the fastest pace of any euro area country. Unemployment has been falling too, and
now stands well below the euro area average. This is all the more impressive given the severe
crisis  Ireland  went  through  and  the  legacies  it  is  dealing  with,  including  high  private  debt  and
arrears.
Looking  ahead,  while  some  sector-specific  data  and  selected  survey  results  have  been
somewhat  weaker  than  expected,  the  latest  incoming  information  overall  suggests  that  the
broad-based  expansion  in  the  euro  area,  and  in  Ireland,  is  set  to  continue.  Against  this
background, euro area inflation is expected to continue to converge towards the ECB’s objective
of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Getting to this point has required considerable monetary policy support. The euro area is looking
back  on  several  years  of  exceptionally  low  interest  rates  and  unconventional  monetary  policy
measures.  The  ECB’s  key  interest  rates  have  been  at  unprecedented  low  levels  since  2009.
They have been supported by a series of unconventional measures, introduced in the face of a
protracted recession and persistently low inflation.
While we are now at the point where we anticipate – subject to incoming data confirming our
medium-term  inflation  outlook  –  that  we  will  end  net  asset  purchases  at  the  end  of  the  year,
significant monetary stimulus will still be needed to ensure the continued sustained convergence
of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Even after we end our
net asset purchases, monetary stimulus will continue to be provided by the guidance we have
given namely that we expect to keep interest rates at their present levels at least through the
summer  of  2019  and  to  maintain  the  stock  of  assets  on  our  balance  sheet  by  reinvesting
maturing bonds purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
after the end of our net asset purchases.
But  the  overall  favourable  outlook  and  our  still  accommodative  stance  should  not  invite
complacency. Although on the whole the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook can still
be  assessed  as  broadly  balanced,  risks  relating  to  protectionism,  vulnerabilities  in  emerging
markets  and  financial  market  volatility  remain/are  prominent.  We  are  seeing  a  growing
willingness to question multilateralism, which has underpinned global growth since the end of the
Second World War. The protectionist trade measures implemented may have had very limited
effects thus far, but the escalation of trade tensions is undermining confidence.
Financial stability
Allow  me  also  to  say  a  few  words  about  euro  area  financial  stability.  The  financial  stability
environment  in  the  euro  area  overall  remains  favourable,  but  it  has  become  somewhat  more
challenging in recent months.
The  results  of  the  European  stress  test  published  last  Friday  show  that  euro  area  banks  are
increasingly resilient to financial shocks. This also reflects the continuing economic expansion,
which has strengthened private and public balance sheets alike.
Still, there are risks. These include liquidity risks in the non-bank financial sector that could be
transmitted  to  the  broader  financial  system.  Developments  in  this  area  should  be  closely
monitored,  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  non-banks  needs  to  be
strengthened.
Asset prices also require close monitoring. While there is currently no compelling evidence of
overstretched  asset  valuations  at  the  euro  area  level,  we  are  seeing  some  localised  risks.
However, euro area monetary policy is not the appropriate tool with which to address such risks.
They  call  instead  for  targeted  macroprudential  policies,  which  can  be  tailored  to  local  and
sectoral conditions. The recent decisions by the Central Bank of Ireland are an example of how
macroprudential policy can promote financial stability.
As  regards  Brexit,  with  negotiations  ongoing  and  less  than  five  months  to  go  until  the  United
Kingdom’s  departure  from  the  European  Union,  it  is  essential  to  prepare  for  all  possible
outcomes, including a no-deal scenario. While the direct trade effects of a hard Brexit would be
limited for the euro area as a whole, Ireland is more exposed due to its very close trade relations
with the United Kingdom. We also see limited overall risks to euro area financial stability. Without
sufficient mitigating action, however, a cliff-edge Brexit could have an adverse impact in certain
areas of centrally cleared derivatives markets.
Sources of risk from outside the EU have grown since May. A stronger US dollar and heightened
trade tensions triggered renewed stress in a number of emerging market economies.
Financial integration and the deepening of EMU
Thanks to our collective efforts at the European and national level, we have come a long way
since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis.  However,  to  strengthen  our  economies  and  preserve
financial stability, we need to go further. Let me highlight in particular some of the concrete steps
in the area of financial integration that we need to take at the European level.
First, we need to complete the architecture of the banking union. The benefits of having a euro
area supervisor are clear when we look at banks’ strengthened balance sheets. Still, more needs
to be done to reduce the risks for citizens as both taxpayers and depositors and to break the
remaining link between banks and national governments. In addition to the adoption of banking
package  which  is  currently  under  negotiation  among  EU  legislators,  a  genuine  banking  union
needs  further  regulatory  harmonisation,  for  instance  through  greater  reliance  on  Regulations
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
instead of Directives. In particular, unwarranted national options and discretions still stand in the
way of a level playing field for banks. At the same time, we need to establish a common backstop
to the Single Resolution Fund and lay the groundwork for the creation of an effective European
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme.  Significant  steps  in  these  areas  are  a  precondition  for  a  truly
integrated euro area banking system and single money. The transmission of the ECB’s monetary
policy  remains  at  risk  of  being  hampered  in  crisis  situations  as  long  as  levels  of  depositor
confidence differ across the euro area.
The  second  thing  we  need  to  do  is  build  a  true  single  market  in  capital.  Diversified  capital
markets play an important role in sharing risks and smoothing private consumption over time.
For this reason, the ECB has been a strong supporter of the European Commission’s plan for a
capital  markets  union.  To  be  robust,  the  capital  markets  union  needs  effective  regulation  and
supervision, for example in relation to investment firms and clearing. Not least given the United
Kingdom’s imminent departure from the EU, we need to make concrete progress on this agenda
and complement it with an ambitious, longer-term vision.
Conclusions
I would like to end by mentioning that recent Eurobarometer data show that support for the euro
stands at a record high of 77% among euro area citizens and a large majority believe that their
country’s membership of the EU is a good thing. Support for the European project is particularly
strong  in  Ireland,  where  with  88%  of  citizens  the  single  currency  enjoys  the  highest  level  of
support in the EU.
Europe has to repay this trust.
We  face  important  global  challenges  that  are  naturally  causing  concern  among  the  people  of
Europe,  especially  those  who  feel  left  behind.  Common  institutions  and  collaboration  among
Member States give Europe a strong voice in the world. More importantly, they make it possible
for us to find effective answers to joint problems. In other words, we are stronger together. Thank
you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
