Luis de Guindos: Redesigning Europe's financial landscape
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 6th 
Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy, Frankfurt am Main, 14 December 2018.
It is a pleasure to be here today.
 As  you  know,  there  is  a  long  tradition  of  the  ECB  participating  in  SAFE  conferences  here  in
Frankfurt.  The  second  conference  in  2014  was  already  dedicated  to  “Banking  beyond  banks”
acknowledging important changes underway in the European financial landscape.  Indeed, this
was a prescient choice of topic given the growth of the non-bank sector, which has continued
unabated  ever  since.  In  a  recent  speech ,  I  also  highlighted  the  rapid  growth  of  asset
management  in  the  euro  area  and  at  the  global  level,  and  the  impact  this  is  having  on  the
structure of the euro area financial sector. In fact, in 2008, total assets held by investment funds
made up just 15% of banking sector assets. In 2017, these assets had grown to 42% of total
banking sector assets, amounting to €12 trillion. As the non-bank sector continues to grow, so
does the need to ensure that our supervisory and regulatory framework is fit for purpose.
1
2
At the same time, banks still play an important role in many areas of Europe’s financial system,
notably in the financing of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). So a healthy banking
sector remains crucial to financing the economy, and despite the progress made in improving
the resilience of European banks, some legacy issues from the crisis continue to weigh on the
system.
This has two implications for strengthening the financial pillar of Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU), which will be the topic of my speech today.
First,  we  need  to  shore  up  the  banking  sector  further  by  thoroughly  completing  the
reform agenda that emerged in response to the crisis.  This  means  taking  the  remaining
steps to complete the banking union – in terms of both risk reduction and risk-sharing.
Second, we need to facilitate the growing role capital markets and the non-bank sector
can play in financing economic growth in a sustainable and resilient manner. This requires
boosting the capital markets union (CMU) agenda while ensuring that authorities are equipped to
face the new challenges of a changing financial landscape. This will require the fragmentation of
European capital markets to be overcome and the macroprudential toolkit to be extended beyond
the banking system to cover, in particular, the investment fund sector.
Finalising post-crisis reforms
I  welcome  the  decisions  taken  by  the  Eurogroup   to  continue  advancing  the  banking  union,
reforming the European Stability Mechanism and building euro area fiscal instruments.
3
In the financial sector – which is my focus today – the response to the crisis has centred on
addressing  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  and  institutional  framework.  The  new  European
regulatory framework is making Europe’s banks more resilient and gives authorities the tools to
act  when  risks  begin  to  build  up.  Furthermore,  banking  union  elevates  the  supervision  and
resolution of banks to the European level.
This strategy has paid off: substantial risk reduction has been achieved, is ongoing and should
continue. Banks now hold more and better-quality capital than in the past , and have improved
their  liquidity  positions  and  leverage.  Addressing  legacy  issues,  such  as  high  levels  of  non-
performing  loans  (NPLs),  is  progressing  well.  For  banks  under  direct  ECB  supervision,  NPL
4
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
levels fell from €958 billion when the Single Supervisory Mechanism was launched to €657 billion
in  June  2018.  The  framework  for  resolution,  following  the  introduction  of  BRRD  and  the
implementation  of  Minimum  Requirements  of  Eligible  Liabilities  (MREL)  also  contribute  to
increase buffers, reduce risk and thereby the scope for risk sharing.
However, the euro area’s financial architecture is not yet complete.
There is some good news: there is now an agreement to make the common backstop to the
Single Resolution Fund (SRF) operational, which will instil confidence in the markets that bank
resolutions will happen in an orderly fashion. There is also a recognition that it is time to start
political  discussions  on  the  missing  third  pillar  of  the  banking  union  –  a  European  deposit
insurance scheme (EDIS). The high level group in charge of the discussions must be ambitious
and ensure that we live up to the agenda laid down in the roadmap on completing the banking
5
union agreed by finance ministers in 2016.
The ECB has often made the point that the opposing sides of the debate – risk reduction versus
6
risk-sharing, and private risk-sharing versus public risk-sharing – are in fact complementary.
Completing the institutional leg of the banking union, with the SRF and EDIS, would move us
closer to a level playing field. In a genuine banking union, banks would operate across borders
and diversify their sources of income, which would allow them to continue lending to the real
economy even when faced with localised shocks. This would create private risk-sharing across
the euro area and shield regions from localised credit crunches.
But  a  level  playing  field  for  banking  would  also  enable  risk  reduction.  Increased  cross-border
competition between banks, backed by a solid system of European supervision and the winding
down  of  unwarranted  national  protections,  could  further  incentivize  banks  into  getting  their
balance sheets in order.
At  the  same  time,  the  SRF  and  EDIS  would  also  constitute  a  form  of  private  risk-sharing  by
providing a final, powerful backstop. They enable bank resolution, limit contagion in the case of
bank defaults thereby contributing to safeguarding overall financial stability. This, in turn, would
reduce the need for public risk-sharing in the first place. Such an approach is borne out by the
experience of other advanced economies, such as the United States, where hundreds of banks
were  resolved  successfully  by  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  with  no  long-term
fiscal costs.
While the case for completing the banking union is strong, supporting EDIS is seen by some as
tilting at windmills. Indeed, three years after the initial Commission proposal, progress has been
very limited. But the potential benefits of EDIS are not the illusions of a romantic daydreamer like
Don  Quixote;  they  are,  in  fact,  very  real.  EDIS  would  provide  uniform  confidence  in  deposits
across  Europe  which  would  be  beneficial  for  all  European  economies,  as  no  single  banking
system  is  immune  to  a  potential  bank  default.  EDIS  would  therefore  further  underpin  EMU  by
ensuring that a €1 deposit is just as safe, and just as valuable, wherever you are in the euro area.
Fostering the resilient and sustainable development of Europe’s financial landscape
Completing the post-crisis agenda is therefore crucial, but we should not only look back. After
dealing  with  banking  sector  fragilities,  we  should  now  be  shifting  our  attention  to  the  steadily
growing  non-banking  system,  which  is  changing  Europe’s  financial  landscape  and  whose
potential to contribute to growth has not been fully unlocked.
A  range  of  banking  activities  is  increasingly  carried  out  by  non-banks,  notably  insurance
companies and the investment fund sector at large. Total assets of the euro area investment
fund sector have expanded by roughly 170% between 2008 and 2017, on account of both net
cash inflows and rising asset valuations.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Deeper and more efficient bond and equity markets in Europe would permit economies of scale
and allow capital to be allocated to the most productive uses at the European level, in line with
the Single Market objectives. By enhancing cross-border private risk-sharing and consumption
smoothing through cross-border holdings of assets, CMU can reduce the need for public risk-
sharing.
Developing  capital  markets  would  also  alleviate  the  shortage  of  risk  capital   that  hinders  the
growth of Europe’s innovative start-ups and SMEs by increasing the presence of investors with
high risk-bearing capacity. As in the case of depositors, issuers and investors should enjoy the
same  legal  rights  in  capital  market  activities  across  the  EU,  irrespectively  of  their  country  of
domicile.  Furthermore,  Brexit  accentuates  the  need  to  develop  and  integrate  the  EU’s  capital
8
markets to prepare for the likelihood that the City of London will play a reduced role in the future.
7
In terms of legislation, the CMU agenda has already yielded some positive results, but a more
ambitious long-term approach should be pursued.
On insolvency frameworks, the Commission has put forward a number of proposals  which aim
to enhance aspects, such as the efficiency of debt recovery procedures.
9
In the realm of taxation, adopting the proposal on a common consolidated corporate tax base
would  help  to  reduce  or  remove  the  bias  towards  debt  over  equity  in  some  Member  States,
thereby facilitating the development of equity markets.
The  creation  of  a  pan-European  personal  pension  product,  for  instance,  would  help  channel
more savings into long-term investments through a portable, pan-European product.
Finally, fostering a deep and efficient CMU means reviewing the supervisory framework to align it
with  the  cross-border  nature  of  capital  markets,  enhance  supervisory  and  regulatory
convergence  and  remove  possibilities  for  regulatory  arbitrage,  also  crucial  in  the  context  of
Brexit.
Indeed, the non-bank financial sector may harbour leverage and liquidity risks, requiring additional
efforts to address emerging vulnerabilities at the system level.
First, the asset management sector is highly connected with other parts of the financial system
through  ownership  links,  common  asset  exposures  and  the  provision  of  wholesale  funding  to
banks.
Second, liquidity mismatches and leverage often build up slowly over time. In the euro area, we
see that investment funds have been taking on higher credit risk and duration risk in the current
market  environment. And  there  are  strong  indications  that  liquidity  risks  are  building  up  in  the
sector with the share of less-liquid assets in the sector growing continuously since the global
financial crisis.
Third, the overall leverage of the sector is difficult to grasp. Alternative investment funds do not
face any binding restrictions on leverage. A tail of highly leveraged bond and hedge funds with
leverage multipliers exceeding 30 compares to an average leverage ratio for banks of below 20 in
the euro area.
As the global crisis has shown, we must remain vigilant to possible new risks that might emerge
in the financial system. We need to better understand the macroprudential dimension of risk in
the investment fund sector. And we need to further enhance the sector’s resilience to system-
wide shocks.
The  existing  regulatory  framework,  with  the  Undertakings  for  Collective  Investment  in
Transferable  Securities  and  Alternative  Investment  Fund  Managers  Directives  as  the  main
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
building blocks, is well designed to address micro-prudential and consumer protection concerns.
However, additional tools need to be developed to address rising risks in the investment fund
sector from a macroprudential perspective.
Macroprudential policy is primarily preventive. The toolkit available to macroprudential authorities
should include ex ante tools to limit the build-up of risks associated with liquidity and leverage in
the investment fund sector, such as minimum mandatory liquidity buffers and redemption notice
periods.
The investment fund industry in the EU is furthermore highly concentrated in a few jurisdictions,
but  –  due  to  the  diverse  asset  holdings  and  investor  locations  –  the  impact  of  adverse
developments  in  this  sector  may  be  felt  across  the  EU.  So  we  should  consider  elevating  the
supervision  of  investment  funds  and  the  potential  activation  of  macroprudential  tools  to  the
European level. This would be also in line with the spirit of CMU.
A comprehensive, long-term European strategy for a more complete financial union
Let me conclude. Finalising EMU reforms, completing banking union and capital markets union
must stand out as unquestionable objectives. We need to pursue a comprehensive long-term
European strategy for building a more complete financial union that fosters both risk-sharing and
risk  reduction,  which,  as  I  argued,  are  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  This  will  strengthen  the
financial system in the long run.
Achieving these objectives hinges on building a strong degree of trust between Member States
and European institutions. It fundamentally hinges on looking beyond short-term national benefits
and pursuing European goals. Europe should live up to its ambitions.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See  Constâncio,  V.  (2014),  “Beyond  traditional  banking:  a  new  credit  system  coming  out  of  the  shadows”,
speech at the 2nd Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy: Banking Beyond Banks, organised by the
SAFE Policy Center of Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 17 October.
See de Guindos, L. (2018), “Coming to the forefront: the rising role of the investment fund sector for financial
stability in the euro area”, speech at the Opening Conference of the 21st Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main,
12 November.
See the Eurogroup report to Leaders on EMU deepening.
The fully-loaded CET1 ratio of significant institutions was 13.8% in the second quarter of this year, up by 2.6
percentage points compared with the last quarter of 2014.
See the press release from the European Council.
For example, see de Guindos, L. (2018), “Building a resilient Economic and Monetary Union”, Lectio magistralis
opening the XXIX Edition of the Masters Programme in European Union law of the University Carlos III of Madrid,
5 October.
See AFME (2017), The shortage of risk capital for Europe’s high growth businesses, March.
See de Guindos, L. (2018), “Promoting the stability and efficiency of EU financial markets beyond Brexit”, speech
at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  reception  on  the  occasion  of  Euro  Finance  Week,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  13
November.
See European Commission (2018), “Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
credit servicers, credit purchasers and the recovery of collateral”, 14 March.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
