        DYNAMIC BUT VIGILANT 
ADDRESS BY DR MARIO VELLA 
GOVERNOR, CENTRAL BANK OF MALTA 
DELIVERED DURING THE IFS MALTA ANNUAL DINNER 
30 NOVEMBER 2018 
Dear  President  and  Members  of  the  Committee  of  the  Institute  of  Financial  Services  (IFS)  Malta, 
distinguished guests, personally and on behalf of the Board of the Central Bank of Malta, I thank the 
IFS for this traditional annual opportunity to address this distinguished audience and, through it, all 
stakeholders. 
I also join the President in welcoming to Malta the representatives of the Chartered Banker Institute, 
the  London  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance,  the  International  Compliance  Association  and  the 
European Banking and Financial Services Training Association (EBTN).  
Mr President, it is encouraging to hear of all the initiatives the Institute has undertaken in the area of 
financial  services  education.    The  topical  theme  of  your  recent  Annual  Seminar  on  ‘Digital 
Transformation’  and  your  pro-activeness  in  developing  a  Diploma  in  Digital  Technology  for  our 
sector,  demonstrate  your  willingness  to  embrace  change  and  adapt  to  the  evolving  needs  of  the 
marketplace. 
Let me assure you that the Central Bank of Malta will continue to support you.  
I wish the Institute every success in the future. 
Last  year,  I  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  performance  of  the  Maltese  economy  had  exceeded  the 
Bank’s expectations and those of other institutions.  Key economic indicators were among the best 
in  Europe,  with  the  European  Commission  at  the  time  projecting  continued,  though  moderating, 
strong GDP growth through 2019. 
Page | 1 
This assessment can be broadly confirmed at the current juncture.  GDP growth in the first half of 
2018 averaged 5.4%, which is in line with the latest projections that the Central Bank published over 
the summer.  The unemployment rate fell to a new record low of 3.8% in the second quarter of this 
year.  Labour market  participation, previously on the low  side, now  slightly exceeds the euro area 
average.  
In the area of public finances, the general government balance remains in surplus, the debt-to-GDP 
ratio extended its downward path, and contingent liabilities, while still elevated, are now within the 
range  observed  in  other  countries.    The  external  balance  remains  in  surplus  and  inflationary 
pressures remain contained. 
When  compared  with  the  information  available  a  year  ago,  the  economic  record  is  even  more 
impressive.  Then, GDP growth in 2017 was recorded at 5.6%, now the latest vintage of data puts last 
year’s growth rate at 6.7%.  Growth in 2018 is also expected to be higher than previously expected.  
The European Commission’s latest projections foresee growth this year at 5.4%, the second highest 
rate the European Union after that of Ireland.  This compares with a projection of 4.9% in November 
2017.  
According  to  the  European  Commission,  fast  growth  rates  are  expected  to  prevail  through  2020, 
although  as  one  might  expect,  the  pace  of  expansion  is  set  to  moderate  from  recent  highs,  with 
annual growth reckoned to stand at 4.4% in 2020.  
All this is positive news, but there is also some not so good news. 
While  the  outlook  for  the  Maltese  economy  remains  bright,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  the 
external  environment  is  becoming  less  supportive  than  we  expected  a  year  ago,  or  even  three 
months ago.  Some of the external downside risks flagged by the Bank in recent projection rounds 
have started to materialise.  Global economic growth has become more diverse across regions, with 
soft indicators suggesting that global trade is losing the buoyancy seen in 2017.  Partly in response to 
the less benign economic conditions abroad, activity has also softened in the euro area. 
The  less  favourable  international  environment  partly  reflects  new  restrictions  on  trade  and  the 
response  of  businesses’  capital  spending  plans.    In  late  2017  and  also  in  the  course  of  2018,  the 
United  States  introduced  additional  trade  protectionist  measures,  which  have  been  followed  by  a 
degree of retaliation.  Although these actions mostly concern trade between the United States and 
China, the overall impact may be considerably broader once global value chains and the effects of 
uncertainty on private spending are taken into account.  This assessment is broadly confirmed by the 
latest assessments published by the IMF in October, and by the OECD a week ago.  Indeed, year-on-
year growth in world trade has slowed to 3.2% in the first half of this year, from the relatively fast 
Page | 2 
growth of 5.0%  recorded in 2017, while growth in container port traffic averaged 3.9%  in the  first 
nine months of this year, down from 6.5% in 2017. 
Notwithstanding  the  deal  reached  during  the  special  meeting  of  the  European  Council  held  on 
25 November,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  UK’s  future  relations  with  the  European  Union 
continues.  Should the deal be rejected, the immediate effect would be an amplification of the loss 
of momentum. 
The  European  Central  Bank  continued  to  pursue  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  throughout 
2018, against the backdrop of a continued recovery in economic activity in the euro area as a whole, 
to ensure that inflation would converge sustainably to the target of below, but close to, 2% in the 
medium term. 
Following very strong growth in 2017, real GDP in the euro area continued to expand during the first 
three  quarters  of  this  year,  albeit  at  a  slower  pace,  with  an  annual  growth  rate  of  1.7%  being 
registered  in  the  third  quarter.    The  latest  information,  while  being  somewhat  weaker  than 
expected, remains consistent with an ongoing economic expansion.   
In  turn,  with  the  economy  growing  at  rates  above  potential,  and  with  the  unemployment  rate 
declining  steadily,  inflation  should  gain  momentum.    Indeed,  the  euro  area  inflation  rate  stood  at 
2.2% in October, up from 2.1% in September and from 1.4% a year earlier.  That having been said, 
measures of underlying inflation, which strip out the contributions of volatile items such as energy 
and food, remain muted.   
The situation in international financial markets during 2018 remained very challenging. Most asset 
classes  today  are  in  negative  territory  when  compared  to  the  start  of  the  year,  which  is  a  very 
unusual  phenomenon.    Over  the  past  year,  developments  in  financial  markets  have  been  largely 
dominated  by  several  political  events,  while  generally  positive  economic  news  seemed  to  matter 
much less.  These political events ranged from trade tensions, especially between the US and China, 
to  Brexit-related  developments,  a  slowdown  in  emerging  market  economies,  most  notably  in 
Argentina  and  Turkey,  and  also  the  rise  of  populist  movements  in  some  European  countries  that 
have  led  to  tensions,  particularly  between  Italy  and  the  European  Commission.    All  this  led  to 
volatility in financial markets, with a constant turn in Risk-On /Risk-Off sentiment, which has made it 
more challenging for investment strategies.  
As  a  Central  Bank,  financial  market  developments  are  of  a  direct  interest  to  us  as  these  have  an 
impact  on  both  the  domestic  banking  system  and  the  Central  Bank  itself.    While  such  volatility  in 
financial markets and persistence of interest rates at a relatively low level in Europe have continued 
to  exert  pressure  on  interest  income  flows  and  potential  on  capital  gains,  and  hence  impinge  on 
profitability,  nevertheless  domestic  banks  have  absorbed  such  turbulence  relatively  well.    For  the 
Page | 3 
year ahead, the situation is likely to remain equally challenging on interest income and profitability, 
as signs are emerging that world economic growth, including in Europe, is losing momentum.  This 
could  be  also  particularly  challenging  for  the  process  of  the  normalization  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance in Europe, which is likely to be very gradual.  
As you are all well aware, during 2018, the European Central Bank  gradually scaled back  the non-
standard monetary policy measures  that it  had introduced to combat the  risks of a long period  of 
low  inflation  and  possible  deflation.    In  January,  the  monthly  purchases  in  terms  of  the  Asset 
Purchase Programme were halved from €60 billion to €30 billion.  They were halved again, to €15 
billion,  from  October.    The  Governing  Council  currently  anticipates  that,  subject  to  incoming  data 
confirming the medium-term inflation outlook, the net purchases will cease altogether in December 
2018. 
Indeed, even after net asset purchases have ended, monetary policy will continue to provide support 
to the euro area economy as the stock on Central Banks’ balance sheets will be maintained with the 
re-investment of maturing bonds.  The ECB’s key interest rates remain very low, with the overnight 
deposit rate standing at -0.4%.  The Governing Council expects them to remain unchanged at least 
through  the  summer  of  2019.    At  the  same  time,  the  Governing  Council  will  ensure  that  ample 
liquidity conditions will continue to prevail for as long as needed by reinvesting principal payments 
from maturing securities for an extended period of time.  This combination of very low interest rates 
and  ample  liquidity  should  ensure  favourable  financial  conditions  for  firms  and  households, 
underpinning economic activity, and should strengthen the sustained convergence of inflation to the 
target. 
Looking ahead, domestic demand will play an important role in economic growth.  The prospects in 
this  regard  remain  favourable.    The  still  very  low  unemployment  rate  and  the  low  interest  rate 
environment  should  continue  to  shore  up  private  consumption,  while  investment  should  benefit 
from  increased  public  spending  on  infrastructure  as well  as  new  projects  in  education  and  health.   
Certain  capital  intensive  sectors  look  set  for  further  expansion.    The  continued  strong  growth  in 
permits for residential dwellings should also lead to further growth in dwelling investment. 
It is also evident, however, that maintaining the momentum registered in recent years is becoming 
an  increasingly  challenging  feat,  as  a  number  of  internal  constraints  already  identified  last  year 
persist.  
The rapid economic expansion and population growth have put pressure on the country’s physical 
infrastructure, in particular as regards road transport and health and education facilities.  Given the 
adverse  effects  of  infrastructure  gaps  on  business  investment,  productivity  and  social  welfare,  it 
should not be surprising that one of the key recommendations which IMF staff issued in January was 
to boost public investment, to address infrastructure bottlenecks and support medium-term growth 
Page | 4 
in a budget-neutral manner.  This need to boost investment in infrastructure was also acknowledged 
by  the  European  Commission  in  its  assessment  of  the  Stability  Programme  and  National  Reform 
Programme.    In  this  regard,  the  Government’s  announcement  of  a  seven-year  capital  investment 
programme focusing on the road network is an encouraging step forward.  However, given that this 
additional investment coincides with a booming construction sector and more stringent procedures 
as regards the utilisation of EU funds, the possibility of slippages should not be overlooked.   
The Government’s efforts need to be complemented with a better utilisation of savings accumulated 
by the private sector.  The Malta Development Bank can help in this regard, by identifying gaps in 
the financing of viable projects and partnering with financial intermediaries and other stakeholders 
to develop financial instruments that can finance them.   
Apart  from 
infrastructure  bottlenecks, 
international 
institutions  that  monitor  the  business 
environment  flag  other  areas  that  warrant  immediate  attention.    While  we  have  significant 
reservations on a number of methodological aspects underlying such surveys, we also share the view 
that in some areas we do need to step up our efforts very considerably.  This is notably the case as 
regards the efficiency of  court  proceedings.  Although the  time  it takes to resolve court  cases  has 
more or less halved since 2010, it is still among the longest in the European Union.  Other challenges 
we  need  to  address  concern  the  length  of  procedures  to  set  up  a  business,  the  low  educational 
attainment  level  relative  to  our  peers  and  a  limited  capacity  to  innovate.    These  are  essential 
elements  that  support  investment  and  productivity.    The  development  of  an  intelligent  online 
business portal which ties all Government business-related services into a one solid platform should 
put  businesses  in  a  better  position  to  do  business.    The  new  legislation  in  the  area  of  digital 
innovation  provides  the  legal  framework  for  business  to  embrace  disruptive  technologies.    The 
private sector is encouraged to exploit the opportunities that these technologies entail in terms of 
efficiency  gains,  adaptability  and  overcoming  labour  shortages  which  remain  widespread  across 
sectors and skill levels. 
So  far  we  have  managed  to  address  these  gaps  partly  through  labour  activation  policies  targeting 
nationals  and  partly  through  foreign  labour.    However,  one  has  to  acknowledge  that  the  national 
working age population is what it is.  With the male participation rate already around the euro area 
average, a better utilisation of the domestic component of the labour supply can only be achieved if 
more  women  take  up  employment  or  if  the  labour  force  works  longer.    Alternatively,  production 
processes would need to rely on upgraded technology, such as automation and artificial intelligence. 
While  further  gains  in  the  female  participation  rate  are  possible,  these  will  likely  materialise  only 
gradually,  as  the  participation  rate  of younger  females  already  exceeds  that  in  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole, while that of older females does not adjust upwards easily, as these tend to have fewer skills 
and experience or have to care for dependants.  Longer hours are probably not compatible with a 
better  quality  of  life.    Technology  upgrades  through,  for  example,  automation  and  artificial 
Page | 5 
intelligence offer a promising avenue,  but  can  be  very  costly for small firms and  also require  skills 
and  financing  that  are  not  immediately  available.    Their  effectiveness  rests  on  a  more  active 
participation in training and re-skilling programmes as well as entrepreneurial willingness to support 
innovative activities. 
The private sector is likely to maintain a high dependence on foreign workers.  The latter, however, 
tend  to  stay  for  a  relatively  short  period  in  Malta,  which  does  not  augur  well  for  firms’  return  on 
investment  in  human  capital  and  productivity.    It  may  also  put  at  risk  the  competitiveness  of  our 
exports and job prospects to the extent that wages begin to increase faster than productivity.   
From this point of view, there is an urgent need to understand the factors behind the relatively short 
stay of foreign workers in Malta and devise  solutions  to this  problem.   A key  factor that has been 
cited by firms and foreign workers alike is the recent rapid increase in rent in the private market, but 
there  may  be  other  reasons.    The  recently  published  White  Paper  on  rent  reform  puts  forward  a 
number of proposals that should enable a better-informed assessment of the rental market in Malta 
and which seek to offer greater certainty and protection to landlords and tenants.  With the public 
consultation  on  this  subject  now  completed,  we  now  look  forward  to  the  implementation  of  the 
proposed measures. 
Permit me at this point to note that the Central Bank is itself an employer of specialist foreign staff, 
thus we also speak on the basis of a direct feel for some of the problems they face.  Apart from the 
already  mentioned  rents  issue,  there  are  other  apparently  minor  but  certainly  unhelpful  matters, 
ranging from the difficulty of finding school places, opening a bank account and the time consuming 
effort to get an ID card. 
While  home  ownership  in  Malta  remains  among  the  highest  in  the  EU,  it  is  also  evident  that  the 
changing  fabric  of  society  and  economic  factors  are  pushing  some  segments  of  the  population  to 
resort to the rental market.  
The continued rise in house prices reinforces this pattern.  According to Eurostat, house prices rose 
at  an  annual  rate  of  5.6%  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  following  a  5.3%  increase  last  year.    The 
deflated  measure  has  also  picked  up  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.    This  acceleration  suggests  that 
although the issuance of permits for the construction of residential units continues at a brisk pace - 
growth exceeded 30% last year and up to September this year - supply still falls short of the demand 
for housing. 
Continued  increases  in  house  prices  risk  rendering  house  ownership  unaffordable  for  a  wider 
segment  of  the  population  in  a  country  accustomed  to  a  very  high  rate  of  home  ownership.  
Moreover, while overall risks to financial stability from real estate remain contained at the current 
juncture, an extension of recent trends may result in potential macro-financial imbalances. 
Page | 6 
Dear colleagues,  
The year 2018 was a milestone date, marking the Central Bank of Malta’s fiftieth anniversary of its 
establishment  and  also  the  tenth  anniversary  of  Malta  joining  the  Eurosystem.    The  latter  had 
coincided with the  start of the  most-severe  financial crisis since  the Great  Depression. Since  then, 
the  regulatory  response  and  reform  agenda  intensified  as  authorities  struggled  to  bolster  the 
resilience  of  financial  systems.    Ten  years  on,  banks  around  the  globe  have  raised  capital  and 
strengthened  their  balance  sheets.  On  their  part,  supranational  authorities  have  gone  to  great 
lengths  to  enhance  regulation  and  be  better  prepared  for  the  next  crisis.    Apart  from  regulatory 
challenges, the system is still grappling with additional risks stemming from the macro-financial and 
geopolitical spheres.  
Notwithstanding, in Malta, bottom lines remained healthy as banks and other financial institutions 
managed to record healthier profits in relation to their European peers.  By  mid-2018, the return on 
equity  and  assets  of  the  core  domestic  banks  stood at  7.6%  and  0.6%,  respectively  as  against  the 
6.2% and 0.4% reported by small European banks.  But, just like them, domestic financial institutions 
had to  weather  headwinds from geopolitical uncertainties  which have  become  more prominent  in 
recent  months  -  most  notably  Brexit,  concerns  on  Italy’s  economic  fundamentals  and  their 
implications for the euro, emerging market contagion, and the rise in trade wars between economic 
superpowers which many fear will lead to widespread protectionism.  This is further compounded by 
the  negative  effects  of  a  prolonged  low  interest  rate  environment  which  is  increasingly  exerting 
pressures  on  profitability,  particularly  to  the  more  traditional  business  models  of  our  domestic 
institutions.   
On balance, the Central Bank of Malta remains confident that risks to the domestic financial system 
are contained. Exposures to emerging market economies are low and limited as credit and financial 
institutions  have  taken measures  to protect their balance  sheet  from any undue  risk.    Despite the 
strong historical ties with the UK, studies carried out by the Central Bank of Malta indicate that the 
potential  direct  adverse  effects  of  a  ‘hard  Brexit’  on  the  Maltese  economy  are  deemed  to  be 
manageable. 
  The  robust  economic  developments  together  with  the  regulatory  measures 
implemented  by  domestic  authorities  have  contributed  to  the  further  decline  in  credit  risk  and 
improving asset quality, with the non-performing loans ratio for the whole banking system falling to 
just 3.1% and comfortably  below the EU average. 
Following  a  contraction  phase  of  four years,  lending  to  non-financial  corporates  finally  turned  the 
corner, increasing by an annual rate of 4.6% in September 2018.  This is a welcome sign since it does 
not only hint that bank disintermediation is normalising, but it also augurs well for monetary policy 
effectiveness, given that banks are the conduit for its proper functioning.  Although such signs are 
encouraging, we have yet to stimulate more usage of the current liquidity lying idle at the Central 
Bank. Here, banks play a crucial role in finding new viable business niches.   
Page | 7 
Key  performance  indicators  (KPIs)  for  domestic  financial  institutions  are  healthy  but  we  must  not 
become complacent.  Vulnerabilities remain.  Aggregate KPIs only give one side of the story masking 
the variability in operational performance at an institutional and sectoral level.  The-not-so-distant 
past has taught us that structural overreliance on real estate poses considerable economic pain in a 
downturn.  Indeed, despite a turnaround in the real estate market since 2014, some banks have not 
yet  fully  recovered  from  past  overexposure  to  this  sector.    While  households’  balance  sheets 
remained broadly sound, one also cannot overlook their increasing exposure to this sector.  This, in 
turn, is being reflected in growing concentration in the banks’ loan portfolios.  The Central Bank of 
Malta, in consultation with the MFSA through the Joint Financial Stability Board, is taking pro-active 
steps  by  introducing  borrower-based  measures  to  increase  the  resilience  of  both  banks  and 
borrowers to such potential threats.   
Undoubtedly, from a supervisory perspective, the past two years have been very challenging.  Two 
banks had their licence withdrawn, while another was put under the administration of a competent 
person.  Despite the negativity of such developments, these are in themselves indicative of the fact 
that  Maltese  Authorities  are  actively  taking  the  right  measures  to  protect  the  sector  from 
inappropriate behaviour. We must constantly bear in mind that from a reputational point of view we 
are only as strong as our weakest link and that the externalities that each institution transmits to the 
system,  be  it  big  or  small,  in  the  periphery  or  at  the  core,  is  always  material  in  a  small  financial 
centre  such  as  Malta.    Furthermore,  such  negative  externalities  may  also  impact  the  use  of 
infrastructural gateways that service the industry, without which, the entire financial sector would 
be isolated. 
We  all  have  a  role  to  play.    We  have  to  acknowledge  that  in  good  times,  there  is  heavy  inter-
temporal discounting of future bad events, with calls for less regulation.  This temptation must be 
resisted. We need a balanced view that is stable and fair, but also sufficiently rigorous and intrusive 
irrespective of economic cycles.  Otherwise regulators will keep being found wanting when the bad 
times  come,  adversely  affecting  many  ordinary  people  and  feeding  mistrust  in  authorities.    The 
Central  Bank  of  Malta  welcomes  the  supervisory  authorities’  commitment  to  step-up  their 
supervisory  intensity  as  this  is  crucial  for  regulation  and  oversight  to  keep  pace  with  market 
developments. Supervision must remain on-going to safeguard the system from moral hazard, while 
keeping the bar sufficiently high to minimise adverse selection at entry point. Practitioners also have 
a  duty  of  care  to  their  clients  and  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.    They  play  a  critical  role  in 
safeguarding its integrity. 
Christine  Lagarde  has  recently  said  that  while  policies  had  addressed  the  mistakes  that  led  to  the 
crisis, there is still much more to do as a ‘lot of the murkier activities are moving toward the shadow 
banking sector’.  This risk is also indicated in the most recent IMF Global Financial Stability Review as 
well as the work of the ESRB and ECB related to the non-bank financial sector.  The CBM and MFSA 
Page | 8 
participate actively in this work.  The domestic non-bank financial sector in Malta is linked with the 
banking sector through cross shareholdings.  These links need to be studied more rigorously, both at 
a micro and macro level, as well as  across  sectors.  In this regard, regulation and supervision must 
aim  at  minimising  regulatory  arbitrage.    Irrespective  of  the  set-up,  or  technology,  institutions 
transmitting common types of risks should be treated on the same footing. 
It is also opportune to formulate a holistic strategy for our financial services sector that takes into 
account  a  national  risk  appetite.    One  must  take  stock  of  the  risk/benefit  quotient  of  each  sub-
sector,  and  the  lessons  learnt  thus  far,  and  put  it  in  a  long-term  context  on  where  to  focus  going 
forward.   
During  the  year,  at  the  request  of  the  Maltese  Government,  Malta  underwent  an  IMF  Financial 
Sector  Assessment  Programme,  which 
is  an 
in-depth  assessment  of  the  financial  sector. 
Furthermore, a comprehensive update of the 2015 National Risk Assessment (NRA) was carried out 
in  2017  and  published  earlier  this  year.    It  identified  potential  money  laundering  and  terrorism 
financing  threats  and  vulnerabilities  that  present  risks  to  Malta's  economic  and  societal  stability.  
The  NRA  forms  the  basis  of  Malta’s  National  AML/CFT  Strategy.    In  fact,  some  of  the  initiatives 
identified in the NRA are already being implemented.  
In addition, a Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering Measures and the 
Financing  of  Terrorism  (MONEVYAL)  has  just  ended  a  rigorous  on-site  mission  to  assess  Malta’s 
standing with international AML/CFT standards.  
The local authorities are eagerly expecting the final results of these evaluations as they represent a 
standardised global yardstick against which to benchmark our state of play.  This will leave a wealth 
of information for authorities to exploit as they direct efforts into strengthening further the current 
institutional framework and operations.  All stakeholders are encouraged to seize the opportunity to 
improve the reputation, soundness and resilience of our financial services sector.  
Malta is also actively working to embrace blockchain technologies, including virtual assets. 2018 will 
also be  remembered  as the  year when Malta was propelled to the fore with the  introduction  of a 
holistic legislative and regulatory framework for fintech and virtual assets, asserting itself as a digital 
hub. Such technologies provide the benefits of reducing transaction costs which can be passed on to 
consumers;  greater  efficiency,  transparency,  advancement  in  KYC  capabilities  and  competition. 
While  these  benefits  are  acknowledged  and  duly  welcomed,  one  must  also  be  sensitive  to  the 
underlying potential risks they might pose as they become more main-stream.   
The effective implementation of the new legislation and regulation requires expertise not only in the 
underlying technology, but also in its legal aspects and all the risks involved, such as cyber risks.  The 
fast  technological  advancements  are  also  a  challenge  and  staying  ahead  of  the  game  from  a 
Page | 9 
regulatory perspective should be given high importance for the successful development in this new 
field.    Thus,  while  all  the  legislative  initiatives  for  this  new  technology  to  succeed  augur  well,  the 
authorities need to remain vigilant about the implications for financial stability stemming from the 
digital economy.  
Fast  economic  growth  does  not  happen  without  shaking  a  society's  economic,  social,  cultural, 
political  and  institutional  equilibria.    This  'shaking'  is  both  a  condition  and  a  consequence  of 
economic  acceleration.    It  is  both  an  effect  of  economic,  social,  cultural,  political  and  institutional 
disruption and a cause of economic, social, cultural, political and institutional disruption.  This is not 
a moral judgement; it is a statement of what I believe is a sober understanding of the state of affairs. 
In  the  well-known  words  of  the  Foreword  to  the  Second  Edition  of  Liquid  Modernity,  the  late 
Zygmunt Bauman, remarks that “Forms of modern life may differ in quite a few respects – but what 
unites  them  all  is  precisely  their  fragility,  temporariness,  vulnerability  and  inclination  to  constant 
change.”  Bauman’s “liquid modernity” is characterised by, I quote him, “the growing conviction that 
change  is  the  only  permanence,  and  uncertainty  the  only  certainty.    A  hundred  years  ago  'to  be 
modern'  meant  to  chase  'the  final  state  of  perfection'  --  now  it means  an  infinity  of  improvement, 
with no 'final state' in sight and none desired.” 
Of course Joseph Schumpeter, almost sixty years before (and he was not the first one), had already 
emphasised  the  centrality  of  the  disruptive  process  of  transformation  that  characterises  modern 
economic reality.  He described it as “…by nature a form or method of economic change and not only 
never  is  but  never  can  be  stationary.  [...]  The  fundamental  impulse  that  sets  and  keeps  […]  (it)  in 
motion  comes  from  the  new  consumers’  goods,  the  new  methods  of  production  or  transportation, 
the new markets, the new forms of industrial organization […] (as a) process of industrial mutation 
that  incessantly  revolutionizes  the  economic  structure from  within,  incessantly  destroying  the  old 
one, incessantly creating a new one.” 
When  confronted  with  this  state  of  affairs  –  a  state  of  affairs  that  is  admittedly  disquieting  and 
unsettling – the worst possible reaction is to retreat into nostalgic denial, and to pretend that we are 
living  in  temporary  blips  of  disequilibrium,  in  exceptional  situations,  that  will  at  some  unspecified 
point  in  time  revert  to  a  blissful  state  of  economic,  social,  cultural,  political  and  institutional 
equilibria.  The only reasonable approach is to endeavour tirelessly and to the best of our technical 
ability to navigate a reality that is complex, characterised by change and prone to crises.  If there is 
no going back, then going forward we can only go forward.  
Navigating this reality requires us to be constantly vigilant to the risks involved, a task that requires 
us  to  understand  reality  and  to  deal  with  it  to  best of  our  technical  competences.    Change  brings 
with  it  challenges  and  opportunities,  which  challenges  and  opportunities  easily  morph  into  each 
other, and generate further challenges and opportunities.  
Page | 10 
Of  course,  the  financial  system,  like  any  other,  cannot  reduce  risk  to  zero.  We  will  always  face 
inappropriate  behaviour,  but  we  are  confident  that  Malta’s  financial  system  can  withstand  the 
shocks generated by such behaviour, given constant vigilance. 
Precisely because the economy is everybody’s business, it is in everybody’s business that we do not 
underestimate  the  critical  importance  of  the  technical  competences  required  to  understand  and 
manage  the  challenges  and  opportunities  that  change  inevitably  implies.    It  is  an  aspect  of 
contemporary  reality  where  words  matter,  where  words  are  performative,  where  they  have 
practical consequences, where – therefore – it is critical that we know what we are talking about. 
In this address today, my colleagues and I have highlighted some of the issues we face as we deal 
with change within our remit and within perspective of our main institutional objective, namely to 
maintain price stability within the framework of our enthusiastically committed membership of the 
Eurosystem  and  our  participation  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy.    The  Central  Bank  of  Malta’s  Mission  Statement,  declares  that  amongst  our 
institutional  obligations,  we  must  “contribute  effectively  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  by 
identifying  and  assessing  systemic  risks  and  imbalances,  and  making  the  appropriate  policy 
recommendations”, and that “we must formulate and implement a macro-prudential policy to fulfil 
the tasks of the Bank as the national macro-prudential authority”.  We will continue to do so with all 
the energy, consistency and competence required. 
Page | 11 
