 An address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at UBS's Ninth Annual Economics Conference 
 The Radisson Blu Hotel, Cape Town 
19 October 2018 
The monetary policy outlook and challenges in South Africa 
   Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
 Thank you for having me here today.  
 During my speech, I will discuss the outlook for the South African economy and the 
current  stance  of  monetary  policy.  I  will  also  touch  on  recent  trends  in  the  global 
economy and the influence that these are having on South Africa.   
 Global economic developments 
 Global economic developments can increasingly be characterised as asynchronous 
and risk-prone.  
 Growth in the United States (US) appears to be diverging from that of other advanced 
economies. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects growth in the eurozone, 
the United Kingdom (UK) and Japan to be slower in 2018 than in 2017, moderating 
to 2.0%, 1.4% and 1.1% respectively.1 Meanwhile, US economic growth is forecast to 
accelerate this year to 2.9% from an already strong level of 2.2% in 2017.  
 The opening up of a significant growth gap is, in part, related to the fiscal stance of the 
US  relative  to  other  large  advanced  economies.  The  US  budget  deficit  for 2018  is 
                                                           
1 International Monetary Fund. (October 2018). World Economic Outlook. 
 Page 1 of 8 
expected to rise to 4.7% of gross domestic product (GDP) – the largest in six years. 
Conversely,  Germany  is  expected  to  record  its  largest  budget  surplus  in  a 
decade, while  Japan  is  forecast  to  narrow  its  deficit  to  3.7%  of  GDP.  The  UK  has 
recently  moved  to  a  slightly  more  stimulatory  stance,  with  its  2018  deficit  rising 
marginally to 2% of GDP, but this remains a small budget shortfall relative to every 
other year of the past decade.2 
 A strong fiscal impulse in the US alongside low levels of unemployment and gradually 
rising inflation is providing the justification for further US monetary policy tightening. 
One could argue that US monetary policy has been diverging from that of other large 
advanced economies for a number of years. But, with the latest fiscal stimulus, this 
divergence looks set to widen further.  
 As  of  last  month,  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  had  hiked  its  benchmark  interest  rate 
eight times in less than three years – on each occasion by a quarter of one per cent. 
Meanwhile,  the  so-called  ‘dot  plot’  published  by  the  Fed’s  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee indicates that the measured pace of US interest rate increases is likely to 
continue in 2019.  
 In  Japan,  the  benchmark  interest  rate  is  in  negative  territory  and  large-scale 
asset purchases remain underway. The European Central Bank is gradually becoming 
less accommodative as it tapers its asset purchase programme, but it is guiding for its 
benchmark deposit rate to remain slightly below 0% for at least another year. The UK, 
meanwhile, has hiked its benchmark interest rate twice since last year when it was at 
its lowest level of the cycle.  
 Thus,  two  important  trends  are  apparent.  First,  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced 
economies  is  becoming  less  accomodative  overall.  Second,  the  US  is  far  more 
advanced  in  its  tightening  cycle,  no  longer  describing  its  policy  stance  as 
accommodative. As a result, global financing conditions are tightening.  
                                                            
2 International Monetary Fund. (October 2018). World Economic Outlook Database. 
 Page 2 of 8 
It has historically been the case that upswings in the US interest rate cycle have given 
rise  to  growth  and  financial  stability  risks  in  the  emerging  markets.  On  the  whole, 
emerging markets appear to be relatively more resilient today than they were in the 
1990s,  for  example,  when  rising  US  interest  rates  precipitated  a  widespread  crisis. 
This  resilience  has  in  part  been  supported  by  the  development  of  domestic  capital 
markets (which reduces reliance on external debt), a movement towards more flexible 
exchange  rate  regimes,  and  increased  self-insurance  through  the  build-up  of 
substantial foreign-currency reserve buffers. 
 Nevertheless,  US  policy  continues  to  meaningfully  affect  financial  conditions 
elsewhere  due  to  the  widespread  use  of  US  Treasury  bonds  as  a  global  risk-free 
benchmark  as  well  as  the  dominant  role  that  the  dollar  plays  in  global  trade  and 
finance. Furthermore, it has recently been estimated that countries representing more 
than half of global GDP have principally anchored their currencies to the US dollar3, 
which implies a link between the monetary policy of these countries and that of the 
US.  
 For many emerging markets, the tightening global financing conditions are giving rise 
to capital outflows. While the forecast for emerging market and developing economies 
is one of gradually accelerating growth over the medium term1, these capital outflows 
are  exposing  vulnerabilities  in  some  countries.  Moreover,  they  are  giving  rise  to 
currency  weakness  and,  in  turn,  higher  inflation  across  a number  of  emerging 
economies. South Africa has been no exception.  
 Global financial market volatility is being exacerbated by trade tensions between the 
US and various other large economies, in particular China. Increased tariffs, if they 
persist, threaten to reduce global trade volumes and disrupt complex supply chains.  
 The recent rise in oil prices is a further challenge, driving up inflation and weighing on 
the trade balance of oil-importing countries. The price of Brent crude oil has doubled 
since early 2016, but remains well below the high of approximately US$154 reached 
                                                           
3 Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. (2017). Exchange arrangements entering the 21st century: 
which anchor will hold? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23134.  
 Page 3 of 8 
in  2008.  However,  when  priced  in  the  currencies  of  emerging  markets  like  Brazil, 
Mexico or South Africa, Brent crude oil is back near its historical highs.     
 Notwithstanding these concerning developments, global growth on aggregate remains 
relatively strong and is expected to moderate only marginally over the medium term. 
This trend is also reflected in the forecasts for South Africa’s major trading partners 
where, on average, GDP growth is expected to slow slightly from 3.6% in both 2017 
and 2018 to 3.5% in both 2019 and 2020.   
 South  Africa  faces  two  key  external  risks  over  the  coming  months.  The  first  is 
a possible sharp and sustained drop in capital inflows, as US interest rates increase. 
The second is a further substantial rise in oil prices. The two could also conceivably 
occur simultaneously. If so, South Africa would face increased inflationary pressure 
and a further drag on household disposable income.  
 Domestic economic developments 
 The  domestic  economy  has  substantially  underperformed  in  2018  relative  to 
expectations  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  the  longer-term  trend. 
Indeed, the  technical  recession  recorded  in  the first  half  of  the  year  surprised  most 
economic analysts.  
 At  the  January  meeting  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC),  we  had  forecast 
GDP growth of 1.4% for this year. By the September MPC meeting, this was revised 
down  to  0.7%.  The  weakness  in  economic  activity  witnessed  in  2018  reflects 
a combination  of  transitory  factors  and  more  persistent  constraints.  Poor  weather 
conditions  exacerbated  the  fall  in  agricultural  output  from  2017’s  elevated  level. 
Meanwhile, ongoing policy uncertainty and weak domestic demand resulted in a lack 
of business investment and hiring.  
 Moving into 2019, we are anticipating an economic rebound driven largely by an export 
recovery  and  improved  growth  in  fixed  investment.  Household  and  government 
spending growth is projected to remain stable. We believe that the relatively weak level 
of the exchange rate, alongside firm global growth, will provide support to the export 
 Page 4 of 8 
sector  over  the  coming  quarters.  This,  in  turn,  is  projected  to  gradually  lift  private-
sector capital formation. Furthermore, as the transitory shocks of 2018 fade, the low 
base that they would have established will support the 2019 growth rate somewhat.  
 In  order  to  determine  whether  the  economy  is  operating  with  spare  capacity,  we 
estimate a level of potential output and compare it to the actual level of output. Based 
on our estimates, potential growth has fallen substantially: from levels in excess of 4% 
per  year  in  the  mid-2000s  to  an  average  of  1.2%  since  2015.  This  reflects,  among 
other things, a sharp slowdown in the growth of fixed investment, skills constraints, 
and weak productivity gains.  
 Even with an unusually low level of potential growth, the South African economy has 
consistently  failed  to  reach  its  potential.  This  has  been  underscored  by  the  recent 
recession, which produced a more negative output gap estimate of -1.5% of GDP for 
the  second  quarter  of  2018  –  the  widest  gap  in  a  decade.  Given  the  weak  starting 
point, the output gap is now projected to close only in the final quarter of 2020 – a full 
six months later than the MPC had predicted at its July meeting.  
 The  relatively  large  output  gap,  alongside  low  food  prices  and  the  effect  of 
an exchange  rate  appreciation  in  2017  and  early  2018,  has  constrained  inflation. 
For example, in August, core inflation had moderated to 4.2% year on year. This was 
the  11th  straight  month  in  which  core  inflation  had  remained  at,  or below,  the 
4.5% midpoint  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  (SARB)  inflation  target  range. 
However, headline inflation that same month was higher at 4.9% year on year.  
 Much  of  the  gap  between  these  two  measures  reflects  demand-insensitive 
administered price growth, which in August stood at 12.1% year on year. In this regard, 
it must be highlighted that greater restraint over the rise of administrative prices, to the 
extent that it is within the control of the relevant price-setters, could serve to provide 
the  MPC  with  increased  monetary  policy  flexibility  and  potentially  with  room  for  a 
relatively more accommodative stance than would otherwise be the case.  
 As  monetary  policy  operates  with  a  lag,  the  level  of  inflation  that  the  MPC  must 
consider  is  that  which  is  expected  to  prevail  over  the  coming  12-24  months. 
 Page 5 of 8 
Unfortunately, the inflation forecast is far less benign than the levels currently being 
experienced.  Headline  inflation  is expected  to  increase from an  average  of 4.8%  in 
2018 to 5.7% in 2019 and 5.4% in 2020. This includes a forecast peak of 5.9% in the 
second quarter of 2019. The upward trajectory of inflation is driven by the pass-through 
from the recent exchange rate weakness, rising food and oil prices, a narrowing output 
gap, and our expectation that nominal wage growth will remain above the upper end 
of the inflation target range over the forecast horizon.  
 The SARB’s Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) forecasts inflation simultaneously with 
the repurchase rate (repo rate) as part of its general equilibrium framework. Given the 
outlook  for  the  exchange  rate,  the  output  gap  and  inflation,  the  QPM  forecasts five 
interest rate hikes of 25 basis points each by the end of 2020. All other things being 
equal, if monetary policy tightens by less than the model predicts, inflation may come 
out higher than is currently expected.  
 The repo rate forecast of the QPM is merely a guideline and does not fully account for 
the balance of risks or for the uncertainty around the variables, both included in and 
excluded  from  the  model.  The  MPC  may  well  diverge  from  this  endogenously 
generated interest rate path. Nevertheless, the key point is this: if the inflation forecast 
plays out as expected, monetary policy tightening will be required to stop inflation, and 
potentially also inflation expectations, from moving outside of the SARB’s target range 
for an extended period of time.  
 The likelihood of slightly higher nominal interest rates over the medium term must be 
put in context, however. Monetary policy has been, and remains, accommodative. Had 
the economy not been so weak, the policy stance would  in all likelihood have  been 
different.   
 It is also worth bearing in mind that it is the real repo rate that is relevant when thinking 
about the policy stance. Thus, monetary policy can remain accommodative of the large 
negative output gap, even as the nominal interest rate rises, if  it is rising alongside 
higher expected inflation.  
  Page 6 of 8 
From this discussion, it should be clear that the MPC faces a challenging outlook. It is 
difficult to balance the large negative output gap and downside risks to growth against 
the rising inflation trajectory and upside risks to inflation. This is further complicated by 
significant uncertainty around the forecast for key variables, including the oil price and 
the  exchange  rate,  not  to  mention  the  possible  consequences  of  escalating  trade 
tensions. 
 During periods such as the one we are currently in, calls for much easier monetary 
policy  become  more  common,  for  understandable  reasons.  However,  as  we  have 
been  at  pains  to  point  out,  the  main  drivers  of  the  current  weakness  in  economic 
activity are structural in nature. Monetary policy is rather constrained in the support it 
is able to provide under such circumstances. 
 Indeed, it would be imprudent to provide additional monetary stimulus in the face of 
elevated 
inflation  projections,  emerging  market 
turbulence,  and  a  domestic 
environment characterised by policy uncertainty and lofty risk premiums. Under these 
conditions, the growth benefits of such a stimulus would likely be muted. But, more 
importantly, monetary easing would raise the spectre of an upward inflation spiral. This 
is  not  merely  theoretical;  there  are  numerous  examples  of  such  outcomes  among 
emerging  markets  today.  We  simply  will  not  allow  our  hard-won  credibility  to  be 
squandered in that way. 
 Those who call for increased monetary accommodation often do so in the name of the 
poor. However, recent IMF research shows that the poor benefit most when inflation 
is low and they are least adversely affected by rising interest rates.4 This is because 
the poor are less able to shield themselves from the effects of inflation and tend to 
have lower exposure to floating interest rate debt. Therefore, a loose monetary policy 
is not likely to be pro-poor, nor would it be a net benefit to the economy over the longer 
term.  
 In  fact,  the  loss  of  central  bank  credibility,  especially  in  cases  where  their 
independence is questioned, comes with high social costs over the longer term. This 
                                                           
4 International Monetary Fund. (2018). South Africa Article 4 Consultation.   
 Page 7 of 8 
is  because  very  dramatic  steps  are  required  to  contain  inflation  and  stabilise  the 
economy once market confidence in a central bank is lost. The recent steep tightening 
in the policy rates of Argentina and Turkey, to 73% and 24% respectively, serves as a 
stark reminder that the erosion of central bank credibility and independence comes at 
a steep cost. 
 Monetary  policy  is  far  better  utilised  as  a  tool  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and 
ensure that all South Africans are provided with a degree of certainty about prices in 
the future. Indeed, this is the only way in which it can positively contribute to long-run 
investment and growth, and thus fulfil its constitutional mandate of ‘protecting the value 
of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the 
Republic’.  
 Concluding remarks 
 The MPC faces a difficult balancing act. We do not want to unduly constrain an already 
weak economy, but we must also ensure that the average South African’s purchasing 
power remains intact. Hence, the repo rate may rise gradually over the medium term, 
in a manner consistent with keeping inflation inside the target range. However, we are 
not bound to any particular path of action. Rather, the MPC will continue to conduct 
policy commensurate with the forecast and the balance of risks as these stand at the 
time of each meeting.  
 Thank you. 
 Page 8 of 8 
