Øystein Olsen: Navigating normalisation
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Bank of
Thailand – OMFIF High-level Seminar, Bangkok, 9 October 2018.
 First, let me thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I am very happy to visit the Bank
of Thailand and to participate on this panel.
The financial crisis demanded powerful economic policy measures. Monetary policy had to take
on substantial responsibility, in Norway as in many other countries. As we are hopefully heading
for more normal times, it is important to evaluate our policy framework. Our experience is that a
flexible inflation targeting regime has helped dampen the impact on the real economy. In recent
years, output and employment volatility has been relatively limited despite large shocks to the
Norwegian economy.
The  exchange  rate  has  played  an  important  role  as  a  shock  absorber,  especially  during  the
financial crisis and in periods when oil prices have fallen. At the same time, the interest rate level
abroad  places  limitations  on  the  room  for  manoeuvre  in  monetary  policy  in  a  small  open
economy like Norway.
Our economy and economic policy
Before I elaborate on this, I would like to give you some background on my country. Norway is a
small country with a little more than five million inhabitants. The economy is open; total imports
and exports make up about 2/3 of GDP. The public sector benefits from the government’s large
revenues  from  petroleum  extraction,  and  although  the  direct  employment  effect  is  small,  the
impact on the overall economy is significant.
These  specific  features  of  the  Norwegian  economy  are  important  concerns  behind  the
framework  for  economic  policy. Fiscal policy is governed by a fiscal rule, designed to insulate
public  finances  from  oil  price  volatility.  The  government’s  large  petroleum  revenues  are
channelled into the Government Pension Fund Global and the fund’s capital is invested abroad.
The fiscal rule specifies that only the expected real return of the fund, on average over the cycle,
is to be spent over public budgets every year. With this set-up, the fund also provides leeway for
discretionary  fiscal  expansion  when  needed  and  enables  future  generations  to  benefit  from
Norway’s petroleum revenues.
Monetary policy has targeted low and stable inflation since 2001. After an adjustment earlier this
year, the operational target of monetary policy is now annual consumer price inflation of close to
2  percent  over  time.  Inflation  targeting  shall  be  forward-looking  and  flexible  so  that  it  can
contribute to high and stable output and employment and to counteracting the build-up of financial
imbalances.
Norges Bank sets the key policy rate with a view to stabilising inflation at the target in the medium
term. The horizon will depend on the disturbances to which the economy is exposed and the
effects on the outlook for inflation and for output and employment.
Large  and  sudden  outflows  of  capital  are  a  potential  source  of  instability  for  small,  open
economies.  Large  exchange  rate  movements  have  at  times  been  a  source  of  instability.  In
Norway, the household, banking and corporate sectors as a whole take on currency risk to a
limited extent. Furthermore, government finances are solid, and fiscal policy is not affected to any
great extent by short-term exchange rate movements. This allows the exchange rate to play an
important role in absorbing shocks to the economy. We have thus been able to reap the benefits
of an efficient international capital market without having to deal with its challenges.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, in a world of high capital mobility and extensive trade, monetary policy’s room
for manoeuvre is constrained by the exchange rate channel. In a small open economy with a
floating exchange rate, the domestic interest rate can differ from interest rates abroad. However,
an  interest  rate  differential  that  becomes  too  wide  can  lead  to  considerable  exchange  rate
volatility, which will in turn feed through to inflation, output and employment. Thus, the domestic
interest  rate  cannot  be  set  without  regard  to  the  level  of  external  interest  rates.  The  room  for
manoeuvre in monetary policy is further constrained in periods when external interest rates are
close to or below zero.
Although the financial crisis in 2008 had a marked impact on Norway, our economy was affected
to a lesser extent than most other advanced economies. There are a number of reasons for this.
The Norwegian economy was in an upturn when the crisis hit. Commodity prices fell, but soon
rebounded.  Norwegian  banks  were  not  directly  exposed  to  loss-making  financial  instruments
backed  by  subprime  US  housing  mortgages.  The  banks  suffered  for  a  short  period  when
international liquidity dried up, but these problems were resolved. In addition, substantial fiscal
leeway  enabled  policy  to  respond  forcefully,  allied  with  a  slashing  of  interest  rates,  from  5.75
percent in September 2008 to 1.25 percent in June 2009. The economy recovered rather quickly,
and  we  did  not  need  to  resort  to  quantitative  easing  or  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange
market.
When the oil price plummeted in 2014 and 2015, the value of our currency fell sharply, reflecting
weaker terms of trade. Norges Bank reduced the key policy rate. This dampened the decline and
facilitated structural adjustments in the Norwegian economy. As the krone depreciation did not
result  in  demands  for  wage  compensation,  competitiveness  improved.  Fiscal  policy  also
responded forcefully. Together, this enabled a reasonably swift return to more normal economic
conditions. At the same time, low interest rates contributed to increasing housing prices and debt
levels in Norway, as in some other countries.
We are ready to normalise monetary policy
Over the past couple of years, growth in the Norwegian economy has been solid, underpinned by
an economic upturn among our trading partners, increasing oil prices and low interest rates. The
labour market has improved. Spare capacity is gradually diminishing, and capacity utilisation now
appears to be close to a normal level. Underlying inflation is close to the 2 percent inflation target.
Against this background, Norges Bank increased the key policy rate in September –for the first
time in seven years. If the economy evolves as we now expect, this is the beginning of a gradual
normalisation  of  the  interest  rate  level.  A  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  and  mounting
household debt burdens has led to greater uncertainty surrounding the effects of higher interest
rates.  This  suggests  a  cautious  approach  to  interest  rate  setting.  Rising  protectionism
internationally  and  turbulence  in  some  emerging  economies  adds  to  the  risk  picture,  with
potentially strong negative effects for Norway.
Communication is an important part of our monetary policy. We aim to be transparent and to
communicate frequently, simply and clearly. We have published our own interest rate projections
since 2005. All through this year we have repeatedly indicated that the key policy rate most likely
would be raised after summer.
Financial stability
The  financial  crisis  was  a  reminder  that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  financial
stability.  In  an  environment  of  low  global  interest  rates,  there  is  a  clear  risk  of  a  build-up  of
financial imbalances, which increases the risk of new economic downturns further out. Norges
Bank has thus in periods kept its key policy rate somewhat higher than implied by a short-term
goal  of  inflation  and  output  stability.  This  does  not  mean  that  asset  prices  or  debt  have  been
given independent roles as target variables of monetary policy. The decisive factor has been the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
consideration of economic stability over time.
The main responsibility for counteracting financial imbalances cannot lie with monetary policy. If
monetary policy seeks to pursue goals beyond its reach, the credibility of monetary policy will
gradually weaken. Regulation and oversight of financial institutions must therefore continue to be
the first line of defence against shocks to the financial system.
The  regulation  of  Norwegian  banks  largely  follows  EU  rules,  which  in  turn  are  governed  by
guidelines decided by the Basel Committee. Generally, we have been able to implement stricter
regulation  more  rapidly  than  most  other  countries,  partly  because  the  economic  downturn  in
Norway  has  been  relatively  mild.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  has  also  introduced  residential
mortgage lending regulations to slow down the increase in house prices.
Conclusion
I  believe  both  international  and  our  own  experiences  with  inflation  targeting  have  been
predominantly  positive.  While  the  exchange  rate  targeting  regime  that  prevailed  until  the  late
1990s tended to function procyclically, flexible inflation targeting has contributed to stabilising the
economy when it has been exposed to shocks. In Norway, we can now look back on a quarter of
a century of price stability. At the same time, employment has shown less variation since 2001
than  in  previous  periods,  in  spite  of  the  substantial  disturbances  that  have  hit  the  Norwegian
economy.
In the early years of inflation targeting, policymakers had high ambitions of fine-tuning inflation to
meet  the  target  and  of  achieving  this  goal  within  a  clearly  defined  time  horizon.  But  useful
lessons  have  been  learned.  In  the  face  of  various  kinds  of  shocks,  small  open  economies  in
particular found that bringing inflation rapidly back to target can have undesirable consequences
for the real economy. It has been essential to practise flexibility in inflation targeting to address
shocks. The horizon for achieving the target has been lengthened. The latest adjustment of the
mandate for monetary policy in Norway clarifies this flexible interpretation of the inflation target.
We believe the framework is well suited to guiding monetary policy through the years ahead.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
