    Remarks by Timothy Lane 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
Haskayne School of Business  
University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta 
October 1, 2018 
Decrypting “Crypto” 
Introduction 
Good afternoon.  
  Some of you here today may have purchased bitcoins or one of the other 
cryptocurrencies or products that have launched in recent years. I’m not here to 
give you investment advice about them. Rather, I want to share with you our 
current thinking about these virtual products.  
Investors worldwide have taken an increasing stake in them over the past few 
years, even as their market values have fluctuated widely. Around 2,000 crypto 
products are now available, with dozens more launching every month.1 Trading 
volumes have grown almost 100-fold in just the past two years. Media interest in 
them has inflated at a similar pace, often including a thick layer of hype. The 
recent collapse in the market valuations of many cryptoassets—almost 40 per 
cent of those originally launched are now worthless—seems to have done little to 
dampen enthusiasm.2  
Some investors see these products as potentially world-changing; others as an 
example of “popular delusions and the madness of crowds.”3 Possibly both are 
right. New financial or technological innovations often ignite market bubbles as 
users race to discover their most popular and profitable applications. Think of the 
“dot-com” bubble of the late 1990s, when prices of many Internet-related stocks 
shot into the stratosphere. While that period ended in tears for many investors, a 
handful of new companies that rose at that time, such as Google and Amazon, 
have brought about profound changes in the way we work, play, shop and live. 
The Bank of Canada is not responsible for regulating these crypto products. 
Indeed, the term “cryptocurrencies” is a misnomer. We prefer to call them 
 1 See coinmarketcap.com. 
2 There is now even a website, deadcoins.com, that lists the failed cryptoassets and the reasons 
they collapsed.  
3 C. Mackay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (London: 
Richard Bentley,1841).  
 I would like to thank James Chapman and Scott Hendry for their help in preparing this speech. 
 Not for publication before October 1, 2018 
1 pm Eastern Time 
 - 2 - 
“cryptoassets” because, as I will discuss in a moment, they don’t do a good job of 
performing the basic functions of money. But as they evolve, they may touch on 
the Bank of Canada’s core functions: monetary policy, financial stability, 
payments and currency.  
In my remarks today, I’ll put these crypto developments in context, discuss the 
need for globally harmonized regulations and highlight the Bank’s research and 
responses to public interest in cryptoassets. 
Currency and trust 
Bitcoin and many similar products were created in the hope that they would 
become the money of the future. How well do they stack up against the money of 
the past and present? This includes bank notes as well as bank deposits that can 
be accessed with a debit card or—for your parents’ generation—by cheque.4  
Let’s consider bank notes. One of our core functions at the Bank of Canada is to 
provide bank notes that Canadians can use with confidence. This is perhaps the 
most visible aspect of our work. 
We all take for granted that if you want to buy a coffee you can pay with cash. 
The coffee shop deposits the cash in the bank and uses the funds to pay for 
beans and baristas’ wages. The cash is universally accepted by all parties. Why 
is that?  
First, bank notes are a simple but effective technology for keeping track of who is 
paying how much to whom. Because a bank note is a physical thing, you can’t 
spend the same note twice. Many Canadians still prefer the simplicity of cash for 
small transactions. And cash works even when systems are down. 
Second, bank notes offer privacy for your transactions. You can use them without 
giving anyone your personal or banking information. Using cash avoids the risk of 
being hacked or having your card compromised. Privacy is a controversial 
attribute given that bank notes are a preferred medium of exchange for all kinds 
of illicit transactions. But for entirely legitimate reasons, most people place a high 
value on the privacy of their financial transactions. 
Third, we incorporate into our bank notes the most advanced security features to 
ensure they are difficult to fake and easy to authenticate. We also work closely 
with law-enforcement agencies to deter counterfeiting. 
Fourth, the acceptance of money is a matter of social convention. People accept 
cash as a means of payment because they know that others will do the same. 
This convention is enshrined in law: Canadians understand that we and the 
Royal Canadian Mint have a monopoly on the issuance of what’s called legal 
tender, the official money used in Canada.  
Finally, bank notes are denominated in dollars that offer stable purchasing 
power. The Bank of Canada helps preserve their value by keeping inflation low, 
stable and predictable. Since the early 1990s, when we adopted our inflation-
 4 Credit cards are another popular method of payment in Canada, but they are not considered 
money because they do not store value. They only commit the card holder to pay later using 
another method. 
 - 3 - 
targeting monetary policy framework, we have maintained inflation close to the 
midpoint of our 1 to 3 per cent target range. This has allowed Canadians to make 
spending and investment decisions with the confidence that the future 
purchasing power of their money is secure and predictable.  
After a quarter century of successful inflation control in Canada, overall price 
stability has become the new norm. But some of us can recall the impact on 
households of spiralling inflation during the 1980s, when the interest rate on 
mortgages hit 20 per cent. Even today, while many countries have tamed 
inflation, some like Venezuela are coping with hyperinflation that is causing 
widespread hunger and hardship.  
The trust and confidence that Canadians have in our notes and in their 
purchasing power is based on our track record and reputation. 
Cryptoassets: what’s their story? 
So where do cryptoassets fit into this picture?  
Their proponents argue that the great benefit of Bitcoin and other forms of crypto 
cash is that they eliminate the need for public institutions like a central bank or 
large commercial banks. People using this system, they argue, don’t have to trust 
an individual or institution. That’s true, but they do have to trust the technology.  
Cryptoassets are so called because they use cryptography to validate 
transactions and prevent fraud. Records are kept through blockchain 
technology—a digital ledger stored on thousands of computers worldwide that 
keeps track of every coin or token issued. Anybody trying to fraudulently use their 
crypto cash multiple times will likely be caught by the validation process on all 
these computers.  
The use of encryption gives cryptoassets a similar level of privacy as bank notes. 
And they are as light and borderless as air. You can transfer them across town or 
across continents much more easily than you can a suitcase filled with $100 bills.  
A key feature of most cryptoassets is that their value is not tied to the dollar or 
other national currencies but has its own unit.  
Blockchain provides a mechanism for creating new tokens that makes it difficult 
to generate more in any way other than as prescribed by its underlying software. 
To create new units of value, cryptoassets must typically be “mined” by running 
energy-intensive computer computations. This is, in effect, a form of pre-
programmed monetary policy: the purchasing power of the crypto tokens is 
determined by supply and demand, where the supply is limited by the enabling 
software.5 This pre-programmed mechanism for creating cryptoassets was 
originally a key selling point. Those who believed that central banks could not be 
trusted to maintain the value of money were attracted by the idea of a money that 
is untouched by any public institution or individual. 
 5 However, Bitcoin allows the possibility of “forking” or the creation of two separate versions of the 
blockchain and two different cryptoassets. This implies that Bitcoin’s claim to complete control of 
monetary growth is overstated. See J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier, “Blockchain Economics,” 
August 25, 2018. 
 - 4 - 
Ironically, this very mechanism has turned out to be its fundamental flaw. When 
the limited supply of tokens meets large flows of demand from enthusiasts, the 
result—as we have seen—is wild fluctuations in the value of cryptoassets. These 
fluctuations have drawn in even more speculative money, which has further 
amplified the price movements. Indeed, many Canadians who purchased bitcoins 
in 2017 reported that they did so for “investment” purposes—and that really 
means speculation.6  
The implication of these price movements is that the purchasing power of 
cryptoassets is far less stable than that of almost any sovereign money. The 
value of a bitcoin in US dollars topped $20,000 in the last year and is now down 
to around $6,000. Such wide price movements make it unlikely that the current 
crop of cryptoassets would ever be used as money for ordinary purposes when 
there is a stable national currency. 
Cryptoassets are also very expensive to use. Transaction costs were high in 
2017—as much as $55 per transaction—compared with almost zero for cash.7 
These costs have come down since then, but if transaction volumes push the 
limits of the network again, costs will jump back up. 
In short, the current crop of cryptoassets is not about to replace the Canadian 
dollar or other national currencies. They are products that may be largely of 
interest to three kinds of users:  
 investors, who should be fully aware of the risks they are taking; 
residents of countries where there is no trustworthy national currency; and 
those undertaking illicit transactions, including tax evasion, money 
laundering and terrorist financing, for which the property of pseudonymity 
makes them an ideal way to move funds. 
The crypto ecosystem  
So far, I have been talking about digital tokens launched with the ambition of 
becoming a form of currency. Now, many digital tokens are being created without 
any such ambition.  
Every month, dozens of new crypto products are launched through initial coin 
offerings (ICOs). In an ICO, investors purchase a new digital token in exchange 
for cash or for other, more established cryptoassets. Some of these resemble the 
initial public offerings that private companies use to raise capital by offering their 
stock to the public for the first time. In this way, they are like crowdfunding—a 
means to raise equity capital without jumping through all the regulatory hoops 
needed to issue publicly traded securities. Other ICOs offer the purchaser the 
right to use services on a platform that has yet to be built—and are thus more like 
the economic equivalent of a gift card. In yet other cases, the promised benefits 
to the purchaser are more nebulous. 
 6 See the results of the 2017 Bitcoin Omnibus Survey conducted by the Bank of Canada. 
7 See Bitcoin average transaction fee. 
  - 5 - 
Those ICOs that function in a similar way as shares in a new company raise all 
the same issues as any other stock offering. Their value is based on the profits 
from some enterprise, so investors need to be able to verify that the enterprise 
actually exists and keep track of what it is doing with the funding it raises.  
In practice, ICOs have not always met that standard. For example, failure to meet 
funding targets hasn’t always resulted in the return of money to investors. And in 
cases where funding targets were exceeded, it’s not always clear how ICOs are 
using the extra money.  
Thus, while there are certainly advantages to a flexible, technologically advanced 
method of funding innovative enterprises, investors in ICOs need to be wary of 
fraud and misrepresentation.  
Given the steady introduction of new types, crypto products are often hard to 
classify. Many will prove to be short-lived.  
Yet it would be a mistake to dismiss all these innovations as fleeting fads. Some 
products may turn out to be smart and useful—by finding better, cheaper, more 
competitive ways of filling an actual need. If they do that, they could also 
challenge the existing business models of established financial institutions. For 
example, if the risks are properly managed, cryptoassets could potentially serve 
as a new funding tool, allowing small businesses to find the capital they need. 
Some also argue that cryptoassets could deliver financial services to segments 
of the population that are underserved by existing financial institutions. 
Even if the products themselves ultimately fail, they advance the development of 
technologies that are likely to be useful for a range of other purposes. 
Cryptoassets spurred the development of distributed ledger technology (DLT), 
which may have many valuable applications. At the Bank of Canada, through our 
Project Jasper, we have been exploring the potential use of DLT to streamline 
the settlement of financial transactions and the associated back-office activities.8 
This technology may have many other uses, such as registries for anything from 
land to commodities, trade finance and parolees in China. 
Although cryptoassets themselves exist only in cyberspace, they connect with 
the real economy and the financial system at various junctions—comprising a 
kind of crypto ecosystem. One point of contact is the direct use of these products 
to pay for goods and services over the Internet. A second is ICOs.  
Third, certain investment products in the mainstream financial system are linked 
in some way to the valuations of cryptoassets. These include derivatives 
contracts that have been launched on some commodity exchanges and 
exchange-traded funds.  
A fourth important point of contact is crypto exchanges, where cryptoassets are 
traded for money or for other cryptoassets. Crypto exchanges have been set up 
in different ways, which makes them hard to classify. Some exchanges have an 
 8 See Could DLT underpin an entire wholesale payment system? 
   - 6 - 
economic function similar to banks: they hold cryptoassets on behalf of their 
clients, so the client gives up direct control of the cryptoassets themselves and 
has a claim on the exchange.9 Other crypto exchanges function more like 
electronic trading platforms for cryptoassets.  
The regulatory arena 
The newness of crypto products and the fact that they claim to be delivering 
some of the same services provided by regulated financial institutions raises key 
questions. What risks could they pose? Should they be regulated? If so, how? 
As I mentioned earlier, the Bank of Canada is not responsible for regulating 
crypto products. Nonetheless, we have been examining their potential impact on 
the stability of Canada’s financial system. We’ve also been participating in 
international research on them, through the Financial Stability Board (FSB), G20 
and G7.  
Regulators need to examine cryptoassets from a number of angles:  
the potential risks to the stability of the financial system,  
the integrity of markets and protection of investors, and 
• 
• 
•  protection against abusive financial flows such as money laundering and 
terrorist financing.  
The consensus of policy-makers is that crypto products do not yet pose financial 
stability risks.10 This is in part because, despite their rapid growth, crypto 
products have a relatively small footprint in the financial system. The market 
capitalization of all cryptoassets was recently estimated at $230 billion and the 
volume of trading in these products at about $15 billion annually. While these 
seem like big numbers, they are dwarfed by other global financial markets: global 
equity markets alone have a market capitalization of around $100 trillion. 
Moreover, crypto products are not deeply interconnected with the mainstream 
financial system. For example, there is little evidence that commercial banks are 
investing in cryptoassets or accepting them as collateral. 
In this context, the immediate priorities are to address the other two issues I 
mentioned: investor protection and abusive financial flows. In these areas, the 
relevant regulators are working hard to adapt their frameworks to cover these 
new products.  
But things are evolving rapidly. Cryptoassets are growing in size, complexity and 
interconnectedness. As the underlying technologies and the design of crypto 
products evolve, we need to be ready to reassess how they might affect financial 
stability. Some potential aspects include the integrity of payment systems, bank 
business models, and the exposures of financial institutions and infrastructures. 
The FSB and related bodies are monitoring this evolution closely.  
 9 In such cases the crypto exchange holds the only copy of the key to the client’s cryptoassets. 
The cryptoassets are thus accessible only to the exchange; the investor holds a claim on the 
exchange.  
10 See the recent FSB report and letter from the FSB Chair to G20 Finance Ministers and Central 
Bank Governors. 
 - 7 - 
Regulators also have to be forward-thinking about what kind of action may be 
required. That means putting in place a framework that is sufficiently adaptable 
so when new products emerge that potentially pose new risks, regulatory 
agencies will be ready.  
Crypto products are already regulated in many countries at the national or 
regional level. But in many jurisdictions the regulatory framework is far from 
complete. Also, given that cryptoassets are global in scope and not confined by 
borders, an emerging problem is the gaps between regulatory regimes.  
Different jurisdictions have adopted different regulatory approaches, depending 
on how they have defined these assets. When a new product is launched, is it 
classified as a payment instrument, a security, a commodity or none of the 
above? Should crypto exchanges be called banks, financial market 
infrastructures or something else? These classifications differ across jurisdictions 
and in some cases remain nebulous.  
Beyond these differences in classification, the regulatory treatment of these 
assets differs. In China, the response has been to ban them. In Japan, 
authorities are creating a framework to manage the risks associated with their 
growth.  
Such differences among regulations globally, together with the incompleteness of 
regulation in many jurisdictions, open room for promoters to engage in regulatory 
arbitrage, developing new products to exploit them. Regulators must decide how 
far they need to go in harmonizing their approaches with other countries. 
Differences in the regulatory treatment of these products for controlling money 
laundering and terrorist financing are a particularly pressing concern.   
Such factors pose key challenges for regulatory agencies. Data and a consistent 
means of collecting them are required to assess emerging risks. And an agreed 
system is needed to classify new products by their attributes and economic 
functions.  
At the same time, we need to avoid regulation that is so heavy-handed or 
cumbersome that it stifles innovation. New crypto products could deliver more of 
what the public wants and bring more competition and financial inclusion to the 
system. Developments in this space could spur the growth of technologies that 
have important positive spinoffs. These concerns must be carefully balanced. 
The regulatory framework in Canada is still a work in progress, but a number of 
steps have been taken by the federal and provincial governments, which share 
jurisdiction in this area. 
In 2014, the federal government amended Canada’s anti-money laundering 
legislation to include businesses dealing in cryptoassets. Regulations based on 
the legislation are now being finalized. The Canada Revenue Agency also 
published a note on the tax laws that apply to cryptoassets. And the Financial 
Consumer Agency of Canada has a useful backgrounder on the risks and tips for 
using cryptoassets. 
At the provincial level, the Canadian Securities Administrators issued a staff 
notice in 2017 on crypto offerings, warning investors about issues such as 
volatility, transparency, valuation, custody and liquidity, as well as the use of 
 - 8 - 
unregulated cryptocurrency exchanges. The notice also offers guidance on the 
applicability of securities laws and what steps businesses should take if they are 
raising capital through ICOs.  
Central bank digital currency 
At the Bank of Canada, we are also considering the potential implications of 
these developments for our own core functions. In particular, we are assessing 
how we could respond if cryptoassets were to evolve in a way that undermines 
our ability to provide Canadians with a means of payment with stable purchasing 
power that they can use with confidence. This is related to our ability to 
implement effective monetary policy as well as to the security and finality of 
settlement we provide through our bank notes. While we do not have any doubts 
currently about our ability to fulfill our mandate, contingency planning is 
important: the changes driven by technology may be rapid.  
In this context, one of our priorities is to explore under what conditions, if any, we 
might recommend to the government that we issue our own digital currency. At 
the same time, we are studying key design questions related to a central bank 
digital currency (CBDC), such as what form it might take and whether it would be 
anonymous like cash. As it turns out, the questions of “under what conditions” 
and “in what form” are closely intertwined. 
The design of a CBDC has important implications for its risks and benefits. For 
example, some major reasons for caution about a central bank digital currency 
are concerns that it could become a vehicle for illicit transactions or that it could 
have significant negative implications for financial intermediation. Unless such 
risks could be managed through appropriate design, the Bank would not 
recommend issuing such a currency. 
Ultimately, then, this exploration is going to require a unique combination of 
economics, technology and business strategy as well as thorough consultations 
with all stakeholders. We have assembled a multidisciplinary team to do this 
work and will provide more details as the research unfolds. We are also 
exchanging information with other central banks, notably the Swedish Riksbank, 
which is well along in examining CBDCs. The results of our work in this area are 
available on a special page on our website.11 
Conclusion 
It’s important that Canadians benefit from financial products and services that are 
better, cheaper and more flexible. At the same time, we will continue to keep a 
close eye on the risks associated with cryptoassets. We are working with our 
domestic and international partners to ensure they do not pose a risk to the 
Canadian or global financial system.  
Canadians need universal access to means of payment that they can trust. As 
advances in technology open up new opportunities and transform the financial 
 11 See Digital Currencies and Fintech. 
  - 9 - 
system, we at the Bank of Canada will continue to do what is needed to maintain 
that trust.  
 