Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 26 November 2018.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  back  at  the  European  Parliament  and  to  appear  again  before  your
Committee for our last exchange of views of the year.
As  you  have  chosen  very  topical  issues  for  our  discussion  today,  I  will  get  started  on  the
substance  without  further  ado.  First,  I  will  share  with  you  our  assessment  of  the  economic
outlook  for  the  euro  area  and  the  implications  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  Second,  I  will
discuss  why  designing  and  implementing  the  necessary  reforms  to  Economic  and  Monetary
Union (EMU) would support the ECB’s monetary policy – and thus the euro area economy at
large.
The euro area outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy
The  data  that  have  become  available  since  my  last  visit  in  September  have  been  somewhat
weaker than expected. Euro area GDP grew by 0.2% in the third quarter. This follows growth of
0.4% in both the first and second quarter of 2018. The loss in growth momentum mainly reflects
weaker trade growth, but also some country and sector-specific factors.
Do we think this slowdown is temporary or more long-lasting?
A gradual slowdown is normal as expansions mature and growth converges towards its long-run
potential. Indeed, looking further ahead, employment growth is expected to slow somewhat as
labour supply shortages become more binding. Savings ratios will also normalise and temper
consumption  dynamics  to  some  degree.  This  is  also  reflected  in  our  staff  projections  from
September, which see annual growth at 2.0% for this year, and then slightly lower rates of 1.8%
in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020.
Some  of  the  slowdown  may  also  be  temporary.  In  fact,  the  latest  data  already  show  some
normalising  of  production  in  the  car  industry  which  has  been  impeded  by  one-off  factors.  In
addition, insofar as world trade stabilises, albeit at a lower level, its drag on growth could also be
temporary. At the same time, risks relating to protectionism, vulnerabilities in emerging markets
and financial market volatility remain prominent.
Underlying  drivers  of  domestic  demand  remain  in  place.  Household  income,  which  underpins
domestic  demand,  continues  to  be  supported  by  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  further
improvements in labour markets. The unemployment rate declined to 8.1% in September 2018,
which is the lowest level observed since late 2008, and employment continued to increase in the
third  quarter.  Moreover,  business  investment  is  supported  by  still  very  favourable  financing
conditions in the euro area, together with solid demand and rising profitability.
Regarding price developments, HICP inflation increased to 2.2% in October 2018, from 2.1% in
September.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  continue  to  be  muted,  but  have  increased  from
earlier lows. Generally, there is good reason to be confident that underlying inflation will gradually
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
rise in the period ahead. Wages are rising as labour markets continue to improve and labour
supply shortages become increasingly binding in some countries. Higher wage growth, as well
as  a  recovery  in  producer  and  import  prices,  is  expected  to  continue  to  support  the  upward
adjustment  in  underlying  inflation.  In  addition,  long-term  market  and  survey-based  inflation
expectations are reasonably well anchored and broadly in line with this outlook.
Overall,  recent  developments  confirm  the  Governing  Council’s  earlier  assessments  of  the
medium-term  inflation  outlook.  The  underlying  strength  of  domestic  demand  and  wages
continues to support our confidence that the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will
proceed, and will be maintained even after a gradual winding down of our net purchases. The
Governing Council therefore continues to anticipate that, subject to incoming data confirming our
medium-term inflation outlook, net asset purchases will come to an end in December 2018.
At  the  same  time,  prevailing  uncertainties  still  call  for  patience,  prudence  and  persistence  in
calibrating  our  monetary  policy  stance.  Significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still  needed  to
support the further build-up of domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over
the  medium  term.  To  ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  our  aim  in  a  sustained
manner, a significant degree of monetary policy stimulus will be maintained, even after the end of
net asset purchases. This will be provided by the enhanced forward guidance pertaining to the
path  of  interest  rates  and  by  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated
reinvestments.
EMU reform and the ECB’s monetary policy
In  keeping  with  the  topics  you  have  chosen  for  today’s  exchange,  let  me  now  discuss  why  a
more complete EMU would support the ECB’s monetary policy.
In  particular,  I  will  discuss  two  sets  of  challenges  which  arise  in  an  incomplete  EMU  where
monetary policy is truly European, while other important parts of economic policy are still handled
at the national level.
First, the euro area is exposed to shocks arising from global shocks or common vulnerabilities.
The 2007–08 financial crisis and its aftermath were a case in point, causing growth to go into
negative territory in all euro area countries in 2009.
What made the euro area different from other economies was the absence of a readily available
area-wide fiscal capacity to complement monetary policy.
Moreover, the lack of a robust regulatory, supervisory and crisis management framework when
the crisis hit gave rise to increased doubts in the solidity of the European banking system. This in
turn affected the financing of the real economy and the transmission of monetary policy.
Second, as we have seen in the past crisis, the euro area can be exposed to the risks originating
from unsustainable domestic policies resulting in excessively high levels of debt, financial sector
vulnerabilities and/or a lack of competitiveness.
Through financial, confidence and trade channels, these risks can spill over to other countries
which have similar fragilities or strong interlinkages with the country where the risk originated.
Such  policies  can  also  fragment  economic  and  financial  conditions,  thereby  hampering  the
homogeneous  transmission  of  our  single  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area.  And
unsustainable  policies  eventually  force  socially  painful  and  financially  costly  economic
adjustments which can undermine cohesion in EMU.
In other words, an incomplete EMU impacts the economic and financial environment in which we
conduct monetary policy.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe has learned this lesson the hard way.
And we have made significant progress in fixing the gaps in EMU’s architecture. For instance, we
now have a much stronger and more integrated framework for financial regulation, supervision
and crisis resolution. You played an essential role in bringing this about. And the framework has
also helped contain any financial stability risks that may emerge during a long period of low rates.
But more progress can and should be made. I would like to mention three areas where work is
still needed.
First, an effective system  for  policy  coordination  is  vital  for  promoting  sound  national  policies,
thus reducing the domestic sources of such shocks and increasing countries’ shock-absorption
capacity when they materialise. This pertains to promoting sound economic and fiscal policies.
For  that,  we  need  to  rekindle  faith  in  our  common  rules  and  ensure  that  they  are  respected.
Additional support from the EU level, as recently proposed by the European Commission, could
be beneficial in implementing reform priorities identified in the European Semester. If euro area
economies had a greater level of resilience, they would also be more likely to react to a common
shock  in  a  similar  way,  thus  reducing  costly  macroeconomic  divergences  which  cannot  be
addressed by our single monetary policy. Developing sound economic structures and institutions
would also lift potential output.
1
Second, as recently advocated by the ECB in its opinion on the establishment of a European
Investment  Stabilisation  Function   ,  the  euro  area  needs  a  fiscal  instrument  to  help  maintain
convergence in the face of large exogenous shocks, thereby also supporting the single monetary
policy. A  fiscal  stabilisation  function  should  focus  on  cyclical  developments,  and  it  should  be
conditional  on  economic  and  fiscal  policies  being  sound  and  fully  respecting  the  EU’s
governance framework. This would in turn contribute to macroeconomic stability both at the euro
area  level  and,  crucially,  in  each  of  its  Member  States. And  it  would  allow  action  to  be  taken
before recourse to the ESM needs to be made.
For  situations  where  market  instability  materialises,  the  ESM  remains  essential  to  credibly
address the causes of financial instability and contagion. It is important that the ESM is provided
with  the  financial  instruments  necessary  to  achieve  its  objectives  and  to  support  the  banking
union.  I  thus  welcome  the  ongoing  discussions  on  making  the  ESM  more  effective,  as  also
2
advocated in an ECB opinion on the subject .
Last but not least, completing the banking union and building an ambitious capital markets union
are essential. If we want to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, it is crucial to strengthen the
resilience and integration of the financial sector, thereby also improving the transmission of our
monetary policy.
Of  course,  the  policy  agenda  I  have  just  outlined  would  support  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.
However, its benefits would not end there. The main motivation for these policy initiatives would
be to deliver the tangible benefits of the common currency for all Europeans. Their support for
the euro has increased as EMU has recovered from the crisis, and it now stands at a record
high. We need to ensure they are not disappointed.
Conclusions
I  would  like  to  end  by  saying  that  the  coming  days,  weeks  and  months  until  the  end  of  this
legislature will be decisive in making concrete steps on EMU reform.
This  institution  has  repeatedly  played  a  crucial  and  constructive  role  in  ensuring  that  such
discussions focus on a truly European dimension and on building effective common institutions.
We know that such a shift from coordination to common decision-making, from shared rules to
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutions, is necessary but it requires time.
This should not be an excuse for inaction. Many of the basic steps for this to happen need to be
taken now, namely designing an ambitious reform plan and building trust among all parties.
I am confident that you and the EU leaders will again play an instrumental role in moving this
EMU agenda forward, so that we can deliver tangible results to mark the 20th anniversary of the
euro.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
Opinion  on  a  proposal  for  a  regulation  on  the  establishment  of  a  European  Investment  Stabilisation
Function (CON/2018/51), 9.11.2018. www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2018_51_signed.pdf
Opinion  on  a  proposal 
Fund 
www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/celex_52018ab0020_en_txt.pdf
regulation  on 
OJ 
C 
(CON/2018/20), 
for  a 
220, 
the  establishment  of 
the  European  Monetary
2.
p. 
25.6.2018, 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
