Ca' Foscari University of Venice 
Department of Economics
In praise of popularization
Lectio magistralis by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
and President of the Italian Insurance Supervisory Authority (IVASS)
Salvatore Rossi
Venice, 5 October 2018
Introduction
This lecture stems from a reflection on the way in which we − all of us − 
form our opinions and make decisions. 
The question has many aspects, but here we will deal with one in particular: 
the information that we consume and the sources from which we gather it. 
This is a crucial aspect. Opinions and decisions are, of course, shaped by 
cognitive  processes  and  inspired  by  religious  or  political  persuasions,  but 
the  information  that  we  use  is  their  main  sustenance.  Combined  with  our 
pre-conceptions, they lead us to think one thing or another, and to decide 
accordingly.
And yet, at this historical juncture, Western democracies appear to have 
a problem regarding the quality of the information that is made available 
to the public. A lot of this information, it is said, is false or misleading, 
either through ignorance, superficiality or malice on the part of those who 
produce it. The fake news phenomenon is part of this debate. Of course, 
Italy is not exempt from this problem. On the contrary, it is one of its main 
laboratories.
The  thesis  of  this  lecture  is  that  nowadays  serious  manufacturers  of 
information, and scholars in particular, have what has become an impelling 
and  absolute  duty  to  disseminate  their  knowledge.  This  should  be  their 
main concern. In all fields. Before it is too late. Especially here in Italy. 
Especially when it comes to economics.
The high priests of knowledge versus democracy
Fantastical stories and tall tales have always circulated widely among 
human  beings,  at  all  times  and  in  all  places. A  defining  feature  of  the 
modern era was the emergence and diffusion of Galilean science, according 
to which all claims must be subjected to careful empirical scrutiny and 
there are no absolute dogmas; put simply, we should not believe in fairy 
tales. 
Modern science, regardless of whether it is engaged in sending a rocket 
to the moon or in improving economic welfare, can sometimes be hesitant 
and imprecise, but it is the best that humanity can offer to draw closer to 
natural truths. It feeds on skills and talents, it seeks first and foremost to 
convince the rest of the scientific community of the validity of its findings 
(even at a long remove), it assigns no role to religions, political ideologies, 
fads or mass enchantments. 
For several years now, it has been claimed, in many public debates the 
opinions of qualified persons have been rejected, if not derided. An idea has 
gained currency that there is no such thing as difficult problems and complex 
solutions, and that everything is easy and within everyone’s grasp – both in 
terms of understanding problems and finding solutions − if only the group 
of so-called experts, who are only good at perpetuating their own power, can 
be defeated. 
The Internet appears to have played an important role in all of this. It lends 
a voice to anyone with access to as little as a cheap smartphone, even  if they 
are typing in a far-flung corner of the globe. Anyone can write, photograph or 
film something that will become viral. The traditional intermediation of the 
experts, of qualified observers, of professional ‘sorters’ of information, has 
disappeared. It is a grand, liberating bonfire (but so were the book burnings 
organized by Nazi students in the spring of 1933)1.
A revolution of this kind spares no branch of public activity. Economics 
and economic policy are deeply affected, at a time when these disciplines 
are at the centre, either directly or indirectly, of almost all the decisions of 
individual citizens and of governments − even ethical ones.    
Decade  after  decade,  administrative  and  technical  apparatuses  have 
taken  shape  in  the  economic  field  alongside  governments,  building  up  a 
1  Shirer, William L., 1961, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, Rosetta Books, New York.
4
body  of  knowledge  and  practices  of  their  own. This  includes  ministries, 
specialized  institutes  and  agencies,  independent  authorities  and  central 
banks. They have developed an autonomous capacity to process information 
and take action. Until a few years ago, the balance between governments 
and administrative apparatuses was ensured by a sort of trust in the medium 
term on the part of the former towards the latter: governments only checked 
intermittently  the  validity  of  these  apparatuses’  action  −  which  at  times 
was not merely administrative − limiting their role to that of setting broad 
political guidelines. But for governments to behave in this way they also 
had  to  be  intermittently  accountable  to  voters  for  their  track  record,  for 
example on the occasion of general elections.
Now,  as  long  as  voters’  judgement  in  Western  democracies  was 
mediated by the great ideologies that emerged at the turn of the 18th and 
19th  centuries,  this  form  of  intermittent  control  came  naturally.  Voters 
trusted  that  the  people  in  government  would,  at  least  in  the  medium 
term, act in their interest; they did not seek to judge their performance in 
real  time  because  the  common  ideological  bond  reassured  them. When 
the  ideologies  weakened  to  the  point  of  almost  disappearing  and  the 
electorate morphed into the audience of a continuous and never-ending 
show, political marketing became the only language spoken to the masses 
by  politicians  operating  in  democratic  systems,  and  the  only  language 
understood by those masses. Today, the conversation between the electors 
and the elected must be unceasing, uninterrupted and take place through 
any  means  of  communication,  especially  ‘instantaneous’  ones  such  as 
social media. 
It is worth noting that this does not apply only to economic matters in 
a narrow sense, but also to other domains of administrative and political 
action,  for  example  foreign  policy.  If  a  country’s  international  relations 
are constantly exposed to changing public preferences and whims; if, to 
give an account of the state of national interests and international relations, 
storytelling techniques − to be clear, the same as those employed in TV 
series  –  become  widespread  and  are  used  to  stir  the  public’s  feelings; 
if  what  counts  is  the  short-term  audience  share,  regardless  of  the  actual 
medium  to  long  term  reality  of  the  national  interest;  then,  a  democratic 
country’s diplomatic apparatus will find it harder and harder to influence 
the action of a governing class interested only in the real-time advertising 
5
of its political stance for the benefit of current and potential voters. Today’s 
United States of America is a textbook case.2
Does all of this mean that those with technical skills, the high priests 
of knowledge, are always right and people’s representatives always wrong? 
That overthrowing the synod of high priests and restoring to ordinary people 
the power to find simple solutions to their problems is always a revolutionary 
gesture that must be condemned? Sadly, no. Otherwise, one would not be 
able to explain the periodic emergence throughout history of vast shifts in 
opinion or political movements that revolt against the establishment.3
It  is  necessary,  I  believe,  to  reflect  on  this  point:  science  (including 
economics) is indeed democratic,4 but only within its own confines. All those 
who stand outside of it, that is, the body of citizens as a whole, have to trust 
the fact that the scientific community has strict rules designed to ensure that 
it can work to the best of its ability in the interests of humanity. If citizens’ 
overall trust is undermined − as can happen in historical eras, as perhaps the 
current one is, marked by social and political crisis − this is to the detriment 
of everyone. And it is of no use for researchers to rebel against the mounting 
obscurantism by proudly reiterating the established rules. Society as a whole 
might trust them even less as a result. 
In other words, making discoveries, innovating, and developing theories 
and  techniques  will  not  suffice.  To  keep  or  regain  the  public’s  trust  the 
findings of research must be explained to those outside the field, humbly and 
patiently and without the haughtiness sometimes displayed by those who are 
proud of their hard-won knowledge. Technical jargon must be meticulously 
translated into plain, everyday language, trying to reduce as much as possible 
the inevitable loss of accuracy that any translation of this kind implies. 
2  The  day  after  the  meeting  between  the  presidents  of  the  United  States  and  of  Russia,  which  took 
place on 16 July 2018, the French political scientist Dominique Moïsi gave an interview to Corriere 
della Sera, which the journalist summarized in the headline: ‘More than diplomacy, this is marketing’. 
Corriere della Sera, 17 July 2018.
3  Eichengreen, Barry, 2017, The Populist Temptation, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
4  Viale,  Riccardo,  ‘Politics  versus  science  –  terrible  examples  from  our  past’,  Corriere  della  Sera,  9 
August 2018.  
6
In  short,  we  must  popularize.  But  we  must  do  so  without  ever  losing 
touch with rigorous reasoning and cold, hard facts. At the same time, we must 
aim for simplicity and clarity in our explanations, no matter how complex the 
issues at hand. 
The popularization of economics
But what does this mean in practice? Let me give you an example of 
an  inaccurate  and  misleading  myth  about  the  Italian  economy,  which 
would  benefit  greatly  from  a  fair  account  of  the  facts,  that  is,  from  good 
popularization.
According to this myth, the Italian economy could be prosperous and 
happy if only Europe, out of Teutonic foolishness, and the market, out of 
occasional political antipathy, did not impose a financial straitjacket on it. In 
this oversimplified narrative, there are grains of truth and mountains of lies. 
The issues are much more entangled and complicated, and it is up to those 
who  have  spent  a  long  time  studying  these  problems  to  make  this  clearly 
understood. 
For  now,  let’s  clarify  one  thing:  the  main  problem  with  the  Italian 
economy is that, when something is produced (industrial equipment, a legal 
opinion, a history lesson), it is not done efficiently enough. In other words, 
resources are wasted and it costs more to achieve a given level of quality.5 On 
average, of course. The differences between one firm and another, between 
one lawyer and another, between one professor and another, are enormous, 
but overall the Italian economy suffers from a competitive disadvantage and 
growth gap when compared with other economies. And it has done so for at 
least the past 20 years. Italy knows how to do all manner of things, but it does 
them, overall, less frequently and less well than it could.6
This is another reason for the growing and widespread concern about 
inequality in Italy. An economy that grows little over such a long period, 
5  Economics calls it ‘productivity’, but that is jargon I will not use here.
6  Giunta, Anna and Rossi, Salvatore, Che cosa sa fare l’Italia (Bari-Roma: Laterza, 2017).
7
where household income in per capita terms is stuck at late 1980s levels, 
is an economy that offers few opportunities to its citizens, and especially 
to  the  young.7  It  is  not  surprising  that  two  thirds  of  young  people  aged 
between 18 and 34 believe that those who are today setting out to study 
or  work  will  never  attain  the  same  social  or  financial  level  as  previous 
generations.8
There are a variety of reasons for this situation and we will not discuss 
them here. One thing is certain: the problem cannot be solved by encouraging 
the State to borrow more. The State can do a great deal in this area by spending 
better and establishing regulations that promote efficiency.
If we wanted to tackle the issue from a social equity standpoint (and 
we would be making a mistake if we were to separate this from production 
efficiency – you have to bake the pie before you think about how to slice 
it),  once  again  more  debt  will  not  resolve  the  problem.  What  we  have 
to  do  instead  is  to  redistribute  taxes  between  those  who  have  more  and 
those who have less and improve the equalization capacity of many public 
transfers.
Today,  Europe  and  the  markets  are  first  and  foremost  worried  about 
Italy’s public debt which, as everyone knows by now, has risen to more than 
€2,300 billion, or 130 per cent of one year’s GDP. 
So let’s ask ourselves: What does Europe mean? What do the markets 
mean? 
Europe  means  all  the  complicated  architecture  of  institutions  (the 
Commission, European Parliament, European Council, European Central 
Bank, and so on) and legislation (Treaties, Directives, Regulations, etc.) 
that  limit  or  influence  the  sovereignty  of  the  Member  States.  By  their 
choice. 
7  Andrea Brandolini, Romina Gambacorta and Alfonso Rosolia, ‘Inequality Amid Income Stagnation: 
Italy Over the last Quarter of a Century’, in Inequality and Inclusive Growth in Rich Countries: Shared 
Challenges and Contrasting Fortunes, Brian Nolan (ed.), (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
8  Demopolis survey on ‘Italian youth and inequality’ conducted on behalf of Oxfam Italia in September 
2018 on a representative sample of 1,040 participants.
8
Let  us  linger  a  bit  longer  on  the  markets.  Markets  mean  investors. 
Anyone  who  has  set  aside  even  a  modest  amount  of  money  anywhere 
other  than  in  their  current  accounts  and  entrusted  it  to  someone  else  to 
invest  for  them:  a  bank,  a  financial  agent,  a  friend.  Usually  these  retail 
investors turn to wholesalers (banks frequently have both in-house) who 
sell them financial products of various kinds, from the most simple, such as 
government bonds, to the most complex, such as derivatives, depending on 
the sophistication of the final customer. The wholesalers (agents who work 
in the product development departments of banks, or for investment funds 
or  asset  management  firms)  have  no  homeland,  even  if  they  are  Italian, 
German or American by passport and residence. They have the whole world 
as their playground and they all think more or less in the same way. 
How many are there? Let’s say, at a very rough estimate, about half a 
million  worldwide. Their  goal  is  to  earn  the  highest  returns  possible  for 
the same amount of risk so as to satisfy their clients – those retailers who, 
in  turn,  must  satisfy  the  investors  who  have  turned  to  them. They  strive 
to emerge in a highly competitive environment, but basically they use the 
same methods, chasing news about the financial outlooks of companies and 
countries one second before their competitors. 
And the speculators? They also exist, of course. People who use their own 
money or that of a few associates (hedge funds, private equity funds, and so on) 
to place bets, even shorting, i.e. betting that a company or country will get into 
difficulty and that the securities that it issued to fund itself will lose value. But they 
are pilot fish, not sharks (even if sometimes they are the size of whales). They short 
(that is, short sell securities that they do not own) when they understand that the 
immense school of fish that is right behind them – the investors who act on behalf 
of savers throughout the world – is unsure about what direction to take, to sell or 
not, and they try to point them toward selling. If they succeed, and the value of the 
securities sold collapses, they buy them back at a much lower price and honour 
the previous short sale, at a large profit. They come into play when there is already 
concern among ordinary investors because of worrying news circulating about this 
or that company or State. And in any case they are only motivated by the prospect 
of profit. Which is all the more likely when they perceive in advance that the victim 
is teetering on the edge and all that is needed is a little push to make them fall. 
Political sympathies and antipathies do not even enter their minds, it would cloud 
their vision, which must remain focused on making money.
9
If the market basically means small savers, are domestic savers different from 
foreign ones? In other words, would I, as an Italian, be more likely to choose, for 
patriotic reasons, to hold a BTP (an Italian government security) in my portfolio 
than a French or German saver would? Maybe, but it is highly unlikely. Money 
is  money,  and  no  one  likes  to  lose  it  for  love  of  country,  except  in  exceptional 
circumstances,  like  a  war.  One  economic  difference  could  be  that  if  the  Italian 
State, let us say, were to default, in other words if it were unable to redeem its 
bonds on time or could do so only in part, it would have to raise taxes to try to get 
back on its feet, thereby hurting its own citizens, but not the French and Germans 
as  well.  Italians  might  then  be  more  reluctant  to  rid  themselves  of  domestic 
government  securities,  when  there  is  more  bad  news  about  their  government’s 
finances,  in  an  attempt  to  save  the  State  and  avoid  further  taxation.  But  this  is 
more the reasoning of an economist discussing theory than of the average saver; 
it is really very unlikely that this can explain the difference in behaviour between 
Italian and foreign holders of Italian public debt. Another economic reason for the 
relatively  greater  inclination  of  Italian  savers  to  hold  Italian  government  bonds 
could be this: in the event of a partial default and consequent debt restructuring, 
the Italian State could seek to protect its savers, at least the domestic retail ones (so 
not banks or insurance companies), but not the foreign savers. This is also a highly 
unlikely scenario because it would be counterproductive when thinking of a future 
return to the international markets and because, in any event, foreign bondholders 
would avail themselves of the collective action clauses that now protect them.
If there is even the remotest possibility of debtor default, that is, the failure to 
repay debts on time, savers/creditors will protect themselves as best as they can by 
instructing their investment managers to sell a portion of these riskier securities; 
it makes little difference whether the savers are Italian, French or German. The 
official statistics do not help us discover in time if a given wave of sales of Italian 
public securities originated more from domestic or foreign savers without cross-
analyzing various databases and relying on estimates.
The  markets  –  that  is,  domestic  and  foreign  savers/creditors,  plus  any 
speculators/anticipators  –  read  the  papers,  watch  TV  and  follow  social  media, 
listen to policy statements and try to understand whether the probability of a State 
default is increasing or decreasing. 
For a country that is a member of the euro area, like Italy, they also look at 
its  relationship  with  the  European  institutions  and  EU  legislation,  because  any 
10
deterioration  in  these  relationships  is  a  sign  of  an  approaching  expectation  of 
a  default,  even  a  unilateral  abandonment  of  the  euro  area.  Therefore  Europe  is 
important, but only indirectly. It is the markets, as I defined earlier on, that have 
their finger on the trigger.
In conclusion, Italy’s main problem is the average efficiency of the country’s 
producers: for many years now this has been improving very little or not at all, 
because the technology used is inadequate, the laws and regulations unfriendly, 
the public institutions weak, because business owners do not want to expand their 
companies too much, because, because... 
Italian society remains unequal also because its economy has little capacity 
for growth. In any case, the solution is not more government debt. 
Why it is difficult to popularize economics
Reaching a large audience is very hard to do and economics is no exception. 
Because economic reasoning and facts are never 100 per cent watertight or purely 
objective. 
The economy studies human behaviour: therefore it is not an exact science. 
Even the best economic theories conceived by acclaimed scholars whose good 
faith  cannot  be  doubted,  can  be  tarnished  by  prejudice  and  distorted  by  non-
economic convictions.9 
Economic events – both at a micro or individual and a macro or group level – 
pose  formidable  problems  of  identification  and  measurement.  For  example, 
measuring  firms’  investments  or  those  of  an  entire  domestic  economy,  in  a  way 
that can be compared across firms and countries, first requires setting multiple and 
detailed  accounting  and  statistical  standards,  identifying  the  right  interlocutors  in 
firms, and formulating the right questions for data collectors: because a productive 
investment can have a thousand different implications, from the purchase of a pencil 
9  On the role of scientific paradigms, Thomas Kuhn is among the most often cited (1962), The Structure 
of Scientific Revolutions, The University of Chicago. 
11
to new software or an entire skyscraper, from the construction of a warehouse to the 
planning and realization of industrial machinery.
It is even more difficult to measure the sentiment and expectations of a local, 
national  or  international  community:  confidence  levels,  inflation  expectations, 
consumption  or  investment  intentions.  For  example,  if  the  community  to  be 
surveyed is a large one, for obvious cost reasons, it will be necessary to rely on a 
sample and sampling techniques are highly complicated if the survey is, in fact, a 
serious one. 
Official statistical institutions present in all of the countries and international 
organizations  that  publish  economic  and  financial  data  (including  Eurostat,  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development) take care of the main knowledge needs in economic matters and 
they do it in the best way possible. But the need for precise and comprehensive data 
often trumps clear communication. Moreover, the official institutions are far from 
being the only sources available. There are also many private statistical centres that 
supply the media with data, at times well done, at others not. At times they are no 
more than outright statistical scams. 
We citizens are not used to paying attention to the sources of the news that 
rains down on us every day when we leaf through a newspaper, consult the digital 
devices that most of us have, or look at dear old television. The media is full of 
tables and charts about various economic facts and almost never indicate sources 
and methodologies. Even if they were indicated we would not pay them any heed 
as we normally have very little time to devote to one particular news item. But if 
the fact is non-existent or measured badly we will receive an incorrect impression 
which, however mild and fleeting, can leave traces in our psyche and affect our 
behaviour. 
It is even worse when we are faced not with non-existent or poorly measured 
facts, but with mistaken or misrepresented theories. Any statement about the way 
in  which  economies  work,  the  laws  they  obey,  the  ways  in  which  they  pursue 
the goal of well-being that a society sets itself must correspond to a theory that 
has been empirically and robustly validated. Otherwise, especially if emotionally 
persuasive, this might induce the recipients to behave in a way that is contrary to 
their own interests.  
12
In short, we are all extremely vulnerable, exposed to all manner of error or 
manipulation, even when we believe we are sufficiently evolved so as not to run 
this risk. 
The need for effective popularization
What can be done to stop the rot? How can we defend ourselves against those 
who want to manipulate us or who are simply ingenuous or untruthful out of sheer 
ignorance but whose opinions risk leading us astray?
We can appeal to three categories to counter distorted or false information: 
ordinary citizens, that is, consumers of information; the media, which spreads it; 
and the serious architects of information, individual scholars, research centres 
and statistical institutions. Let’s start with the first category: citizens/consumers 
of information. They must raise their guard, there is no doubt about this. They 
must  become  more  aware  of  the  need  to  carefully  assess  the  quality  of  the 
economic  information  that  reaches  them,  first  weighing  the  reputation  of  the 
various  sources  and  being  wary  of  those  that  are  unknown  or  of  bad  repute. 
However, this is difficult and takes time; it depends on our individual good will 
and is therefore a task that no public authority can carry out on our behalf. 
The media should be the first to select sources based on quality. Few do so 
nowadays. The media universe has changed greatly with the advent of Internet. 
The daily and periodical press, which could be relied on more in the past, has 
lost  enormous  ground  and  the  digital  formats  with  which  it  has  attempted  a 
comeback  have  only  partly  succeeded.  Internet-based  communication  tools, 
in particular the social networks, have long passed it out, even if for the time 
being they do not threaten the supremacy of television. Italy’s Communications 
Regulatory Authority (AGCOM) recently10 confirmed this by measuring the four 
major categories of media (television, Internet, newspapers, radio) according to 
the share of the population that claims to use that medium as its main source of 
10 
 AGCOM, Rapporto sul consumo d’informazione, February 2018.
13
information: 56.6 per cent said television and radio were their primary source, 
26.3 per cent the Internet and 17.1 per cent newspapers.11
Television and radio, precisely because of their general popularity as channels 
of  information,  above  all  for  politics,  have,  for  many  years,  been  particularly 
exposed to the influence of political parties and movements, which impair their 
ability  to  filter  news  on  the  basis  of  genuine  scientific  facts. This  problem  also 
affects the press, which often puts news that is useful for promoting the political 
and  editorial  line  of  a  newspaper  before  objectivity  (which  is  always  relative, 
as  we  well  know,  but  which  nonetheless  ought  to  be  pursued).  The  Internet  is 
inherently  anarchic:  as  we  said  before,  it  is  a  platform  that  allows  everyone  to 
transmit  whatever  they  want,  without  intermediation  or  filters.  But  it  is  turning 
into a colossal tool of manipulation by occult intermediaries, in the very name of 
the democratic struggle against manipulation by the traditional intermediaries of 
printed news, television and radio. 
In short, one can hardly rely on the capacity and willingness of the media to 
start actively distinguishing between good and bad news, with the truth as their 
only polestar. 
Let’s turn to those who try to present theories and facts in the best possible 
way,  in  the  sole  interest  of  advancing  knowledge:  the  authors  who  claim  to  be 
serious. Are they the good guys in our history? Not exactly. Not if they take refuge 
in the ivory tower of their knowledge and do not care to earn the understanding 
and trust of the public by disseminating their research and that of the scientific 
community to which they belong. 
Here we need to dispel a basic misconception which is insidious especially in 
countries such as Italy, where the official culture is humanistic: that to disseminate 
11 
In  reality,  and  as  always  in  these  cases,  this  was  a  sample  survey. AGCOM  relied  on  a  well-known 
market  research  company,  GFK-Italia,  an  Italian  subsidiary  of  the  big  multinational  GFK.  For  many 
years now, this company has used a vast representative sample of the Italian population for carrying out 
surveys, which apart from substituting the units that naturally disappear, remains unchanged from year 
to year: technically speaking, a panel. Since it is a company that sells its services to make money, it does 
not willingly disclose the technical characteristics of the panel or its overall modus operandi. AGCOM 
provides some technical details in an Annex to the Report, but these are clearly insufficient to get an 
accurate idea of the reliability of the results. The reader is expected to trust the findings based solely on 
GFK’s reputation, which is indeed good. So let’s agree to trust them too. But this is an example of the 
difficulties that one encounters when assessing the quality of the information that surrounds us.  
14
is to make vulgar, in a derogatory sense; so that, in addition to being a waste of 
time, it is to dirty the purity of cultured thought. In reality, dissemination should be 
the researcher’s highest aspiration if it is done in a way that that does not undermine 
the strength of the argument and the accuracy of the analysis: to popularize in this 
sense means, as was mentioned earlier, to translate but also to prune back, to get 
to the heart of the matter. It is a laborious and complex exercise. It requires vision. 
In  the Anglo-American  world  which,  and  this  is  no  accident,  has  achieved 
absolute supremacy in all fields of knowledge over the last century, both specialized 
journalists and scholars, even illustrious ones, manage to spread their knowledge 
in  later  years.  In  their  youth  they  advance  knowledge  using  the  techniques  and 
language typical of their field, without worrying about being understood except 
by their peers. Then, later on, they put what they have learnt and discovered at the 
service of the wider community. 
Today  this  capacity,  which  has  always  been  very  important,  has  become 
essential  to  curb  the  drift  towards  superficiality,  approximation,  falsity  and 
manipulation that threatens to overwhelm us. Those who are in the trenches and 
struggle to push out the frontiers of knowledge in their own circumscribed fields 
cannot shake their heads and say: it is none of my business, it cannot be up to me 
to make myself understood by the lawyer or the plumber next door. And so we 
become  accomplices  of  those  who  make  of  superficiality  or  manipulation  their 
creed.  Those  who  transform  economic  or  foreign  policy  into  instant  political 
marketing. 
In  short,  what  was  in  the  past  only  desirable  –  that  economists 
communicate  reliable  and  proven  economic  theories  and  data  more,  and 
more effectively – is imperative and urgent in these times of omnipresent 
bad or inaccurate economic information, used for political purposes. It is not 
only the good name of the economic profession that is at stake here. It is the 
very functioning of our democratic societies.
15
Grafica e stampa a cura della Divisione Editoria e stampa della Banca d’Italia
