Gent Sejko: Welcome address - Annual Conference of the Bank of
Albania
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Annual Conference
of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 1 November 2018.
 Your Excellency Prime Minister,
Your Excellency Minister of Finance,
Dear Professor Berglof,
Dear Governors and Deputy Governors, Your Excellencies, Ambassadors, dear professors and
representatives of the banking system,
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
It is always a pleasure for me, as the Governor of the Bank of Albania, to have the opportunity to
open the proceedings of our annual conference. This year we are organising it in cooperation
with  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science  (LSE),  one  of  the  foremost
academic  institutions  in  the  field  of  research  on  economic  and  political  sciences.  The  LSE’s
interest and the professional investment testifies that the cycle of our conferences has matured.
I  am  sure  that  this  year’s  conference  will  uphold  and  even  forge  ahead  the  frontiers  of  our
standards. Engaging in open discussions and sharing our experiences will eventually help us to
identify the optimum way for addressing the challenges that lie ahead.
 This year’s theme is especially important not only to central banks but also to all the decision-
makers  for  the  economy.  While  focusing  on  the  direct  implications  for  the  monetary  policy,  it
touches on issues that address strong and dynamic changes that economic structures, financial
markets,  doctrines  of  economic  management,  and  societies  and  human  communities  are
experiencing at the local and global level.
Recent  reports  by  prestigious  international  financial  institutions  point  out  that  the  prospects  of
economic development remain positive. Likewise, Albania is set on a steady positive trajectory of
economic growth.
Our  prudent  economic  policies,  the  constant  improvement  of  balance  sheets  in  the  real  and
financial sectors, and the ongoing restructuring of the economy and of the growth model have
created adequate premises for an increasingly fuller utilisation of production capacities and the
convergence of inflation toward the target.
Let me explain this in greater detail. According to official statistics, economic growth in Albania
accelerated  to  4.4%  in  2018  H1,  showing  a  broad  base  in  terms  of  aggregate  demand
components, and a diverse composition in terms of sectors contributing to growth.
In  particular,  Albanian  exports  showed  growth,  while  the  level  of  foreign  direct  investments
remained high, contributing to the narrowing of the current account deficit and the stability of the
external position. The dynamism of the exporting sector and the high level of foreign investments
are encouraging for a steady economic growth, and testify to the increasing competitiveness and
attractiveness of the Albanian economy.
The effects of economic growth have begun to be present in almost all economic and financial
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicators. Participation in the labour force and employment has increased, the unemployment
rate decreased to 12.4% in 2018 Q2, and wages have started to trend upward.
Also, the growth in aggregate demand has contributed to the improvement of balance sheets of
Albanian enterprises and has enabled a clearly downward trend in non-performing loans (NPL).
The NPL ratio dropped to 12.9% in 2018 Q3, almost halved from its peak recorded in the wake of
the crisis.
Reflecting its performance and the recovery of economic activity, against the backdrop of low
interest  rates  triggered  by  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  the Albanian  banking
sector remains liquid, profitable, and well capitalised. This sector appears resilient to potential
shocks and has adequate capital and liquidity to cover the needs of the economy for financing.
The currently positive momentum of the Albanian economy has created adequate premises for
the  growth  trend  to  continue  in  the  period  ahead.  The  expansion  of  aggregate  demand,  the
favourable  financial  environment,  the  improvement  of  balance  sheets,  and  the  restoration  of
confidence in the economy form a virtuous circle, which will support growth in the medium-term
horizon.
Furthermore,  the  long  series  of  structural  reforms  –  whether  already  undertaken  or  being
currently  implemented  –  should  pave  the  way  for  faster,  sustainable  and  comprehensive
economic growth.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 The topic of today’s conference is related with the challenges that policy makers face in terms of
growth  as  well  as  of  economic  and  financial  stability.  From  a  general  perspective,  these
challenges pertain to:
Implications  arising  from  the  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  major  central  banks  on
developing countries, especially those that have adopted the short-term debt as their growth
model;
Populist phenomena, which fuel a protectionist rhetoric, are detrimental to global trade, and
refrain the free movement of production factors; and
Risks that remain present in the global financial system.
From  a  more  specific  perspective,  today’s  economic,  monetary  and  financial  reality  appears
especially challenging for the monetary policy. This reality is labelled as the new “normal” of the
monetary policy. Let me identify a few of these challenges.
The  natural  interest  rates  appear  downward,  potentially  as  a  result  of  a  combination  of
several  factors:  slowdown  of  productivity  and  of  the  pace  of  innovation;  unfavourable
demographic trends in advanced economies; and the recycling of savings from developing
economies toward advanced economies. The rate fall leads to the reduction of space for
conventional stimulating monetary policies in the future.
The correlation between aggregate demand and the inflation rate has weakened in the short
and  medium  term,  as  a  result  of  developments  in  the  labour  market  and  increasing
integration  of  the  global  economy.  This  phenomenon  renders  the  monetary  policy  action
more costly.
The financial innovation and the increasing awareness of the correlation between economic
and  monetary  stability,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  financial  system,  on  the  other,  have
reduced the space for conventional monetary policy instruments.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite  the  complexity,  recommendations  for  dealing  with  these  challenges  have  been  put
forward. They range from the modification of the monetary policy mandate to enriching the array
of instruments it employs, and its better combination with the macro-prudential policy.
I am certain that the issues set out above will be addressed at length during the day.
From my perspective, the consensus on the shape of the new ‘normal’ of the monetary policy
should maintain three key elements:
First, avoiding multiple, ambiguous and non-transparent objectives related to the monetary
policy. This principle would sustain the credibility of the monetary policy, as a prerequisite for
increasing the effectiveness and decreasing the side effects from its intervention.
Second, acknowledging the limits of the monetary policy, both in the short and medium term,
and in the long term.
In  the  short  and  medium  term,  the  monetary  policy  often  encounters  limited  effectiveness,
especially in the case of financial crises, or negative side effects in the form of heightened risk in
the financial system. This limitation stresses the need for supplementing and coordinating it with
other economic management policies.
In  parallel,  the  monetary  policy  alone  does  not  have  adequate  instruments  for  generating  a
sustainable  acceleration  of  the  growth  pace  in  the  long  term.  This  limitation  underlines  the
argument that the monetary policy is not and may not be a substitute for structural reforms.
Third,  in  designing  the  range  of  instruments  at  the  disposal  of  the  monetary  policy,  care
should be taken to avoid the risk in the central banks’ balance sheet, which would negatively
affect their independence.
 The experience of the Bank of Albania in withstanding the crisis and fostering growth in the wake
of the crisis illustrates some of the key topics I mentioned above.
In response to the aggregate demand slowdown and the subsequent negative implications on
employment, soundness of financial balance sheets and inflation, the Bank of Albania undertook
a  progressive  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  by  lowering  the  policy  rate  and  injecting
liquidity vis-a-vis an expanded collateral base.
The  monetary  expansion  policy  was  supported  by  a  clear  focus  on  price  stability  and  was
favoured by the operation of a free exchange rate regime. The latter has served and will serve to
absorb short-term shocks to the Albanian economy and financial system.
I want to emphasise a very important principle to uphold, that is maintaining a free exchange rate
regime  and  activating  market  interventions  only  in  situations  when  the  primary  objectives  are
affected. The sustaining reason is that movements in specific moments toward a new and more
stable equilibrium enable our monetary policy to focus on its primary objective – price stability –
and  contribute  to  a  more  productive  orientation  of  human  and  financial  resources  in  the
economy.
The  monetary  stimulus  transmitted  through  conventional  instruments  proved  successful  in
containing negative effects from the crisis. It contributed to a calm operation of financial markets,
eased the cost of debt servicing, and helped start a restructuring process of the economy.
Yet, some features of the development of the Albanian financial markets limited the effectiveness
of  the  monetary  policy  action.  The  low  level  of  development  of  the  financial  markets,  the
phenomenon  of  the  increase  in  non-performing  loans  and  the  high  level  of  foreign  currency
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
borrowing decelerated the full transmission of the monetary stimulus to the economy.
In response, the Bank of Albania adopted an integrated approach to boost the effectiveness of
the monetary stimulus, which implied the adoption of new instruments as well as the initiation of
a series of structural reforms aimed at improving the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
With regard to instruments, the Bank of Albania began to employ the forward guidance tool,
and applied countercyclical macro-prudential measures to support the growth of lending to
the economy.
With regard to the transmission mechanism, the Bank of Albania undertook in cooperation
with the Government of Albania a series of structural reforms in the financial system. These
reforms  were  aimed  at  further  developing  the  financial  market,  improving  the  legal  and
regulatory environment with regard to contract compliance, collateral execution and lowering
the credit risk, as well as reducing the phenomenon of foreign currency borrowing.
This  integrated  approach  has  yielded  the  first  results,  creating  a  financial  environment  that  is
more responsive to our policies, being an additional guarantee for convergence with our price
stability objective and maintaining the sustainability of economic growth.
This  investment,  however,  should  be  further  supplemented  by  creating  and  maintaining  the
necessary  fiscal  space  for  withstanding  shocks,  and  should  be  accompanied  by  structural
reforms across the board to boost the resilience and flexibility of our economy.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 Looking ahead, I would like to underline that one of the valuable lessons we have learned from
the  crisis  is  that  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  maintaining  a  functioning  monetary  policy
pass through are among the most important investments that a central bank can make for the
future of the country.
Nonetheless, the challenges that lie ahead of the global economies will be increasingly complex,
implying the need for informed and courageous decision-making in line with the developments of
the time.
What in today’s terminology is known as the “New Normal” is characterised by many unknowns,
while all policymakers require finding appropriate and necessary options to facilitate the decision-
making of a central bank not only from the perspective of the good management of the monetary
policy, but also from the perspective of the financial stability, protection of the consumers and of
the economy against economic and financial shocks.
Hence,  we  have  brought  together  with  the  LSE  the  best  experts  from  the  academia,  central
banking, international institutions and the financial market to discuss the potential effects of these
developments, to generate ideas as to which might be the adequate and optimum policies for
addressing these challenges.
The need to coordinate domestic policies, and fostering the cooperation and interaction between
the markets and the Authorities is evident. Our experience in this regard is positive. The lessons
learned from the crisis, and the scanning of the development level of the financial sector, have
enabled us – under a successful cooperation with the Government of Albania – to pave the way
for a full restructuring of the architecture for the regulation and monitoring of the financial sector,
create  functional  mechanisms  for  exchanging  information  and  coordination  among  regulatory
agencies, and pave the way for concrete reforms for the development of the financial system,
especially in the field of capital markets and payment systems.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  need  for  cooperation  and  coordination  crosses  the  national  borders.  A  comprehensive
approach, at global and regional level, would contribute to preventing unwanted consequences,
not only for small and developing economies – which are often consumers of financial regulation
policies at the global level – but also for the large economies, which originate them.
I believe that the conclusions of the conference panels will be very useful for all of us and will
thoroughly  portray  and  present  the  risks  and  benefits  from  the  issues  mentioned  above,  with
particular focus on their treatment from the perspective of decisionmakers.
Thanking you once again for your participation, I wish the conference a complete success and
hope all of you will enjoy your stay in Tirana!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
