Stephen S Poloz: Launch of new $10 note
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the launch of the new $10
note, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 November 2018.
 We  are  here  today  to  celebrate  the  end  of  a  long  journey.  A  Canadian  journey.  Today,  we
celebrate the launch of this incredible new $10 note.
Bank notes are more than secure means of payment that Canadians can use with confidence.
They also tell the stories that have shaped our country. Now, each time this new vertical $10 bill
changes hands, it will remind us of our continued pursuit of human rights and social justice in
Canada.
Bringing a new bank note from concept to reality is a remarkably complex process. Few people
realize just how long the process is—work on this note started 2½ years ago and the planning for
it  goes  back  twice  as  far. And  the  process  involves  a  wide  range  of  people.  Some  have  an
obvious  role—the  historians,  researchers  and  graphic  designers,  for  example,  who  make  the
note  beautiful  and  meaningful.  Photographers  and  engravers  also  play  an  important  part.  But
others involved in the process aren’t quite as obvious—the chemists, physicists and engineers
who  do  the  research  on  the  polymer  and  help  develop  the  features  that  make  our  notes  so
secure.
And then there are all our partner groups, many of which are represented here today, and the
Bank  staff  who  work  closely  with  them.  We  truly  appreciate  the  assistance  of  the  financial
institutions who distribute the notes across the country. We expect that they will be available at
local branches throughout Canada over the next few weeks. And we appreciate the help of the
retailers who handle the notes and the law enforcement agencies that work to make sure that
counterfeiting remains very low.
So yes, it’s a long and involved process and a lot of hard work. But it’s the hard work that makes
the process so worthwhile and the celebration so sweet.
I want to highlight a couple of things that made bringing this note to reality so special.
The first is the public’s involvement in designing the note. Finance Minister Bill Morneau agreed
with me that it was long past time to feature an iconic Canadian woman on the front of a regularly
circulating bank note. So, the Bank asked Canadians to tell us who that woman should be. And
that invitation unleashed a flood of nominations—over 25,000 of them. An expert panel helped us
comb through them all. This turned into a tremendous opportunity to learn about all these great
Canadians and to give their stories some well-deserved and long-overdue recognition.
The  second  thing  about  this  note,  of  course,  was  the  ultimate  choice  of  Viola  Desmond,  the
successful businesswoman from Nova Scotia’s Black community, who took a stand for human
rights, and against discrimination, in the 1940s.
With this inspired and inspiring choice, the note’s themes of human rights and social justice fell
naturally into place. And what better embodiment of this theme than this remarkable location—
the Canadian Museum for Human Rights. I am so pleased that this building as it stands, and
everything it stands for, are being recognized on this note.
The  choice  of  Viola  Desmond  has  touched  off  conversations  about  human  rights  across
Canada, as well as celebrations of the life of this remarkable woman, especially in the North End
of Halifax, where she lived and grew her business. I know events are taking place in Halifax to
honour this great Canadian, where people can spend their brand-new vertical notes and even
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
see  an  original  musical  production  about  her.  Right  here  in  this  museum,  there  is  an  exhibit
where you can learn more about Viola. And starting at the end of the month, our own Bank of
Canada  Museum  in  Ottawa  will  have  a  special  exhibition—A  Noteworthy  Woman—that  will
explore the story of Viola and this new vertical note.
The choice of Viola Desmond brought her story of dignity, courage and human rights to the fore.
And,  it  brought  one  other  remarkable  person  to  our  attention.  That  is,  of  course,  Viola’s
incomparable sister, Wanda Robson.
You may know that Wanda was pursuing her dream of getting a university degree at a time in life
when  most  of  us  would  be  planning  for  a  quiet  retirement.  In  her  studies,  Wanda  heard  her
sister’s story being told by her professor, Dr. Graham Reynolds, who is also with us today. At
that  point,  Wanda  realized  the  importance  of  sharing  her  sister’s  story  with  the  world.  It  was
Wanda  who  worked  tirelessly  to  make  sure  that  her  sister’s  story  wouldn’t  be  forgotten. And
Wanda, we all owe you a debt of gratitude because, thanks to your hard work, your sister’s story
won’t be forgotten.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
