Bank of Japan’s August report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, 15 August 2001
 The Bank’s view2
Adjustments in economic activities are intensifying further, reflecting a substantial decline in exports
and production.
With regard to final demand, private consumption remains flat on the  whole. Housing investment is
declining  and  public  investment  is  also  starting  to  decrease  since  the  implementation  of  the
supplementary budget for fiscal 2000 has peaked out. Net exports (real exports minus real imports)
continue to decline, reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies but also sluggish demand
for IT-related goods. Business fixed investment is also decreasing while exporting conditions continue
to deteriorate.
Industrial production continues to decline sharply, reflecting such developments in final demand and
strong  excessiveness  in  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  some  materials.  Corporate  profits  and
business sentiment are also worsening particularly in manufacturing. Affected by such developments,
household income seems to be weakening gradually.
As for the outlook, public investment is expected to follow a declining trend. Net exports are likely to
continue decreasing for a while amid the deceleration in overseas economies and ongoing inventory
adjustments in IT-related  goods worldwide. Judged from leading indicators and investment  plans  of
firms,  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  downward  trend.  In  addition,  inventory
adjustments in goods such as electronic parts and materials will continue for the time being. Industrial
production is, therefore, expected to follow a declining trend.
There still exist such general views that around the end of this year, ongoing inventory adjustments in
IT-related  goods  worldwide  are  likely  to  peak  out  and  overseas  economies,  particularly  the  United
States, will start to recover. Based on these preconditions, exports are expected to pick up sometime
in the future and thus underpin industrial production. However, cautious views on global demand in
IT-related goods and developments in overseas economies for both their timing and pace of recovery
are recently growing. At home, under the prolonged adjustments in economic activities particularly in
production,  household  income, which  is the  basis  of  private  consumption,  is  likely  to  be  weakening
gradually along with the decline in corporate profits.
Overall, it seems to be inevitable that adjustments in economic activities, starting from the decrease in
exports, will continue for the time being. Moreover, the substantial decline in production would cause
domestic demand to decrease and in turn generate the risk of adjustments in economic activities to
spread  even  further.  Also,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  a  negative  impact  on  the  economy
induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and  domestic  capital  markets  via  corporate  and  household
confidence.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  mostly  unchanged.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  are  weak
mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery and materials. Consumer prices continue
to  be  somewhat  weak  owing  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  and  their  substitutes.
Corporate service prices continue to decrease.
As for the conditions surrounding price  developments, the past  yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressure  on  prices.  However,  with  the  ongoing  adjustments  in  economic  activities,  the  balance
between supply and demand in the domestic market is likely to exert downward pressure on prices.
Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by  technological
innovations,  the  decreases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  reflecting  deregulation  and  the
streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are
expected  to  be  weak  for  the  time  being.  Moreover,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding
                                                     
1
This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
August 13 and 14, 2001.
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on August 13 and 14 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
2
BIS Review 72/2001
1
future  economic  developments,  the  possibility  that  weak  demand  will  further  intensify  downward
pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring.
In  the  financial  market,  the  overnight  call  rate  is  basically  moving  around  zero  percent  under  the
guideline for money market operations to maintain the current-account balance at the Bank of Japan
at around 5 trillion yen.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  basically  level  on  the  whole.  The  Japan  premium  remains
negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds rose temporarily to 1.40-1.45 percent, but are recently moving
around the range of 1.30-1.35 percent. The  yield spreads  between  private bonds (bank debentures
and corporate bonds) and government bonds are contracting somewhat.
Stock prices are declining around the lowest level since the start of the year.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 121-124 yen to the
U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved. However, there are some
signs  indicating  that  the  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  perceived  by  small  firms  are
becoming  slightly  more  cautious.  Meanwhile,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for
such instruments as corporate bonds and CP continue to improve owing to a decline in market interest
rates and the more active stance of investors to take credit risks.
On the other hand, credit demand in the private sector seems to be declining slightly faster due to a
decrease in business fixed investment while firms continue to reduce their debts.
In  view  of  this,  private  banks’  lending  remains  sluggish.  Meanwhile,  the  growth  rate  of  amount
outstanding  of  corporate  bonds  issued  is  on  the  gradually  rising  trend,  reflecting  the  favorable
environment for issuing corporate bonds. The amount outstanding of CP issued is well above that of
the previous year and marking the highest level to date.
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in July was slightly higher than that of the previous month
due mainly to the inflow from postal savings.
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy as a whole. For the time being, attention should be paid to the effects of the
monetary easing measures taken by the Bank, while careful monitoring is required for the effects of
stock price developments and corporate profit conditions on the behavior of financial institutions and
the fund-raising conditions of firms.
2
BIS Review 72/2001
