Y V Reddy: Communications policy of the Reserve Bank of India
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 150th anniversary of
the Reuters Group, Mumbai, 28 August 2001.
 Mr. Green, Mr. Weetman, Mr. New and friends,
I am thankful to the organisers and in particular Mr. New for giving me the honour of participating in
the 150th anniversary celebrations  of the Reuters Group. In  all innocence,  I  accepted  the  invitation
only soon to realise that there is no free lunch or free dinner in this world. I am assigned the task of
inaugurating the evening and addressing the guests on this occasion. I pleaded for some draft from
Reuters, though informally. As you may be aware, as senior bureaucrats, we are good at reading out
excellent speeches drafted by others. But, the organisers insisted on giving me a free hand. It was a
polite way, I presume, of suggesting that we do our homework diligently. So, a visit to Reuters Website
and Websites of several central banks became necessary to select a subject and also to obtain some
material for a suitable address on this occasion. Of course, I consulted several of my colleagues in the
Reserve Bank, including Ms. Alpana Killawala, the points person in our relations with the media.
Reuters
Reuters is, perhaps, synonymous with online news but there is more to Reuters than purveying news.
In 1850-51, Mr. Paul Julius Reuter, the founder had used a fleet of forty five pigeons to deliver news
and  stock  prices  between  Brussels  and  Aachen  in  Germany.  Now,  in  2001,  besides  serving  the
financial markets using state of art technology, Reuters information is read by an estimated 73 million
people each month. The Reuters website provides a long list of its impressive achievements over the
last 150 years. An aspect that is the most striking is the reach of its information to different parts of the
world. Reuters is a prime example of how the most modern available technologies can be harnessed
to minimise information asymmetry. To quote from the Reuters website: “Over 5,58,000 professional
users in 69,700 locations access Reuters information and news worldwide. Data is provided on more
than  9,40,000  shares,  bonds  and  other  financial  instruments  as  well  as  on  40,000  companies.
Financial  information  is  obtained  from  257  exchanges  and  over-the-counter  markets.  5,047  clients
contribute prices, opinions, and analyses covering a wide variety of markets”.
In this background, perhaps this is a proper occasion to share with the distinguished gathering today
some  of  my  thoughts  on  dilemmas  faced  by  central  banks  in  their  communication  policies  and  the
multiple  effects of the media.  This  will  be  followed  by  a  brief  narration  of  initiatives  taken  by  select
central  banks  and  then  by  a  more  detailed  account  of  dissemination  policies  and  practices  of  the
Reserve Bank of India.
Central banks’ dilemmas
The functioning of the central banks has generally been considered highly secretive if not entirely to
be an ivory tower. In fact, a book by William Greider on the Federal Reserve published as recently as
1987  is  titled  “Secrets  of  the  Temple”.  The  situation  has  changed,  however.  For  instance,  the
European Central Bank (ECB) like most other central banks in the world, is laying greater emphasis on
its communications policy, as acknowledged by Mr. Otmar Issing about a year ago. In fact, Mr. Issing
explained the communications problem in the context of “euro’s external exchange rate” and the rather
mixed opinion of the ECB despite its success in its main task. It is clear that the approaches of central
banks to communications have changed. What are the reasons for this change?
Traditionally, central banking policy formulation has been associated with an element of secrecy, and
for good reasons, a central bank was considered to be an arm of Government. Furthermore, financial
markets  and  entities  were  tightly  regulated  and  functioned  the  way  regulators  would  like  them  to
behave. However, with financial deregulation and increasing cross border flows, the central banks of
most countries have gained some degree of autonomy and with it a sense of accountability. Hence,
central banks do see some advantage in communicating in as transparent a manner as is appropriate,
their  policy  intentions and operations. Well informed market participants enable,  though  not  assure,
improved  functioning  of  markets.  Of  course,  the  policy  maker  cannot  reveal  policy  cards  as  it  is
BIS Review 79/2001
1
advisable to maintain an element of surprise or avoid anticipatory actions. Yet, in all cases, either ex-
ante,  or  concurrent  or  at  least  ex-post,  adequate  communication  of  rationale  for  policies  and
operations is expected now and, in my view, this is desirable.
There are several dilemmas faced by central banks while designing an appropriate communications
policy. What should be communicated and to what degree of disaggregation, are one set of issues.
The second set relates to: at what stage of evolution of internal thinking and debate should there be
dissemination. The third set relates to the timing of communication with reference to its market impact.
The fourth relates to the quality of information and the possible ways in which it could be perceived.
Thus,  alleged  incoherence  or  an  element  of  ambiguity  at  times  on  the  part  of  central  bankers  in
explaining  policies  is  as  much  a  reflection  of  the  complexity  of  the  issues  as  it  is  of  the  differing
perceptions of a variety of audiences to which the communication is addressed.
Perhaps, the diversity in the audience needs to be explained. Broadly speaking, any communication
from a central bank is addressed to several constituencies namely, the regulated entities; participants
in  financial  markets;  financial  analysts;  economists-cum-researchers  or  opinion  makers  in  the
academia; the multilateral bodies including the International Monetary Fund; the World Bank and  of
course credit rating agencies; the immediate stakeholder being the Government or Parliament; and the
ultimate  stakeholder  being  the  public  at  large.  Each  of  these  constituencies  has  its  own  concerns,
time-frame,  perception  and  technical  expertise.  While  there  is  some  scope  for  designing  specific
communications to be of use to a particular constituency on its unique requirements, a large part of
communications has to be addressed to all constituencies. In any case, all communications, unless
they  are  very  confidential  in  nature  are  rightly  accessible  to  all  the  constituencies  and  selective
dissemination  is  almost  impossible  in  modern  days  of  high  technology  and  vibrant  democracy.  So,
often the practical issue is to design an array of instruments and a menu-approach keeping in view the
sensitivities and complexities, recognising that the users and uses of a central bank’s communications
are  varied.  An  illustration  is,  how  to  craft  a  press  release  or  website  release  that  produces  hard
information to professionals but does not keep away the interests of general public.
In designing and effectuating a communications policy, it is also necessary to recognise the variety in
media.  Traditionally  the  press,  i.e.,  the  print  media  has  been  the  most  dominant  and  perhaps
continues to be so especially  to reach a  wide audience and for analysis. The electronic media  is a
more recent phenomenon, which is becoming increasingly dominant.
The  speed  with  which  wire  agencies  can  impact  the  markets  is  of  special  significance  to  a  central
bank.  The  visual  impact  is  more  in  respect  of  television  and  of  course,  debates  on  televisions  are
likely. An important means of communication in the recent past has been website and also e-mail. The
problem before a central banker is to cater to the needs of the different means of communication with
appropriate nuance while maintaining the quality of information and credibility of policy. In a sense, we
have two sets of problems in this regard, viz., the variety of target audience and the varying nature of
media  through  which  communications  occur.  Briefly  stated,  if  a  central  banker  sounds  confused  at
times,  he  or  she  may  be  truly  confused;  and  it  is  unlikely  to  be  a  pretence.  But,  there  are  more
occasions when a central banker knows what to say but is confused when it comes to deciding on the
design of communication or the appropriateness of media.
Multiple effects of the media
In assessing the contribution of the media to public good, I would distinguish among at least four types
of effects. The first type may be characterised as the ‘news effect’, which would normally reflect factual
or formal positions or events. In a sense, the media’s reporting would be faithful and non-controversial.
A second type can be identified as ‘rumour effect’, and often rumours have a destabilising effect and in
some cases have the potential to degenerate into self-perpetuating or self-fulfilling events. The rumour
effect often results in unintended losses or gains and people may suspect that there is some vested
interest behind such rumours. Needless to say, the media’s role will, on the whole, tend to be negative
in this channel. The third type is marked by the ‘survey effect’. It is not uncommon for the media to
undertake opinion polls or surveys and these could have methodological and other problems in terms
of reflecting the true picture. These surveys have a tendency to influence the perception of markets
and  sometimes  the  general  public.  In  such  a  case,  the  contribution  of  the  media  would  depend  on
scientific  methodology  adopted,  transparency  of  assumptions,  and  objectivity  in  presentation  of  the
results. Adequate care is a pre-condition to ensure a positive effect through this channel. The fourth is
the ‘interpretation effect’, where media tries to interpret the stand taken by policy makers or markets or
corporates. The interpretation effect may be positive or negative depending on professional skills as
2
BIS Review 79/2001
well as commitment to objectives. Responsibility and accountability would be key to ensure positive
effect through this channel.
In brief, it is my submission that the media’s responsibilities are not confined to its shareholders or to
its  subscribers,  but  extend  to  the  larger  segment  of  the  public.  In  this  sense,  the  challenges  and
dilemmas before the media are perhaps no less than those before the central banks.
Dissemination initiatives of central banks
Central banks use a variety of methods to disseminate information to the market. It could include daily
press releases, periodical policy announcements, regular and ad  hoc publications, speeches  by  the
top management, interviews  with the press, etc.  More recently, central banks have  been  effectively
using the website for disseminating information. However, the critical change that can be observed in
recent  years  is  that  the  electronic  media  such  as  the  Reuters  have  enhanced  the  ability  of
communication  systems  to  allow  instantaneous  reach  of  information  to  market  participants.  The  IT
revolution has transformed financial services by changing the speed, scope, nature of information and
communication.
A  random  survey  of  the  websites  of  some  central  banks  shows  availability  of  a  wide  variety  of
applications  such  as  quick  dissemination  of  important  policy  communications;  posting  of  press
releases; disclosing information relating to financial markets; releasing economic indicators in various
formats; providing applications to extract statistics in the format desired by the user, equipping other
web-based services to the financial sector such as facilitating submission of returns, advertising job
opportunities in the central banks, etc. There are increasing similarities in the type of information that
is released by central banks on their websites. The differences in availability of information, that  do
exist, come from the differences in institutional responsibilities, such as supervision being vested with
an authority outside the central bank, etc.
It is also observed that many central banks use the website as their primary medium of communication
and look forward to reducing or discontinuing the print media.  Some central  banks like the  Bank of
England and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand have offered special initiatives in creating awareness
of their functioning among lay public including schools and colleges.
The survey also brings out a universal recognition of four relevant issues, namely:
First,  in  an  increasingly  deregulated  market  and  enhanced  credibility  of  central  banks  in
macro-policy, the effective articulation of policy by the central bank is important.
Second,  appropriate  and  transparent  communications  from  the  central  bank  helps  the
market respond to policies with better information.
Third, the perceptions of media are critical and act as a feedback mechanism to the central
bank.
Fourth, while central banks are increasingly transparent, the extent of transparency from the
regulated units and financial markets is still a matter of concern. This results in a type of information
asymmetry between public authorities and private sector, a factor that needs to be noted by the media
in the discharge of their functions.
Communications policy of RBI
Against  this  backdrop,  I  would  attempt  to  explain  the  communications  policy  of  RBI  and  bring  on
record the sources of information available to the media and the public from the RBI. Information on
areas  relating  to  the  economy,  banking  and  financial  sector  is  released  with  stringent  standards  of
quality  and  timeliness.  Dissemination  of  information  takes  place  through  several  channels  such  as
press  releases,  publications  -  regular  and  occasional  -  notifications,  Frequently  Asked  Questions,
advertisements and website. The annual April and October monetary and credit policy statements and
speeches and interviews of the Top management articulate the RBI’s assessment of the economy and
the financial system. My presence here today is part of a fruitful and beneficial partnership between
RBI  and  media  in  the  broader  context  of  creating  public  awareness,  and  obtaining  continuous
feedback.
BIS Review 79/2001
3
The RBI makes efforts to provide quality data to the public at  large,  which emanates from a robust
statistical system established and strengthened over the years. The fundamental attributes of a good
statistical  system  are  credibility,  timeliness  and  adequacy.  The  RBI  endeavours  to  provide  credible
statistics  for  dissemination  through  the  media  through  various  ways  –  with  updating  of  data  on  its
website,  daily  press  releases,  and  its  weekly,  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  publications.  The
communications from RBI range from a daily press release on money market data at about 9.00 A.M.;
details of repos and reverse repos as part of Liquidity Adjustment Facility at about 12.30 P.M.; the U.S.
dollar-rupee reference rate at about 2.00 P.M.; monetary, banking and prices data through a Weekly
Statistical Supplement and the  Annual Report of RBI, Report on Trend and  Progress of  Banking  in
India and the Report on Currency and Finance. Incidentally, you would have already seen the Annual
Report of the RBI for the year July-June 2000-01 on the RBI website at 5 PM today followed almost
simultaneously by wide coverage by the electronic media.
The RBI brings out a number of Ad hoc publications, which contain a wealth of useful information on
national and international issues.
Information on various facets of Indian Economy is disseminated through the RBI publications, such
as, Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, Banking
Statistics  -  Annual  and  Quarterly.  The  document  relating  to  Macroeconomic  and  Monetary
Developments issued along with the April Monetary and Credit Policy Statement is also an important
source of background information. Incidentally, RBI is the only recognised source for the information
on the consolidated position of State Finances. These publications contain valuable information useful
to researchers and to the general public at large.
The RBI also brings out special publications and monographs from time to time dealing with issues
such  as  the  problems  of  agricultural  finance,  company  finances,  balance  of  payments,  etc.,  which
have  a  unique  place  in  the  economic  information  system  in  the  country.  Available  evidence  on
international  comparisons  of  level  of  transparency  as  well  as  quality  and  timeliness  of  information
clearly shows that RBI comes out well in the top league. Professional standards and credibility of RBI
are ranked very high. In fact, several of the speeches of Governor and Deputy Governors of RBI are
circulated  to  other  central  banks  as  part  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Review,  Basel,
Switzerland.  India  is  also  amongst  the  first  few  signatories  to  the  Special  Data  Dissemination
Standards (SDDS) as defined by the International Monetary Fund for the purpose  of releasing  data
and  the  RBI  contributes  to  SDDS  in  a  significant  manner.  There  has  been  an  ongoing  and  steady
improvement  in  the  collection,  compilation,  coverage  and  publications  of  various  economic  and
monetary statistics.
Conclusion
In the context of deregulation and  liberalisation of financial markets, it is  well recognised that  wider
dissemination  of  information  by  all  economic  agents  and  transparency  of  policy  formulation  and
operations  on  part  of  the  Government  and  other  regulatory  authorities  contribute  significantly  to
efficient  markets.  Further,  timely  and  relevant  information  is  vital  for  efficient  policy  making  and
stabilising  expectations.  While  opaqueness  will  lead  to  inefficiency,  asymmetric  information  would
cause  segmented  market  behaviour  and  imperfections.  RBI  believes  that  information  dissemination
leads to minimisation of uncertainties about policy intentions and contributes to market stability. RBI,
therefore, lays a great emphasis upon transparency and public availability of information. Agencies like
Reuters  have  a  significant  role  in  providing  on-line  information  to  market  participants.  In  fact,  not
merely the financial market participants use such services and no doubt derive benefit out of it, but the
RBI  itself  utilises  such  services  and  is  by  and  large  pleased  with  the  benefits  derived.  In  a  very
important sense, therefore, RBI is not only a supplier of information and analysis but also an attentive
consumer of media-services such as that of Reuters.
In this background, dissemination of information should be authentic, properly classified, and should
have sufficient details so that it is understood in a homogenous manner by all participants including
central  banks.  In  that  sense,  while  information  per  se  is  neutral,  if  it  is  understood  differently  and
interpreted  with  any  element  of  bias,  the  purpose  of  information  dissemination  may  get  distorted
leading to destabilising influence and panic reactions in the market. There is, therefore, an enormous
responsibility placed upon the agencies viz., press, journals or any other media like Reuters to ensure
that authentic and properly interpreted information are provided to the market.
4
BIS Review 79/2001
Correspondingly, the Reserve Bank of India has a responsibility to benefit from and contribute to the
activities of media such as Reuters.
Confidence and mutual trust is the key to a productive role for all concerned. The fact that Reuters has
thought fit to call an official from the RBI on this important occasion is a testimony to the valuable and
fruitful relationship between media and the RBI.
Thank you.
BIS Review 79/2001
5
