Jean-Claude Trichet: Preserving monetary and financial stability in an
increasingly globalised world
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the OECD Forum
2001 on Sustainable Development and the New Economy, Paris, 16 May 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited today to this OECD Forum to talk about preserving monetary
and financial stability in an increasingly globalised world.
One  should  keep  in  mind  that  financial  globalisation  has  brought  about  improved  macro-
economic efficiency.
As you know, the globalisation of the world economy and the development of financial markets were
driven by two key factors:
• 
firstly, financial deregulation – reinforced in Europe by the setting up of the single market and
subsequently  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –    which  liberalised  capital  flows  and
enhanced competition among financial sectors;
and secondly, technical and financial innovation, which simultaneously paved the way for the
creation of financial markets that are deep, liquid and interconnected.
 What  is  interesting  to  stress  is  that  the  interaction  of  free  capital  movements  within  interconnected
markets,  increasing  integration  of  market  segments  and  hedging  opportunities  provided  by  new
financial  instruments  have  allowed  a  better  fit  between  the  financing  capacities  and  borrowing
requirements  of  both  governments,  households  and  companies.  The  use  of  market  interest  rates,
which represent the markets’ consensus on the risk incurred at a moment, as a driving force is fully
beneficial to an efficient allocation of capital.
Lowering  the  barriers  to  entering  the  financial  sector,  the  free  circulation  of  information  and  fiercer
competition  have  also  brought  financial  markets  closer  to  a  situation  of  pure  and  perfect
competition, which is beneficial to all consumers.
Last but not least, the growth of market financing has allowed savings to be channelled directly into
investment.  Reducing  the  share  of  bank  financing,  and  consequently  that  of  money  creation,  has
enabled  a  less  inflationary  financing  of  the  economy.  Thus  increased,  monetary  stability  has
produced tangible and positive effects and contributed decisively to a strong and sustainable growth
of the world economy.
Thus,  these  developments  have  resulted  in  increased  monetary  stability  and  a  more  efficient
allocation  of  resources.  However,  while  globalisation  and  financial  integration  have  decisively
contributed to improving overall economic efficiency, experience also suggests that financial cycles
may have tended to amplify relative to business cycles over recent years.
In  particular,  financial  markets  have  experienced 
in  some  circumstances  somewhat  erratic
developments. The rapid emergence of the "new economy" bubble in 1999 and early 2000 – followed
by a series of sharp corrections – illustrated the potential of markets for providing funding to the real
economy  (particularly  to  the  most  innovative  sectors);  but  it  also  demonstrated  the  tendency  of
markets  to  over-react,  moving  from  excessive  optimism  to  disproportionate  pessimism,  with  the
ensuing negative consequences for the behaviour of firms and households.
As  a  result,  financial  authorities  have  been  confronted  with  boom-bust  episodes  which  must  be
carefully  monitored,  since  they  could  affect  global  monetary  and  financial  stability.  I  would  like
therefore to consider two issues here:
• 
Firstly,  experience  suggests  that  financial  cycles  may  have  recently  tended  to  amplify
relative to business cycles; what are the driving factors behind this move;
BIS Review 41/2001
1
Secondly,  what  are  the  possible  policy  implications  of  this  development,  from  both  a
monetary and financial stability perspective.
Experience suggests that financial cycles have recently tended to amplify relative to
business cycles.
What are the major features of these amplified financial cycles?
A.
Let us first consider credit cycles. There is no doubt that the amplitude of credit cycles is usually
larger  than  that  of  business  cycles.  What  is  however  noticeable  here  is  that,  over  the  last  three
decades, business cycles have been less frequent and less amplified while credit cycles have tended
to remain fairly marked. Thus credit cycles have been amplifying in relative terms compared with
business cycles.
Asset  price  cycles  have  also  become  more  pronounced  even  if  the  fixed  interest  rate  markets
have a tendency to be somewhat contra-cyclical.
• 
In  the  last  two  decades  market  forces  have  indeed  tended  to  cause  clear  misalignments
between equilibrium and actual asset prices. Stock markets in particular have experienced
this  phenomenon.  But  in  foreign  exchange  markets  as  well,  prices  have  also  tended  to
diverge  substantially  from  their  “equilibrium  level”,  although  those  divergences  have  been
contained through fruitful GVII cooperation during the last 15 years.
In  addition,  some  markets  have  seen  an  increase  in  volatility  and  frequent  volatility
peaks. Although cyclical moves should be clearly distinguished from volatility, the latter may
in  some  circumstances  exceed  what  can  be  considered  optimal,  making  the  price
determination mechanism less efficient and thus contributing to misalignments.
Moreover,  as  demonstrated  by  a  number  of  financial  crises  during  the  last  two  decades,
contagion  among  countries  and  across  financial  markets  has  been  frequent.  As  a
result, investors have faced asset price fluctuations that might be more synchronised than
before.
Lastly, the connections between credit, asset price and business cycles have tended
to amplify cyclical swings. Credit, in particular, has played an increasing role in asset price
fluctuations. Initially observed during the “speculative bubbles” of the 1980s and early 1990s,
this trend has persisted. Another example is provided by boom-bust cycles in asset prices
and credit activities, which have often been associated with sharp economic contractions.
In  sum,  the  recent  period  has  experienced  some  amplification  of  financial  cycles,  compared  with
business cycles.
B.
Let us first consider credit cycles:
• 
What are the factors underlying this possible amplification of financial cycles?
the  first  factor  in  play  is  the  behaviour  of  banks,  which  is  closely  linked  to  their
environment.  Some  of  them may  have  tended  to  artificially  increase  their  return  on  equity
through higher leverage or low provisioning during upswings. As a consequence they tend to
become more fragile in the downward phase of the cycle. In parallel, investors have become
more  reluctant  to  invest  in  the  banking  sector  when  profit  expectations  are  low,  making  it
difficult  for  banks  to  raise  new  funds.  Banks’  soundness  therefore  tends  to  be  more
correlated to economic fluctuations than in the past, contributing to the amplification of the
credit cycle.
Accounting regulations so far may also contribute to amplifying credit cycles to some extent.
In most financial centres, current provisioning behaviour does not allow banks to take a
forward-looking  view  of  their  risks,  as  accounting  and  tax  rules  only  accept  loan-loss
provisions for impaired loans. Such a regulatory environment may amplify the credit cycle,
contributing  to  low  provisioning  and  over-lending  during  upswings  and  paving  the  way  to
sharp  corrections  during  downswings.  Using  full  fair  value  accounting  for  loan  portfolios
might further amplify credit cycles by increasing the volatility of banks’ earnings.
Prudential  rules  may  also  have  been  unable  so  far  to  always  prevent  these
developments.  Current  capital  adequacy  rules  are  not  risk-sensitive;  as  a  result,  credit
 1.
     2
BIS Review 41/2001
deterioration  does  not  require  additional  regulatory  capital  unless  loan  losses  erode  the
capital base under minimum requirements. As most banks – particularly large ones – have
capital far beyond the prudential minimum requirements, they can bear a reduction of their
capital base without being compelled to restrict their credit granting. Therefore, capital ratio
is not pro-cyclical as such. The point is that, even while capital requirements are fulfilled,
losses can reduce banks’ own funds at a time when capital issuance is difficult or costly; in
such a juncture, some analysts argue that banks may be led to restrict credit lending during
downswings although they are not bound to do so for prudential reasons. I consider that the
future  capital  requirements  of  the  New  Accord  will  significantly  improve  the  situation  as
regards the risk-sensitivity of capital requirements.
Let us now turn to asset price moves.
As  previously  mentioned,  financial  asset  prices  may  fluctuate  widely  and  sometimes  deviate  from
economic fundamentals for long periods of time. Several factors may be in play when this happens. I
shall give a few examples.
• 
Some market participants may have become more inclined to engage in "short-termism",
that  is,  they  are  only  preoccupied  with  their  short-term  results.  This  trend  might  result,  in
particular,  from  growing  pressure  to  yield  high  immediate  financial  results  that  are  not
necessarily sustainable. Marking-to-market financial products may also have contributed to
this  widespread  focus  on  immediate  financial  performances.  This  focus  on  short-term
performance can translate into additional volatility in the price discovery process: the shorter
the investment horizon of market participants, the bigger the impact of any new information
on prices.
Mimetic  behaviour  is  of  course  by  no  means  a  new  phenomenon  on  financial  markets.
Technological developments on markets may however have gradually reinforced this type of
behaviour, as participants are increasingly incited to follow their peers through matching the
performance of a benchmark. There is no doubt that the spread of benchmarking allows fund
managers and clients to better assess their performance against that of other funds. But, in a
context  of  growing  competition  within  the  sector,  it  may  well  have  increased  mimetic
behaviour.  Some  economic  operators  (whose  own  compensation  is  closely  linked  to  the
relative, rather than absolute, profit and losses they generate) may indeed have come to the
conclusion that it would be better to be wrong along with everybody else, rather than running
the  risk  of  being  wrong  alone.  A  striking  example  of  rational  mimetic  behaviour  is  the
influence  that  hedge  funds  enjoyed  as  "opinion  leaders"  and  trend  makers.  By  its  nature,
trend following amplifies the imbalance that may at some point affect a market, potentially
leading to vicious circles of price adjustments and liquidation of positions.
Another factor to be taken into consideration is the spectacular development of certain fund
management techniques, such as index management. As it has proven very popular on
equity  markets,  index  management  may  have  contributed  to  exacerbating  movements  in
financial asset prices. Because their goal is to mimic the performance of indexes, “passive
managers”  try  constantly  to  match  the  composition  of  their  benchmark.  They  thus  help  to
amplify market trends, buying more as the market rises and liquidating more as the market
drops. It can be argued that index funds distort the price of the targeted indexes and that, as
a result, the indices end up creating rather than measuring performance.
Last but not least, the impact of risk management techniques on market dynamics is
particularly enlightening with regard to the question of asset price overshooting. Value-at-risk
calculations  have  become  a  crucial  element  of  the  standard  approach  used  by  market
participants  to  evaluate  the  risk  inherent  in  their  market  activities  and  to  set  up  exposure
limits. Of course, central banks and financial institutions should continue to  encourage the
use of these instruments. But, in times of financial turmoil, the growing use of sophisticated
risk  management  techniques  by  financial  intermediaries  might  have  had  the  paradoxical
effect  of  amplifying  the  initial  shock,  exhausting  liquidity  and  contributing  to  contagion
phenomena.  Regardless  of  the  intrinsic  qualities  of  these  risk  management  tools,  we  see
that their growing use may have produced pernicious effects. When market players rely on
converging  risk  evaluations,  they  tend  to  take  the  same  decisions  at  the  same  time,  thus
amplifying the initial shock to prices and trading volumes.
   BIS Review 41/2001
3
All those factors have one consequence in common: they encourage homogenous behaviour and
reactions to the detriment of the diversity that is indispensable to the smooth functioning of financial
markets.
2.
Possible policy implications of such developments from a monetary and a financial
stability perspective
All the factors I have just mentioned require authorities to consider – in conjunction with the financial
industry – ways of preserving monetary and financial stability in this changing environment.
A. 
A  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  is  a  fundamental  prerequisite  for  the  smooth
functioning of financial cycles.
Financial deregulation has radically changed the conduct of monetary policies.
More  open  economies  and  greater  interdependence  between  financial  systems  have  completely
overhauled the context in which monetary policy is implemented.
• 
Financial  markets  can  now  penalise  inflationary  monetary  policies  by  withdrawing  capital,
with a subsequent rise in long-term interest rates and/or depreciation of the exchange rate.
At the same time, monetary policy transmission mechanisms have become more diversified
and complex.
 This  situation  has  prompted  the  authorities  to  separate  the  different  instruments  for  implementing
economic  policy.  In  this  context,  monetary  policy  has  been  clearly  been  assigned  the  objective  of
maintaining price stability.
Today, monetary policies are conducted within a framework characterised by three features:
• 
Firstly, reducing inflation expectations depends on compliance with a  number of rules that
have been clearly defined in advance. Consequently, this policy can only be effective if the
authority responsible for defining and implementing it is credible. The conjunction of a clear,
overriding objective of price stability (which has been explicitly laid down in the statute of the
ECB),  with  well-established  institutional  independence  ensures  the  continuity  of  the
monetary policy decisions made by the authorities.
Secondly,  the  emergence  of  a  globalised  market  has  quite  naturally  led  to  new
developments in monetary policy instruments. The interest-rate instrument is overwhelmingly
used to the detriment of quantitative and regulatory instruments.
Lastly,  these  instruments  serve  converging  strategies.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy
framework, for instance, is based on an analysis of growth in the monetary aggregate – the
EMU reference value for M3 growth is 4.5% – combined with a wide range of economic and
financial indicators to monitor inflationary risks.
  In such a context, monetary policy acts as a stabiliser.
Monetary policy alone cannot guarantee the stability of financial systems, which may be jeopardised
by  shocks  from  both  the  financial  and  the  real  economies.  However,  it  must  be  stressed  that  an
adequate monetary policy is a fundamental prerequisite to a smooth functioning of the financial cycles.
An appropriate monetary stance –both in terms of interest rate and money supply – is crucial for banks
and  monetary  participants  to  base  their  decisions  on  solid  ground.  The  objective  of  price  stability
lowers economic agents’ uncertainty regarding future price developments. In addition, by committing
itself to a long-term objective, the central bank reduces market uncertainty, which can be a source of
disruption  to  the  financial  economy.  Interest  rates  and  money  supply  are  less  volatile  as  a  result,
which is of benefit to the long-term growth of the economy.
However, for financial systems to be stable, monetary policy must be consistent with the other aspects
of  economic  policy,  that  is,  fiscal  policy  and  structural  programmes.  The  policy  mix  must  be
well-balanced  at  the  international  as  well  as  the  domestic  levels.  Placing  too  heavy  a  burden  on
monetary policy in terms of achieving the main economic and financial balances is detrimental to its
effectiveness.  In  particular,  it  diminishes  its  ability  to  maintain  and  consolidate  financial  market
stability. This concern underlies the implementation of the Growth and Stability Pact in Economic and
Monetary Union. By obliging fiscal policies to commit to stability, the pact allows the fiscal buffers to
fulfil  their  role  as  stabilisers.  Indeed,  by  their  information  and  expectations,  investors  can  penalise
4
BIS Review 41/2001
imbalances affecting the main world economies or diverging developments in different countries. To
reduce this constraint, economic and monetary policies must be harmonised at the international level
in order to achieve more balanced international financial relations.
B. 
Financial authorities have to soften as much as possible some of the side-effects of
the new financial market features.
Let us first consider a few possible improvements as regards credit cycles:
• 
Provisioning standards should allow banks’ lending to be less pro-cyclical. As a general rule,
provisioning  standards  require  improvements  so  that  provisions  better  reflect  the  actual
inherent  credit  risk  of  loan  portfolios.  They  should  also  be  improved  for  macroeconomic
purposes,  so  that  banks’  lending  behaviour  becomes  less  pro-cyclical.  These  objectives
could be achieved through a more forward-looking provisioning, whereby provisions
are set up earlier – that is to say, in a perfect world, as soon as a loan is granted. Current
accounting and tax frameworks hamper the widespread adoption of dynamic provisioning by
requiring that risks on specific loans be identified prior to provisioning. Discussions among
accounting standard-setters, tax authorities and regulators are essential to encourage such a
reform.
Globalisation and the development of financial markets have created a real need for reliable
information  and  harmonised  accounting  practices.  We  fully  support  such  trends  towards
increased transparency. But,  it is  nonetheless vital to ensure that,  when  applied  to banks,
some of the new widespread accounting practices neither distort the presentation of banks'
individual  situations,  nor  disrupt  their  management  practices.  A  “full  fair  value”  approach
assumes that a “fair value” can be determined for all financial instruments; but this does not
necessarily apply to banking activities, since loans and deposits are essentially neither liquid
nor  tradable.  Using  the  full  fair  value  approach  for  the  banking  book  might  result  in
sharp  swings  in  banks'  earnings  and  prompt  banks  to  curtail  their  lending  activity.
This  approach  might  further  amplify  the  credit  cycle  and  could  potentially  affect  financial
stability. This is the reason why an increasing number of bank regulators are not in favour of
this approach as regards banking book.
 Let us now focus on asset prices moves. Financial authorities might reflect on some ways to
foster behavioural diversity in financial markets.
As we have seen before, a series of factors, such as short-termism, mimetic behaviour or index
management, have tended to make “contrarians” less pro-active on financial markets. This has
resulted in somewhat modified market dynamics and less efficient price determination mechanisms. In
order  to  safeguard  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  markets,  the  diversity  of  participants’  behaviours
must  be  protected  or  even  reinforced.  This  necessary  diversity  should  logically  reflect  natural
differences in time horizons, strategies and reaction functions of market players. On this point, I would
like to explore three possible avenues for future action for both authorities and the industry.
First avenue: Strengthen the continuing efforts aiming at market transparency
• 
Experience  shows  that  uncertainty  and  incomplete  information  are  determining  factors  in
mimetic behaviour. These shortfalls in market transparency make mimetic behaviour seem
rational  to  agents,  who  prefer  to  follow  bigger  participants,  who  are  thought  to  be  better
informed,  rather  than  develop  their  own  analysis.  Strengthening  transparency  therefore
continues to be a priority.
One  of  the  objectives  of  transparency  is  to  enable  better  differentiation  of  borrower
creditworthiness. A key feature of mimetic behaviour is that all borrowers are "tarred with the
same  brush".  So  when  one  emerging  economy  encounters  difficulties,  all  neighbouring
countries  are treated in the same way –  regardless  of  their  actual  economic  and  financial
situation.  The  same  applies  to  businesses  operating  in  the  same  economic  sector.
Transparency  as  substantially  improved  since  the  Asian  crisis  thanks  to  a  solid  global
consensus. Let us continue and reinforce these efforts.
 Second possible avenue: Taking into account the medium and long-term perspective of some market
participants.
• 
Some investors, such as pension funds and insurance companies, have to invest funds in
order to enable their customers to build up wealth over the medium and long term, notably in
BIS Review 41/2001
5
 preparation  for  retirement.  Consequently,  this  type  of  investor  are  supposed  to  behave
differently from traders and short-term investors,  who are  working on a  very  different  time
horizon. But at times it seems that they are all pushed to behave in much the same way, on
the basis of a very short-term horizon.
To preserve, and even restore, their specific investment approach, these investors might be
more  shielded  from  excessive  short-term  pressures.  This  objective  raises  considerable
difficulties, because it touches on the way in which the performances of medium and long-
term  funds  and  life  insurance  companies  are  assessed.  In  other  words,  this  objective
concerns the  accounting standards and practices they use. It might  imply  that  some  rules
and  standards  would  be  adapted  to  the  medium  and  long-term  horizon  used  by  these
entities.
Third possible avenue: Diversify the risk management tools of financial institutions:
• 
As I mentioned earlier, even the best techniques can have adverse effects when used by too
many  participants.  To  some  degree,  this  is  perhaps  what  has  happened  to  value-at-risk
based techniques,  which have been massively  adopted by the  financial  industry.  Because
they  use  more  or  less  similar  parameters  and  suffer  from  the  same  weaknesses  –  for
example, they took inadequate account of market liquidity at the time of the 1998 crisis –,
such  tools  might  tend  to  give  converging  signals  to  those  that  use  them.  They  thus
encourage the mimetic behaviour that I discussed previously.
Of course, the fact that some market participants are more sophisticated than the average is
a guarantee that standardisation will remain limited, since they will develop techniques that
are little used by others.
However, supervisors might help, and obviously are already helping to spread the idea that
financial institutions should round out their current range of risk management tools to include
extensive  use  of  stress  testing.  This  technique  offers  a  better  reflection  of  the  varying
situations of institutions and of the diverse perceptions that institutions have of exceptional
events.  The  application  of  stress  testing  techniques  and  their  results  are  thus  inherently
more diversified than those resulting from methods based on the value-at-risk approach.
  These are only  examples of possible options to  help  improve the functioning of the financial cycles
and smooth their interaction with the business cycles. There is probably some merit to embark in
an overall review of regulatory, accounting and tax rules and regulations, as well as of codes of
good conduct and good practices  and of structural developments of markets themselves, to
identify  possible  amendments  and  improvements  that  could  help,  protect  and  enhance  the
behavorial and conceptual diversity of modern financial markets.
In conclusion, let me stress the important role played by central banks in preserving monetary
and financial stability in an increasingly globalised world.
• 
The  recent  years  have  shown  the  benefits  of  monetary  stability  in  terms  of  growth  in  a
globalised world. It is of course closely linked to central banks’ independence, which is no
longer a matter of debate.
Financial  authorities  are  nevertheless  faced  with  a  new  challenge,  which  is  to  strengthen
financial  stability,  in  a  context  of  amplified  financial  cycles,  in  conjunction  with  monetary
stability. I would like to stress what I feel is the highly complementary nature of price stability
and financial stability objectives: price stability is the bedrock on which financial stability is
built.
Central banks have a undoubtedly special responsibility due to their position at the heart of
financial systems:
they contribute directly to supplying liquidity to the economy,
their close and constant contact with credit institutions gives them a thorough understanding
of banking systems,
they are responsible for ensuring that payment systems operate smoothly,
and they contribute to banking supervision.
    I thank you for your attention.
6
BIS Review 41/2001
