Peter Nicholl: Perspectives on monetary policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Lecture  by  Mr  Peter  Nicholl,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  to  the  1/1
Student Initiative, Sarajevo University, Sarajevo, May 2001.
 Introduction
I  am  very  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  talk  to  the  top  students  of  Sarajevo  University  about
monetary policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH). As we have only an hour and a half in all, and I want
to leave plenty of time for your questions, I do not have time for a comprehensive  discussion of all
possible monetary policy issues for BH. So I have decided to talk on the following four inter-related
issues:
 
 
 
 
the Currency Board option;
macro-economic sustainability in BH;
the role of the banking sector in BH ;
institutional design of economic institutions.
The currency board option
As  I  am  sure  you  all  know,  the  CBBH  operates  monetary  policy  in  BH  by  a  Currency  Board
arrangement.  The three essential features  of  the  Currency  Board,  all  of  which  are  specified  in  the
CBBH law, are:
 
The BH currency, the Convertible  Mark (KM) is tied to  the  Deutschmark  (DEM)  at  a  fixed
exchange rate of 1KM= 1DEM. It is now also tied to the Euro at the same rate as the DEM (
1 KM = 0.511 Euro);
The KM liabilities of the CBBH have to be fully backed with convertible foreign assets;
The CBBH has to be prepared to convert KM for DEM at any time for any amount (i.e. It is a
fully convertible currency)
 It  is  interesting  to  remember  back  to  the  sort  of  payment  and  banking  sector  that  operated  in  BH
before the CBBH was established in 1997:
 
there  were  four  currencies  in  use  in  BH  and  the  only  one  that  was  used  over  the  whole
country was the DEM;
there were three payments bureaus that had a monopoly on domestic non-cash payments
but could not settle electronically with each other;
there were around 70 organisations that called themselves banks but most were very small
and none of them operated over the whole country.
  Linking the KM to the DEM through a Currency Board was an easy choice for BH because the DM
was already extensively used in the country and was the currency people trusted.
It has been a successful choice too:
 
 
 
the KM has been a stable currency against the DEM and the Euro since it was introduced;
inflation in BH is relatively low and stable;
KM use has risen rapidly within BH and it is now the dominant transactions currency in all
parts of the country. Our KM liabilities have risen from KM 132 million when we started in
August 1997 to KM 1,023 million at the end of February 2001;
they can even be traded in a number of other countries in Europe;
 BIS Review51/2001
1
 the  KM  has  remained  fully  convertible.  Since  the  KM  currency  was  introduced  we  have
issued around KM 3.44 billion and we have converted back to DEM around KM 2.66 billion.
I  do  not  think  there  is  any  other  type  of  monetary  policy,  except  the  adoption  of  the  DEM  as  the
currency of BH, that could have given a country like BH a stable and trusted currency this quickly.
Why has the currency board worked in BIH?
I think there are four main reasons:
 
first, people have faced many financial traumas. They therefore value a stable currency. The
Currency Board consequently has a high level of public and political support within BH;
second, people had complete trust in the anchor currency, the DM a strict Currency Board
has allowed the CBBH, a new institution with no track record, to gain some of the credibility
of the DEM and the Bundesbank;
third, some people say it is because the CBBH has a foreign Governor. I think that is only a
small part of the reason.
in my view, the major reason it has worked is the very good legal and institutional framework
the CBBH has.
– 
– 
the goal of the CBBH is simple, clear and specified in the law;
the law limits our activities where there would be any potential conflict with the Currency
Board requirements;
–  within  these  statutory  goals  and  limitations,  the  CBBH  is  independent  of  political
direction;
–  we have sensible and sound internal decision-making processes;
–  we are easily and firmly held accountable. A breach of the Currency Board requirements
would  be  quickly  obvious  to  all.  Within  the  current  economic  jargon,  it  is  a  very
transparent form of policy implementation.
Some  economists  and  others  argue  that  a  Currency  Board  has  disadvantages  because  of  the
limitations it places on the economic roles of the CBBH for example:
 
the CBBH can not play a role in providing liquidity to the banking sector (i.e., it can not act as
lender of last resort);
the CBBH can not finance the Government;
the CBBH can not play any direct role in financing economic development;
the exchange rate can not be used as a tool to adjust to economic shocks or poor economic
performance.
 These areas of policy discretion, if used wisely and in moderation, could be of advantage to economic
development in BH. There are lots of projects in BH for which a  ‘little  bit’ of CBBH finance may be
helpful. But the problem would be in keeping the CBBH credit to a  ‘little bit.’ The experience  of the
region is that excess central bank credit has usually been created and the result is inflation. That does
not help business, employment or confidence in BH. So in my view, the strict Currency Board is the
best approach for BH.
Will the currency board be continued in BIH?
I believe it will for the following reasons:
 
there is widespread support for it because it has provided one of the few elements of stability
the people of BH have had for some time;
it would be risky to change it. confidence in the KM would drop as people waited to see how
any alternative monetary policy would work;
    2
BIS Review 51/2001
  Currency Boards have worked well in other eastern European countries such as Latvia and
Bulgaria. Currency Boards are becoming acceptable, even fashionable;
the long-term goal of BH policy is to take the economy closer to Europe. The KM is already
tied to the Euro. It would therefore seem sensible to maintain this link.
Macro-economic sustainability in BIH
While I believe strongly that  BH should maintain  its Currency Board,  there  will  need to be changes
made  in  other  areas  if  BH  is  to  have  macro-economic  sustainability  over  the  medium  term.  The
Currency  Board  requirement  means  that  the  CBBH  can  not  issue  KM  currency  in  any  quantity  it
chooses or the economy needs. The amount that can be issued is tied to the net position of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s external accounts. This is the Currency Board arithmetic.
What does this Currency Board arithmetic mean for a central bank and a country? If the net position
on a country’s external accounts is positive, the central bank’s foreign reserves will increase as the
foreign inflows are changed  into the domestic currency. There  is  nothing  to  stop  a  Currency  Board
having more than 100% backing for its domestic currency liabilities.
(Indeed,  at  present  the  CBBH  has  foreign  reserves  equal  to  106%  of  our  KM  liabilities.)  So  if  the
overall  foreign  accounts  are  in  good  shape,  there  will  be  no  pressure  on  the  Currency  Board  and
medium term economic sustainability will be easy.
But, if the country’s overall foreign accounts are negative, the situation is very different. If people wish
to buy foreign exchange with their KM currency, the CBBH has to do so without limit. That is what full
convertibility  means.  The  level  of  the  CBBH’s  foreign  reserves  will  fall  as  will  the  volume  of  the
domestic money supply. The Currency Board rules will still be met, but the balance sheet of the CBBH
will decline and could continue to decline until there were no more foreign reserves. At that stage, BH
could only meet foreign expenditures as they earned or gained foreign exchange.
The current position of the balance of payments of BH are a cause for concern. The trade deficit is
very high.  The amount of foreign private capital coming into the country is still very low. The flows that
have made the situation work are the large amounts of official capital and repatriations by Bosnians
living abroad.
Looking ahead:
 
we know the level of official capital flows will slow, the only uncertainty being exactly when
this will occur:
it will be difficult to rapidly increase export receipts, though more could be done than has so
far occurred;
the  country  is  very  heavily  dependent  on  imports.  A  slowdown  in  reconstruction  will  slow
imports to some extent. But a rapid slowdown in imports would also hurt consumption and
living standards;
it is difficult to predict or rely on repatriations;
the item that has the most potential to change rapidly is foreign private investment. But for
BH  to  attract  more  foreign  private  investment  the  environment  for  private  investment  will
have to change substantially.
   If BH does not attract large quantities of private foreign investment, pressure will come on the level of
foreign reserves as the official capital flows slow down. This in turn will decrease the domestic money
supply  and  put  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  Monetary  policy  as  implemented  through  a
Currency Board arrangement is pro-cyclical when the economy has a foreign exchange problem i.e. It
will increase the contractionary pressure on the economy.
The  situation  facing  the  BH  economy  is  critical  and  urgent.  Most  of  the  policy-makers  have  some
understanding of the foreign exchange problems. But they still seem to think they have policy choices
and a sense of urgency is lacking. In my view the only choice is to make BH an attractive place for
private investment and to  do  everything necessary to  attract foreign  private capital. If that  does  not
happen, the BH economy will have major foreign exchange problems and the currency board will be
unable to protect the country from those shocks. Indeed, it could become one of the victims of those
shocks as politicians look for scapegoats to explain the country’s economic problems to the people.
BIS Review51/2001
3
Foreign investment is increasing. In 1999 for example, direct foreign investment was 50% higher than
in 1998 and though we do not  yet have figures for 2000, I  am sure it has risen strongly  again. But
while this growth rate sounds spectacular, it is from a very low base. Direct foreign investment into BH
in 1999 is estimated to have been KM 170 million. The current account deficit for that year was KM 1.4
billion. So private foreign investment financed just 12% of the current account deficit in that year. BH
needs  to  be  increasing  private  foreign  investment  by  around  200%  a  year  over  the  next  two  years
rather than 50% a year if the current economic growth rates are to be sustainable when the official aid
flows slow down.
This target is possible. The arrival here of foreign banks from Austria and Croatia shows that there is
increased interest from foreign investors.  But the climate for private investment in BH is still far from
supportive. This applies to local investment as well as foreign investment. There are still problems in
the  legal  system,  which  is  incomplete,  the  licensing  and  regulatory  systems,  which  are  far  too
bureaucratic, intrusive and multi-level, and in the financial system, which is still relatively weak.
Improving the environment for private investment, both local and foreign, is the key economic issue
facing this country. It is this that will determine whether BH has a sustainable economy – and whether
it is a country in which good students like yourselves should stay to be a part of its future.
The banking sector
As  I  said  in  the  last  section,  a  weak  financial  sector  is  one  of  the  factors  that  hampers  private
investment in BH. The good news is that this gloomy picture finally began to change  in 2000. I  will
mention just a few of the highlights.
 
First, the payments system underwent fundamental reform. The old state-owned centralised
system that had a monopoly was closed. It has been replaced with a modern European-type
system with two clearing houses, a RTGS one and a Giro one, owned and operated by the
Central Bank and payments are  being conducted by the commercial banks. The suppliers
we  used  had  put  similar  systems  into  place  in  nine  other  European  countries.  But  it  was
done more quickly in BH than anywhere else showing that it is possible to implement large,
technical projects  in  BH successfully. It  has been  operating since  5  January  2001  and  is
going very smoothly.
Second, minimum capital requirements for banks were increased and it became possible for
a  bank  registered  in  one  entity  to  operate  branches  in  the  other  entity.  Five  banks  are
already doing so and more will follow.
Third,  more  foreign  banks  commenced  operations  in  BIH  in  2000,  either  by  applying  for
licenses directly or by purchasing an existing BH bank. Increased foreign competition will be
very good for the BH economy. It will give depositors more choice and  will force the  local
banks to improve the range and quality of the services they provide if they want to survive.
One can already see these effects occuring after only a few months.
Fourth,  a  limited  deposit  insurance  scheme  has  started  which  should  help  return  citizens
confidence  to  the  banks  that  qualify.  So  far,  only  four  banks  have  been  admitted  to  the
scheme and it is only operating in the Federation.
Fifth,  most  of  the  state-owned  banks  (there  are  around  twenty  state-owned  banks  in  BH)
finally  had  their  opening  balance  sheets  approved  and  they  moved  into  the  privatisation
phase.  But progress in bank privatisation continued  to be  very slow  in  2000. While  this  is
disappointing, in my view it is no longer critical for the process of bank reform in BH as the
reform  process  is  being  largely  driven  by  privately-owned  banks,  including  the  recently
arrived foreign banks. The citizens actually show a higher degree of trust in privately-owned
banks  as  compared  to  state-owned  banks.  While  at  first  sight,  this  may  seem  to  be
paradoxical it is completly understandable once one knows a bit of the financial history of the
region.
    There is still a long way to go before BH has a banking sector that can play the major role that the
banking sector plays in most other countries in Europe, including most other transition economies in
Eastern europe. But 2000 will be seen as the year in which the  BH  banking sector finally  began to
move in the right direction and it is certain that the speed of change will accelerate even more in 2001.
4
BIS Review 51/2001
The system will be fundamentally  different  and  stronger  in  a  year's  time  compared  with  today.  The
CBBH will do all it can to ensure that happens. Similar progress needs to be made in the other areas
so that private investors, both Bosnians and foreignors, see this as a good country to invest in.
the CBBH has clear and unambiguous goals;
it has a sound and clear legal framework;
it has good internal decision-making and monitoring processes;
it has a sensible degree of independence.
Institutional design of economic institutions
I want to conclude my lecture with some comments on the institutional design of economic institutions.
Many internationals, and quite a lot of Bosnians, are critical of the performance of many of the state
institutions in BH. I do not want to comment on the structure of state political institutions. But I know it
is  possible  to  build  successful  state  economic  institution  in  BH.  The  CBBH  is  a  state  economic
institution.  It  works successfully. In my  view, the major reason it  works successfully is  the  way  it  is
structured. I set out some of the features earlier in the paper but they are so important that I will repeat
them:
 
 
 
 
In other words, the legal and operational structure of the CBBH is much the same as that of Central
Banks in other countries – and it works, even in BH.
But  most  other  state  institutions,  and  particularly  the  economic  ministries,  are  constructed  in  a
completely  different  way.  They  have  unclear  goals,  rotating  heads,  consensus  decision-making,
frequent changes  of staff  etc.  They  are  built  on  political  criteria  rather  than  on  effective  operational
criteria,  even  though  there  job  should  be  to  implement  decisions  taken  by  politicians,  not  to  act  as
politicians. We should not therefore be surprised by the relatively poor performance of many of these
organisations.
I believe the design of state economic institutions is an issue the BH authorities and the international
community  need  to  pay  more  attention  to.  Setting  up  an  institution  isn't  enough.  The  way  it  is
structured will have a big impact on how effectively and efficiently it operates -no matter who its staff
are.  Also,  making  the  ministeries  political  undermines  the  responsibility  and  effectiveness  of  the
institutions in BH that should deal with political issues – the Presidency, the Council of Ministers, the
State Parliament, and the Entity Governments and Parliaments.
BIS Review51/2001
5
6
BIS Review 51/2001
