Bank of Japan’s February report of recent economic and financial
developments1
Bank of Japan, 13 February 2001.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s economy continues to recover gradually, but the pace is slowing due to decelerating export
growth.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  on  an  increasing  trend.  The  recovery  in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole  due  to  lack  of  notable  improvements  in
employment  and  income  conditions,  but  there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some  indicators.
Housing investment is virtually unchanged. As for public investment, the pace of decline is slowing.
Meanwhile,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  are  starting  to  decrease  reflecting  a
slowdown in overseas economies such as the U.S. and East Asia.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production remains on a rising trend, but the
pace is slowing considerably. Inventories of some materials and electronics parts, for which demand
from overseas is declining significantly, have become somewhat excessive, but inventories as a whole
still  remain  at  a  low  level.  Meanwhile,  corporate  profits  continue  to  improve.  Income  conditions  of
households  still  remain  severe  but  are  not  deteriorating,  as  employment  conditions  are  on  an
improving trend.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  expected  to  start  increasing  with  the  implementation  of  the
government’s  new  economic  stimulus  package.  In  the  corporate  sector,  firms  still  strongly  feel  that
they  have  excess  capacity  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.
However,  it  is  very  likely  that  fixed  investment  in  high-growth  sectors,  including  those  related  to
information technology services, will increase as corporate profits continue to recover. Moreover, the
improvement in corporate profits will increase household income and this in turn is expected to boost
private consumption. However, the pace of recovery in household income will be modest for the time
being, since firms’ perceptions of excess employment still persist, and thus no significant change has
been observed in their efforts to reduce personnel expenses.
It seems to be inevitable that exports will decline for some time reflecting the slowing of economies
overseas.  Imports  are  projected  to  continue  increasing,  particularly  those  of  consumer  goods,  and
capital  goods  and  parts.  Hence,  net  exports  are  expected  to  decline.  Mainly  due  to  these
developments in exports, industrial production is expected to remain at around the current level for a
while.
Overall, it is likely that the economy will continue a gradual upward trend led mainly by business fixed
investment. In addition, the favorable financial environment, created partly by the Bank’s continuation
of its easy monetary stance, and the government’s new economic stimulus package are expected to
underpin the economy. However, attention should be paid to growing risks of downward pressures on
the  economy  induced  by  a  possible  further  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  as  well  as  by
developments in foreign and domestic capital markets.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the yen. Domestic
wholesale prices are declining somewhat mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery.
Consumer  prices  continue  to  be  somewhat  weak  owing  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  other  imported
products and their substitutes, despite the increase in prices of petroleum products. Corporate service
prices are still falling slowly.
                                                     
1
This report was written based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 9, 2001.
2
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on February 9 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 12/2001
1
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the recent yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressures on prices. Moreover, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market is
projected to be on a gradual improving trend, while an economic recovery is expected to continue at a
moderate pace. Recently, however, the pace of recovery seems to be slowing and crude oil prices,
which had been exerting upward pressures on prices, are falling. In addition to the declining trend of
machinery prices due to technological innovations, the decrease in prices of consumer goods arising
from  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels,  and  the  reduction  in  communications  fees  aided  by
deregulation will continue to exert downward pressures on prices. Overall, prices are expected to be
somewhat weak for the time being.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is generally moving around 0.25 percent.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  have  been  declining  somewhat.  The  Japan  premium  remains
negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds have declined to around 1.4-1.45 percent. The yield spreads
between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are  mostly
unchanged or expanding somewhat.
Stock  prices  continue  to  be  weak  and  are  moving  around  the  lowest  level  recorded  since  the
beginning of 2000.
In the foreign exchange market, the sharp depreciation of the yen since late December has come to a
pause. The yen is currently being traded in the range of 114-117 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  There  seem  to  be  no
significant  changes  in  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such  instruments  as
corporate bonds and CP.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with the recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, lending by private banks remains sluggish, declining at around 2 percent year-on-year.
Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of corporate bonds  issued  is  slightly  above  the  previous  year’s
level. The amount outstanding of CP issued continues to be at a high level.
Recently, the growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) is slightly increasing due to the inflow from postal
savings.
As for funding costs for firms, short-term funding rates basically remain flat but long-term funding rates
seem to be declining reflecting the developments in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions  remain  easy.  However,  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  stock  prices  on  the  fund-raising
conditions of firms need to be carefully monitored.
2
BIS Review 12/2001
