Bank of Japan’s March report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, 21 March 2001.
 The Bank’s view2
The recovery in Japan’s economy has recently come to a pause, reflecting a decrease in exports.
With  regard  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  increasing.  The  recovery  in  private
consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole,  but  there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some
indicators. Housing investment is virtually unchanged. Public investment is bottoming out.
While domestic demand remains steady, net exports (real exports minus real imports) are plummeting
reflecting a sharp slowdown in overseas economies such as in the U.S. and East Asia. Mainly due to
these developments, industrial production is starting to decline, and inventories of some materials and
electronics  parts  are  becoming  excessive.  Corporate  profits  continue  to  improve  but  the  pace  is
thought  to  be  slowing  significantly,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  industries,  as  exports  and
production  are  recently  weakening.  Income  conditions  of  households  have  not  deteriorated  but  the
effects of the decline in production are starting to be observed in new job offers and overtime working
hours.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  expected  to  start  increasing  with  the  advance  in  the
implementation  of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  2000.  Net  exports,  however,  are  likely  to
continue decreasing for a while, as adjustments in overseas economies will take some time. Leading
indicators suggest that business fixed investment is likely to peak out gradually, although there will be
a backlog of orders to be  implemented for a  while. In addition, the  need  for  inventory  adjustments,
although not to a large extent, is heightening for some goods. Thus, industrial production is expected
to  follow  a  declining  trend.    In  these  circumstances,  the  increase  in  corporate  profits  is  likely  to  be
subdued, and recoveries in household income and consumption are projected to be sluggish.
Overall, the economy will likely remain stagnant for some time. Meanwhile, it is generally thought that
overseas economies, particularly the U.S., will follow a gradual recovery trend from the latter half of
2001.  In this case, together with the effects from the depreciation of the yen, exports are expected to
underpin  the  economy  once  again.  However,  attention  should  still  be  paid  to  the  possibility  of  a
prolonging  deceleration  of  overseas  economies  and  risks  of  a  negative  impact  on  the  economy
induced by developments in foreign and domestic capital markets through corporate and household
confidence.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the yen. Domestic
wholesale prices are declining somewhat mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery.
Consumer prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to the decline in prices of imported products
and their substitutes. Corporate service prices are falling slowly.
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the recent yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressures on prices. However, given the pausing economy as well as the heightening excessiveness
of  inventories,  albeit  the  latter  is  observed  only  for  some  goods,  the  balance  between  supply  and
demand  in  the  domestic  market  is  likely  to  exert  downward  pressures  on  prices.  In  addition,  the
declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by  technological  innovations,  the  decrease  in  prices  of
consumer  goods  arising  from  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels,  and  the  reduction  in
communications  fees  aided  by  deregulation  will  continue  to  restrain  price  developments.  Overall,
prices are expected to be somewhat weak for the time being. Moreover, given the high uncertainties
                                                     
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
March 19, 2001.
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on March 19 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 22/2001
1
regarding  future  economic  developments,  possibilities  that  weak  demand  will  intensify  downward
pressures on prices warrant careful monitoring.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate generally moved around 0.25 percent in February, and is
moving around 0.15 percent from March in response to the decision at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 28 to change the guideline of money market operations.3
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  declining  substantially  due  to  the  announcement  of  the
improvements in the way of liquidity provision and monetary easing by the Bank. The Japan premium
remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  have  declined  to  1.1-1.2  percent  due  to  the  even  more
cautious view of market participants towards the economic outlook. The yield spreads between private
bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are  mostly  unchanged  or
expanding somewhat.
Stock  prices  dropped  substantially  reflecting  the  decline  in  U.S.  stock  prices  and  the  downward
revision of the outlook on firms’ profits.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  depreciated  again  from  the  end  of  February.  The  yen  is
currently being traded in the range of 122-124 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  There  seem  to  be  no
significant  changes  in  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such  instruments  as
corporate bonds and CP.
On the other hand, credit demand of private firms continues to lack momentum as corporate demand
for external funds  is subdued,  since  firms’  cash  flow  is  at  a  high  level.  Moreover,  firms  continue  to
reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result, credit demand in
the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish, although the year-on-
year  rate  of  decrease  moderated  somewhat  in  January  and  February.  Meanwhile,  the  amount
outstanding of corporate bonds issued continues to be slightly above the previous  year’s level. The
amount outstanding of CP issued remains at a high level.
Recently, the growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) is increasing reflecting the  inflow from  postal
savings.
As  for  funding  costs  for  firms,  both  short-  and  long-term  funding  rates  are  declining  reflecting  the
decrease in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy. However, the effects of the decline in stock prices on the behavior of financial
institutions and the fund-raising conditions of firms need to be carefully monitored.
                                                     
3 
“The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to move on average around 0.15 percent.”
2
BIS Review 22/2001
