Donald T Brash: Faster growth? If we want it
Address by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the “Catching the
Knowledge Wave” conference, Auckland, 2 August 2001.
 Fundamentally, this conference is about economic growth, and how New Zealand can get more of it.
Many New Zealanders do not see increasing growth as a high priority objective. What we want is to
have access to better housing, better health-care, and better education. What we want is to protect the
relatively  egalitarian  society  of  our  past  from  increasing  income  disparities.  What  we  want  is  more
attention paid to preserving our natural environment. What we  want is less stress and more leisure
time.
But the reality is that if we want better housing, better health-care and better education, we certainly
need economic growth – we have difficulty funding our collective desire for health care and education
now, and those costs look certain to rise in the years ahead. If we want to retain a relatively egalitarian
society, we absolutely need economic growth – without it, too many of our highly skilled people will
leave our shores, forcing up the relative incomes of the skilled people who choose to stay. Perhaps
surprisingly,  even  if  we  want  more  attention  paid  to  preserving  our  natural  environment,  we  need
growth – international experience suggests that it is the relatively affluent countries which can afford to
spend resources on protecting the environment.
So a conference on economic growth is not "just about money" but concerns many of the issues of
vital relevance to all of us. It also concerns issues which go well beyond the statutory responsibilities
of the Reserve Bank, and for this reason I must stress that my comments this morning reflect personal
views, and not necessarily those of the Bank.
Our growth performance: much improved
How have we been doing in the economic growth stakes? Unfortunately, not too well if we judge from
the last three decades. Over that period, our growth in GDP per capita has averaged 0.8 per cent per
annum, compared with an average of 2.0 per cent  per annum in the countries  of the OECD.1 As a
result, we have slid from 9th in the OECD "rankings" in 1970 to 20th in 1999 (comparisons made on a
purchasing  power  parity  basis,  rather  than  at  market  exchange  rates),  and  have  also  been  well
surpassed  by  some  countries  which  are  not  OECD  members  at  all  (Singapore  being  the  best
example).
As  recently  as  1990,  New  Zealand's  GDP  per  capita  was  roughly  on  a  par  with  Ireland's  and
Singapore's. By 1999, both countries had very considerably surpassed us. In 1990, Australia's GDP
per capita was only some 5 per cent above New Zealand's; by 1999, it was nearly 40 per cent above
New Zealand's.2
What should we make of these figures? The first thing to say is that for a whole range of reasons GDP
per capita is not a very precise measure of human well-being. We New Zealanders have more cars
per  capita  than  people  in  all  but  a  tiny  handful  of  countries. We  have  substantially  more  EFT-POS
terminals  per  capita  than  any  other  country  in  the  world.  We  have  easier  access  to  uncrowded
beaches and countryside than people in most other countries. We spend much less time commuting,
even in Auckland, than people in many other countries. Our life expectancy at birth is the same as that
in, say, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States, and infant mortality is identical to the
developed country average. As Paul Carpinter recently observed, quality of life measures often show
Auckland  in  the  top  ten  cities  world-wide3,  something  hardly  consistent  with  New  Zealand's  being
towards the bottom of the OECD "ladder".
                                                     
1 
"Climbing the OECD ladder: what does New Zealand have to do?", a memo written by Grant Scobie and Peter Mawson to
Alan Bollard, New Zealand Treasury, 4 April 2001.
Ibid.
2 
3  Speech to the annual conference of the New Zealand Association of Economists, Christchurch, 28 June 2001.
BIS Review 69/2001
1
the 
But having said that, there can be little doubt that there has been some relative decline in our living
standards in recent decades.
At first sight, our relatively slow growth seems surprising. We have many characteristics which make
for  rapid  economic  growth.  For  more  than  a  decade,  we  have  had  macroeconomic  stability,  with  a
sound fiscal position and monetary policy delivering consistently low inflation. We have a competent
and corruption-free judiciary implementing a legal system based on British common law. We have a
civil service which is also competent and corruption-free. We have a stable political environment, with
a  substantial  measure  of  consensus  across  political  parties  on 
important  aspects  of
macroeconomic policy. We are an English-speaking society, and one where people tend to be highly
receptive  to  the  adoption  of  new  technology.  On  several  indices,  we  are  ranked  among  the  freest
economies in the world.
And we've had an extensive period of economic reform, specifically designed to help us to grow more
quickly. Doesn't our poor growth performance suggest that the reforms were seriously flawed? Not at
all. I don't think there is much doubt that the reforms of the mid-eighties and early nineties have helped
our growth potential a great deal. I have mentioned the decade of macroeconomic stability – which
also delivered a huge reduction in the net public sector debt, from over 50 per cent of GDP in the early
nineties to under 20 per cent at the present time. The reforms also delivered a very big improvement
in  the  quality  of  service  in  areas  such  as  banking,  retailing,  telecommunications,  postal  services,
health-care, and airlines.
Recent  years have also seen very rapid growth in a whole host  of relatively new  industries – wine,
mussels, software, furniture, specialised manufacturing, education services – to say nothing of a rapid
increase in the sophistication of some of our traditional industries.
Moreover,  while GDP per capita  grew  at  a  rate  of  only  0.8  per  cent  per  annum  over  the  last  three
decades  on  average,  it  grew  at  almost  1.7  per  cent  during  the  nineties,  virtually  identical  to  the
average OECD per capita growth over the same decade.4 So the reforms seem to have arrested our
relative decline,  but  not,  as  yet,  enabled  us  to  begin  the  process  of  reducing  the  gap  in  per  capita
incomes which emerged over earlier decades. We are now keeping up, roughly, but not catching up.
Why have we not done better still?
Given that many of our reforms were, at the time, regarded as world-beating, why haven't we done
better? I don't think anybody has a totally satisfactory answer to that question, but let me suggest a
few factors which seem relevant.
First, New Zealand is a very long way from all of its export markets, and there is a growing awareness
that  this  imposes  a  considerable  handicap  on  our  performance.  As  The  Treasury  observed  in  its
Briefing for the incoming Government in 1999, "Draw a circle with a radius of 2,200 kilometres centred
on Wellington and you capture within it 3.8 million New Zealanders and rather a lot of seagulls. Draw a
similar  circle  centred  on  Helsinki  and  you  capture  within  it  a  population  of  over  300  million,  from
39 countries."5 And for Helsinki, The Treasury could equally well have said Dublin or Singapore.
Second, our natural resource endowment makes us extremely efficient at producing some things that
we  are  effectively  banned  from  selling  to  many  of  the  consumers  of  the  world.  Thus  for  example,
although  we  are  one  of  the  world's  largest  cheese  exporters,  and  have  developed  a  range  of
sophisticated cheeses in recent years, we are limited to a tiny quota of about 0.6 per cent of the US
cheese market. If New Zealand producers want to sell butter to Japan, they find that Japan has limited
total butter imports, from all sources, to less than 2,000 tonnes each year, with sales beyond that tiny
quota facing a tariff of more than 500 per cent.
Our distance from world markets and a resource endowment which favours the production of goods
which face major obstacles in international markets are facts of life. To make matters worse, we have
compounded matters by creating some of our own obstacles to economic growth.
For example, as a country we squandered a large amount of capital investing in projects of very low or
negative  value  in  the  late  seventies  and  early  eighties,  most  as  a  result  of  strong  government
encouragement – the Clyde dam, NZ Steel, and the synthetic petrol plant to name just three.
                                                     
4  Scobie and Mawson, op. cit.
5  Towards Higher Living Standards for New Zealanders: Briefing to the Incoming Government 1999, The Treasury.
2
BIS Review 69/2001
Second, because of very high effective rates of protection in many parts of the manufacturing sector,
we  probably  squandered  even  more  capital  over  several  decades  by  investing  in  industries  where
New Zealand had no prospect of ever being internationally competitive. (Many studies have suggested
that  economic  growth  tends  to  be  fairly  closely  correlated  with  the  degree  of  openness  of  the
economy,  and,  while  New  Zealand  is  now  a  very  open  economy,  that  was  not  true  until  about  a
decade ago.)
Third, we have paid a high price for years of encouraging investment in real estate while discouraging
investment in plant and equipment – the result of the interaction between a period of high inflation and
a tax system based on the assumption that prices are stable6, plus perhaps the bitter memories of the
1987 share-market crash.
Fourth,  we have paid  a  high  price  for  not  encouraging  the  acquisition  of  education  and  skills  –  the
result  of  decades  of  protection  for  industries  requiring  only  a  modest  level  of  skill  and,  perhaps,  a
welfare policy providing benefits of unlimited duration.
Fifth, we have paid a high price for tolerating an education system which produces too many people
with inadequate literacy and numeracy skills, unable to fill the jobs available in a modern economy.
And we have paid a price too for disdaining commercial success, with the consequence that too few of
our youth aspire to make money growing a business and too many of our most able  entrepreneurs
have chosen to leave our shores. (It has to be a strange society which cheers somebody being paid
millions of dollars for a few minutes of belting the daylights out of his opponent in the boxing ring, or
somebody who wins millions in a highly regressive game of chance; but criticises somebody paid one
million dollars for a year of running a complex company providing services to hundreds of thousands
of customers, or somebody else paid $300,000 for running a large hospital with hundreds of staff and
thousands of patients.)
What about the future?
Can we be optimistic about the future? There are clearly some factors adversely affecting our growth
rate which we can never change. Most obviously, we will always be thousands of kilometres from our
major markets, and it  will take  years before the  high  protection  impeding  our  agricultural  exports  is
eliminated. We can not avoid the fact that, as a country, we have squandered large amounts of capital
on projects which have only a minimal benefit for future growth.
But  perhaps  the  significance  of  our  distance  from  major  markets  is  diminishing  as  transport  and
communications systems become ever cheaper and more efficient (I suspect that there are both costs
and benefits for New Zealand in that development), and barriers to our exports continue to reduce,
though painfully slowly.
Moreover, within New Zealand we have eliminated the protection and the subsidies which caused so
much misallocation of resources in the past. Inflation no longer interacts with the tax system to steer
investment into real estate and out of investment in plant and equipment. And most of the other factors
which have adversely affected our growth are ones which we ourselves can change, if only we have
the will to do so.
In recent times, many political leaders have suggested that as a country we should be aiming to return
New  Zealand's  income  levels  to  the  top  half  of  the  OECD.  As  far  back  as  1990,  the  Trade
Development Board, now Trade New Zealand, proposed that that goal be achieved by 2010.
Would it now be feasible to raise New Zealand's per capita GDP to the median OECD level by 2010?
What such a goal would imply in terms of growth rates over the next decade would clearly depend in
part on how fast other OECD countries themselves grow over the decade, but plausible numbers –
which  assume  that  other  OECD  countries  achieve  the  same  per  capita  growth  rates  over  the  next
10 years as they did in the nineties – would require GDP per capita growth in New Zealand of about
                                                     
6
It is not hard to see why a tax system that allows the deductibility of nominal interest payments in full – even when much of
the interest paid in a high inflation environment is, in reality, a compensation to the lender for erosion in the capital value of
the loan – but does not tax the increase in the nominal value of the asset strongly encourages people to borrow heavily to
invest in real estate in an inflationary environment. It is also the case that, in allowing deductions for depreciation based on
historical  cost  and  taxing  profits  on  inventory  on  the  basis  of  the  historical  cost  of  acquisition,  the  tax  system,  in  an
inflationary environment, over-taxes, and thus discourages, investment in other kinds of businesses.
BIS Review 69/2001
3
3.6 per cent per annum, somewhat more than double the growth in per capita GDP achieved by New
Zealand in the nineties.7
Can  a  doubling  of  our  per  capita  growth  rate,  as  compared  with  the  average  of  the  nineties,  be
achieved?  I  am  sometimes  surprised  to  hear  people  argue  that  such  a  goal  should  be  easy  to
accomplish. Why, it is occasionally argued, some companies have grown by 10 per cent annually for
years! Even whole regions sometimes grow at rates which are well above the growth rates suggested
as being necessary to raise per capita income levels to the median of the OECD. But what is often
overlooked in making such comments is that a company may grow at a high rate for years because it
can absorb resources of people and capital from outside itself; regions can similarly grow rapidly by
absorbing people and capital from other areas. New Zealand as a whole may increase its gross output
more rapidly by bringing in lots of additional people and lots of additional capital, but that increase in
gross output may produce only a modest increase in the per capita incomes of New Zealanders.
No, doubling the growth in per capita incomes would be extremely difficult. But perhaps it would not be
impossible.  Some  other  small  countries  –  Finland,  Ireland,  and  Singapore  are  the  most  frequently
cited  examples  –  have  achieved  similar  or  even  greater  increases  in  per  capita  income,  but  it  has
been  a  very  rare  achievement,  sometimes  made  possible  in  part  by  starting  from  a  situation  of
economic collapse (Finland), and sometimes made possible in part by being able to bring very large
numbers  of  unemployed  people  into  the  workforce  (Finland  and  Ireland).  Finland  and  Ireland  also
derived substantial benefits by being inside the European Union. We do not start from a position of
economic  collapse,  and  our  unemployment  rate  is  already  low  compared  with  that  in  many  other
OECD countries. We  do  not  have  large  numbers  of  unemployed  people  with  appropriate  skills  and
attitudes  waiting  to  leap  into  the  workforce.  We  are  not  part  of  a  very  large  market  of  300 million
people. To have any chance of doubling our per capita growth rate we will need to see quite radical
changes in people's attitude and behaviour, and quite radical changes in public policy to encourage
those changes in attitude and behaviour. Minor changes at the margin simply won't do the trick.
Even major changes might not do the trick, since we seem to have some deeply-engrained cultural
characteristics  which  are  not  conducive  to  rapid  growth  –  surprisingly  widespread  disdain  for
commercial  success,  no  strong  passion  for  education,  and  a  tendency  to  look  for  immediate
gratification (as reflected in our very low savings rate and strong interest in leisure) – and it usually
takes years, and perhaps generations, to change such cultural characteristics.
Indeed,  this  attitudinal  change  is  probably  the  most  important  single  need  if  we  are  to  radically
increase  our  per  capita  growth  rate.  We  need  to  want  faster  growth  or,  in  personal  terms,  higher
income. This may sound like a rather odd comment, but many of us know people who, having started
a successful business, were happy to sell out of it for a few million dollars because that was more than
sufficient to buy a nice house, a bach by the sea, a boat, and a decent car. And let's not criticise those
who make that choice – after all, economic growth is a means to an end, and not an end in itself – but
recall that retiring to enjoy the good life is not usually the attitude of entrepreneurs in the United States
or other more successful economies.
But let’s assume that most New Zealanders do in fact want to see faster economic growth, so that our
more able children  will  not  feel  obliged  to  leave  as  soon  as  they  can  afford  a  one-way  air-ticket  to
Sydney or London, so that we can keep and attract able people without creating Latin-American-style
income disparities, and so that we can afford the health-care and quality of life which our Australian
cousins will increasingly enjoy.
What might be required?
Increasing per capita GDP is about increasing the proportion of the population who are contributing to
the production of goods and services in the market economy, and about increasing the productivity of
those people.
What  scope  is  there  for  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  population  who  are  contributing  to  the
production  of  goods  and  services  in  the  market  economy?  Not  very  large.  Certainly,  not  nearly  as
large as was the case in Ireland and Finland when they began their period of rapid growth, with very
high levels of unemployment. Participation in the workforce by those between 15 and 64 is currently
around 66 per cent in New Zealand, not far below participation rates in Singapore and Ireland (68 to
                                                     
7
Scobie and Mawson, op. cit.
4
BIS Review 69/2001
reached 
than  when  unemployment 
70  per  cent)  currently,  and  unemployment,  while  higher  than  anybody  feels  comfortable  with,  is
already approaching levels which are relatively low by OECD standards.
Getting still more people into employment in the market economy may involve making some difficult
social and political trade-offs. For example, does the present welfare system – with largely unrestricted
access  to  benefits  of  indefinite  duration,  and  with  a  very  high  effective  marginal  tax  rate  for  those
moving from dependence on such benefits into paid employment – provide appropriate incentives to
acquire education and skills and to find employment?
Nobody that I have ever met in New Zealand wants to deny those who are temporarily down on their
luck sufficient income support to enable  them to  get  back  on  their  feet.  In  that  respect,  we  are  not
willing to pay the price which Singapore paid to achieve very high growth, a society almost devoid of
taxpayer-funded  income support. But increasingly  it is recognised that  we  will not achieve  a radical
improvement  in  our  economic  growth  rate  while  we  have  to  provide  income  support  to  more  than
350,000  people  of  working  age  – 60,000  more 
its
post-World-War-II peak in the early nineties – to say nothing of the 450,000 people who derive most of
their income from New Zealand Superannuation.
This is partly because of the huge fiscal costs of these transfer payments – amounting to an estimated
$13 billion this financial year, or some 11 per cent of estimated GDP (both figures include the fiscal
cost  of  New  Zealand  Superannuation).  This  cost  substantially  constrains  the  government  from
devoting more resources to education, law and order, research and development, and tax reduction.
Indeed, it is probably fair to say that there is no other part of the government budget which can provide
resources  for  these  things.  Certainly,  it  is  hard  to  see  scope  for  big  reductions  in  the  health  or
education budgets, the only other really major categories of government spending.
But I mention these transfer payments and the very high effective tax rates faced by those trying to get
off  them  at  this  point  not  simply  to  draw  attention  to  the  fiscal  costs  but  mainly  because  these
payments  have  an  influence  on  the  numbers  of  those  contributing  to  the  production  of  goods  and
services in the market economy.
Are  there  ways  in  which  we  can  change  the  incentives  facing  people  now  receiving  such  transfer
payments? There are clearly a number of alternatives to the present way in which we provide income
support short of adopting a cold-turkey Singaporean approach, and there is no single "right" way of
doing it. Could we, for example, drop all benefits to the able-bodied and scrap the statutory minimum
wage, so that pay rates could fall to the point where the labour market fully clears, but simultaneously
introduce a form of negative income tax to sustain total incomes at a socially-acceptable level? Could
we introduce some kind of life-time limit on  the  period  during  which  an able-bodied individual could
claim benefits from the state? Could  we,  perhaps, gradually raise the age  at  which people become
eligible  for  New  Zealand  Superannuation,  reflecting  the  gradual  increase  in  life  expectancy  and
improved health among the elderly? One of my colleagues has suggested the idea of abolishing the
unemployment benefit but introducing some kind of "employer of last resort" system, perhaps run by
local  authorities  with  support  from  central  government,  under  which  every  local  authority  would  be
required to offer daily employment to anybody and everybody who asked for it. Clearly, there would be
huge benefits not just to economic growth but also to social cohesion if  we  were  able to achieve a
radical reduction in the number of those dependent on income transfers from the state.
Increasing productivity
But  even  more  important  than  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  population  who  produce  goods  and
services  in  the  market  economy  is  increasing  productivity.  Ultimately,  it  is  productivity  –  output  per
person – which mainly determines the standard of living, and it is clear that increasing GDP per capita
by 3.6 per cent per annum means at least trebling the rate  of productivity improvement  which New
Zealand has achieved in recent years (not much above 1 per cent).
How might we move in this direction? Before attempting to answer that question, let me stress that,
while the Reserve Bank makes a useful contribution to the economy's performance, it can never make
the  difference  between  1.7  per  cent  per  capita  growth  and  3.6  per  cent  per  capita  growth.  The
Reserve Bank can and does operate monetary policy to maintain stability in the general level of prices,
and  that  is  a  necessary  condition  if  New  Zealand  is  to  maximise  its  growth,  but  it  won't  produce  a
doubling  of  our  growth  rate.  The  Reserve  Bank  can  and  does  promote  the  stability  of  the  financial
sector, and that too is a vital contribution to maximising New Zealand's growth, but it won't produce a
doubling of our growth rate.
BIS Review 69/2001
5
No, most of what  now  needs to change  if  we  want  to  double  our  growth  rate  involves  policies  and
behaviour which fall well outside the Reserve Bank's areas of responsibility, as I have already noted.
The second point I want to make is that it is important as we talk about all the opportunities afforded
by the "knowledge economy" not to forget that for many years to come most New Zealanders will not
be employed in software companies or biotechnology research firms. They will be employed in "the old
economy".  But  that  does  not  mean  that  they  will  be  employed  in  industries  which  lack  scope  for
improving productivity. On the contrary: it is useful to recall that over the last 15 years, with average
productivity improving by little more than 1 per cent per annum, productivity in agriculture improved by
almost 4 per cent per annum – a rate of productivity growth which, if achieved across the economy as
a whole and sustained for a decade, would easily see our per capita incomes reach the OECD median
within a decade.
Improving  productivity  involves  a  whole  host  of  things  which  can  be  loosely  grouped  under  three
headings – improving human capital, improving physical capital, and improving technology.
Improving human capital
To improve our human capital, we urgently (I almost said "desperately") need to improve the quality of
our education system. And I say "improve the quality of our education system" rather than increase the
resources  devoted  to  our  education  system.  We  might  need  to  increase  the  resources  devoted  to
education, but we already spend a higher fraction of our national income on government support for
education than the great majority of other developed countries. Despite this, international surveys of
educational  achievement suggest that  we are  not  getting  educational  outcomes  consistent  with  this
high level of expenditure.
It must be a source of grave concern that so many of the people coming out of our high schools have
only the most rudimentary idea of how to write grammatical English; and that while Singapore, South
Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong occupied the top four places for mathematics in the Third International
Maths and Science Study, New Zealand ranked only 21st (out of the 38 countries in the study).8 It can
not be good for our economic growth, or for the employment prospects of many of our young people,
that, according to an OECD report released in April 1998, nearly half of the workforce in New Zealand
can not read well enough to work effectively in the modern economy.9 It must be a matter for particular
concern that 70 per cent of Maori New Zealanders, and  about three-quarters of  Pacific  Island  New
Zealanders, are functioning "below the level of competence in literacy required to effectively meet the
demands of everyday life".10
The University of Auckland is one of the two main hosts of this conference, so you would be surprised
and  disappointed  if  I  did  not  stress  the  importance  of  doing  more  to  improve  the  quality  of  tertiary
education  in  New  Zealand.  And  clearly,  I  believe  that  that  is  vitally  important,  though  whether  that
means even more public sector resources going into the tertiary sector or other kinds of reform I am
not in a good position to judge.
But I strongly suspect that improvements in pre-school, primary, and secondary education are even
more important for our long term growth, and for the long-term social cohesion of our society, than are
improvements  in  tertiary  education.  Indeed,  it  may  well  be  that  improvements  in  these  pre-tertiary
areas are the fundamental prerequisites for improving the quality of tertiary education in New Zealand.
But  although  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  improving  our  human  capital  by  securing  improved
educational  outcomes  would  contribute  to  New  Zealand's  long-term  growth,  the  higher-growth
dividend from improved educational outcomes would almost certainly accrue well into the future, not
within the next few years, or possibly even within the next decade. Indeed, it is sobering to reflect that
some  of  the  countries  which  have  had  particularly  good  economic  growth  in  recent  years,  such  as
Australia and the United States, have literacy levels not significantly higher than New Zealand's. It may
well be that better educational outcomes would be more important in ensuring that more of our people
have  access  to  higher  paid  jobs,  and  thus  in  assisting  social  harmony,  than  in  assisting  economic
growth directly.
IEA Third International Mathematics and Science Study, 1998-1999.
                                                     
8 
9  Human Capital Investment: an International Comparison, OECD, 1998.
10  Adult Literacy in New Zealand, Ministry of Education, 1998.
6
BIS Review 69/2001
Improving physical capital
One obvious way of increasing the output per person employed is to give people more physical capital
to work with. (And by "physical capital" I mean not just plant and machinery but also roads and other
infrastructure.)  Of  course,  more  physical  capital  is  of  no  use  whatsoever  if  it  is  the  wrong  sort  of
physical capital, and that points towards the huge importance of "getting the signals right" – by which I
mean ensuring that investment takes place in areas which maximise the goods and services produced
by that capital. As the Japanese have discovered in recent years, all the investment in the world will
not  encourage  growth  if  the  extra  capital  produces  few  of  the  goods  and  services  which  people
actually want. Happily, as I have mentioned, we now have most of the signals right – businesses are
no longer encouraged by high levels of protection to invest in industries where New Zealand will never
be  internationally  competitive;  the  financial  sector  is  free  of  the  regulation  (and  the  irrational
exuberance  which  immediately  followed  the  removal  of  that  regulation)  which  used  to  distort  the
allocation of resources; and the misallocation caused by the interaction of inflation and the tax system
is also now a thing of the past.
Under these circumstances, what might we do to encourage investment in more physical capital?
At very least, we need to seek and destroy those obstacles to investment which are within our own
control.  There  is  little  doubt,  for  example,  that  businesses,  especially  small  and  medium-sized
businesses,  find  the  compliance  costs  of  many  public  sector  rules  and  regulations  a  significant
obstacle to more investment. The recent report of the Ministerial Panel on Business Compliance Costs
highlighted these issues, and noted that complying with a multiplicity of rules and regulations stifled
the  ability  of  businesses  "to  expand,  innovate  and  compete".  Businesses  saw  the  biggest  single
problem as the way in which the Resource Management Act was being implemented, and described
dealing  with  that  legislation  as  being  "cumbersome,  costly  and  complex".  It  should  not  require  two
years to get all the approvals needed to set up an early child-care facility catering for only 30 children,
or ministerial intervention to cut through the red-tape involved in setting up a boat-building yard. Most
of us know similar horror stories.
We may also need to look at whether there are deficiencies in our national infrastructure which are
acting as a deterrent to investment. Do we, for example, need to improve the transport infrastructure in
some  parts  of  the  country  –  perhaps  in  some  of  the  areas  where  forests  are  reaching  maturity  by
upgrading  roading  systems,  perhaps  in  Auckland  by  completing  the  originally-planned  motorway
system and by introducing more appropriate congestion charges?
Could we do more to encourage investment by expanding the size of the market? If the small size and
isolation of the New Zealand market discourage investment in New Zealand, should we be doing more
to  encourage  those  with  the  skills  and  attitudes  which  can  assist  our  growth  to  immigrate  to  New
Zealand? Should we more vigorously seek economic integration into a much larger market? We have
made a great deal of progress through our free trade arrangement with Australia, and the bilateral free
trade arrangements with Singapore, and potentially Hong Kong and other countries in the region, are
greatly to be welcomed. But if we really  want to  encourage  investment in  New Zealand for a much
larger market, perhaps we should be devoting every effort to negotiating a free trade arrangement and
greater  economic  integration  with  the  United  States  also.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  one  of  the
major reasons for the recent economic success of both Ireland and Finland is their membership of the
European Union, as I have mentioned. A closer economic integration with the United States would not
make  New  Zealand  any  closer  physically  to  California,  but  it  would  carry  potentially  enormous
economic benefits.
It is in this context that the time may have arrived when we need to give serious consideration to the
pros and cons of alternative currency arrangements. Far be it from me to advocate the abolition of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand and, as I have said on a previous occasion, any decision to abandon
the New Zealand dollar in favour of some other currency is finally a political decision, not a decision for
central bankers. And frankly, I do not know whether there would be net economic benefit in adopting
some  other  currency  arrangement,  but  if  we  are  to  have  a  no-holds-barred  discussion  on  how  to
improve New Zealand's economic performance, one of the issues which should be looked at is this.
Another  matter  relevant  to  how  we  might  encourage  more  investment  in  physical  capital  is  the  tax
regime.  Do  we  need  a  substantial  change  in  the  tax  structure  to  encourage  investment  in  New
Zealand  by  New Zealanders, by immigrants, and by foreign companies?  And if so,  what  might  that
change  look  like?  This  isn't  the  place  to  go  into  detail,  but  it  would  probably  involve  a  significant
reduction in the corporate tax rate (it is disturbing that New Zealand's corporate tax rate is now the
highest in the Asian region). The rate of company tax is rarely the only factor determining the location
BIS Review 69/2001
7
of a new investment, and indeed it is not often even the dominant factor. But it is a relevant factor, and
is one of the issues to look at if we are serious about encouraging more investment in New Zealand.
Improving technology
And finally, how might we increase the growth rate of productivity,  or of GDP per capita,  by further
increasing the rate at which we adopt new technology from abroad, and develop new technology of
our own? Roger Ferguson, Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, cites research done by Fed
economists  which  suggests  that  "the  consolidated  influences  of  information  technology  investments
account for about two-thirds of the acceleration in (US) productivity since 1995".11 And there can be
little doubt that a radical improvement in New Zealand's productivity growth rate will require a more
rapid adoption of new technology than has been the case in recent years.
To some extent, we would see more rapid adoption of new technology if we saw more investment in
human  and  physical  capital.  The  three  things  often  go  together.  But  there  are  some  things  we
probably need to do to encourage this.
To begin with, we should at least try to ensure that there are no obstacles to the development and
adoption of new technology. In particular, we need to ensure that our regulatory framework does not
close off developments in biotechnology, an area where we must surely have the potential to be world
leaders.  This  does  not,  of  course,  mean  that  there  should  be  no  restrictions  whatsoever  on
experiments in this area, but it does mean that we should remember that every restriction has a cost
as well as a potential benefit, and sometimes the cost can be very substantial.
Do we need to go further, by providing positive incentives to undertake research and development in
New  Zealand?  Our  unhappy  experience  with  governments  providing  incentives  to  particular  private
activities inevitably and rightly makes us nervous about such a suggestion, but might the "externalities"
associated with research and development – the economic benefits which the individual firm can not
itself capture and retain – justify an exception in this case? Recent OECD data suggest that Australian
businesses spend about double what New Zealand businesses spend, relative to GDP, on research
and  development,  while those in Ireland spend about three  times  as much,  those  in  Finland  spend
about six times as much, and those in Sweden spend about nine times as much. Even allowing for
some over-statement arising from businesses having an incentive to re-classify expenditure as R & D
where  there  are  tax  benefits  from  doing  so,  New  Zealand  businesses  seem  to  be  spending
substantially less on R & D than do businesses in other successful economies.12
Do  we  need  to  take  steps  to  encourage  the  adoption  of  new  technology  by  encouraging  a  more
entrepreneurial, a more risk-taking, culture? At a minimum we may need to try to make entrepreneurs
feel more loved – if not our only national heroes at least among our national heroes! We also need to
foster  an  understanding  of  financial  matters,  and  an  interest  in  business  activities,  in  our  schools,
through programmes such as those run by the Enterprise New Zealand Trust.
We need to consider whether the personal income tax structure provides appropriate encouragement
to  entrepreneurial  New  Zealanders  to  stay  in  New  Zealand,  and  encouragement  to  entrepreneurial
potential New Zealanders to come here. Our top rate of personal income tax is not particularly high by
the  standards  of  other  developed  countries,  but  it  cuts  in  at  a  level  of  income  below  that  in  many
countries  and  our  tax  system  allows  relatively  few  deductions.  Compared  with  the  rapidly  growing
economies of Hong Kong and Singapore, our top rate of personal income tax is very high.
Perhaps we also need to think of some more innovative moves in the tax area. The United Kingdom
attracts  many  entrepreneurial  people  from  all  over  the  world  to  live  and  work  in  that  country  by
exempting  from  UK  tax  all  income  generated  outside  the  UK  for  people  not  born  in  the  UK.  I
understand that Switzerland effectively "negotiates" the tax to be paid by wealthy foreigners who want
to live in Switzerland. It may be no accident that many entrepreneurial New Zealanders have moved to
these countries in recent years.
Another  idea  was  suggested  in  the  discussion  paper  issued  by  the  McLeod  Committee  recently,
namely establishing a maximum amount of income tax to be paid by any individual during the course
                                                     
11 
"The productivity experience of the United States: past, present, and future", a speech at the US Embassy in The Hague, 14
June 2001.
12  A new economy? The changing role of innovation and information technology in growth, OECD, 2000, page 29.
8
BIS Review 69/2001
of  a  year.  The  McLeod  Committee  suggested  that  that  might  be  $1 million.13  Even  a  maximum  of
$500,000 per annum would be more than enough to cover 10 times over the cost of public services
likely to be used by a person paying that much tax, but would be a level of tax which would seem very
attractive to many expatriate New Zealanders and other entrepreneurial people in the US, Europe and
Asia, from whom we are currently collecting no tax revenue at all. I strongly suspect that establishing
such  a  maximum  would  actually  generate  significantly  more  tax  revenue  for  the  New Zealand
government than the present tax structure does.
Yes, it would offend our traditional New Zealand values to waive income tax once $500,000 had been
paid, but what if very few current New Zealand residents pay more than $500,000 in tax each year?
And if such a regime encouraged 1,000 entrepreneurs to come to New Zealand and the government
were  to  gain,  say,  an  extra  $500 million  a  year  in  tax  revenue  to  finance  more  early-childhood
education  and  tax  incentives  for  research  and  development,  who  amongst  us  would  be  worse  off?
Indeed, the likelihood is that such an injection of entrepreneurial drive might well play a major role in
changing the rate at which New Zealand business adopted new technology, and so in improving the
growth in New Zealand productivity.
More savings?
Before concluding,  let me  talk  briefly  about  the  role  which  increased  national  savings  might  play  in
helping  us  to  increase  New  Zealand's  economic  growth  rate.  "Briefly"  because  I  am  not  at  all  sure
what  role  national  savings  play  in  economic  growth  in  a  world  where  capital  is  free  to  move  from
country to country. We know that Japan has one of the highest savings rates in the world, but has had
one of the worst growth records in the developed world for more than a decade. We know that the
United  States  and  Australia  have  had  rather  low  national  savings  rates  in  recent  years,  but  both
countries have grown strongly. We certainly know that savings which are channelled into investments
which yield little or no growth are of no benefit.
On the face of it, our own national savings performance has been poor over several decades, and that
has been reflected in persistent balance of payments deficits over more than a quarter of a century –
and  very  high  private  sector  levels  of  indebtedness  to  foreign  savers  as  a  result.  We  know  that,
because of our heavy dependence on the savings of others, a significant fraction of the total output
produced within New Zealand now accrues to those foreign savers. We know too that we probably all
pay somewhat higher interest rates than would otherwise be the case because of the risk premium
which foreign lenders charge as a result of our heavy dependence on the savings of others.
But even if we were sure that improving our savings performance was a vitally important ingredient in
improving our growth performance, or our standards of living more generally, nobody knows for sure
how best to do that.
In recent years, successive governments have sought to contribute to an improved national savings
performance  by  running  fiscal  surpluses,  though  there  is  no  certainty  that  that  increases  national
savings  in  total  –  the  possibility  is  that  increased  public  sector  savings  may  be  offset  by  reduced
private  sector  savings,  perhaps  because  of  enhanced  public  confidence  that  taxpayer-funded
retirement income is assured.
What  about  special  tax  incentives  for  retirement  saving?  Alas,  there  is  little  evidence  that  such
incentives have any significant effect on national savings – to the (limited) extent that they increase
private sector savings, they may well simply produce an offsetting reduction in public sector savings
(because of the reduction in tax revenue required to provide the incentives). They also tend to be quite
regressive, in that most of the benefit of the  incentives goes to those on the highest  incomes, who
might well be savers even without the incentives.
It  is  possible  that  some  form  of  mandatory  savings  scheme  might  produce  an  increase  in  national
savings. It  is hard to  avoid the conclusion that Singapore's  breath-taking  savings  performance  over
several  decades  is  related  to  the  very  high  level  of  mandatory  savings  required  by  that  country's
Central Provident Fund. But on the other hand, it is not yet entirely clear that Australia's more modest
mandatory savings scheme is having a marked effect on Australia's savings performance, although it
is clearly having an effect on developing a pool of institutional savings.
                                                     
13  Tax Review: Issues Paper, June 2001.
BIS Review 69/2001
9
On  balance,  I  would  probably  be  a  supporter  of  some  kind  of  mandatory  savings  scheme  as  one
contribution to improving our growth performance. But the case is not yet conclusively proven, and I
would prefer to see more informed debate on the subject (as distinct from the substantially ill-informed
debate of the kind we saw when this matter was last on the public agenda in 1997).
One  thing  is  clear  however:  we  can  not  afford  to  lament  the  extent  of  foreign  investment  in  New
Zealand, and more generally the extent of our dependence on the thrift of foreign savers, unless we
are also willing to save more ourselves. Our high level of dependence on foreign capital, year after
year, is simply the other side of our lousy savings performance.
Conclusion
Mr  Chairman,  let  me  conclude  by  reminding  you  that  we  have  some  huge  advantages  in  terms  of
economic growth – macroeconomic stability, a substantial measure of consensus on economic policy
across  the  political  spectrum,  a  competent  and  corruption-free  judiciary  and  bureaucracy,  an
English-speaking  population.  After  some  decades  of  growing  substantially  more  slowly  than  other
developed  countries,  we  have  recently  picked  up  our  growth  performance  and  during  the  nineties
achieved per capita growth at a rate closely similar to average growth in other OECD countries.
There are, therefore, plenty of reasons to be optimistic. Getting ourselves back to around the middle of
the OECD pack in terms of GDP per capita within a decade – indeed, even within two decades – will
still  be  a  major  challenge  to  all  of  us.  Fortunately,  our  history  suggests  that  we  thrive  on  major
challenges.
10
BIS Review 69/2001
