Ljube Trpeski: Goals and objectives of the monetary policy for the year 2001
Address  by  Ljube  Trpeski,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  to  the
Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia on 6 February 2001.
 Honorable,
According  to  Article  3  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  Act,  the  Central  Bank  is
responsible for the stability of the domestic currency, the monetary policy and the overall domestic and
international payments liquidity in the Republic of Macedonia. Furthermore, the National Bank, within
its rights and duties, is responsible for providing and preserving sound banking system of the Republic
of Macedonia.  Given such defined legal duties and taking into account achievements in this area, it
may be concluded that in 2000 the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, acting in compliance
with the given rights, accomplished its legal duties.
Stability of the domestic currency
The stability of the domestic currency may be observed from two aspects:
•  Stability of the internal value of the Denar.  It is expressed through its purchasing power, i.e. the
price stability in the Republic of Macedonia; and
•  Stability of the external value of the Denar.  It is expressed through the stability of the exchange
rate of the Denar, i.e. its preservation at adequate level against other currencies.
 The preservation of the price stability is the primary objective of the monetary policy of the National
Bank of the Republic of Macedonia.  In 2000, relative price stability was achieved and the inflation rate
on annual basis (December 2000 / December 1999), measured through the retail prices index equals
10.8%.  Measured through the costs of living index, as agreed with the IMF arrangement, the inflation
in  2000  equaled  6.1%.    In  2000,  compared  to  the  previous  several  years,  the  inflation  is  higher,
however it should be underlined that the reason for that is not the monetary policy, but the impact of
the non-monetary factors.
These factors are the following:
•  one-time effect of the introduction of the value-added tax on prices;
• 
increase  in the  price  of  oil  on  the  world  markets,  accompanied  with  the  appreciation  of  the  US
Dollar;
increase in the price of electricity and maintaining higher tariff for calculation of the price  of the
electricity;
increase in the prices of particular services which are under direct control of the government
• 
However,  it  is  crucial  that  the  potential  fundamental  generators  of  inflation  such  as  the  monetary
policy, the fiscal policy, the exchange rate and the wages remained under control and coordination.
Therefore, the Central Bank considers that the impact of the non-monetary factors that gave rise to the
inflation in 2000 are of temporary character and that in 2001 the inflation will get back to the level from
the previous several years.  Thus, measured according to the costs of living index, the annual rate of
inflation in 2001 on December basis (December 2001 / December 2000) is projected to equal 1.2%. In
that sense, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia will continue with its intention to preserve
that  inflation  rate  to  low,  stable  and  predictable  level,  which  is  in  compliance  with  the  empirically
confirmed knowledge that the price stability creates the most favorable macroeconomic environment
for accelerated, long-term sustainable economic growth.
The second aspect of the domestic currency stability is preserving the stability of the Denar exchange
rate.  The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia managed to preserve the nominal exchange
rate of the Denar against the Deutsche Mark at the targeted level of Denar 31 per 1 Deutsche Mark.
The exchange rate stability was preserved, despite the developments on the foreign exchange market,
where  the  supply  significantly  exceeded  the  demand  for  foreign  currency.  As  a  result,  the  National
Bank of the Republic of Macedonia intervened on the foreign exchange market in order to prevent the
appreciation of the domestic currency – Denar. From the beginning of the year to December 31, 2000,
BIS Review 9/2001
1
net-amount  of  USD  190.1  million  was  purchased  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.    Relating  other
currencies, the Denar fluctuated according to the changes of the exchange rate of the Deutsche Mark
against these currencies on the world markets.
Monetary Policy
In  2000,  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective,  the  National  Bank  of  the
Republic  of  Macedonia  successfully  implemented  the  monetary  strategy  of  targeting  the  nominal
exchange rate of the Denar against the Deutsche Mark. Hence, the Central Bank aimed the money
supply at preserving the exchange rate stability as a nominal anchor in the economy. Thus, the stock
of money supply was sized according to the needs for regular execution of financial transactions in the
economy.  It  should  be  underlined  that  in  the  first  half  of  2000,  the  money  supply  registered
considerably high annual growth rates, while in the second half of the year they slowed down, due to
the high comparison base from the previous year. Thus, in June 2000, the money supply M2 - Denar
component  compared  to  the  same  month  of  the  previous  year,  was  by  24.4%  higher,  while  in
December 2000, compared to December 1999 was higher by 17.5%. At the end of December 2000,
the broadest money supply aggregate M4 registered annual growth rate of 21.7%.
Considerable challenge for the NBRM in 2000, was the high amount of foreign currency purchased by
the Central Bank on the foreign exchange market, which exceeded the projections.  Nevertheless, the
close  coordination  between  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  and  the  high  growth  of  the  government
deposits  with  the  NBRM  adequately  sterilized  the  monetary  effects  of  the  Central  Bank  foreign
exchange  transactions.  The  higher  purchase  of  foreign  currency  on  the  foreign  exchange  market
acted towards increase in the NBRM gross foreign exchange reserves. On December 30, 2000 they
reached USD 713.6 million, thus increasing by USD 235.5 million compared to the end of 19991.
In 2000, the upward trend of the deposits with the banks continued due to the gradual strengthening of
the confidence of the economic agents in the banking sector. Thus, on annual basis (December 2000 /
December  1999),  the  total  non-government  deposits  with  the  money  deposit  banks  increased  by
Denar 6,906 million, or by 23.1%. In addition, the foreign exchange deposits registered more intensive
growth of 49.1%, while the Denar deposits increased by 13.9%. Analyzed by maturity, both short-term
and long-term deposits increased by 27.0% and 4.4%, respectively.
It  should  be  underlined  that  in  2000,  the  banks’  credit  activity  registered  considerable  expansion.
Thus, in December 2000 relative to the same month of the previous year the total banks’ credits in
favor  of  the  non-government  sector  (according  to  the  actual  balance)  increased  by  Denar  6,042
million, or by 17.2%. A good and close coordination between the monetary and fiscal policy created a
room for such an increase in the credits, significant increment in the liquidity of the banks, removal of
the credit ceilings by the NBRM and increased banks’ deposit potential.
With respect to the currency of denomination, the increment in the total banks’ credits is solely due to
the  increased Denar credits,  whereas the foreign currency  placements registered  a fall. The banks’
Denar credits increased by Denar 7,463 million, or by 27.8%. The increase was primarily due to the
abolishment of the credit limits of the banks’ Denar placements at the end of March 2000, which was a
period  of  significant  credit  expansion.  It  should  be  underlined  that  according  to  the  supervisory
examinations  of  the  NBRM,  the  newly  extended  credits  are  granted  to  good  clients.  In  December
2000,  compared  to  the  same  month  of  1999,  the  banks’  foreign  currency  placements  to  the  non-
government sector decreased by Denar 1,421 million, or by 17.2%. The fall was primarily due to the
higher attractiveness of the banks’ Denar credits due to the higher interest rates.
At  the  end  of  March  2000,  the  NBRM  continued  with  further  reforms  of  the  monetary  policy
instruments, where the abolishment of the credit ceilings being the most significant one. Hence, the
transition to indirect market-oriented instruments for monetary regulation has entirely been completed.
Moreover, the existing monetary instruments have been improved in order to be modern and closer to
those used in developed market economies. Within the framework of continuous and intensive efforts
to  lower  the  banks’  interest  rates,  the  NBRM,  in  April  2000,  decreased  the  discount  rate  and  the
Lombard credit interest rate by one percentage points, thus reducing them to 7.9% and  17.5% p.a.
respectively.
                                                     
1  On  December  30,  2000,  according  to  the  new  methodology,  the  NBRM  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves
equaled USD 478.1 million.
2
BIS Review 9/2001
Domestic and International payments liquidity in the Republic of Macedonia
In  2000,  the  liquidity  of  the  banking  system  considerably  improved.  In  January  –  December  2000,
compared to the same period of 1999, the average daily liquidity of the banking system was by 42.1%
higher. This resulted in decrement of the demand for liquid funds by the banks, which was reflected
upon  the  movement  of  the  interest  rate  on  the  Money  Market.  In  December  2000,  the  average
weighted  interest  rate  on  the  Money  Market  amounted  to  7.1%  and  was  by  4.5  percentage  points
lower compared to the same month of 1999.
The international liquidity in the payments is visible through the ability of servicing the external debt.
On  September  30,  2000,  the  external  debt  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  based  on  disbursed
medium-term and long term foreign credits, amounted to USD 1,400.8 million. Compared to the end of
1999, the external debt of the Republic of Macedonia was reduced by USD 37.7 million, as a result of
the  repayment  of  the  regular  liabilities,  as  well  as  the  exchange  rate  differentials.  According  to  the
payment schedule, liabilities in the total amount of USD 43.3 million are projected to be paid in the last
quarter  of the  year.  At the  end  of September 2000, the short-term debt  of  the  private  sector  of  the
Republic of Macedonia amounted to USD 42.9 million, and compared to the end of 1999 was by USD
10.8  million  lower.  The  share  of  the  external  debt  in  GDP  accounts  for  42.0%,  which  ranks  the
Republic of Macedonia in the countries with moderate to medium degree of indebtedness.
Sound and stable banking system in the Republic of Macedonia
In  2000,  the  banking  sector  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  continued  to  recover  from  the  adverse
effects caused by the external shock in 1999. The share of high-risk credits in the total credit exposure
of  the  banks  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2000  reduced  by  4.1  percentage  points,  however,  still
remaining high at the level of 37.3%. Nevertheless, the high average capital adequacy ratio of 33.8%
at  the  end  of  September  2000,  positively  affects  the  banking  system  stability,  by  far  exceeding  the
required  minimum  of  8%.  Significant  investments  of  foreign  capital  in  the  Macedonian  banks  was
registered in the first six months of 2000, increasing the share of the foreign capital in the total banking
capital from 19% to 33.3%.
In  2000,  the  legal  framework  regulating  the  banks’  operations  was  subject  to  fundamental
improvement. In that context, the newly adopted Banking Law in July 2000 is of great importance, in
which preparation the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia had a considerable contribution.
This Law represents a step towards the harmonization with the European legislative and the European
Union Directives and achieves greater degree of compliance with the so-called Core Basle Principles
for Effective Banking Supervision.
In  November  2000,  certain  changes  were  made  in  the  regulation  on  banks’  foreign  exchange
operations, as well. With the new amendments of the regulation, the requirement for holding portion of
the  foreign  exchange  deposits  collected  by  the  banks  on  their  accounts  abroad  was  reduced.  This
measure is expected to have positive effect on the banks' credit supply in the economy.
Monetary Policy in 2001
Monetary  policy  projection  for  2001  has  been  defined  in  the  macroeconomic  policy  package
incorporated in the arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. Primarily, the 2001 monetary
policy will be directed towards preservation of stable macroeconomic environment, as a precondition
for  achieving  long-term  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  projected  economic  growth  will  be
supported  through  the  adequate  money  and  credits  supply,  simultaneously  designing  the  monetary
policy in a manner that will not endanger the price stability.
Monetary Strategy
In 2001, the NBRM will continue implementing the monetary strategy of targeting the exchange rate,
thus remaining a nominal anchor in the Macedonian economy. Thus, in 2001, the nominal exchange
rate of the Denar against the Deutsche Mark will also be preserved at the targeted level of Denar 31
per one Deutsche Mark. The preservation of the stable Denar exchange rate, as an intermediate goal,
will be directed towards achieving the ultimate objective of the monetary policy – the price stability. In
addition,  the  annual  inflation  rate  measured  through  the  costs  of  living  index,  is  projected  to  equal
1.2% (December 2001 / December 2000).
BIS Review 9/2001
3
Monetary Aggregates
Taking  into  account  the  assumptions  for  the  inflation  rate,  the  real  growth  of  the  gross  domestic
product and the increase in the real demand for money in 2001, it is estimated that the nominal growth
in  the  demand  for money,  expressed  through  the  money  supply  M1  will  equal  12.0%.  In  2001,  the
money supply M2 – Denar component and the broadest money supply M4 should increase by 12.1%
and 13.3%, respectively. The projected growth in the money supply will enable regular execution of
financial 
the  banking  sector,  and
simultaneously, will not disturb the stability of the domestic currency.
the  economy  and  adequate 
transactions 
liquidity  of 
in 
Reserve money and foreign currency net-purchase
The stability of the monetary multiplier, in other words the existence of stable connection between the
reserve money and the money supply has been taken as an initial presumption when projecting the
reserve money. Accordingly, in 2001 the reserve money is planned to increase by 12.0% in order to
meet the projected growth in the money supply. The reserve money issuance is planned to be carried
out through the foreign exchange transactions of the NBRM. In 2001, the supply is planned to exceed
the demand for foreign currency on the foreign exchange market. In compliance with the strategy for
targeting of the nominal exchange rate of the Denar against the Deutsche Mark, the NBRM plans to
purchase foreign currency on the foreign exchange market in the net amount of USD 29.0 million in
2001 in order to preserve the exchange rate of the Denar at the targeted level. The reserve money
issuance  based  on  foreign  exchange  transactions  of  the  Central  Bank  will  be  supported  through
further increment of the government deposits with the NBRM. The support of the monetary policy by
the  fiscal  policy,  through  the  increase  in  the  government  deposits  with  the  NBRM,  will  enable  the
reserve money increase to be aimed at acceleration of the banks’ credit activities.
Monetary regulation instruments
In 2001, it is projected NBRM to continue using indirect, market - orientated instruments for monetary
regulation.  The  most  utilized  instrument  will  be  the  CB  bills  auction,  which  will  serve  for  dynamic
regulation  of  the  liquidity  of  the  banking  sector.  Regarding  the  changes  in  the  monetary  regulation
instruments,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  fulfillment  of  some  criteria  incorporated  in  the  IMF
arrangement will be carried out in a qualitatively different environment. Namely, the absence of direct
instruments,  as  credit  ceilings  for  the  banks,  will  make  things  more  difficult  for  the  Central  Bank,
nevertheless it remains firmly determined to use indirect monetary regulation instruments, exclusively.
Non-Government sector deposits
It is projected that the upward trend in bank deposits will continue in 2001. The total non-government
sector deposits (including the demand deposits) are planned to increase by Denar 5,139 million or by
13.6%  in  2001.  The  deposits  growth  should  result  from  the  increased  confidence  of  the  economic
agents in the banking system, as a result of:
•  Stable macroeconomic environment
• 
Increased  income  of  the  economic  agents  resulting  from  the  projected  acceleration  of  the
economic activity
Initiation of bond repayment process of so-called “old foreign exchange savings”
• 
•  Modification in the legal framework regarding the operations of the Insurance Deposit Fund, which
has  been  transformed  into  a  state  fund.  Moreover,  the  amount  of  the  insured  deposit,  and  the
indemnfication percentage in case of risky event have been increased, as well
Increased presence of foreign investors in the banking system of the Republic of Macedonia.
• 
Analyzed by currency denomination, in 2001, Denar and  foreign  currency  deposits  are  projected  to
increase  by  Denar  3,139  million,  or  by  12.0%,  and  by  Denar  2,000  million,  or  17.5%,  respectively.
Namely, following its introduction in the first half of 2002, the Euro will replace the currencies of the
EMU  member  countries.  This  will  result  in  enhanced  Euro  conversion  of  the  households'  foreign
currency deposits currently denominated in these currencies and not deposited in the banking system.
Hence, part of the converted savings are expected to remain within the banking system, increasing the
foreign currency deposits.
4
BIS Review 9/2001
Credits
The  monetary  projection  for  2001  envisages  continuation  of  the  intensified  credit  activity  of  banks
registered in 2000.  It  is  consistent  with  the  expected  growth  in  the  banks  deposit  potential  and  the
growth in the government deposits with the Central Bank. In 2001, total banks’ credits in favor of the
non-government sector should increase by Denar 5,420 million or by 13.1%. Observed by structure,
the  Denar  credits  are  projected  to  increase  by  10.9%,  or  by  Denar  3,610  million,  while  the  foreign
currency credits are projected to increase by 21.5% or by Denar 1,810 million. The monetary policy
will  be  aimed  at  achieving  the  projected  dynamics  of  the  economic  growth  in  the  Republic  of
Macedonia, creating room for growth of banks’ credits to the non-government sector. Simultaneously,
the downward trend in lowering the share of the non-performing credits in total banks’ credit exposure
is expected to continue. This should derive from the initiated improvements in the commercial banks’
credit policy, stimulated by the strengthened banks' corporate governance, on one hand, as well as by
the  continuous  strict  supervision  examination  on  the  banks  operations  by  the  Central  Bank,  on  the
other hand.
Foreign exchange reserves, balance of payments
In 2001, the Central Bank’s net purchase of foreign currency on the foreign exchange market, together
with  the  movements  in  the  government  external  account  with  the  NBRM  and  the  inflow  based  on
interest received on the foreign exchange funds deposited abroad, is expected to result in increased
gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  NBRM  by  US  Dollar  75  million,  (government  deposits  with
NBRM are included in the new definition for foreign exchange reserves).  Thus, the foreign exchange
reserves should increase from the level of 3,5 to 3,6 months of imports of goods and services in the
current year. The projected developments in the balance of payments in 2001 should result in deficit
on the current account in the amount of 8,2% of the Gross Domestic Product (if the official transfers
are included), i.e. 9,1% of the GDP (if the official transfers are excluded).
 BIS Review 9/2001
5
