The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: The economic prospect
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the JiJi Press London
Top Seminar, London, 30 May 2001.
 Mr Chairman, I am delighted to join you today for this Jiji Top Seminar and to have this opportunity to
meet with so many senior representatives of the Japanese business – and financial–community here
in the UK.
I have chosen to speak in my opening remarks on "The Economic Prospect", which today more than
ever means the international economic prospect. But before I come to the immediate situation, let me
say just a few words about what it is that we are all trying to achieve through our overall approach to
economic  management,  which  can  perhaps  best  be  summed  up  as  "macro-economic  stability  and
supply-side flexibility" – though that characterisation needs elaboration.
On  the  macro-economic  side  we  have  learned  –  and  it  has  taken  some  countries  longer  than
others – that you cannot achieve what we are all trying to achieve – sustained growth, high levels of
employment and rising living standards – simply by pumping up  demand in our economies through
expansionary monetary and fiscal policies without proper regard to the underlying supply-side capacity
of our economies to meet that demand. Short-term demand management through monetary policy too
often led instead to accelerating inflation, and increasing external deficits, which had then eventually to
be brought under control through recession –  an  absolute recipe for  short-termism  in  both  financial
and business behaviour. Equally, excessive public expenditure – which had ultimately to be financed
through  higher  taxation  –  imposed  burdens  on  the  private  sector  which  weakened  its  capacity  to
generate employment and income and wealth.
So the emphasis now, throughout the industrial world but increasingly too in the developing, emerging
and transition economies, is on effective price stability as the immediate objective of macro-economic
policy – not simply as an end in itself but as a measure of the balance between aggregate demand
and underlying supply in the economy as a whole. In effect the aim of monetary policy in particular is
to moderate, rather than aggravate, the economic cycle, and so to provide the basis for sustainable
growth at around the underlying rate of growth of productive, supply-side, potential. And the emphasis
now in relation to fiscal policy is to limit public sector borrowing, and the outstanding level of public
sector  debt,  to  levels  that  can  be  sustained  into  the  medium  and  longer  term  without  the  need  for
increasing tax burdens or the imposition of rising real interest rates on the private sector.
Of  course  on  occasion  the  flesh  proves  to  be  weaker  than  the  spirit  –  and  achieving  these
macro-economic objectives is not easy in practice even as a technical matter. But the intention – the
international commitment to macro-economic stability – is clear.
Acceptance of the aim of macro-economic stability served to bring into sharper focus the structural,
supply side, of the economy – that is the whole raft of influences that can affect the underlying growth
rate of capacity and thus the growth rate of aggregate demand that can be sustained.
And  here, too, there has been a strengthening international presumption in favour  of  open  markets
and free competition – both  domestically and  internationally  – with  a continuing strong presumption
against predatory trade or exchange rate manipulation. The justification is that undistorted competition
contributes to  potential global  economic growth  through  increased efficiency  and  the  more  effective
allocation  of  productive  resources.  Faster  growth  in  turn  provides  a  more  favourable  context  for
addressing social concerns, including the issue of poverty.
The international presumption in favour of free markets in itself is somewhat remarkable, given that, at
the  micro-economic  level,  increased  competition  invariably  constitutes  a  threat  to  established
producers  –  and  their  employees  –  who  might  well  be  tempted  to  urge  protection  in  one  form  or
another on their national governments. Consumers, who benefit from such competition, tend to be less
vocal  or  well  organised.  The  threat  of  protectionism  is  never,  therefore,  far  away.  But  in  fact  the
presumption in favour of competition has proved encouragingly robust. And that is not just in relation
to international trade. There is a parallel presumption in favour of freedom of capital movements, and
much greater openness around the world to foreign investment.
BIS Review 47/2001
1
Among  other  things  on  the  supply-side,  there  is  a  shared  emphasis  on  the  need  to  direct  public
spending to developing human resources through education and training, to effective health care, and
affordable  social  safety  nets.  There  has  been  a  global  trend  to  privatisation  through  which
governments  have  increasingly  returned  essentially  commercial  activities,  in  which  they  have  no
necessary comparative advantage, to market disciplines.  And  there  is a common recognition of  the
need for reforms in labour and product markets designed to remove unnecessary regulation, and to
reduce distortions, which impede the efficient allocation of resources.
But broad agreement on the principles, does not make them any easier to apply in practice. This is
evident from the imbalances which have built up within and between the major industrial countries in
recent  years.  It  is  uncertainty  as  to  how  those  imbalances  are  likely  to  be  corrected  that  underlies
much of the current concern about the prospects for the global economy.
The major uncertainty relates to the situation in the United States which has experienced a period of
exceptionally strong economic growth with relatively low inflation until quite recently. Briefly – and no
doubt  oversimply  –  this  very  strong  performance  is  widely  seen  as  driven  largely  by  exceptional
productivity  gains,  as  the  application  of  new  information  and  communications  technologies  spread
through  the  economy.  This  development  promised  a  higher  sustainable  rate  of  growth  in  the  US
economy and higher corporate earnings growth. That expectation contributed to a rapid rise in equity
prices, especially in the "high tech" sectors, which in turn helped stimulate both business investment in
the US and consumer demand causing the private sector to move into financial deficit. It also attracted
massive direct and portfolio investment inflows from abroad which over-financed an increasing current
account deficit in the US and caused the dollar to strengthen against other currencies. By the first half
of last year the US economy was expanding at a rate of over 5%, which even on the most optimistic
view of underlying productivity growth was clearly unsustainable. The pace of demand growth in the
US needed to slowdown – as of course it has.
The big questions now are about the extent of the slowdown and how long it will last. And the reality is
that no one can be confident that they know the answers.
What  we  do  know  is  that  the  US  data  on  the  whole  have  not  so  far  been  as  weak  as  many
commentators predicted. Consumer spending in particular has held up reasonably well, though there
has  been  a  fall-off  in  investment  growth,  as  well  as  a  sharp  downwards  stocks  adjustment  and  an
associated  decline  in  US  imports.  On  an  optimistic  view,  if  consumption  continues  to  hold  up,  and
assuming that the recent underlying  productivity  gains  can  be  maintained,  investment  spending  will
recover as the spread of ICT through the economy resumes, and the downward stock adjustment will
come to an end.
On this view we can look forward to a pick up in US activity as we move, say, into next year. But the
pessimist  is  inclined  to  point  to  the  weakness  of  private  sector  saving,  which  could  induce  more
cautious  consumer  behaviour  especially  if  unemployment  continues  to  rise;  he  points  to  a  possible
overhang of past  investment  excesses;  and  he  points  to  the  US  external  deficit  which  will  at  some
point need to be corrected. These adjustments might take place gradually over time, in which case the
US might face a more protracted period of relatively slow growth; or, if you are really pessimistic, the
adjustments might be more abrupt implying a possible period of negative growth and global financial
instability.  The  recent  somewhat  erratic  recovery  of  US  stock  markets  from  their  earlier  gloom
suggests that they are beginning to side with the optimists; some of the survey evidence of consumer
and business confidence on the other hand still supports a rather more pessimistic view. For what it is
worth, and given the strong policy response in the US, I am modestly optimistic, but I recognise the
downside  risks.  The  outcome  is  obviously  the  major  uncertainty  surrounding  the  global  economic
prospect, and policymakers elsewhere can only monitor, continuously and very closely, the emerging
evidence and react to that in the light of its likely impact on their own situation.
The  US  slowdown  comes  at  a  particularly  bad  time  for  Japan  which  is  already  suffering  from  a
combination of weak domestic demand – particularly consumer demand – and supply-side constraints
reflecting  pressures  on  the  banking  system,  heavily  burdened  with  non-performing  loans,  and  an
acknowledged need for restructuring parts of the non-financial sector. Japan has pretty well exhausted
the scope for macro-economic stimulus. Successive fiscal packages focussed on public works, and a
sustained period of attempted monetary expansion, at near-zero interest rates in the face of deflation,
have  failed  to  overcome  a  high  rate  of  precautionary  saving  by  an  ageing  population  facing  an
uncertain economic future. The policy  emphasis of the  new  Japanese  administration  appears  to  be
shifting  towards  firmer  action  to  bring  about  supply-side  reform  in  the  belief  that  this  will  help  to
engender  greater  confidence.  The  danger  is  that,  to  the  extent  that  more  aggressive  restructuring
2
BIS Review 47/2001
results in bank ruptcies and higher unemployment in the short term, that in itself might tend to weaken
consumer  demand  for  a  time  before  the  benefits  of  the  restructuring  come  through.  I  make  no
judgement about the prospects in Japan. You certainly are better placed to do that than I am!
Closer to home in this country, the Euro area economy is a good deal better placed to withstand the
US slowdown,  although  we are  all bound to be  affected to some degree. For most of last  year  the
Euro  area  economy  performed  relatively  strongly,  with  overall  output  growth  well  above  trend,  and
unemployment in the area as a whole continuing to fall from its earlier chronically high level.
A problem, of course, was the persistent weakness of the Euro in foreign exchange markets, despite
strong "fundamentals" in terms of conventional analysis. This was largely the result of an outflow of
capital,  much  of  it  drawn  into  the  US  by  the  magnetic  attraction  of  prospective  corporate  earnings
growth – and apparently continuing despite the US slowdown.
The euro's weakness gave rise to widespread – but in my view unjustified – criticism of the ECB. The
task of a central bank operating an independent monetary policy is necessarily a limited task, not least
because it effectively has only one instrument – its control over short-term interest rates. Its role – as I
said earlier – is essentially, to use that instrument to influence aggregate demand in the economy, with
the aim of keeping demand broadly in line with the supply-side capacity of the economy. The measure
of  its  success  is  consistently  low  inflation.  Against  that  criterion  the  ECB  has  been  relatively
successful.  The  Euro  area  economy  has  grown,  above  trend,  with  core  inflation  nevertheless
remaining within the tolerance range of 0-2%, even though on the headline measure, influenced by
rising oil prices and the weaker exchange rate, inflation has for the time being moved above the top of
that range. The ECB would have put that internal stability of the Euro area as a who le at risk if it had
attempted at the same time to use monetary policy to target the euro's exchange rate, which is what
implicitly many of its critics were effectively suggesting that it should do.
The more recent criticism has been that the ECB has been slow to respond to the weakening of the
US economy. Implicit in that criticism is no doubt a judgement about the extent and duration of the US
slowdown and its likely impact on the euro area. As I have said there is a great deal of uncertainty
about that.
But the ECB has to take account, too, of domestic demand pressures in the euro area, and of the fact
that even on the core measure Euro area inflation has been moving up gradually towards the top of
the  ECB's  0-2%  range.  Frankly  I  don't  see  how  anyone  can  be  confident  whether  the  ECB  has  it
precisely right or wrong – it is perfectly normal for even the best-informed people to disagree on these
judgements, as anyone who reads our own Monetary Policy Committee meeting minutes will tell you.
But, as it showed just recently in making a modest reduction in interest rates, the ECB is sensitive to
changes in the balance of risks around those judgements.
So, too, are we in the United Kingdom. In our case we have been fortunate, since being driven out of
the  ERM  in  1992  and  moving  to  a  symmetrical  inflation  target,  in  enjoying  a  sustained  period  of
relatively stable economic growth. In fact we've experienced the longest period of continuous quarter
by quarter growth since quarterly records began, with average annual growth at around 3% over the
whole period compared with our long term trend rate of 2¼-2½%. Employment has steadily increased,
and unemployment has fallen to its lowest level for 25 years. Meanwhile the rate of inflation has been
consistently relatively close either side of the Government's 2½% target – the lowest and most stable
rate of inflation that most of us in this country can remember. Domestic demand growth in the UK has
remained  relatively  robust  into  this  year,  but  we  too  are  affected  by  the  US  slowdown  and  by  the
associated weakening of equity prices. And we have had a new problem of our own in the form of Foot
and Mouth Disease, the effects of which have gone a good deal wider than just the agricultural sector.
These new developments were likely to have a dampening effect on overall demand pressure within
the economy, both through their direct impact and through possible damaging effects on confidence.
Given the fact that  we  started  from  a  position  in  which  inflation  was  below  target  (and  expected  to
remain  so  for  some  period  ahead);  and  given  only  modest  upward  pressure  –  at  least  so  far  –  on
wages and earnings growth, despite the continuing tightness in the labour market; we have judged, on
the  information  so  far  available  to  us,  that  we  needed  to  reduce  interest  rates  by  ¾%  in  order  to
cushion the impact of the global slowdown and meet the inflation target further ahead.
Of course I am well aware that a stable overall macro-economy does not – and cannot – mean equally
stable economic conditions for every individual sector or individual business. A particular complication
over  the  past  few  years  has  been  the  surprisingly  persistent  strength  of  sterling's  exchange  rate
against the euro, itself a reflection of the puzzling more general weakness of the European currency.
This  has  contributed  to  an  uncomfortable  imbalance  within  the  UK  economy  primarily  between  the
BIS Review 47/2001
3
euro-exposed  sectors,  which  have  been  under  consistent  pressure,  and  the  domestically-oriented
sectors, which have by and large been doing relatively well. Understandably the suffering sectors and
businesses – and I know that they include some Japanese companies operating in this country – tend
to  complain  that  monetary  policy  takes  too  little  account  of  their  position,  often  pointing  out  that
inflation has for the past two years fallen somewhat below the target. The implication is that monetary
policy has been tighter – interest rates have been higher – than was necessary, which, they say, in
turn at least helps to explain the behaviour of the exchange rate.
I have genuine sympathy with their concerns, and I very much admire the huge efforts that many of
the adversely affected businesses have made to overcome the disadvantage coming from the strong
exchange rate. If it's any comfort, I can assure you, that the resulting imbalance within the economy
has been a persistent pre-occupation also for us on the MPC.
We necessarily, of course, take account of the exchange rate in trying to predict the future course of
the  economy.  Its  strength  against  the  euro  has  been  a  factor  which  has  dampened  both  external
demand and the rate of inflation, so that interest rates have certainly been lower than they would have
been if the exchange rate had been weaker. It is nevertheless true that, in common with most other
analysts, we have not fully anticipated the persistence of euro weakness.
We don't of course have a crystal ball – but even if we had, it is important to recognise that the link
between  relative  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  is  much  more  complicated  –  and  indeed  more
unpredictable – than is often suggested. Our own exchange rate against the euro today, for example,
is  stronger  than  it  was  before  our  reductions  in  interest  rates  this  year;  and  the  dollar,  too,  is
substantially stronger against the euro than it was before the much larger cuts in US interest rates. So,
in setting interest rates, we can – and do – make allowance in our projections for what has happened,
and,  on  a  best  guess,  for  what  is  likely  to  happen,  to  the  exchange  rate,  and  that  may  cause  the
exchange rate to soften or it may cause domestic demand growth to strengthen, thereby offsetting the
exchange  rate's  dampening  effect  on  the  economy.  But  what  we  cannot  do  –  any  more  than  the
ECB – is to target the exchange rate, without putting the stability of the economy as a whole at risk of
re-emerging inflation. That would not be in the interests even of the internationally-exposed sectors of
the  economy  except  possibly  in  the  short  term.  They  operate  in  the  same  labour  market  as  more
domestically-oriented  businesses;  and  what  matters  to  them  is  the  real,  rather  than  the  nominal
exchange rate, and it is not at all clear how that would be affected.
Mr Chairman, given the  uncertainties,  I  am  reluctant  to  speculate  as  to  how,  precisely,  the  present
imbalances  within  and  between  the  major  industrial  economies  will  work  themselves  out,  as  they
necessarily  will over time. But,  notwithstanding  the  current  difficulties,  I  am  convinced  that  the  best
prospect for a relatively happy ending is for all of us to persist in our attempts to achieve the macro-
economic stability and supply-side flexibility which I identified as our common goal at the outset of my
remarks.
I am very happy now to take your questions.
4
BIS Review 47/2001
