Christian Noyer: Where are we 11 months before E-day?
Speech delivered by Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion
of the Forum "Tremplin pour l'euro" in Courchevel, France, on 2 February 2001
 Ladies and gentlemen,
Just over two years ago, the European Union adopted its own single currency. Less than 11 months
from today, we will be paying with euro banknotes and coins in our everyday transactions. By many
measures,  this  development  could  justifiably  be  considered  an  achievement  of  historic  proportions.
With the arrival of euro banknotes and coins, the process of introducing a single European currency
initiated in Maastricht in 1991 will finally be complete.
Today,  the  minds  of  European  central  bankers,  the  banking  community  and  many  other  interested
parties are certainly focused on the immense organisational and logistical task entailed by the cash
changeover. Allow me nevertheless to briefly reflect on some of the developments that the euro has
already triggered.
First  of  all,  the  irrevocable  fixing  of  exchange  rates  between  the  participating  currencies  and  the
introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 can rightly be considered as the "crowning" of the Single
Market. The euro is indeed "One money for one market", as the studies supporting the original Delors
Report  succinctly  put  it.  The  euro  has  undoubtedly  become  an  important  catalyst  in  promoting  the
further  integration  of  product  and  capital  markets  of  euro  area  economies.  More  importantly,  the
policy-makers in the Member States have realised that being part of a monetary union  will not only
produce  substantial  economic  benefits.  It  also  imposes  certain  constraints  on  their  own  policies.
Rigidities  in  labour  and  product  markets,  inappropriate  fiscal  policies  and  fragmented  regulatory
frameworks  all  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  economic  conditions,  proper  functioning  and  growth
potential of the euro area as a whole. Tackling these challenges has become a clear political priority
over the last few years. The ECB's success in maintaining price stability has certainly provided - and
continues to provide - a crucial foundation for these  efforts, by stabilising  inflation expectations and
instilling a "stability consensus" across Europe. In this sense, the euro is one factor which is continuing
to push euro area economies towards more balanced budgets and greater competitiveness.
Another important aspect of the transformation of the European economy that has been stimulated by
the advent of the single currency is the increasing financial integration within the euro area. Indeed,
from the start, the prospect of deeper, wider and more integrated financial markets was among the
most widely expected benefits of a common currency. This expectation is now being fulfilled, in some
areas even more rapidly than initially anticipated. The euro-denominated commercial bond market, for
example,  has  facilitated  transactions  of  a  size  not  witnessed  in  Europe  before.  The  availability  of
financing in  a  larger  and  deeper  market  should  help  increase  the  competitiveness  of  the  European
economy.
This  said,  integration  has  proceeded  at  different  speeds  in  the  various  segments  of  the  financial
markets. From the ECB's point of view, we have noted with satisfaction that the money market in the
euro  area  is  now  fully  integrated.  However,  in  other  market  segments,  such  as  equity  or  securities
markets, fragmentation of the legal framework and the lack of a truly pan-European perspective still
hamper  much-needed  consolidation.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  these  deficiencies  are  being
addressed as a matter of urgency. Efforts to harmonise national regulations and practices will help to
cut costs and bring financial market conditions in Europe more closely into line with those prevailing in
the United States.
It is unfortunate that these positive influences of the euro have gone largely unnoticed by the general
public. Rather, it is the value of the euro on the foreign exchange market that has become the focus of
most media attention. The true, and altogether tangible, success of the euro - namely price stability
throughout the euro area - has tended to be overlooked by many European citizens. Instead, while the
euro has largely been associated with the depreciation of its exchange rate, they have attributed the
stable internal value of their currency to the inherent "quality" of the Deutsche Mark, French franc or
guilder, which are still used for everyday transactions.
BIS Review 8/2001
1
This,  I  am  confident,  is  set  to  change  with  the  introduction  of  our  new  currency  in  the  form  of
banknotes and  coins.  The  actual  cash  changeover  is  -  as  I  am  sure  I  do  not  need  to  tell  you  -  an
enormous challenge, not least because it needs to be accompanied by a generalised switchover to the
euro as a unit of account.
The success of this changeover will depend on all the actors involved. This not only includes the ECB
and national central banks, but also national administrations and the banking community. Moreover,
the retail sector, the vending industry and the cash-in-transit companies, to mention just a few, have
important  roles  to  play.  Given  the  complexity  of  the  task  and  the  number  of  players  involved,  a
centralised  organisation  of  preparations  would  not  have  been  feasible  and  was  therefore  ruled  out
from the start. Rather, it was deemed appropriate to devolve responsibility for the organisation of the
various contributions. This decentralised approach certainly has its  advantages. It allows,  within the
agreed overall framework, for tailor-made solutions specific to each national environment. At the same
time, it makes a clear assignment of responsibilities particularly crucial.
I  will  not  go  into  detail  as  concerns  the  changeover  to  the  euro  as  a  unit  of  account,  because  the
responsibility for this clearly lies with the governments. But this does represent a large task since it
concerns all public and private legal acts, administrations, companies and households.
Much responsibility therefore rests with the national administrations of the Member States. They have
to  create  the  conditions  by,  amongst  other  things,  adapting  relevant  legislation  and  administrative
procedures so that, in all respects, businesses, consumers and the public at large are ready and able
to  change  over  to  the  euro,  including  as  regards  the  use  of  the  new  banknotes  and  coins.  The
European  Commission  and  the  Eurogroup  are  monitoring  the  state  of  these  preparations.
Nonetheless, the responsibility for implementation rests clearly with the Member States, which have
set  up  comprehensive  national  changeover  plans.  I  might  also  mention  that  Member  States'
governments are also responsible for the minting of some 50 billion euro coins.
For its part,  the  Eurosystem  has  the  task  of  producing  the  14.5  billion  euro  banknotes  and  making
them available to the  banking sector. In  addition to  this,  although  not  directly  responsible,  the  ECB
naturally  attaches great  importance to a smooth and  well-prepared changeover in every  aspect.  To
this end, the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area have endorsed a number of general
principles, concerning, for example, the frontloading and sub-frontloading of the euro banknotes and
coins.
Given the devolution of responsibilities for the cash changeover, such general principles are important
to  ensure  a  level  playing-field  and  to  avoid  competitive  distortions.  Also  important  is  the  common
schedule  for  the  changeover.  This  sets  specific  dates  for  the  various  stages  of  the  process,  which
need to be respected by all concerned. There are, of course, three important dates which I would like
to briefly recall:
• 
The first of these is 1 September this year, the date on which each national central bank may
begin "frontloading" euro banknotes and coins to credit institutions and other target groups.
However, this period can be shortened at the national level and may differ between target
groups and between banknotes and coins.
Then comes "E-day" - 1 January 2002 - the day on which the euro becomes legal tender and
euro banknotes and coins will be made widely available to the general public.
Finally, there is the end of the dual circulation period, when national banknotes and coins will
cease to be legal tender. This date varies from one Member State to another. From 1 March
2002  onwards,  however,  the  euro  will  be  the  sole  legal  tender  in  all  euro  area  Member
States. The cash changeover will then be complete. In most Member States, it is expected
that the bulk of the cash changeover will take place in just one or two weeks.
  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  talked  so  far  about  the  responsibilities  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the
national administrations.  But  you  and  I  know  that  the  banking  community  also  bears  a  tremendous
responsibility for ensuring a smooth cash changeover. Supplying the new euro banknotes in time to
cash  dispensers,  storing  and  transporting  large  quantities  of  cash  in  a  safe  manner  and  sub-
frontloading the euro banknotes and coins to retailers also imply considerable efforts by the banking
community.  Banks  will  also  play  a  crucial  role  in  informing  and  advising  their  customers,  and  in
particular  small  businesses,  about  the  measures  that  they  need  to  take  as  a  consequence  of  the
changeover to the euro in cash form and as a unit of account. May I say, I very much appreciate the
efforts of the banking community, already undertaken and forthcoming, during this challenging period.
2
BIS Review 8/2001
I also trust in your understanding of the historic dimension of this operation. The long-term benefits of
the euro far outweigh the one-off burden of the changeover.
The  successful  completion  of  the  process  outlined  thus  far  will  be  a  major  operation  for  banks,
retailers, administrations and other parties involved. However, we should not forget that it also implies
a significant change for the 300 million European citizens who will, thereafter, use the euro banknotes
and coins for their daily transactions. By then they must, for obvious reasons, be aware of their new
currency's visual appearance and its security features.
To this end, the ECB and the  national  central  banks,  as  well  as  the  governments  of  the  euro  area
Member States and the European institutions, have embarked on major information campaigns. The
ECB and the 12 national central banks of the euro area alone have earmarked EUR 80 million for their
"Euro  2002  Information  Campaign".  This  Campaign  focuses  on  four  main  themes:  the  visual
appearance  of  the  banknotes,  their  security  features,  their  denominations  and  the  common
changeover  modalities.  It  is  designed  to  complement  the  other  information  campaigns  on  the  euro,
particularly  those  run  by  the  national  authorities  in  each  euro  area  country.  Naturally,  and  as  I
mentioned earlier, we are also relying on the efforts of the banking community in this regard. At the
end of the day, no television advertisement or billboard can replace the direct and immediate advice
which competent bank employees can give to their customers.
Ladies and gentlemen, roughly a year from now, we shall finally be using the new euro banknotes and
coins and our national currencies will no longer be in circulation. However, even then, the euro area
will  still  not  completely  function  as  a  truly  unified  currency  zone.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  euro  area
financial markets are not yet fully integrated. I would also like to draw your attention to another area,
which directly concerns the banking community, and where the potential benefits of the euro have yet
to be fully exploited. I am referring to the price differential that continues to exist between cross-border
retail  payments  within  the  euro  area  and  those  within  individual  Member  States.  Like  the  cash
changeover, this is another area where the banking community has a crucial role to play in securing
the  full  benefits  of  the  common  currency.  I  appreciate  that  this  also  represents  a  substantial  task.
However, once European businesses and citizens are using the euro for their everyday transactions,
the  provision  of  low-cost,  efficient  cross-border  retail  payment  services  will  undoubtedly  become  a
clear policy priority.
Finally, returning to the title of my speech "Where are we 11 months before E-day?", I would say that
so far we are well on track. Even before the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, the euro has
already delivered much of what was expected. We regard these achievements with some satisfaction.
Nonetheless,  this  does  not  mean  that  we  are  complacent.  The  enormous  challenge  of  the  cash
changeover still has to be met and, despite all past and ongoing work, a lot remains to be done. Even
after the changeover, the ECB does not anticipate settling down to "business as usual" anytime soon.
Our objective is to make the euro a lasting success. I am confident that - by also building on our good
working relations with the banking community - we shall continue to succeed in this endeavour.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen.
BIS Review 8/2001
3
