Juergen  Stark:  Reform  propositions  and  the  shaping  of  a  new  financial
architecture
Remarks  by  Mr  Juergen  Stark,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  during  a  panel
discussion  at  a  conference,  “International  financial  architecture:  recent  issues  and  alternatives  of
reform”, organised by the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung and the Brazilian Institute of Economics-Getulio
Vargas Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, 26 June 2001.
 I
To state my standpoint in advance: I myself do not believe a completely new financial architecture to
be  necessary.  I  tend  to  be  one  of  those  people  who  do  want  to  improve  the  free  market  economy
system, but who also want to preserve that which has stood the test of time. Much would already be
gained if free market and institutional rules were to be applied more consistently.
II
There cannot be any therapy without a preceding diagnosis. We have to find out what went wrong,
and  why,  before  discussing  the  remedies.  The  recent  crises  have  undoubtedly  revealed  the
shortcomings of the system. As I see it, in every case – despite all the individual differences – these
were due to a mixture of economic policy errors and inadequate underlying conditions.
In almost all the recent crises, the economic policy errors seem to have been the same:
 
a long period of fixed exchange rates (followed by a loss of external competitiveness, a rise
in interest rates, a considerable set-back in growth rates, and a devaluation of currencies);
an increase in inflation rates;
and increasing budget deficits.
 
 
This problem was  addressed by the Bundesbank  in  a  research  study  which  it  published  in  its  April
1999  Monthly  Report.  The  Bundesbank  based  its  research  on  econometric  procedures,  applied  to
developments in major emerging markets over the past 25 years. The main conclusions reached by
the study were
 
 
 
that currency crises are not the result of pure chance or pure speculation;
that economic fundamentals play an important role;
and  that,  in  particular,  in  the  year  preceding  the  outbreak  of  a  crisis,  the  macroeconomic
indicators deteriorated perceptibly;
on the other hand, although there is a systematic link between fundamentals and crises, the
indicators are  not  able to forecast a crisis in each and every case  (there  may  be  warning
signals not followed by a crisis, and there may be crises not preceded by signals).
 These  conclusions  are  quite  important  for  crisis  prevention.  Above  and  beyond  that,  whether
undesirable economic policy developments expand into a crisis or not hinges mainly on shortcomings
in the underlying conditions. These include
 
 
 
 
 
 
weak financial sectors;
tendencies towards nepotism, cronyism, and corruption;
distorting bail-out expectations on the part of market participants, including moral hazard;
insufficient information on current developments;
insufficient surveillance by the IMF and contradicting actions by other institutions;
a  disregard  of  advice  and  agreements,  accompanied  by  poor  co-operation  with  the
international organisations.
BIS Review 59/2001
1
III
What are my reform proposals and how should the “financial architecture” be shaped? Let me start
with the design of economic policy. This is clearly a matter of the financial architecture as far as the
fundamental characteristics are concerned.
First of all: the exchange rates. The very interesting fixed-versus-floating rate debate is an issue on
which there is no simple “yes” or “no” answer. The choice of an exchange-rate system can only be
judged with reference to a country’s state of development, its economic benchmarks and its political
circumstances.
Experience suggests that stable exchange rates are generally desirable. In some special, well-defined
cases,  exchange  rate  pegging  can  be  useful  in  getting  domestic  inflation  under  control  and  in
maintaining financial stability.
In the long run, however, a country that has given priority to pegged rates must ascertain whether or
not it can keep its internal flexibility sufficiently high to enable it to make all the necessary adjustments.
In particular, with priority given to fixed rates, monetary policy has to be completely subordinate to the
exchange-rate target. Moreover, there is not much room for budgetary policy. It has to be conducted in
a  stability-oriented  manner  in  order  to  keep  up  domestic  and  external  confidence.  Thus,  a  stable
exchange rate  is only sustainable if  the  corresponding  fundamentals  are  adequately  streamlined.  A
pegged currency alone cannot guarantee market confidence on a lasting basis.
On the  other hand,  if the fundamentals of a country are fairly sound,  and, in particular, if monetary
policy can be conducted on the basis of an "own" nominal anchor (i.e. independently, with a strong
sense of responsibility and a firm view of stability) a floating exchange rate may support the necessary
adjustments of a country that is emerging into an advanced economy. In general, with a floating rate,
the room for manoeuvre will be larger. But be careful: flexible rates are not a panacea, they are not a
substitute for keeping your house in order.
It may be asked at this point whether European monetary integration can be a model for an emerging
region. There is no simple answer to that. In my view, one has to be aware of mainly  three points:
Firstly, the decision to adopt a single currency is inevitably a political one. Secondly, a monetary union
cannot  be  a cure for otherwise  deficient economies. And thirdly,  a monetary region clearly requires
internal openness and implies convergence and intense competition. Some radical adjustments may
be necessary.
IV
My next point: the liberalisation of capital movements.
In  principle,  the  fact  that  the  free  movement  of  capital  contributes  to  the  optimum  allocation  of
resources is not open to question. But that must not imply liberalisation at all costs.
One  important  conclusion  from  recent  crises  is  that  the  focus  on  so-called  “sequencing”  has  to  be
strengthened. That  means:  further  liberalisation  only  in  those  countries  where  the  financial  markets
and, in particular, the banking system have a sound structure and are in a healthy condition. Knowing
the risks, it would be irresponsible to take the second step before the first.
On the other hand, there is no doubt, from my point of view, that capital controls are not a realistic
alternative to open capital markets. The reintroduction or maintenance of administrative controls in an
otherwise liberal environment poses fundamental problems.
Firstly, market participants will always contrive to avoid such controls and, if anything, they are more
imaginative than the controlling authorities.
Secondly,  capital  restrictions  are  very  expensive  to  implement  in  most  cases.  To  be  effective,  they
must be applied quite  broadly and may therefore also  hinder  desirable capital  movements. What  is
more, they may also delay the necessary development of an efficient financial sector.
However,  this  does  not  completely  rule  out  the  possibility  of  considering  temporary  restrictions  in
exceptional cases. Limited controls on capital inflows can help to prevent crises by confining potential
withdrawals. Such controls, however, can only be efficient if they are clearly understood as an interim
measure, and if they are complemented by sound policies and well-designed prudential regulations.
2
BIS Review 59/2001
V
As far as the underlying conditions are concerned, allow me here to point out only those that continue
to  be  critical  or  especially  fraught  with  problems:  standards  and  codes,  transparency,  conditionality
and ownership, private sector involvement, and institutional co-ordination.
But first of all, let me come back to the topic of financial supervision. I think, adequate supervision is
the sine qua non of a robust system.
 
If the rules for balancing the inherent risks in assets with the domestic and foreign resources
are insufficient, they encourage an inappropriate allocation of assets and the banking system
becomes inefficient;
foreign  debt  should  be  adequately  structured  to  worst-case  scenarios,  which  –  sooner  or
later – may occur in almost any country;
the maturity structure of banks’ foreign liabilities should not  be  dangerously  biased toward
short-term positions, and the denomination of liabilities in foreign currencies can be rather
risky in the face of domestic currency assets (withdrawals can lead to collapse).
  Let  me  say  this:  With  more  prudent  banking  structures  and  more  appropriate  supervision,  capital
inflows and investments are more realistic, and closer to an optimum. Actual crises could be mitigated
or  even  be  avoided.  By  the  way,  I  do  not  think  that  banking  supervision  has  anything  to  do  with
restrictions or over-regulation. On every highway we need a highway code, and in the cities we need a
certain minimum number of traffic lights. Otherwise, movements could end up in disaster.
VI
Now to “transparency”.
This is the area in which there has probably been the greatest change over the past few years – not
only in the case of the international institutions, but also in the countries themselves. There has been a
significant expansion in the publication of surveillance reports and in the disclosure of information on
lending.
For improving financial market transparency, it is in fact important that comprehensive information be
made available and be analysed and evaluated  thoroughly. Data  contribute  to  stabilising  the  global
financial system. They strengthen the operational efficiency of the markets, investors are better able to
make appropriate risk assessments, and, hopefully, the contagion risk and the associated herd instinct
will be reduced.
All this is clear. Again, however, let me signal some warnings:
 
Transparency  should  not  work  counter-productively.  It  should  have  its  limits  where
confidentiality  and  internal  openness  are  indispensable  to  fruitful  discussions  and  optimal
results.
Moreover, as indicated above, one has to be very careful with detailed information that may
perhaps be evaluated carelessly. And the IMF should abstain from commenting on each and
every  number.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  certain  indicators  always  give  the  right  signals,
and a crisis could be triggered that would otherwise not have taken place.
Too frequent information may favour short-termism, and interfere with the economic culture.
Permanently  looking  at  short-term  profits,  for  instance,  may  be  counter-productive  in  the
longer-run.
Last but not least, I sometimes have the feeling that we do not have a lack of information but
an  abundance.  In  fact,  staffs  have  to  spend  some  time  in  sorting  out  useful  from  useless
information (and sometimes produce new papers with even more information).
   On “standards and codes” in general: This is a complicated matter.
VII
BIS Review 59/2001
3
On the one hand, it is probably correct to say that the recent currency crises were due, at least in part,
to careless or "immature" patterns of behaviour. In that respect, standards and codes set criteria and
require the countries to "behave correctly". The basic idea of drawing up "rules" and of thus making
the interaction on the internationally linked markets easier, predictable and perhaps also more "just", is
surely not wrong either. I give my full support to such rules if they serve the efficiency of the markets
(for instance: eliminating corruption and combating money laundering).
On the other hand, there are problems which might hamper the desired success:
 
There are now more than 60 standards and codes. Over 10,000 assessments would have to
be  prepared  in  order  to  monitor  them  for  all  183  IMF  countries.  This  simply  cannot  be
managed. Besides, the cost would be out of all reasonable proportion to the benefit.
Not  all  standards  and  codes  have  a  relation  to  economics.  For  that  reason,  too,  priorities
have to be set.
Furthermore, there is  not  always  a compelling reason  for  everything  having  to  be  done  in
accordance  with  one  given  standard.  Is  that  really  an  indispensable  precondition  for  the
markets to function efficiently?
It is also difficult to answer the question of whether there really have to be rules that may well
enhance efficiency but perhaps ignore cultural diversity as well.
   Thus, my conclusion at this point is: We have to be careful, we should not carry things too far, and not
at all costs.
VIII
After “standards and codes”, the logical next topic is “conditionality and ownership”. As we all know,
the  IMF  has  always  been  subject  to  criticism  that  it  sets  conditions  for  its  lending  that  are  too
demanding, that it "imposes" its programmes, even that it puts a "gag" on the borrowing countries and
restricts their sovereignty.
Some  of  that  criticism  is  justified.  It  is,  in  fact,  counterproductive  if  the  borrowing  country  is  not
sufficiently involved, if its priorities are not taken into account and if programmes are so detailed that
the country in question no longer has any freedom of action. In that respect, the IMF was on the wrong
path. Things are changing at present, however. I fully support the strategy of focusing in future more
on  the  objectives  of  securing  the  borrowing  country's  ownership  and  of  dispensing  with  detailed
requirements for implementation (technical assistance should continue however).
But let us not deceive ourselves: The freedom of a patient is limited in any case. It may become even
smaller, if the IMF keeps out completely. The constraints of the facts may be overwhelming. Diseases
are likely to take their toll. On the other hand, there is certainly a realistic chance that healing powers
are at work. These powers, however, have to be actively supported by the patient (with or without the
IMF).
IX
Much has been done with regard to “private sector involvement” (PSI). But we have not yet arrived at
final conclusions. Sometimes it seems that this is only a matter of crisis solution. In fact, however, it is
not.  It  is,  in  my  view,  predominantly  a  matter  of  crisis  prevention.  That  is  because  the  manner  of
operating in the event of crisis has a crucial influence on expectations. These, in turn, determine the
actions of investors at a very early stage and thus the scale of the risks and of susceptibility to crisis.
Short-term  financial  assistance  from  the  IMF  in  the  event  of  crisis  may  be  essential,  both  for  the
countries directly affected and, as a result of contagion, for the rest of the world. A regular bail-out of
the private sector, however, is likely to be counter-productive:
 
It may have a detrimental effect on the risk-awareness of private investors and obscure the
optimal allocation of resources;
large-scale financial packages may support unsustainable exchange rates;
large-scale financing by the IMF brings about financial burdens that cannot be covered by
the Fund’s resources;
BIS Review 59/2001
 4
 and, last but not least, endless financing may encourage resistance to the implementation of
reforms.
My  conclusion  at  this  point:  The  role  of  the  IMF  should  be  predominantly  a  catalytic  one.  For  that
purpose,  the  Fund’s  main  instruments  should  be  convincing  advice  and  programmes,  not  money.
Priority has to be given to the private market participants. The leitmotif of the Fund has to be “bail-in”,
not “bail-out”.
Admittedly, it is not easy to find the right balance between “bail-in” and the avoidance of contagion.
Now,  there  are  some  fresh  ideas  from  Lerrick  and  Meltzer.  They  propose,  as  I  understand  it,  that
markets should more or less be left alone  in the  event  of crisis (bail-in),  but  that,  nevertheless,  the
Fund should offer a minimum safety net to avoid panic (by purchasing private creditors’ assets at a
well-defined discount). At first sight, this looks good. I suspect, however, that we partly shall have the
same deficiencies here as mentioned above – only in a new wrapping.
X
My last point, although it is no less important, is “institutional co-ordination”. Activity by private market
participants is fine, but it is not sufficient. We need some public activity to organise the legislative basis
and to provide other public goods in order to maximise global benefits.
Let’s  look  at  the  IMF  and  the World  Bank.  There  have  been  many  suggestions  for  improving  their
effectiveness,  from  merging  these  institutions  to  abolishing  them  altogether.  I  cannot  say  that  I
particularly like those extremes.
Rather, in a changed global economic setting, the IMF needs a clear mandate. This applies as much
to crisis problems as its does to demarcating the IMF’s institutional role vis-à-vis the World Bank.
The roles of the IMF and the World Bank need to be strengthened. They should act as advisers on
macroeconomic, structural and development policy issues, but their role as lenders should be limited
to that of a catalyst. These objectives are consistent with the Articles of Agreement of both the IMF
and  the  World  Bank  and  take  due  account  of  the  changed  environment  since  the  Bretton  Woods
institutions were set up: floating exchange rates, liberalisation of capital movements, globalisation of
markets, and heightened awareness of poverty problems.
The  IMF  is  designed  as  a  monetary  institution,  whereas  the  World  Bank  is  a  development
organisation.  A  blurring  of  their  responsibilities  is  just  as  undesirable  as  a  merger  of  the  two.  The
implications for lending have to logically follow from that division of responsibilities. The IMF should
confine  its  balance  of  payments  funding  to  short-term  liquidity  assistance.  The  World  Bank  should
focus on project financing and sectoral loans. This would involve a redistribution of tasks between the
IMF and the World Bank: the IMF should at least confine its long-term structural loans, and the World
Bank  should  avoid  participating  in  crisis  packages.  Moreover,  combating  poverty  is  a  development
policy objective and therefore comes within the purview of the World Bank. The IMF plays its own part
in  combating  poverty  by  fostering  monetary  stability  and  thereby  contributing  to  non-inflationary
sustainable growth.
BIS Review 59/2001
5
