Urban Bäckström: Sweden’s economy is slowing down
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Social  Democrats,
Härnösand, 20 August 2001.
 Thank you for the invitation to discuss economic developments in Sweden here in Härnösand.
First let me say that conducting monetary policy in the past year has not been exactly easy. The repo
rate was raised 0.25 percentage points last December, from 3.75 to 4.0 per cent, and this has been
followed  by  an  equally  large  increase  to  the  present  rate  of  4.25  per  cent.  In  June,  moreover,  the
Riksbank  intervened  in  the  currency  market  in  an  endeavour  to  strengthen  the  Swedish  krona  and
thereby avert a threat to the 2 per cent inflation target.
This  evening  I  shall  be  attempting  to  present  the  Riksbank’s  actions  as  I  see  them  in  a  wider
perspective and convey my view of the challenges we will be facing.
Before doing so, however, I want to underscore that a decision by the Riksbank to raise or lower the
repo rate does not always appear completely self-evident. In order to avoid an unduly erratic monetary
stance, these decisions have to be based on assessments of developments in the period one to two
years ahead. The current consensus is that this is approximately the time it takes for an interest rate
adjustment to exert its full effect and influence the economy in the desired direction. One alternative
might be to act in relation to a shorter time horizon, which would oblige us to adjust the interest rate
more  markedly  as  well  as  more  frequently.  Both  I  and  many  others  believe  that  would  be  bad  for
output and employment.
As we all know, assessing the future is difficult and the predictions can almost always be questioned
and  debated. Interest rate decisions  by  the Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  are  preceded  by  extensive
discussions and our opinions sometimes differ. Disagreements are obviously not intrinsically desirable
but when a group of people have to decide about complex matters, they are liable to reach different
conclusions at times. That happens in business and it also applies to economic policy. The difference
is that the Riksbank is an open institution, which means that our task-masters - ultimately the Swedish
nation - can, from the minutes of our meetings, see the basis for a decision, the preceding discussion
and  the  positions  Board  members  have  taken.  I  see  that  as  basically  an  advantage  for  people’s
confidence  in  Sweden’s  monetary  policy.  Having  said  that,  I  also  want  to  underscore  the  broad
agreement among members of the Executive Board as to the fundamental framework for our efforts. It
is important to bear that in mind.
After these preliminary remarks, I shall now turn to developments in the Swedish economy in recent
years.
Sweden’s rapid economic expansion has slowed
Economic growth in Sweden has been strong for a number of years. And although demand has risen
rapidly, inflation has been low. This is partly explained by cyclical factors. By this I mean the plentiful
supply of unutilised resources - not least all those who had lost their jobs during the economic crisis
that ravaged  Sweden in the early  1990s.  That  lessened  the  risk  of  the  upswing  in  production  soon
leading to the economy reaching its potential output. But as far as we can judge at present, the more
favourable trend also has to do with an economy that is functioning more efficiently.
Sooner or later, however, demand growth that is unduly strong and persistent will generate economic
imbalances,  whereupon  price  and  wage  increases  usually  tend  to  accelerate.  In  time,  such  a
development  is  liable  to  turn  into  a  recession,  with  falling  output  and  rising  unemployment.  Rapidly
rising inflation is often - though not always - an indication that the economy has been expanding too
rapidly  and  that  economic  policy  has  not  been  sufficiently  tight.  Economic  overheating  and  rising
inflation were in fact a recurrent problem in the 1970s and ’80s. Restricting economic activity  when
times are good has often proved difficult. But sooner or later it has had to be done in ways that were
then more dramatic. Production and employment have then fallen and unemployment has risen.
BIS Review 72/2001
1
Towards  the  end  of  last  year  we  judged  that  it  was  time  for  economic  activity  in  Sweden  to  start
slowing down to the growth rate that is commensurate with a stable long-term trend. Continued growth
at a rate around 3  to  4  per  cent  was  not  reasonable.  Observers  usually  consider  that  the  Swedish
economy is capable of long-term growth at an annual rate of about 2 to 2.5 per cent. A similar situation
had been faced for a time by other central banks around the world. In the United States, for example,
the Federal Reserve  had raised its  instrumental rate successively during 1999  and 2000 to 6.5 per
cent. In Europe, the ECB tightened its rate last year to 4.75 per cent, while the Bank of England’s rate
was raised to 6.0 per cent. The same type of reaction was also evident in other countries.
I recall that in the course of last year many observers counted on relatively large interest rate hikes in
Sweden,  too.  They  thought  they  saw  clear  signs  that  the  Swedish  economy  was  on  the  way  to
becoming  overheated  and  argued  fairly  strongly  that  the  Riksbank  should  therefore  act  quickly  to
increase its instrumental rate in keeping with other central banks around the world.
But the Riksbank arrived at a different assessment and chose instead to proceed more cautiously with
interest rate increases. In our opinion, the relatively favourable inflation prospects last year simply did
not warrant a tighter monetary stance. We kept to the level of 3.75 per cent for practically the whole of
2000.
In December, however, we did raise the repo rate 0.25 per cent points, from 3.75 to 4.0 per cent. In
other  words,  a  small  increase  from  a  level  that  was  a  good  bit  lower  than  in  other  comparable
countries. That applies not least in relation to the United States, which I take as an example because
the central bank there has cut its instrumental rate markedly this spring, a development that of course
has to be seen in the light of the relatively large increases earlier. It was only in the late spring that the
rate in the United States came down to the level in Sweden. And it is little more than a month ago that
the  Federal  Reserve  cut  its  rate  so  that  this  became  somewhat  lower  than  the  Swedish  rate.  The
Swedish  repo  rate  had  in  fact  been  lower  than  the  American  rate  for  almost  five  years,  since
September 1996. That is something that is sometimes ignored in the public debate.
So  the  Swedish  economy  was  moving  towards  a  situation  where  there  was  a  risk  of  total  output
ultimately  rising  too  rapidly.  There  was  nothing  dramatic  about  this.  Considering  the  strength  of
economic activity, it was to be expected. An adjustment of demand to the long-term growth path can
occur either as a spontaneous economic slowdown - for instance because Sweden is affected by a
weakening of international activity - or as a consequence of a monetary policy adjustment; it can also
result from a combination of the two.
We can note that economic activity in the rest of the world, not least in the United States, weakened
appreciably in the first half of this year. The Swedish economy has been affected by this, as is evident
from Statistics Sweden’s latest quarterly GDP data. The most recent figures for the national accounts
are admittedly preliminary but the tendency behind them is clear: GDP growth fell back from an annual
rate of 3-4 per cent in recent years to just under 2 per cent in the first half of this year.
Thus, the  world economic slowdown has helped to  bring about a downward  adjustment  of  demand
growth in Sweden towards the long-term path without the Riksbank needing to lift the repo rate up to
between 6 and 7 per cent, as the central banks in a number of other countries have been obliged to
do.
How does the krona come into it?
But it is not only the interest rate that influences the development of demand and ultimately the rate of
inflation. The exchange rate also plays an important part. Among other things, a weak exchange rate
tends to stimulate exports and other segments of Swedish production that are exposed to international
competition.  That  could  limit  the  impact  of  an  international  economic  slowdown.  Conversely,  an
appreciation of the krona can act as a brake and modify the pull from an economic improvement in the
rest of the world. Another effect of a weak exchange rate concerns the prices of imported goods and
services, with the risk of a pass-through to consumer prices.
In the 1970s and ’80s, currency devaluation was frequently used as an instrument for stimulating the
economy. The  development of demand  was  boosted  via  production  for  export  at  the  same  time  as
imported  goods  became  more  expensive.  In  time,  however,  inflation  began  to  move  up.  Now  that
Sweden has a flexible exchange rate regime, things work somewhat differently. If the krona weakens
and firms and households perceive this as a transient movement, the effect on inflation will not be as
strong  as  before,  when  a  currency  write-down  was  seen  as  a  more  permanent  measure.  This  has
2
BIS Review 72/2001
contributed, for example, to an import price pass-through to consumer prices in the 1990s that was
smaller than earlier. But the magnitude of the effects on demand and inflation with a flexible exchange
rate regime will obviously depend  on  how much the  value of the krona changes.  Even  with  such  a
regime,  a  large  shift  -  upwards  or  downwards  -  in  the  value  of  the  krona  will  have  some  effect  on
demand and prices.
Since  last  summer  the  Swedish  krona  has  weakened  by  between  10  and  15  per  cent  relative  to  a
weighted currency basket. All else equal and given that such a depreciation were to be permanent, the
stimulus to the Swedish economy would be fully equal to the effect on the United States economy of
the Federal Reserve’s interest rate cuts this spring. Against that background it is accordingly difficult to
claim that aggregate monetary conditions in Sweden have become tighter, even though the Riksbank
raised the repo rate last December and, most recently, at the beginning of July.
I should point out here that it is not the krona’s current value that features in the Riksbank’s overall
inflation forecast and monetary policy. What we use instead, as described in our Inflation Report, is an
assessment of the krona’s future path. The krona’s future path is invariably a major factor behind the
Riksbank’s  inflation  forecast.  And  it  is  the  inflation  forecast  that  forms  the  foundation  for  monetary
policy.  Thus,  the  development  of  the  exchange  rate,  demand,  inflation  expectations  and  so  on  all
affect the interest rate decision indirectly via the inflation forecast.
It is never a simple matter to determine the path for the exchange rate in the coming one to two years
that ought to be used in the assessment of inflation. But as long as all reasonable assessments point
to the Swedish economy being in good shape, in the long term that should also motivate an exchange
rate that is considerably stronger than we have seen in the past year. In other words, there have been
grounds for counting in the Inflation Report on a somewhat stronger krona even in the period one to
two years ahead that guides monetary policy. But when the krona began falling almost 5 per cent in
the course of only a fortnight early this summer, it ultimately became difficult to count on the exchange
rate becoming  as strong  as the forecast envisaged  in the coming two  years.  The  weaker  the  initial
position, the larger the requisite appreciation. To quote the press release from 15 June, the Executive
Board considered that “The krona’s depreciation since the latest Inflation Report is the most important
single factor that may lead to the inflation target being threatened 1-2 years from now”. The Riksbank
had then initiated currency market interventions with a view to strengthening the krona.
When the Executive Board met on 5 July the krona was still weak. In the light of the current forecasts
of resource utilisation, the exchange rate and demand, a majority of the Board members concluded
that the repo rate should be raised 0.25 percentage points, to 4.25 per cent, in order to avoid the risk
of  inflation  exceeding  the  target  1-2  years  ahead.  The  picture  also  included  considerable  price
increases  during  the  spring  which,  although  mainly  transient,  were  liable  to  influence  inflation
expectations.
The decision was not an easy one for the Executive Board. As the minutes show, it was preceded by
an intensive discussion. Three members had a different view. In their opinion, the risk of rising inflation
on account of a weak exchange rate was balanced by the risk of economic activity becoming more
subdued.  The  other  members,  of  whom  I  was  one,  concluded,  however,  that  when  everything  was
taken into account, the spectrum of inflation risks had shifted slightly upwards. The increase  was a
precautionary measure. It was also considered important to send a clear signal that the inflation target
is taken very seriously.
It  was  underscored  that  the  decision  did  not  imply  anything  about  the  repo  rate’s  future  path.  That
would be considered as usual at the Riksbank’s regular monetary policy meetings in the light of the
overall picture of inflation prospects.
In view of some comments which suggest that the Riksbank’s action has been wrongly interpreted, I
want  to  emphasise  in  particular  that  the  interest  rate  increase  in  July  did  not  have  the  aim  of
strengthening the krona. As I have indicated, an appreciation would be a good thing in itself but the
interest  rate  increase  was  actually  motivated  by  a  need  to  counter  the  risks  of  inflation  that  were
considered to stem from a weaker currency. Let there be no misunderstandings about that.
During the summer the krona has become somewhat stronger, which is welcome. A major factor here
has  been  the  weakening  of  the  dollar.  A  continued  appreciation  of  our  currency  would  also  be
welcome. In relation to the Swedish economy’s sound fundamentals, the krona is still weak.
BIS Review 72/2001
3
Looking ahead
Before I take a look at future tendencies, it may be in place to emphasise that the Swedish economy is
fundamentally sound, with a good potential for growth and employment, accompanied by surpluses on
the current account as well as the public finances. The recent temporary increase in inflation at a time
of slowing activity is a problem that Sweden has in common with other countries around the world.
Global economic growth has slowed, as I mentioned, during the spring. The fall-off has been deeper
and  more  protracted  than  many  observers  counted  on  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Information
received during the summer confirms the impression of a somewhat more drawn-out course, with an
upturn that looks like being delayed, in many respects because the key player in the global economy
- the United States - is still  limping. The imminent recovery  presaged by signals early  this summer,
above  all  from  the  financial  markets,  now  seems  somewhat  more  doubtful.  The  outlook  for  the
Japanese  economy  is  still  highly  uncertain.  And  in  Europe  the  growth  forecasts  for  the  leading
economies have had to be revised downwards.
It is perhaps not surprising that after a series of years of strong growth it is taking time to overcome the
tensions that arose in the wake of the economic euphoria in the United States. Neither is it odd that
with  an  increasingly  integrated  global  economy,  the  American  slowdown  is  affecting  many  other
countries, too.
After massive investments over a period of years, American companies are now having to cut back
plans for expansion. With the abrupt weakening of demand, stocks have become somewhat too large.
Share  prices,  above  all  in  the  IT  and  telecom  sector,  have  fallen  sharply  during  the  past  year,  in
keeping with declining profit expectations. American households have had strong expectations about
future  income  and  wealth,  as  indicated  by  high  consumption  and  rising  debt  in  recent  years;  these
expectations have now been scaled down and consumption has been affected.
The  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  cut  its  instrumental  rate  six  times  during  the  spring,  bringing  it  down  to
3.75 per cent. But even with this monetary stimulus, the slowdown still seems to be holding its grip on
the  American  economy.  As  we  know,  however,  it  takes  time  for  interest  rate  cuts  to  exert  their  full
effect on economic activity.
In order to form a picture of what lies ahead, one can start from three alternative explanatory models.
The  first  concerns  the  notion  of  the  new  economy  and  stresses  the  U.S.  economy’s  higher  growth
potential, with a rising underlying rate of productivity growth and increased corporate profits that in turn
underpin  a  higher  future  return  on  assets,  including  listed  shares.  A  more  rapid  expansion  of
production capacity  and  better facilities for managing fluctuations in stocks pave the  way for higher
demand and smaller cyclical fluctuations in the future. This is the view that favours a rapid recovery or
a V-shaped decline and upswing.
The second model is more traditional, with links to the Keynesian school. In the post-war era a long
period of high demand has regularly given way to an economic slowdown. Historically speaking, the
latest upswing has lasted unusually long, so perhaps it is not so odd that we are now experiencing a
decline.  But  sooner  or  later  activity  will  pick  up,  though  this  will  take  time.  On  the  other  hand,  the
ongoing downward phase will not be all that dramatic.
The third model has its roots in the Austrian school and harks back to experience from the 1920s and
’30s as well as from before the Great War. Proponents of this view are wont to point out that a period
of  growth  not  infrequently  ends  in  exaggerated  optimism  and  over-investment.  When  profit
expectations  ultimately  become  more  normal,  share  prices  fall  and  investment  undergoes  a
troublesome adjustment. Sometimes the adjustment problems give rise to some form of financial crisis
that accentuates the downward trend. The economic difficulties in Japan in the 1990s are sometimes
cited  as  an  example  of  this  model.  Another  instance  is  the  crisis  in  the  1930s.  Other  examples  in
various countries are to be found in the period before 1913. This explanatory model suggests that the
recovery will take time and it is conceivable that the global economic slowdown will continue for some
time to come.
Turning  now  to  the  economic  situation  in  Sweden,  we  can  say  that  activity  has  slackened  as  a
consequence of the slowdown elsewhere. Swedish firms that are dependent on exports have been hit
in particular, along with their suppliers. At the same time it should be noted that Swedish households,
who  account  for  around  50  per  cent  of  demand,  have  lowered  their  consumption.  Like  their
counterparts  in  the  United  States,  people  in  Sweden  have  reduced  their  expectations  about  future
income  and  wealth.  Infrequent  purchases,  such  as  cars  and  household  appliances,  have  fallen  in
4
BIS Review 72/2001
particular.  Sweden  has  been  hit  by  the  global  slowdown  in  technological  sectors  such  as  IT  and
telecom;  firms  are  being  compelled  to  undertake  structural  adjustments    and  close  down  some
production capacity.  But although Sweden is  affected  more  than  other  countries,  on  account  of  the
dominance of IT and telecom firms, compared with earlier downturns the situation still looks relatively
favourable, at least so far.
The  important  thing  now  is  to  look  to  the  future.  It  is  not  the  most  recent  economic  figures  that
determine  the  course  of  events  and  it  is  not  entirely  clear  what  conclusions  should  be  drawn  with
regard to developments in one to two years' time. One thing that is clear, however, is that resource
utilisation this year will be slightly lower than economic analysts have been counting on. If it turns out
to  be  true  that  GDP  growth  only  reaches  a  figure  of  just  under  2  per  cent  this  year,  this  will
nevertheless be a fairly creditable result for the Swedish economy. This is more or less the growth rate
that characterised the Swedish economy during the period 1975 to 1990. What we are looking at now
is a single year following a period of very rapid expansion and during which the Swedish economy has
been exposed to a sudden global slowdown that has largely been concentrated on a sector of great
importance for Sweden, namely the IT sector. All in all, it would seem reasonable to assume that the
conditions for the near future look relatively good for a cautious economic recovery, combined with an
inflation rate in line with the Riksbank's target. However, it is important to follow developments closely
in order to detect whether the course of events will strengthen or weaken.
BIS Review 72/2001
5
