David Carse: Bank consolidation in Hong Kong
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the JP
Morgan Asian Financial Institutions Strategy Conference, Hong Kong, 1 June 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen
I am grateful to J P Morgan for giving me the opportunity to speak to you this morning on the subject
of bank consolidation in Hong Kong.
Consolidation  of  the  banking  industry  has  been  a  prominent  feature  of  many  of  the  world's  leading
financial centres during the last decade. Hong Kong has been something of an outlier in this respect.
My speech today will explain some of the reasons for this and will describe how and why this situation
is changing. I will also discuss the attitude of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority towards the process
of consolidation and what we can do to assist.
The G10 Report on Financial Consolidation
The trend towards amalgamation among the world's financial institutions prompted the G10 Finance
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  in  September  1999  to  commission  a  study  of  financial
consolidation and its potential effects. A Working Party was formed for this purpose, which reported in
January of this year. The Report1 is available in both summary and detailed form on the BIS website.
The  G10  Report  notes  that  there  was  a  high  level  of  merger  and  acquisition  activity  in  the  1990s
among the financial firms in the 13 countries studied. Banks were the main participants in this. The
annual  number  of  M&A  deals  increased  threefold  during  the  1990s  and  the  total  value  of  deals
increased almost tenfold in the 13 countries as a whole. Moreover, the trend accelerated during the
period, with a noticeable increase in activity in the last three years of the decade. As we proceed into
the first years of the 21st Century, there is little sign of this trend abating.
The result has been the creation of a significant number of large and complex banking groups with a
global reach. The host of today's conference is a living example of this. We also, of course, have our
own homegrown example in the shape of HSBC.
Motivations for consolidation
The motivations behind all  this  activity are not hard to  discern.  Banks,  like  other  companies,  are  in
business  primarily  to  generate  value  for  their  shareholders.  M&A,  it  is  commonly  held,  offers  an
effective means of achieving this through creating synergies  that  can  increase  revenue  and  reduce
cost. In particular, larger banks may be able to achieve revenue gains by filling gaps in their product
range and offering customers the opportunity of "one-stop shopping". Increased size and market share
may give a bank more credibility in the eyes of larger customers, thus providing  the  opportunity for
bigger  and  more  value-added  transactions.  Size  can  also  open  the  door  into  overseas  markets.  A
case in point is that a bank needs to have assets of at least US$20 billion to be eligible to establish a
branch in Mainland China, which is at present beyond the reach of most local banks in Hong Kong.
Future  profits  may  also  benefit  from  cost  reductions  arising  from  economies  of  scale  –  that  is,  the
ability to spread fixed costs, including particularly those  which  are  technology-related,  over  a  larger
scale  of  operations.  Cost  economies  can  also  be  achieved  by  eliminating  duplications  in  branch
networks, functions and staff. There may also be a reduction in risk, and therefore saving in costs, due
to  geographic  or  product  diversification  and  the  ability  of  larger  institutions  to  invest  in  more
sophisticated risk management systems. To the extent that risk reduction boosts a bank's credit rating,
or increased size attracts the attention of investors, its cost of capital may be reduced, thus providing
another means to increase shareholder value.
Of course, merger is not the only way to maximise value. Nor, must it be said, is M&A always pursued
for this reason. Management may have its own motives for chasing size - personal ambition or herd
                                                     
1 
"Consolidation in the Financial Sector": Group of Ten, January 2001, available at www.bis.org.
BIS Review 49/2001
1
instinct  may  also  be  part  of  the  story.  This  may  help  to  explain  one  of  the  paradoxes  of  the
consolidation boom. Lots of companies are doing it, but the success of M&A in  achieving its stated
objectives of cost and revenue synergies is not clear-cut.
Does M&A work?
The G10 Report to which I referred concluded, for example, that there was only weak evidence of cost
reduction arising from increased size, except perhaps in the case of smaller banks. While there was
stronger evidence for improvement on the revenue side, the gains were probably not as large as those
anticipated  by  the  practitioners.  Not  surprisingly  therefore,  there  was  not  much  to  show  that,  on
average, M&A generated significant shareholder value. Rather, what tended to happen was that there
was a transfer of wealth from the shareholders of the acquirer to those of the target.
Other  studies,  and  some  well-publicised  mergers  that  have  failed  to  deliver  the  promised  benefits,
support this somewhat sceptical view. It is however equally possible to point to cases where mergers
have been successful. Indeed, most, if not all, of the market leaders in the industry have got to where
they are today through a series of mergers that have taken place over the years. The risk, however, is
that banks may sometimes embark on a "merger too far". In other words, at some point the complexity
of a merger may outstrip the ability of management to handle it, and diseconomies of scale set in.
This means that we cannot really generalise about the success of bank mergers. The answer, as a
recent  study2  by  UBS  Warburg  has  indicated,  seems  to  be  that  sometimes  mergers  work  and
sometimes they do not. It depends to a large extent on management capability. It also seems to be the
case that the benefits of mergers, in terms at least of securing economies of scale, may be relatively
more easy to exploit in the case of smaller retail banks. This may be relevant to the situation in Hong
Kong, to which I now turn.
The situation in Hong Kong
As I mentioned at the  beginning  of  this  speech,  the  local  banking  system  in  Hong  Kong  has  stood
somewhat  aloof  from  the  general  trend  towards  consolidation.  The  emergence  of  HSBC  as  a  truly
global player over the last decade is of course an outstanding example of what can be achieved with
the help of M&A. But this has happened outside Hong Kong. Until recently, at least, the situation within
Hong Kong has been more static.
The family ownership of a number of local banks is often cited as one of the reasons for this. It is true
that family owners may be influenced by factors other than value maximisation, such as the desire to
preserve the family heritage and to pass it on intact to the next generation. But an additional factor is
that  hitherto  banks  in  Hong  Kong  have  not  been  under  economic  pressure  to  merge  because
profitability has been satisfactory in absolute terms. Local banks recorded average growth in pre-tax
profits of 15% per annum in the six years prior to the Asian crisis. Moreover, most banks remained
profitable during the crisis itself and all continued to maintain high capital ratios. Financial distress was
therefore not a driving force for merger, as it has been in other Asian countries.
But there are signs that the consolidation process is gathering pace in Hong Kong. The reasons for
this are to some extent the same as those elsewhere. These include increased competition from both
domestic and global  players,  deregulation,  the  need  to  invest  in  new  technology  and  the  increased
focus, even for family-owned businesses, on generating shareholder value.
All this means that the life of a banker in Hong Kong is not an easy one at present. Some of the old
certainties are breaking down. The removal of the remaining interest rate controls in a month's time
will usher in a new era of full competition on the liabilities side of the balance sheet. While the surplus
liquidity  in  the  system  may  mitigate  the  immediate  impact  to  some  extent,  banks  will  face  new
challenges on products, pricing, fees and charges, and asset and liability management.
This  comes  on  top  of  the  challenges  that  the  banks  are  already  facing  to  generate  new  lending
business. The residential property market, which has been the mainstay of most of the local banks'
business, is currently  drifting  without clear direction, and mortgage  business is  still  sluggish,  as  the
latest figures for April demonstrated. Margins on new lending have been slashed without generating
much in the way of demand, and the effects of this on the overall net interest margin were evident in
                                                     
2 
"The Urge to Merge - a Global Phenomenon": UBS Warburg, March 2001
2
BIS Review 49/2001
the first quarter of this year. This in turn contributed to a moderate decline in the aggregate profits of
the local banks' Hong Kong operations compared with the same period of last year.
In this environment, where organic growth is hard to come by, it is not surprising that the local banks
should be asking themselves if they should merge or acquire or be acquired.
Coupled  with  this  are  global  or  regional  developments  that  impinge  on  Hong  Kong.  When  foreign
banks merge in their home countries the combined entity may have operations in Hong Kong that are
now surplus to requirements  and  that  they  want  to  sell.  This  may  attract  willing  buyers  from  banks
which want to get into the Hong Kong market or expand their existing presence here. Some foreign
banks are in any case keen to acquire a presence in Hong Kong because they want to escape the
confines of their domestic market, and see attractive business opportunities in Hong Kong, both in its
own right and as a gateway to China. The latter may also be a reason for local banks to get bigger in
order to meet the size criterion for entry or expansion into the Mainland market.
Whatever the motivation, a series of transactions have recently taken place that show that the pace of
consolidation is picking up in Hong Kong. Last year, for example, we saw the acquisition by Standard
Chartered  of  the  credit  card  and  retail  banking  business  of  Chase  Manhattan  and  the  purchase  by
Bank of East Asia of First Pacific Bank. This year, Development Bank of Singapore is in the process of
acquiring  Dao  Heng  Bank  with  the  intention  of  eventually  combining  it  with  its  existing  locally
incorporated subsidiary. Two of the Mainland banks, Bank of China and ICBC, are also consolidating
their Hong Kong operations. The Bank of China move is particularly significant since it will create the
second largest banking group incorporated in Hong Kong.
What we have not so far seen in Hong Kong is merger among indigenous banks that are more or less
of equal footing. This is perhaps not surprising. Such mergers are generally more difficult to arrange
than straightforward acquisitions of a smaller bank by a larger bank. In the latter case, the acquirer is
in a position to decide what it wants to do as regards management and staff changes, harmonisation
of systems and the introduction of new products. With a true merger, these matters have to be settled
by  consensus,  which  may  not  be  easy.  Who  for  example  is  going  to  be  the  chairman  or  chief
executive? It is probably better to avoid the Japanese solution of sharing each of these responsibilities
among more than one individual.
There is also the question of what is the end-result of the merger in terms of market share. It may be
necessary for more than two banks to get together in order to achieve a significant increase in scale.
But the more banks that are involved in a merger, the greater the complexity of achieving strategic fit
and cultural harmony.
The attitude of the HKMA
This reinforces the general point made earlier that successful execution of M&A is not an easy task.
However, despite the potential pitfalls, the HKMA continues to believe that consolidation of the local
banking sector is desirable and probably inevitable. This is for the reasons I have already mentioned.
In general, it is difficult to see how a banking system like Hong Kong's, which is open to the forces of
global competition, can resist the pressures that are leading to consolidation in other banking systems.
In terms of Hong Kong's particular situation, while it is always dangerous to extrapolate current market
conditions into the future, it does appear that organic growth is going to be more difficult to achieve
than it was in the years before the Asian crisis.
This  lays  greater  stress  on  the  need  for  smaller  banks  to  find  a  strategy  that  will  differentiate
themselves from their competitors and enable them to earn an adequate return on capital. This will not
be  straightforward,  particularly  since  a  number  of  the  potential  business  options  such  as  wealth
management  involve  heavy  set-up  costs  that  need  scale  to  justify  them.  Such  new  businesses  are
also more demanding in terms of managerial skills and smaller banks may find it difficult to attract the
right talent.
Consolidation  by  means  of  M&A  is  not  the  only  way  of  grappling  with  these  issues,  as  the  Bank
Consortium Trust has shown, but it is an option that the local banks in Hong Kong should keep very
much  in  mind.  This  should  be  done  as  part  of  an  ongoing  process  of  strategic  planning  that  looks
ahead to the medium-term rather than simply the next year. The outcome of this process may be that
the  bank  opts  to  stay  as  a  stand-alone  entity.  This  is  a  valid  commercial  decision  if  taken  in  a
conscious and considered manner rather  than by default.  However, it should  be kept under regular
review in the light of the changing financial landscape.
BIS Review 49/2001
3
Against  this  background,  the  position  of  the  HKMA  on  bank  consolidation  can  be  summarised  as
follows:
 
We continue to believe that we cannot, and should not try to, force healthy banks to merge
or  be  acquired  against  their  will.  As  noted  above,  this  has  to  be  a  matter  of  commercial
judgement by the banks concerned. It would be difficult for the HKMA to form a better view
than  market  participants  of  how  they  should  partner  themselves,  particularly  since  the
success of individual mergers is by no means assured. Forced marriages between banks are
even more unlikely to be successful.
We will, however, where appropriate, raise the issue of consolidation in meetings with banks'
board  of  directors  and  management,  and  will  encourage  them  to  make  it  part  of  their
strategic planning.
We will also do what we can to provide appropriate incentives for banks to think seriously
about consolidation, in particular by removing potential barriers to competition such as the
last remaining controls on interest rates.
We will not erect artificial barriers to acquisition of local banks by foreign banks, which would
be contrary to Hong Kong's traditional free market ethos and our commitments under WTO.
We note the view that is sometimes expressed that it would be desirable for Hong Kong to
retain a core of strong, locally owned banks. This is something that we would support, but it
is not something that we can deliver. Rather, it would depend on whether the local banks can
agree to merge among themselves.
We  will  do  what  we  can  to  facilitate  individual  transactions  that  are  put  to  us  for
consideration. This will include giving prompt advice on what is acceptable from a banking
regulatory  point  of  view.  We  will  also  look  sympathetically  at  the  use  of  acceptable  debt
instruments to finance mergers as opposed to our previous preference  for  equity  or  cash.
This reflects modern trends in capital management.
We may also be prepared to relax our capital requirements for an acquiring bank on a strictly
temporary basis provided that there are firm and credible plans by the acquirer to raise new
capital. This would only apply where, for good reasons, the timing of the acquisition cannot
coincide with the timing of the issue of capital.
      Conclusions
To  summarise,  consolidation  offers  the  banks,  and  perhaps  especially  smaller  institutions,  the
opportunity to achieve cost reductions and revenue enhancements. This is not, however, something
that can be taken for granted, and there will always be a certain element of execution risk. This is one
of  the  reasons  why  it  is  difficult  for  banking  regulators,  like  the  HKMA,  to  take  a  heavy-handed
approach towards mandating consolidation. Rather, proposals should emanate from the industry itself
based on careful examination of strategic fit and quantification of the benefits that will flow from the
merger or acquisition.
While the local banks are not under immediate pressure to consolidate, we believe that this is an issue
that they should keep under close and continuing review.
4
BIS Review 49/2001
