Otmar Issing: The euro and the ECB: Successful start – challenges ahead
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
Market News Seminar, London, 3 May 2001.
 The  subject  of  the  challenges  facing  Europe  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  after  the
establishment of the Monetary Union is complex and important. Let me organise my remarks from a
chronological perspective. I shall first present my recollection of the challenges that the ECB had to
face and the "battles" in which it was involved in its – very short – past. Then, I shall proceed to what I
consider to be the challenges of the present and what, in my view, lurks just around the corner.
Experience of the first two years
The appropriate conduct of monetary policy in an imperfectly known world is by definition a standing
challenge for any central bank at any time. It is always difficult to draw a correct picture of the world
from  sometimes  ambiguous  and  contradicting  raw  data.  And  it  is  hard  to  devise  an  appropriate
response to new developments that is both free of prejudice, open to new developments, and at the
same time coherently and systematically designed not to compromise the fundamental principles that
need to guide the central bank's policy in the medium run. The ECB has been confronted with these
challenges  from  day  one  of  its  debut.  For  us,  the  problem  of  uncertainty  in  the  day-to-day  policy
management was compounded, at the start of the third phase of monetary union, by the extraordinary
challenge of long-term institutional design.
We were hard pressed – as any other central bank was at that time, in the aftermath of the Asian and
Russian  crises  –  by  the  handling  of  a  difficult  and  unpredictable  situation  which  some  regarded  as
heading  for  the  worse.  But  at  the  same  time  we  had  to  attend  to  the  unique  task  of  laying  the
foundations for our future action, thereby completing the work that had been initiated by the European
Monetary  Institute.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  had  to  be  given  a  position  to  command  the
necessary  economic  details  over  a  new  and  unique  monetary  area,  whose  economic  size  is  only
paralleled by the US. At the same time, future monetary policy decisions had to be framed within a
strategic apparatus that could be both consistent and credible. The Eurosystem had to be vested with
the appropriate instruments and operative procedures to carry out its daily activities in support of the
strategy  of  the  new  institution.  Groundwork  was  needed  to  overcome  the  lack  of  harmonised  and
comprehensive data. True area-wide statistics had to be defined and implemented, while the unknown
properties of the new series were to be studied carefully.
In this endeavour, we could certainly draw on a consolidated stock of knowledge pre-dating the ECB
and grounded in the – sometimes centenary – experience of the participating national central banks.
But  we  also  had  to  create  untested  instruments  from  scratch.  And  the  entirely  new  area-wide
perspective that  we  needed  over a  group of sovereign states  was  simply  unprecedented  in  history.
How did we surmount the difficulties of the beginning? How did we do in the subsequent two years of
monetary union? If you can only make a convincing first impression once, I believe we did not miss
that opportunity.
After years of dire warnings it came, I suppose, as a somewhat puzzling surprise to many that the birth
of  the  euro  proceeded  as  smoothly  as  anyone  could  have  hoped  for.  Indeed,  it  was  a  resounding
success. The process of the change-over to the euro was virtually free of technical faults. We created
almost overnight a unified money market, which – notwithstanding formidable transaction overload –
functioned from the very start almost without frictions. Short term interest rate volatility remained well
contained,  and  the  main  refinancing  operations,  along  with  the  standing  facilities  and  the  reserve
requirement system with averaging provisions, have since guaranteed money market developments
closely in line with the ECB's intentions. Above all, long-term bond yields in the euro area reflect the
confidence that informed investors place on the ECB. Surveys of inflation expectations, which account
for the trust and the credit that the general public accords to a currency, are persistently in line with
our medium term objective of price stability.
BIS Review 36/2001
1
The ECB has, from its very foundation, taken its challenges seriously. The recognition that monetary
policy always has to cope with a changing and imperfectly known world has been placed at a premium
in the design of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. We could also not ignore the fact that the ECB, as
a new-born institution, had with its very appearance marked a historical discontinuity, with potentially
profound implications for economic behaviours and measured structural relationships.
The  Treaty  entrusted  the  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  to  the  ECB  and  to  this  end  it  built  an
independent, supranational institution, put in a safe position to avert outside pressures coming from
any quarter. We, on our side, between autumn 1998 and January 1999, had to concentrate our forces
on solving a twofold problem of trust and controllability. As already said, we had to inherit, intact, the
wealth of credibility that the best monetary tradition in Europe could bequeath to the new institution.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  we  were  called  upon  to  elaborate  an  entirely  new  perspective  on  a  new
economic reality, which was undergoing a fundamental mutation – if I may say so – under our noses.
In these circumstances, the Governing Council chose to equip itself with a consistent and at the same
time  comprehensive  and  appropriately  flexible  approach  to  policy  analysis.  It  was  decided  that  the
best  way  we  could  serve  the  lasting  objective  to  guarantee  in  a  non-discretionary  manner  a  stable
measure of value was to adopt a robust analytical framework well-suited to inform policy makers in a
world of change. Developing and refining this framework was our main challenge.
This tension was resolved – in my view in an optimal manner – by announcing a quantitative definition
of  stable  prices  and  by  adopting  a  diversified  approach  to  analysing  and  assessing  information.
Defining price stability as "a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for
the euro area of below  2 percent,"  along  with  the  emphasis  on  the  medium  term,  was  designed  to
enhance  clarity,  anchor  expectations  and  provide  a  yardstick  against  which  the  new  independent
institution could be held accountable. In the light of what I have just said about the evolution of inflation
expectations in the euro area, that announcement bore its fruit.
The statistical indicator that was selected as the privileged measure of price inflation in the euro area
is the headline HICP. As opposed to alternative measures of inflation, the HICP  is a homogeneous
statistic. Its choice as the focus for monetary policy is appropriate if not necessary because  it most
closely approximates the "true" basket of private households' consumption euro-area wide. While the
HICP  may  over  shorter  periods  be  substantially  affected  by  some  volatile  items,  in  a  medium  term
horizon these movements cancel out. Even though we look at other measures of inflation that do not
include  volatile  components  such  as  unprocessed  food  and  energy  for  the  purpose  of  a
comprehensive analysis, we consider the headline HICP – in its medium term interpretation – as the
only indicator being in line with the Treaty mandate of maintaining price stability.
Likewise, the robust approach to the processing of information, which we call our two-pillar strategy of
monetary  policy,  was  intended  to  guarantee  that  no  piece  of  evidence  relevant  to  policy  decision
making was to be excluded from the Council's information set. The prominent role assigned to money
as the first pillar of our strategy ensures that monetary developments are never lost from sight, and
are attributed the appropriate role that they deserve, given the monetary nature of inflation beyond the
immediate horizon. In parallel, the second pillar of the strategy ensures that other forms of analysis,
such as the investigation of the interplay between supply and demand and cost-push dynamics, are
also  incorporated  into  the  policy  process.  Together,  the  two-pillars  ensure  that  information  and
analysis produced on the basis of one methodological perspective are always cross-checked against
information and analysis produced on the basis of the other and that robust policy decisions are taken.
Analysis under the two pillars provides the Governing Council with crucial information regarding  the
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  shocks  within  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  resulting  risks  to  price
stability. The mutually-reinforcing viewpoints of the two pillars have served well as a comprehensive
framework for analysis in the past two years of experience. The strategy has provided the basis for a
thorough and timely explanation of monetary policy decisions before the general public.
The role of projections within the strategy
At  the  outset  of  Monetary  Union  we  promised  to  be  a  consistently  transparent  institution. We  have
always striven to fulfil this promise. We understand transparency to mean that the internal process by
which information is produced and presented to the Governing Council for policy decisions should be
consistently  reflected  in  the  external  account  that  is  given  to  the  public. With  this  purpose  in  mind,
commencing  with  the  December  2000  issue  of  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin,  the  Governing  Council
decided to publish twice a year its staff macroeconomic projections.
2
BIS Review 36/2001
While  the  publication  of  macroeconomic  projections  is  intended  to  enhance  transparency  and
underscore the forward-looking orientation of the single monetary policy, it is absolutely crucial that the
assumptions underlying their production are well understood by the wider public.
To start with, we are not publishing forecasts, but projections. We place particular emphasis on this
distinction since the forward-looking exercises are undertaken upon the assumption of constant short-
term  interest  rates  and  constant  exchange  rates  of  the  euro.  Our  projections  are  then  intended  to
provide a purely counterfactual scenario, which should not be understood as a predictor of the most
likely macroeconomic outcome, still less a benchmark for expectations. It should be absolutely clear,
in fact, that the Council is always ready to act to fend off dangers to price stability that might emerge
from  whatever  source  of  evidence,  be  it  model-based  econometric  exercises  or  more  specific
assessments of real and monetary developments. Therefore, wage and price setters should continue
to  base  their  decisions  on  the  premise  that  price  stability  according  to  the  ECB's  definition  will  be
maintained.
Third, the mainstream macroeconomic frameworks used in  the  production  of  the  projections  do  not
accord  a  major  role  to  money,  despite  abundant  empirical  evidence  to  the  contrary.  Thus,
macroeconomic projections produced on these bases cannot claim to exhaust our knowledge over the
reality of an advanced monetary economy. This is the reason why our monetary policy decisions have
not responded in the past and will not respond in the future in any mechanical way to deviations of the
staff inflation projection from any numerical target. Neither the ECB strategy nor, for that matter, its
second pillar can be characterised as pursuing an inflation targeting policy.
The production of projections itself does not exhaust the analysis that takes place under the second
pillar.  The  staff  projections  cannot  in  practice  include  the  latest  developments  in  all  economic
indicators.  It  is  therefore  useful  to  monitor  individual  indicators  in  parallel  with  producing  the
projections,  not  least  because  such  analysis  also  provides  an  insight  into  the  forces  driving  the
projections.  Moreover,  under  the  second  pillar  of  the  ECB's  strategy,  the  Governing  Council  also
evaluates the information about financial market expectations derived from financial yields and prices.
This is difficult to combine directly in the projection inter alia as it would imply some inconsistencies
with the assumption of unchanged interest rates on which the projections are based. The Governing
Council also considers other forecasts for the euro area produced by international organisations and
the private sector. All this information is assessed simultaneously and in conjunction with the monetary
analysis under the first pillar.
Fourth, constructing projections is a difficult undertaking: the longer the horizon, the more uncertain
the outcome of the statistical exercise. In view of this, the ECB publishes ranges of the staff projection
figures. The adoption of ranges is in accord with the best practices in use among central banks and
reflects our realistic and honest admission that future developments are uncertain.
In summary, I wish to underscore that the Governing Council should not be held accountable against
its published projections. The Governing Council of the ECB is only responsible for the maintenance of
price  stability.  This  is  its  Treaty  mandate.  Anything  which  detracts  from  the  Governing  Council's
accountability for price stability would be counterproductive and misleading. What we are publishing is
the outcome of a technical process, which is used – and has been used since the beginning – as one
input  into  the  Governing  Council's  deliberations.  The  important  –  but  partial  –  perspective  that  it
provides does not embody, or (worse) pre-empt, the exercise of judgement which solely resides in the
Council.  In  the  discussions  leading  to  its  policy  decisions  the  Council  reconciles  the  analyses
conducted under the two complementary pillars underlying our monetary policy strategy. We have not
changed  our  strategy  or  any  part  of  it  in  any  respect  just  by  deciding  to  disclose  the  inputs  to  the
process that has informed and prepared policy choices since the beginning of Monetary Union.
Price stability in a modern society
Credibility  for  the  maintenance  of  low  inflation,  the  cornerstone  of  an  effective  monetary  policy,  is
inherently  exposed  to  various  challenges.  Slipping  inadvertently  into  a  high-inflation  or  a  deflation
scenario because of errors in perspective would be unforgivable on our part, and, as we know from
experience,  it  would  be  very  costly  afterwards.  The  monetary  union  in  Europe  needs  a  currency
guaranteeing  a  stable  purchasing  power  to  maintain  trust  in  its  economic  and  social  institutions.  It
needs it because it is – and it is expected to become even more in the coming years – a dynamic and
productive  society.  And  it  does  need  it  because  it  is  undergoing  major  challenges,  not  last  those
BIS Review 36/2001
3
related to a difficult demographic transition, with important consequences for the demand that people
will express for economic security and personal safety.
Europe is in one respect a dynamic society and we know that in a dynamic world, where competitive
forces become increasingly intense and economic decisions have to be taken at shorter notice, price
stability minimises the noise surrounding price signals. Hence, it lessens the risk attached to market
activities and long term planning, thus boosting the economic reward to  investment, production and
trade. But Europe is also – let us not forget this – an ageing society. Hence, the terms of the implicit
pact that links successive generations through a chain of mutual transfers have progressively shifted
into the limelight of public attention and general concern. Again, a stable currency eases the anxiety of
the  various  cohorts  of  economic  agents  looking  forward  to  their  old  age,  and  makes  this
intergenerational connection, which lies at the core of our society, a harmonious exchange.
Episodes such as substantial increases in oil prices remind us that central banks, no matter how well-
designed  their  institutional  foundations,  how  well-intentioned  and  personally  committed  their
management,  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum.  Technological  factors  and  agents'  attitude  towards
consumption,  saving  and  work  combine  with  governments'  thrift  and  the  workings  of  law  and
regulations to determine the real basis for economic welfare. Credibly reassuring market participants
and the public at large about price stability over the medium run, and acting in a determined manner to
fulfil  this  promise,  is  the  best  contribution  that  a  prudent  monetary  authority  can  make  to  social
welfare. Any attempt on our part to correct this balance of real forces in the short run at the expense of
the stability of the currency would only be futile and self-defeating.
The  Treaty  establishing 
fundamental  dichotomy.
Consequently,  it  forged  a  thoughtful  and  harmonious  institutional  construction,  in  which  overlaps  of
competence are carefully avoided. For our part, we welcome the construction designed by the Treaty
and respect the separation of policy responsibility on which it rests. The ECB's mandate to maintain
price stability is perfected by the independence it was assigned.
the  European  Community  recognises 
this 
The current situation
Our strategy has been in operation successfully since 1 January 1999. When confronted with risks to
price stability, the Governing Council has never hesitated to take resolute action in a timely manner.
From November 1999 to October 2000, the ECB's interest rates were raised by a total of 225 basis
points  each  in  response  to  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  These  decisions  preserved  successfully
positive outlook for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area.
Where do we stand now, six months after our last interest rate change?
Starting  with  the  analysis  conducted  within  the  framework  of  the  first  pillar  of  the  ECB's  monetary
policy strategy, in the second half of 2000 and in early 2001 we have been witnessing a downward
trend in the dynamics of both money and credit.
Over the period January – March 2001, the three-month average of the annual rate of growth of M3
was 4.8%. This is 1.1 percentage points lower than over the corresponding period 12 months earlier
and close to the reference value of 4½%.
The ECB focuses on  the three-month average  of annual  M3  growth rates since monetary  data can
sometimes be distorted. In March 2001, annual M3 growth was 5.0%. While this was 0.3 percentage
points higher than in February, the March figures should not be read as a change in the underlying
trend. In fact, if calendar effects were filtered out, in March 2001 M3 growth would have been lower.
In addition, in interpreting the latest developments we need to be aware that there is some evidence
that over recent months purchases of marketable instruments by non-euro area residents have biased
the  rate  of  growth  of  M3  somewhat  upward.  Such  purchases  by  non-residents  are  not  expected  to
lead to higher price pressures in the euro area and, in principle, should not be included in M3. The
ECB is trying to better identify such factors and hopes to be able to eliminate them from the data in the
course of this year. We will give further information in our May Monthly Bulletin.
Growth in credit aggregates has also been less buoyant over the last few months reflecting conjuctural
trends and the effect of rises in interest rates. While the annual rate of growth of loans to the private
sector has remained relatively high, it has been distorted upwards by several special factors, as the
financing of the payments of UMTS licences by non-financial corporations in the second half of 2000
and  the  funding  of  mergers  and  acquisitions.  For  this  reason  there  is  now  somewhat  less  concern
4
BIS Review 36/2001
about developments in loans to the private sector at present, not at least as the growth rate of this
component of total MFI credit has been falling recently.
Overall, thus, the analysis conducted within the framework of the first pillar corroborates the view that
the risks to price stability stemming from the monetary side of the economy have become increasingly
more balanced over the recent months.
Within the second pillar of our monetary  policy strategy,  the slowdown in the US economy and  the
economic  developments  in  Japan,  have,  over  the  recent  months,  led  to  a  reassessment  of  the
prospects for world economic growth and to higher uncertainty on the external environment of the euro
area. Our economy, in spite of being relatively closed and with a rate of expansion driven mostly by
domestic factors, had over the past two years benefited from very favourable external developments.
The present weaker external background, via a lower demand for euro exports, may induce a stronger
decline  in  the  euro  area  growth  rate  than  was  expected  some  months  ago.  This  has  also  been
reflected  in  the  weakening  of  industrial  confidence  in  recent  months.  Despite  these  external
influences, there is no reason for pessimism about the euro area economy. Consumer confidence has
remained high, and the ongoing employment growth, the reductions in direct taxes and the lower oil
prices, foster expectations for a continued strong growth in private consumption.
In contrast to other economic areas, there are also no fundamental imbalances that have been built up
over recent years and that may require a correction. Economic growth in the euro area is therefore
expected to remain solid. According to all available forecasts it is expected to move in line or above its
potential trend growth in 2001, an outlook which can hardly be considered as worrying.
While economic growth in line with potential should be conducive to price stability, over recent months
several volatile factors have affected short-term movements in HICP. First, HICP developments were
affected by the recent increases in unprocessed food prices due to the BSE related health concerns
and the measures taken to contain the outbreak of the foot-and-mouth disease. In addition, energy
prices have remained volatile after the strong increases seen over 2000.
We should not overlook, moreover, the fact that other non-energy components of the HICP, namely
services prices and industrial goods prices saw a broadly upward movement since the summer 1999.
In part this is due to temporary factors, but there is also evidence that indirect effects of past oil price
increases and the depreciation of the euro are feeding through. This impact is likely to continue for
some months to come, but it should gradually diminish over time.
Looking  ahead,  however,  we  are  aware  of  the  risk  that  indirect  effects  together  with  unforeseen
developments  in  the  volatile  components  of  the  HICP  will  prevent  the  euro  area  HICP  from  falling
below 2% for more months to come than expected at the beginning of this year.
The current level of HICP inflation should not distract the attention from the fact that the medium term
outlook for price stability has improved, as indicated by monetary developments, and also owing to the
moderation in economic activity. The main upward risk to price stability over the medium term that can
be identified at this juncture relates to the risk of second round effects in wages due to the present
levels of inflation rates. The continuation of responsible wage developments is a conditio sine qua non
for the maintenance of price stability and sustainable growth prospects in the euro area.
Let  me  conclude  this  overview  of  the  current  situation  by  reminding  that  a  medium  term  oriented
monetary policy has little room for fine tuning the economy and controlling the economic cycle. The
ECB has neither the instruments nor the intention to do so. The mandate of the ECB implies that the
monetary policy decisions of the ECB aim at maintaining price stability in the medium term, based on
the  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  conducted  on  the  basis  of  its  two-pillar  strategy.  By
following  this  policy,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  provide  its  best  contribution  to  economic  growth  and
employment. The ECB cannot raise the level of the euro area's production potential. The responsibility
for the structural improvement of the production potential lies with other areas.
Challenges for fiscal policy
While  the  struggle  to  preserve  the  value  of  money  will  remain  our  daily  exclusive  occupation,  it  is
conceivable that the next major challenge in policy making may lie elsewhere. Perhaps the greatest
battle that governments will have to fight in the coming decades will be the maintenance of a virtuous
balance  between  long-sought  fiscal  prudence  on  the  expenditure  side  and  the  challenge  to  further
reduce taxes. Unemployment – albeit declining – remains too high. The capacity of Europe to absorb
its resourceful labour force remains disappointingly weak.
BIS Review 36/2001
5
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  will  assist  governments  in  this  battle.  The  past  three  decades  have
taught  us  that  fiscal  laxity,  far  from  enhancing  the  flexibility  of  public  finances  as  macroeconomic
shock  absorbers,  only  ties  the  hands  of  policymakers  in  the  long  run.  Whether  the  outcome  of
discretionary political choices – to inflate public bureaucracies or permit unsustainable early retirement
dates  for  pensioners  –  or  simply  the  budgetary  by-product  of  adverse  demographic  trends,  fiscal
structures have grown more rigid over the last decades. In such circumstances, fears of spiralling debt
dynamics  have  often  obliged  debt-ridden  countries  to  act  pro-cyclically  in  the  midst  of  severe
recessions. This pattern of forced reaction to macroeconomic adversities has on occasions in the past
contributed to – rather than countered – vicious circles of low growth and endogenous deficit crises.
To be fair, however, we should also recall that fiscal consolidation need not be recessionary. In fact, it
has  been  documented  that  large  and  persistent  fiscal  adjustments,  by  positively  affecting  the
expectations  and  the  confidence  that  agents  place  upon  the  sustainability  of  public  policies,  can
induce expansions in private domestic demand, contributing in this way to a durable improvement in
the economic activity.
Once  fully  phased  in,  the  Pact  will  discourage  deviant  behaviours  in  fiscal  policy  and,  at  the  same
time,  restore  governments'  capability  to  provide  automatic  stabilisation  when  general  income
conditions  worsen.  Fiscal  balances  close  enough  to  zero  or  displaying  a  surplus  in  normal
circumstances will create sufficient room for manoeuvre at times in which the economy operates below
its  potential.  In  that  ideal  situation,  the  financial  effort  required  of  countries  in  the  past  decade  to
rebalance their public finances will ultimately pay off in full.
However, I am afraid that this future is still some way ahead of us. The improvement in the average
deficit ratio for the euro area as a whole will come to a halt in 2001 as large tax cuts throughout the
area are being implemented without due compensation on the expenditure side. While we commend
tax reform with an eye on the long-time growth prospects of our economy, we are concerned by these
signs  of  fatigue,  particularly  in  those  countries  where  robust  growth  would  allow  scope  for  a  more
resolute drive towards the adjustment that is still needed.
The need for structural reform
Certainly, we cannot ask more of the Stability and Growth Pact than it can possibly deliver. The Pact
can make budgets more responsive to economic conditions, but it cannot address more fundamental
issues.  In  particular,  long-term  unemployment  cannot  be  tackled  through  subsidies  and  extended
money  hand-outs.  An  effective  cure  against  structural  unemployment  requires  on  the  part  of
governments an uncompromising commitment to reform the structural and regulatory underpinnings of
our economies. I regard this as perhaps the major challenge that national authorities will have to face
at the start of the new millennium.
It is therefore crucial to recognise that appropriate economic institutions are vital if the jobless are to
be brought to more tolerable numbers over an entire business cycle. New institutional arrangements
must revive the incentives to create new vacancies and to seek and accept new jobs.
It is undeniable that the most dynamic industrialised economies of the past decade are those which
pioneered the drive towards dismantling monopolies and converting industries traditionally dominated
by one or two – in most cases state dominated – firms into more competitive and contestable markets.
The intensification of competition that has ultimately resulted from liberalisation and deregulation has
made for downward pressures on prices.
The ECB recently published a study of the effects of regulatory reforms in network industries ("Price
effects of regulatory reforms in selected network industries", ECB, March 2001, available on the ECB
website  www.ecb.int).  These  initiatives  are  an  example  on  how  reforms  that  succeed  in  increasing
competition  in  previously  sheltered  sectors,  considerably  enhance  social  welfare  by  increasing
potential productivity, leading to permanently lower price levels within the industries themselves, and
by entailing temporary downward effects on inflation for the economy as a whole.
In  Europe,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  already  contributed  to  an  intensification  of  competitive
pressures across firms, since cross-national comparisons of prices have become more  transparent.
We  expect  that  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  early  in  2002  will  further  confine  the
pricing  leverage  of  domestic  producers,  and  restrict  the  capability  of  retailers  to  cultivate  privileged
market positions.
6
BIS Review 36/2001
Discernible progress with regard to labour market reform has also proved a good leading indicator for
unemployment reduction and robust growth. High rates of turnover in the labour market are a signal
that employers enjoy greater flexibility in tailoring their staff numbers to production needs. We know
how innovative ideas and advanced technologies spread in waves, and how these waves can become
a vehicle of economic dynamism and, ultimately, of social promotion.  But the  introduction  of  a  new
technology  requires  flexibility  of  other  factors,  including  labour,  if  production  processes  are  to  be
reorganised  most  efficiently.  If  there  are  limits  and  restrictions  to  the  choice  of  the  most  profitable
combination of productive factors, firms will be inefficient and the full possibilities of a new technology
will  not  be  exploited  reducing  both,  the  welfare  of  workers  and  the  employment  prospect  of  the
employed.
In this area as well we see indications that the traditional hurdles to innovation and competition in our
labour markets are – slowly – being removed. It appears to be increasingly important in national wage
negotiations to assess the implications of domestic pay settlements for regional competitiveness and
unemployment. Sectoral and regional differences in productivity and in levels of unemployment – not
the  traditional  cost-push  dynamics  of  the  past  –  are  becoming  the  benchmark  against  which  social
parties assess the sustainability of wage advances at the national level. Deregulation and productivity-
driven wage negotiations which take into account labour supply have still to impose themselves as a
common and lasting practice. However, we do see cross-border competition already placing strain on
economic decisions taken within domestic borders.
Empirical  results  lend  support  to  the  idea  that  financial  market  deepening  contributes  to  overall
economic growth. The related argument has also been made that financial market deepening would
improve  especially  the  prospects  of  young,  dynamic  and  risky  firms.  These  are  typically  the
enterprises that tend to bring new technologies to the market. In other words, the type of firms that
create  the  waves  of  creative  destruction  noted  by  Schumpeter.  But  with  a  less  developed  financial
market this is precisely the category of firms that, in the absence of sufficient tangible collateral, would
have their credit rationed. We expect that further deregulation as well as common European standards
for regulation and the progressive integration of national financial markets in a unified area transacting
in the euro will increasingly grant easier access to venture capital and allow agents to efficiently pool
risks both domestically and internationally. The private sector will thus be in a better position to cope
with shocks to disposable income and cash flow than was the case in the past.
Continuing efforts to enhance incentives at the micro-economic level are of paramount importance to
prepare  the  ground  for  a  durable  change  in  macroeconomic  performance.  So  far,  the  economic
landscape in Europe has been transformed by the introduction of the single currency and the creation
of the ECB, firmly oriented towards the maintenance of price stability. This development has acted as
the catalyst for a first round of institutional and economic change – I have mentioned the Stability and
Growth Pact, the timid traces of ongoing reform in the markets for labour, products and capital, the
unified  financial  market.  We  are  confident  that  governments  will  not  shy  away  from  initiating  an
urgently needed second round of serious reform.
At stake is the capacity of Europe to grow in a non-inflationary manner at permanently higher rates, to
prevent  its  traditional  resource  constraints  from  biting  at  early  stages  of  recovery,  and  to  pursue  a
smoother and more balanced pattern of growth around capacity levels than seen in the past.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude on a note that has steadily accompanied Europe's history since the end of the war.
The last fifty years have seen an impressive progress towards closer integration among countries that
had been fierce enemies for much of their past. This historical course has, to a certain degree, always
required that governments maintained a balance between the advantages of increased co-ordination
and consensual action, and the need to uphold the healthy forces of competition.
I believe that care should be taken that this balance is maintained in the future. Any design of further
political  integration  will  have  to  be  founded  on  a  stable  currency  and  sound,  successful  economy.
Hence, the  quest  for  more  integration  will  have  to  eschew  the  danger  of  creating  "political  cartels,"
which would be as detrimental to Europe's economy and society, as business cartels are to market
activities.  Healthy  competition  among  jurisdictions  –  within  a  unified  area  founded  upon  shared
principles  and  a  single  currency  –  is  of  no  less  importance  to  promote  progress  than  competition
among  enterprises  in  a  market  economy.  It  is  therefore  indispensable  that  we  allow  time  for  the
BIS Review 36/2001
7
gestation of a sustainable  political structure that  will eventually complement the stage  of integration
that monetary union has already induced.
The ECB, on its side, will be vigilant on monetary union. I do not believe that a stable monetary regime
must necessarily have its root at the level of the nation state. Nevertheless, as a new money that, by
replacing many currencies, has severed the traditional link assigning one means of payment to one
nation state, the euro does face a unique challenge in winning the trust and the hearts of the people.
The ECB can already claim credit and take pride for having fulfilled its mandate so far. We will not
squander in the future the asset of trust that people have already given to us.
8
BIS Review 36/2001
