Andrew Crockett: Financial Stability in the Light of the Increasing Importance
of Online-Banking and E-Commerce
Lecture  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, at the Center for Financial Studies at the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe  University,  for  the  Colloquium  Series  on  “Financial  Markets  and  E-Commerce",  Frankfurt,
31 January 2001.
 Introduction: Revolution and uncertainty
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  in  the  Colloquium  Series  on  “Financial  Markets  and  E-Commerce”,
organised by the Center for Financial Studies. Over the years, the Center has gained a well-deserved
reputation for high-quality  analysis of topical issues facing the  financial  sector.  And  this  Colloquium
series is a good illustration of its ability to identify timely subjects and bring different perspectives to
bear  on  them.  In  dealing  with  the  subject  of  electronic  finance,  I  will  naturally  take  the  view  of  an
official sector observer, with a particular interest in financial stability implications.
I should admit at the outset that I approach the topic with a variety of feelings. One is enthusiasm.
The internet, and the other innovations made possible by information technology advances, have the
potential to transform the financial industry in ways that will bring enormous benefit to businesses and
consumers  alike.  Many  of  you  who  are  deeply  involved  in  the  development  of  e-finance  will
understand the excitement of being involved at this technological and business frontier.
A second feeling, however, is one of uncertainty. Although a lot has been written about e-finance, it is
difficult to identify at this stage what will prove to be its essential characteristics. We inevitably tend to
look  at  the  future  wearing  the  spectacles  of  the  past.  This  does  not  always  help  us  to  distinguish
innovations of lasting significance from those of more passing interest.
Finally – and this may not surprise you from me – there is a feeling of caution. Any major change in
the financial industry carries some risk of undermining financial stability. Only when we understand the
risks involved can we be confident about the approaches we use to manage them.
Both the private sector and the official sector have much to do to ensure that the potential gains from
new  technology  are  effectively  exploited  without  undermining  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.
This aspect will be the main focus of my remarks this afternoon. I will discuss what e-finance means
for financial institutions, for markets and for the official sector.
But before doing that, I  would  like to make two general remarks. The first is that e-finance has the
potential to be more than just another incremental change in ways of doing business; it could be a real
revolution.  The  second  is  that  the  precise  nature  of  e-finance  development  in  the  years  ahead  is
impossible to predict. Let me elaborate a little on these two points as they have important implications.
First, the issue of the scope of change. Some argue that e-finance is simply another technology wave
adding a new delivery channel. On this view, relatively few new policy issues  arise, although many
existing  dilemmas  may  be  accentuated.  The  other  view  is  that  the  financial  landscape  will  be
fundamentally transformed by the new technology. I find myself much closer to this second view.
Earlier waves of technological advance focussed on the elaboration of information, for example, the
development  and  pricing  of  new  hedging  instruments;  and  on  the  transmission  of  information,  i.e.
faster and cheaper communication of product and price data. The wave based on the internet makes a
further  quantum  jump.  As  you  know,  the  internet  relies  on  open  networks  and  standards,  allowing
much  wider  and  easier  access  by  consumers.  This  is  a  radical  change.  Recall  that  the  previous
electronic technologies employed by the financial services sector were generally based on proprietary
networks and standards with restricted access.
There are good grounds for supposing that the internet and financial services have unique synergies:
the  internet  offers  convenience,  price  transparency,  broader  access  to  information  and  lower  cost;
financial services are information-intensive and generally require no physical delivery. E-finance has
the potential, not only to take business away from traditional, “bricks-and-mortar” delivery systems but
also 
financial
consolidation. I will come back to these points in a moment.
introduce  new  business  models,  changing 
financial  structure  and  driving 
to 
BIS Review 5/2001
1
This does not of course mean that the financial system is going to be transformed overnight. During
the last year we have witnessed an enormous swing in sentiment towards e-commerce from almost
frenzied over-optimism to much greater realism, and even pessimism. A huge number of companies
were created and many have since died without generating any profit. So far, the financial industry has
been  largely  spared  in  this  cycle  of  entrepreneurial  creation  and  destruction,  partly  because  of
prudential limits of entry through licensing rules. Such a situation will not necessarily persist, however.
My second general remark concerns the nature of change. If we accept that e-finance will ultimately
have  a  major  impact  on  the  financial  industry,  exactly  how  the  changes  will  take  place  is  quite
uncertain. True, some trends may be relatively easy to understand. For instance, the shift to online
has  been  most  noteworthy  in  the  case  of  brokerage,  somewhat  less  in  banking,  and  much  less
impressive in other sectors. The advantage of real time transactions is clear in the case of securities
and foreign exchange dealing. But it is less evident for mortgages, sales of insurance products and so
on.
Looking ahead, however, it is difficult to know which technologies will work best, how customers will
respond and so on. The fast pace of developments means that there is considerable uncertainty about
which parts of the financial system will feel the greatest stress. How quickly institutions  will  have to
adapt to changes remains uncertain. From what we have learnt so far, the adoption of online delivery
seems to differ across sectors, mainly reflecting the complexity and time-sensitivity of the product or
service.
Uncertainty  about  the  nature  of  the  prospective  changes  has  some  major  implications  for  both  the
private and the public sector. The private sector would be prudent to maintain a questioning attitude
about specific IT developments. It is wise to recall examples of earlier over-estimation of demand for
technical  products  such  as  smart  cards.  Although  many  electronic  purse  pilot  schemes  are  still  in
place,  the  customer  resistance  they  have  encountered  has  turned  initial  euphoria  into,  at  best,
cautious  optimism.  Another  example  would  be  pure  internet  banks,  which  have  had  only  a  limited
success so far.
In making IT investment decisions, firms need to balance two conflicting considerations. On the one
hand,  technology  is  constantly  changing  and  prospective  returns  on  new  technology  may  be
undermined by still newer technology. This calls for caution and the need to discount future returns
heavily.  On  the  other  hand,  so-called  “network  effects”  may  create  “first  mover”  advantages  that
encourage market players to adopt quickly the latest technology, without awaiting a full evaluation of
costs and benefits.
The  public  sector  faces  a  dilemma  too.  On  the  one  hand,  the  authorities  cannot  predict  the  future
shape of the financial industry. This argues against actions that risk stifling the process of innovation,
for  example  by  regulations  that  “freeze  the  present”.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  danger  of  new
unregulated developments going too far, too quickly. It may then be more difficult to introduce prudent
guidelines: once the genie is out of the bottle, it may be difficult to put it back.
Balancing  these  two  concerns  is  not  easy.  In  principle,  the  public  sector  should  be  “technology-
neutral”,  neither  favouring  nor  hindering  particular  technical  approaches.  But  what  this  means  in
practice  may  vary  across  countries  and  industry  sectors.  Many  European  countries,  for  instance,
favour limiting e-finance to regulated institutions. The United States, on the other hand, tends to favour
a more hands-off approach in dealing with the types of institutions that deliver financial products and
the types of delivery channels used. However, US supervisors are strong advocates of the systematic
on-site inspection of unregulated service providers. You may remember a similar difference in views
between the EU and the US as to the issuance of e-money several years ago.
Against the background of these general remarks, let me now address some specific aspects of e-
finance developments. First, I will take a look at the implications of prospective trends for banks and
other financial institutions. Second, I will review implications for markets. Next, I will outline some key
risks in these developments. I will conclude my remarks with some preliminary thoughts on an official
sector agenda.
Implications for banks and other financial institutions
There are many ways of classifying the implications of e-finance for the institutions involved, but I will
group  them  under  six  headings.  First,  it  is  becoming  clear  that  the  physical  start-up  costs  of  e-
financial  institutions  are  lower  than  those  of  traditional  institutions.  Even  the  cost  of  setting  up  IT
2
BIS Review 5/2001
systems – sometimes regarded as a barrier to new entry – can be reduced by outsourcing to a well-
established service provider. Lower cost barriers to entry could well intensify competition and increase
the threat of disintermediation of existing institutions.
Because  it  is  cheaper  to  open  a  selling  point  on  the  internet  than  to  open  a  network  of  physical
branches,  the  distribution  cost  and  marginal  operating  costs  of  electronic-based  platforms  are
significantly lower. This impact will be significant in sectors that rely on a high-cost network of agents,
who can be replaced by electronic communication of content. These agents, whether employees or
independent contractors, may not have enough special advantages over firms that engage  in  direct
distribution to justify the widening cost differences.
Secondly,  e-finance  is  blurring  the  barriers  between  banks  and  other  institutions.  The  internet,
combined  with  data-processing  advances  and  deregulation,  is  reinforcing  the  trend  to  de-couple
manufacturing  of  financial  products  from  their  distribution.  Institutions  now  find  it  easier  to  retail
products they have not themselves produced. Though it remains an open question how much further
this integration of financial activities will progress, the boundaries between banks, brokers and insurers
are likely to be further eroded. One force behind this is increasing consumer demand for personalised
money management services,  which  is pushing banks to respond  with  products that  cross  financial
boundaries. These “hybrid financial services” are nothing new, but the advent of technologies such as
fixed  and  mobile  internet  as  well  as  digital  TV  promises  to  transform  both  their  design  and  their
delivery.
Thirdly, the rapidity of change and the unfamiliarity of the names of some new players highlight the
critical importance of public trust. As I mentioned earlier, pure internet banks have not so far been
very  successful,  in  part  because  of  problems  of  public  acceptance.  While  technology  has  been
lowering  barriers 
to  entry,  brand  establishment  and  customer  acquisition  have  remained
disproportionately  expensive,  particularly  in  banking.  One  survey  indicates  that  even  the  most
promising  demographic  groups  –  such  as  young,  educated,  wealthy,  active  consumers  of  financial
services  -  are  unlikely  to  switch  to  technology  firms  for  financial  products.  A  “brand  premium”  is
probably  the  best  protector  of  established  banks  against  pure  internet  banks.  The  fact  that  some
banks  that  started  as  pure  internet  operations  have  opened  physical  branches  as  “relationship
enhancers”, or acquired ATM networks for the consumers’ cash withdrawal and deposit convenience,
illustrates the continuing importance of physical presence. This experience seems to suggest that the
choice is not that of “clicks-versus-bricks”: it may be “clicks-and-mortar” (or multi-channel distribution)
that will have the ultimate advantage.
However,  the  need  to  inspire  the  trust  of  the  public  does  not  necessarily  favour  existing  banks,
because  firms  that  have  built  up  consumer  trust  and  achieved  high  degree  of  name  recognition  in
other lines of business (Siemens, Sony, General Electric, etc) may also command confidence. While
hardly unique to e-finance, the increasing reliance on untested and sophisticated technology implies a
greater  need  to  have  a  brand  name  that  the  public  knows  and  trusts.  It  may  lead  to  new  forms  of
conglomerate that bring together financial and non-financial companies. The most serious challenge to
the  banking  industry  probably  comes  from  the  entry  of  telecommunication  companies  that  already
possess the necessary IT skills, exercise command over an important delivery channel and have built
an extensive customer base.
The fourth consequence, then, is the increased likelihood of entry of non-financial institutions into
financial activity. A major challenge for supervisors is the adaptation of supervisory techniques that are
traditionally  used  in  licensing  new  entry  (such  as  fit  and  proper  tests;  the  clarification  of  business
plans;  policies  on  mergers  and  acquisitions;  etc).  And  the  very  meaning  of  concepts  such  as
consolidated  supervision  becomes  problematic  in  this  context,  as  does  the  distinction  between
banking and commerce.
Fifthly, some believe that the internet will speed up the process of financial industry consolidation,
both  cross-border  and  cross-sector.  Operating  costs  that  are  low  relative  to  those  of  initial  start  up
costs, give rise to significantly increased potential for economies of scale. In order to pursue these,
financial service companies are increasingly forming alliances with IT vendors and telecommunication
companies.  Large  client  lists  made  available  through  consolidation  increase  the  profitability  of  the
provision of a broad range of different financial  products.  As  I  have  already  said,  name  recognition
also favours big players. E-banking facilitates cross-border expansion at minimum cost. Moreover, the
resources devoted to foreign e-banking business (staff, computing resources, etc) can more easily be
centralised, so that service output can be readily switched from one foreign market to another. It  is
much easier to retrench quickly from a virtual offering than a branch-based one. However, full fledged
BIS Review 5/2001
3
consolidation  is  not  inevitable  since  strategic  alliances  could  in  principle  achieve  the  same  goal  of
saving costs without requiring a full merger. The merger of back office functions is a case in point.
The sixth and final implication is the most difficult to come to grips  with,  yet it is arguably the most
important. It is the potential of e-finance to create new and radically different business models. In
the  current  model,  a  bank  makes  use  of  private  information  it  has  gathered  about  its  customers  in
evaluating and pricing credit risk. The internet, by transforming information gathering and by altering
the way communication is handled, will make several new models possible.
One example of such a new business model that has attracted much attention is that of the so-called
“aggregators”,  firms  that  offer  customers  one-stop  shopping  for  financial  and  non-financial  products
offered  by  a  multitude  of  suppliers.  By  monitoring  the  transaction  patterns  of  their  customers,  such
firms are uniquely placed to  observe individual consumption  patterns  and  obtain  information  on  the
financial  profile  of  an  individual.  Such  information  can  in  turn  be  used  to  directly  market  financial
products, assess credit risk etc. This poses various threats to banks. Banks may lose their direct links
and delivery channels to reach customers. At the same time, banks fear being held responsible for the
mishandling of confidential customer data by the aggregator.
In  a  move  to  counter  attempts  by  non-financial  players  to  enter  the  banking  market,  banks  could
capitalise on their brand name and the trust they enjoy with the public by expanding into services like
certification, digital signatures and secure communication. An important issue in that context is even-
handedness in the official treatment of financial and non-financial firms. As you know, supervisors are
usually reluctant to allow banks to expand into non-financial commercial business. But how can and
should they react to traffic in the opposite direction?
Implications for markets
I turn now to the implications for financial markets. Internet technology is beginning to have a major
impact  on  the  structure  and  functioning  of  exchanges  and  trading  systems.  In  equity  markets,
automated trading systems that use computer software to match buy and sell orders have developed
rapidly.  These  Electronic  Communications  Networks  (ECNs)  are  expanding  not  only  in  the  United
States  but  also  in  Europe,  in  part  benefiting  from  the  continuing  development  of  an  equity  culture
among retail investors.
On-line trading is more cost-efficient,  accelerates  trade  execution  and  potentially  expands  the  price
information  available  to  investors.  As  a  result,  traditional  dealers  are  finding  their  margins  coming
under increasing pressure. Some of the larger dealers may try to respond by chasing volume, which
electronic trading can facilitate. Others may unbundle their services and concentrate on certain niches.
Some may just withdraw totally from trading and concentrate on advice and research.
An  important  issue  arising  from  the  growing  reliance  on  electronic  trading  is  its  impact  on  market
liquidity.  Market  liquidity  is  a  multi-faceted  concept  and  it  is  therefore  very  difficult  to  assess  the
relationship  between  electronic  trading  and  liquidity.  On  the  one  hand,  electronic  trading  leads  to
tighter pricing (ie lower bid-ask spreads) in equity  and securities markets by  decreasing transaction
costs.  Thus  one  dimension  of  liquidity  may  be  improved.  But  there  are  two  other  factors  that  may
reduce liquidity. First, in some currently centralised markets, lower barriers to  entry may mean that
new trading systems proliferate, none of which individually is particularly liquid. Markets may therefore
become more fragmented. Second, by reducing bid-ask spreads, electronic trading will tend to reduce
the  profitability  of  active  market-making,  causing  financial  institutions  to  scale  back  this  activity.
Markets may  become  shallower,  resulting  in  increased  intra-day  volatility  and  a  less  efficient  price-
discovery mechanism. This may be all the more likely in periods of market stress, and may exacerbate
turbulence. This is an unresolved issue on which we need to keep a close eye.
The  use  of  electronic  trading  is  also  spreading  in  other  financial  markets  where  contracts  have
historically  been  traded  over-the-counter  (OTC).  A  recent  report  by  the  Committee  on  the  Global
Financial System1 suggests that electronic trading in foreign exchange and fixed income securities is
centralising many OTC markets and putting some dealers under pressure. However, the report found
no conclusive evidence that these developments have led to a marked reduction in liquidity.
                                                     
1  The  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  The  Implications  of  Electronic  Trading  in  Financial  Markets,  Bank  for
International Settlements, January 2001. The report is available on the BIS Website at www.bis.org.
4
BIS Review 5/2001
A  final  concern  is  about  the  difficulty  of  transposing  existing  market  standards  to  trading  platforms
which  are  purely  virtual.  For  example,  securities  regulators  will  want  to  ensure  that  disclosure
standards are not avoided by marketing new issues directly on the internet. Investment advisers are
often  required  to  be  licensed  and  “suitability”  obligations  are  imposed.    It  is  not  clear  how  these
requirements would apply to advice offered on a website.
Key risks in these developments
Let me next discuss potential risks in these developments. Needless to say, assessing and dealing
with  these  risks  is  the  key  challenge  to  central  bankers  and  other  regulators  and  supervisors
worldwide. But this is not easy. Not only is reliable data on the current situation difficult to come by, its
growth  is  extremely  hard  to  predict.  While  e-broking,  some  types  of  e-banking  and  some  e-trading
have  spread  much  more  rapidly  than  earlier  predicted,  e-money  developments  have  failed  to  meet
earlier expectations of growth.
Even  when  trends  have  been  identified,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  developments  that
simply raise familiar prudential oversight problems in a new guise, and those that give rise to totally
new  challenges.  It  will  inevitably  be  difficult  to  make  such  a  distinction.  It  is  hard  to  isolate  the
contribution  of  the  internet  separately  from  the  effects  of  other  complementary  innovations,  and
equally  difficult  to  distinguish  internet  effects  from  other  long-term  industry  trends  and  exogenous
factors. With these caveats, let me list several key risks that merit attention. I will group them under
four headings.
Firstly, there is the risk of strategic and business misjudgements. Needless to say, this is always a
possibility  during  periods  of  rapid  technological  change  characterised  by  the  kind  of  uncertainty  I
discussed earlier. A characteristic of internet-related firms has been the acceptance of high initial costs
in the hope of long-term profits. The absence of a simple short-term profit test, given relatively little
near-term revenue, makes it very difficult for companies to assess whether their strategy is working.
That mistakes can be made is quite evident from the volatility of high-tech stocks and the failure of
many  high-profile  ventures.  Banks  can  also  make  big  mistakes  in  their  e-finance  strategies.  Bank
managements today need to be more knowledgeable about IT matters than in the past.
The second risk is operational, resulting from reliance on complex technology. Such risks can arise
not  only  when  technology  is  developed  in-house  but  also  when  it  is  outsourced.  The  practice  of
outsourcing core technologies and processing operations raises questions about how far, and by what
mechanisms,  a  bank’s  management  should  oversee  the  operations  of  service  providers.  The
existence of increasingly complex arrangements between a financial institution and a whole chain of
service  providers  –  a  main  contractor  with  multiple  sub-contractors  providing  the  various  different
elements  of  the  IT  architecture  –  creates  novel  oversight  problems.  A  recent  report  by  the  Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision2 suggests that the comfort from outsourcing may be illusory.
The third risk arises from legal and regulatory uncertainty in e-finance transactions. Even a question
of  “Where  is  the  headquarters  of  an  e-finance  firm?”  cannot  always  be  answered  easily.  Another
question is whether location is physical or legal. Under such circumstances, it is all the more important
that the definition of home and host supervisors and the division of responsibilities between them be
clarified. This should include any requirement for licensing in the “targeted” host country. It is also all
the more desirable that common standards are set and enforced across countries to avoid financial
firms  moving  their  notional  headquarters  to  laxer  supervisory  regimes.  Cross-border  mergers  of
exchanges would pose even harder questions. Similar considerations apply to different sectors of the
financial industry within one country. The risks of “regulatory arbitrage” must be kept clearly in mind.
The  fourth  risk  I  want  to  note  is  systemic  risk.  Because  financial  institutions  use  similar  software
programs, there is a risk that many  large institutions could be simultaneously subject  to a  common
adverse  shock.  This  was  one  worry  about  the  2000  year  bug,  which  happily  turned  out  to  be
well-contained.  But  can  we  rely  on  always  being  so  fortunate?  A  simultaneous  technology-related
problem would be a potential systemic nightmare.
We know that there is no computer systems technology that is absolutely “hacker-proof”. And the more
open  platform  the  greater  the  risk.  A  failure  of  a  large  internet  service  provider  could  be  a  major
                                                     
2  Basel Committee for Banking Supervision, Electronic Banking Group Initiatives and White Papers, October 2000. The report
is available on the BIS Website at www.bis.org.
BIS Review 5/2001
5
disruption. So far, incidents have been relatively minor, but the risk remains. For instance, insufficient
or inadequate segregation between internal systems for retail and large-value payments could allow
the breach of the lighter security net around a lower value system, such as a bank’s retail website,
which would in turn allow entry to a high value system via the bank’s internal network.
Moreover,  the  deeper  involvement  of  greater  numbers  of  new  and  different  firms  –  including  non-
financial firms – in financial markets may make it much more difficult to monitor the links between the
various actors and to assess the risks to which they are exposed. As the links between financial and
non-financial  markets  become more  pervasive,  the  sources  of  systemic  threat  are  likely  to  become
harder to identify.
An official sector agenda
I come now to my final substantive point, which concerns the official sector agenda for dealing with
some of these issues. I have five points to make. First, and I put this above all else, the official sector
should  do  some  serious  thinking  about  how  e-finance  could  change  the  structure  of  the  finance
industry.  Is  it  possible  that  the  impact  could  be  revolutionary  and  rapid?  The  transformations
engendered by the spread of e-finance could at some point raise systemic concerns for central banks,
particularly  given  the  greater  importance  of  unregulated  entities  outside  the  present  reach  of
supervisors.  Prudential  concerns  about  individual  institutions  and  markets  may  need  to  be
supplemented from the perspective of systemic risk to address directly market dynamics and industry
structure issues.
Ironically,  while  the  internet  has  vastly  expanded  the  availability  of  information,  there  are  too  few
reliable data on e-finance itself. The statistics produced by market analysts are generally piecemeal,
based on different definitions and assumptions and sometimes include optimistic biases. But  before
new  data  collection  systems  are  considered,  a  clearer  conceptual  framework  is  needed  to  pose
relevant  questions. We  need  the  help  of  the  private  sector  and  of  the  academic  community  in  this
endeavour.
Secondly, as discussed earlier, e-finance is also likely to blur further the distinctions between different
financial sectors as well as products. This will pose co-ordination problems for financial regulators,
regardless of whether supervision is organised along product or institutional lines. It will make banks
less  “special”.  There  is  a  need  to  be  aware  of  linkages  across  sectors,  particularly  links  between
banks, insurance companies and securities companies. This implies a greater need for consultation
and co-ordination among regulators. As depositors are less familiar with e-banks, and know deposits
can  be  withdrawn  faster,  e-banks  may  be  more  susceptible  to  erosion  of  their  deposit  base  than
traditional banks. The challenges for banks, supervisors and central banks will remain the same, but
the nature of cyberspace may leave them far less time for crisis management and resolution.
The Financial Stability Forum3, which brings together national regulatory authorities and international
standard setters, has a special role to play in this effort of cross sector cooperation and coordination.
As  you  may  know,  the  Forum  prepared  a  mapping  of  e-finance  issues  and  international  groups
working on them. A contact  group  that  comprises  of  Chairpersons  of  the  various  e-finance  working
groups  of  the  standard  setting  bodies  and  Basel-based  Committees  has  now  been  established  to
examine areas where enhanced cross-sector cooperation and coordination on e-finance issues would
be beneficial. In time, it may be necessary to extend and formalise the current network of contacts.
Thirdly, a flexible and adaptive regulatory approach becomes vital. This does not mean an absence
of regulations. In particular, licensing rules for banks, investment advisers, etc, will remain crucial in
maintaining high standards in the financial system and building public confidence. But it does mean
that the old regulatory mind-set is no longer appropriate. This will be particularly so in the world of e-
finance where change is the norm. There is a need for guidance, not rules. Different contexts require
different  responses.  There  will  have  to  be  more  emphasis  on  operational  and  reputational  risk.  E-
finance raises many additional complexities: for example, the question of “What is a bank?” becomes
even more difficult to answer. Moreover, the answer could well differ from one supervisory jurisdiction
to  another.  The  good  news  is  that  advanced  technology  permits  more  effective  monitoring  of  the
complex  issues  that  technology  has  created.  For  example,  the  use  of  intelligent  electronic  agents
                                                     
3  More information about the Financial Stability Forum is available at its Website; www.fsforum.org.
6
BIS Review 5/2001
should enable consumers to monitor their journey through cyberspace and warn them when they are
entering a site whose privacy policies do not match their preferences.
Fourthly, there may be cases where additional prudential buffers for risk-seeking institutions are
needed.  It  can  be  debated  whether  e-banks  are  inherently  riskier  than  traditional  banks,  but  some
aspects of e-banks do require much more careful examination. They have generally needed to offer
higher interest rates to attract deposits, which can be very rapidly transferred to another bank. They
may  be  more  vulnerable  to  operational  breakdowns  and  security  breaches  by  “hackers”  as  I
mentioned  earlier. The management  challenges,  such  as  credit  assessment  at  a  distance,  are  less
well-understood, though technologies could be employed to monitor and overcome these risks. It is
interesting to note that in some countries (for example, Singapore and Hong Kong), e-banks cannot be
established except through the conversion of existing local banks. Some countries require a physical
presence for e-banks within their national jurisdiction, but this may be difficult to enforce.
Fifthly, it is important to make sure that the current levels of market and operational integrity are not
undermined  by  the  development  of  e-finance.  A  continued  effort  will  be  required  to  transpose
disclosure for listing as  well as  licensing  for  investment  advisers  to  purely  virtual  markets,  however
difficult this might be. The information technology infrastructure supporting the settlement of financial
market transactions must be entirely reliable. The safe and orderly operation of banking and financial
systems  at  all  times  is  essential  to  ensure  public  trust.  Security  is  critical  to  allow  customers  to  do
financial transactions online. It is important that a “virtually closed” network is built supported by robust
technology such as cryptography and digital signature. As long as online payments are cleared and
settled through the existing clearing  and settlement infrastructure that complies  with “best practice”,
such  as  the  Core  Principles  recently  published  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement
Systems4, the development of e-finance should have only a limited impact on payment system risks.
E-finance will continue to increase the demand for more efficient and robust  back-office operations.
This “straight-through” processing will not only reduce operational risks by minimising errors caused by
human intervention but also reduce settlement risks by shortening the settlement cycle.
Conclusion
I  will  end  by  saying  a  few  words  about  cooperation  between  the  private  and  the  public  sector  in
charting the way forward. I began by noting that we have much to learn about the development of e-
finance and its impact on the financial system. Some challenges are  novel,  while other may be old
issues in new guise. The net impact of conflicting forces will vary significantly by product, by player
and by market. While it is retail financial services that have been most radically transformed by the
internet to date, there may be a major impact on  the  business-to-business  segment  in  the  medium
term. The business models will also keep evolving with the enabling technologies (such as mobile data
communications or interactive TVs) bringing  about major change  in the nature of financial services.
But which business models will work, and which will fail, is difficult to know at this stage. How these
models will behave  under stress as well as during normal market  conditions  is  also  very  difficult  to
predict.
These uncertainties make it all the more important to have a regular and deep exchange of information
between central banks, supervisors and the private market players. Periodic reappraisal of the global
e-finance landscape and the main policy issues becomes therefore vital. Policies toward e-finance are
at present being carefully reviewed by Committees that meet in Basel such as the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision, the Committee on the Global Financial System and the Committee on Payment
and Settlement Systems.
And  as  I  mentioned,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  will  continue  to  play  a  role  in  ensuring  regular
exchange of views between those responsible for different aspects of e-finance. A major future task is
to clarify where there are gaps in the structure of official oversight. I would also like to encourage the
private sector to play a full part. We all have much to gain from the existing developments that are
under way, but only if we monitor and control the associated risks.
                                                     
4  Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems, Bank for
International Settlements, January 2001. The report is available on the BIS Website at www.bis.org.
BIS Review 5/2001
7
