M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul: Corporate challenges in the new millennium
Speech by M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand,  at the  Annual Business
Awards Gala Dinner of the Netherlands-Thai Chamber of Commerce held in Bangkok, 17 May 2001.
 Your Excellencies,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
First,  let  me  thank  Mr.  Jan  de  Kam,  President  of  the  Netherlands-Thai  Chamber  of  Commerce  for
inviting me to give the Keynote Address for this Annual Business Awards Gala Dinner, an occasion
that exemplifies the co-operative relationship between the Netherlands and Thailand that dated back
through time since 1602.
At the time, the Dutch East India Company had already begun trading with the southern part of Siam
through their main trading station in Batavia, Indonesia. Several  years later, it opened its Ayutthaya
trading post and became very influential during the reign of King Prasat-Thong. And indeed, one of the
best historical accounts of the Ayutthaya Dynasty  was written by  a director of the  Dutch  East  India
Company in Siam, Mr. Jeremias van Vliet.
Now in 2001, our co-operative relationship continues. Many prominent corporations of the Netherlands
remain their presence in Thailand, including Philips, Shell (Royal Dutch), Unilever, Heineken, and ABN
AMRO, only to name a few.
By  now,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the  tide  of  globalization  is  here  to  stay.  So,  we  must  heartily
embrace  the  process  and  take  the  best  opportunities  offered  by  the  integration  of  the  global
communities while limit the potential adverse consequences that come along with the process. To do
this, we must reexamine ourselves to review our weaknesses and our strengths. After all, there was
an old Chinese saying: "If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a
hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will also suffer a
defeat. If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle."
Thailand learned her first-hand lessons the hard  way  and  had opportunities to reexamine herself in
detail in the past couple years. Several weaknesses were identified. Prominent in the list is, of course,
we do not fully know our enemies. This has already been partially remedied by simply being part of the
game, staying competitive in the world market, and actively participating in the new knowledge-based
economy. Thai Ministry of Commerce now has 48 representative offices around the world. And in my
case,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  constantly  sends  our  staffs  to  work  at  other  public  and  private
organizations, both inside and outside the country.
But still, at the core of all of these, we need to make sure that our corporate sector gets back on its
feet.  Sustainable  growth  at  its  full  potential  requires  that  there  must  be  a  corporate  reform  that
emphasizes  flexible  and  transparent  organization,  sound  corporate  governance,  and  increased
economic value-added through moving up the technological ladders. By so doing, we will be ready for
the  intensified  battles  of  globalization.  And  these  will  be  our  Corporate  Challenges  in  the  New
Millennium.
So far, Thailand has made much progress in corporate restructuring. As of March 2001, more than
380,000  cases  of  debt  restructuring  have  been  completed,  involving  the  credit  outstanding  of  2.1
trillion baht. Yet, we must not stop there. The true challenge of corporate reform remains to be tackled,
should we want a vibrant and resilient corporate sector to emerge from the crisis. We have to move
beyond the financial side of the corporations, move beyond the balance sheet cleaning up, and start to
address the real issues that will determine the long-term competitiveness of the corporate sector and
thus consolidate the economic recovery achieved thus far.
I will not have time to cover all of the important issues of corporate reform, but let me mention a few.
Corporate governance will be one of the major themes of an on-going corporate reform around the
world  in the  years to come. By  good governance, I mean transparency, competitiveness, and good
BIS Review 41/2001
1
internal management, which include the relationship between the board of directors and managers as
well as issues such as shareholder rights, management oversight, and information disclosures.
To illustrate my points, let me use the  work  that  the  Bank  of Thailand  has  been  engaging  with  the
financial  institutions  during  the  past  couple  of  years.  We  have  provided  guidelines  to  improve
corporate governance within the Thai financial sector to complement the on-going change within the
corporate sector. Bank directors are now required to have no more than 3 directorships in other profit-
seeking  institutions,  so  that  they  will  have  more  time  to  carry  out  the  required  duties,  as  directors
should do. Before, 82 directors did not qualify, but 60 of those have now complied. And for the rest,
arrangements were made for them to observe the guideline.
To improve internal management, we ask major shareholders not to vote for the independent directors
so  that  minority  shareholders  are  better  represented  on  the  board.  Audit  committees  are  now  a
requirement  and  many  banks  now  have  nomination  and  compensation  committees  to  reduce  the
power of the major shareholders. Most also have risk management committee or, at least, asset and
liability management committee.
To further increase transparency, commercial banks now have to announce at the end of each month
their NPL level, penalties and fines imposed by the authorities, as well as the amount of their related
lending. By year-end, we will launch the Director's Handbook for the financial community and further
encouraging increased transparency of appointment and compensations.
Of  course,  we  cannot  change  others  without  changing  ourselves  at  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  Our
reorganization strategy focuses on four aspects, namely  organizational  structure  and  work  process,
human resource management, decision-making process, and database and information technology.
Our hierarchical structure has now been reduced from a total of seven layers to four. Authorities and
responsibilities are  being  further  delegated  toward  a  lower  level  to  the  operating  officers  in  charge.
This helps reduce the previously lengthy approval process and increase our flexibility.
New departments have been established to better cope with the rapidly changing economy and the
rising  information  need  of  the  organization.  These  include  the  Data  Management  Group,  the
Information  and  Public  Relation  Group,  the  Planning  Group  who  conducts  a  bank-wide  risk
assessment  as  well  as  a  new  Department  of  Risk  Management  and  Information  Technology
Examination, who monitor risk profile and risk management at the financial institutions.
In addition, our business processes are now more client-oriented with a new website, new voice-mail,
and new central point of contacts being offered as services to our stakeholders.
Both the Netherlands and Thailand are small open economies in the world market. To survive the tide
of globalization, we both need a well thought out strategies. We have to choose our battleground and
cooperate with friends around the world. To do this, local strength has to be further strengthened while
lessons and technologies must be learnt from others. Here, international co-operations through jointed
ventures, through foreign direct investment, or through international trade will play major roles in our
successes.
On this front, Thailand has done remarkably  well, registering  a  substantial  increase  in  net  inflow  of
foreign direct investment in the four  years following the crisis  despite the overall net capital outflow
due to debt repayment within the banking sector. Foreign direct investment (to the non-bank sector)
increased from an average around  1.4  billion  US  dollars during  1992-1996  to  3.4  billion  US  dollars
during 1997-2000.
Though much work is required on the corporate sector in the march toward modernization of the Thai
economy, the government and the central bank also have vital roles in maintaining stable economic
environment and providing the required infrastructures to allow the private sector to drive forward to
create wealth and prosperity.
Several long-term plans have been made in the past couple years.
On the macroeconomic front, the Bank of Thailand has adopted Inflation Targeting as a framework of
our monetary policy since May 2000. It may be a little too early to claim our success, but the results
thus  far  have  been  encouraging.  Long-term  interest  rates  of  the  interpolated  14-year  government
bonds were reduced from 8.3 percent  at the beginning of 2000 to currently  at 6.1 percent. Inflation
remained subdued and will stay within the target range during the next two years. The maturity of state
enterprise debentures offered in the market increased from a maximum of 7-year  in  1998  up  to  20
years in 2000, reflecting greater confidence on the long-term economic stability.
2
BIS Review 41/2001
On the financial system level, we are drafting a new Financial System Master Plan in cooperation with
stakeholders and representatives from other regulators within Thailand such as the SEC as well as the
Department of Insurance. This will provide a new and vibrant financial system whose survival will be
judged  by  the  value  added  it  creates  and  delivers  to  the  clients.  And  these  will  ensure  adequate
provision of financial services as required by the new economic environment.
As for the current economic policy, we are not yet out of the crisis. The economy recovered from a
10.8  percent  contraction  in  1998  and  posed  a  4.2  percent  and  4.3  percent  in  1999  and  2000,
respectively. Nevertheless, the global slowdown, particularly from our main trading partners such as
the US and Japan  who  account for roughly  35  percent of our exports,  have complicated our tasks.
Here,  it  is  the  lack  of  confidence  in  the  overall  economic  conditions  that  is  the  main  problem  that
prevents the resumption of business lending.
Earlier this week, the government announced its plans to put in place additional fiscal stimulus for the
fiscal year 2002, as well as programs to stimulate domestic spending. These include new measures to
utilize  excess  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector  to  further  enhance  economic  activities,  to  increase
investment  through  a  matching  fund,  as  well  as  to  retrain  the  workforce.  These  should  provide  the
much-needed economic stimulus to the corporate sector.
Prosperity of our nations rests on the hard work of the corporations, for what really matters in the long
run  is  your  productivity.  Corporates  must  strive  to  improve  their  competitiveness,  increase  their
economic value added, move up the technological ladders, and stay innovative. All of these cannot be
achieved without true corporate reform.
For  those  of  you  who  love  to  play  soccer,  good  government  policies  are  like  good  players  in  the
backfield. We can help defend the goalie – the stability of the country; send the ball up to you who are
in the front field. But, if you do not try hard to score on the behalf of our countries, then who will?
So, I wish to congratulate those who win the award today. They have set the examples of what the
Netherlands and Thailand need in order to prosper in the new millennium.
Thank you for your attention..
BIS Review 41/2001
3
