Lars Heikensten: On clarity and flexibility
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  Center  for
Business and Policy Studies (SNS) seminar held in Stockholm on 9 May 2001.
 Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  I  welcome  this  opportunity  for  a  fundamental  discussion  on  the  way
monetary policy is formulated.
The background to today's discussion consists of a number of contributions to the debate in which it
has been asserted in somewhat differing ways that the way we have chosen to formulate monetary
policy  is  not  sufficiently  flexible.  Our  critics  are  of  the  opinion  that  by  tying  ourselves  down  to  an
inflation target of 2 per cent we risk allowing unacceptably high domestic inflation. And that we risk
strengthening "bubbles" in asset prices. It has also sometimes been intimated, in so many words, that
the  way  we  have  chosen  to  formulate  policy  is  one  explanation  for  the  very  weak  exchange  rate.
Furthermore, in this debate, it has  also  been suggested  that  we should  adopt less  specific  inflation
targets,  similar  to  those  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  its  American  counterpart  –  The
Federal Reserve.
The debate has arisen primarily in three different contexts. How deregulation should be handled, to
what  extent  asset  prices  should  be  taken  into  account,  and  the  role  the  krona  has  to  play  in  this
analysis.
The mainstay of my argument is that there are no simple solutions to any of these problems. What is
needed  is  an  empirical  assessment  from  case  to  case.  I  think  that  monetary  policy  does  have  the
flexibility needed to deal with the problems with which we are faced. At the same time, clarity in the
formulation of objectives brings advantages.
The basis of the way in which the Riksbank evaluates the future path of inflation and makes decisions
on the repo rate is the guiding rule, which we have followed for a number of years. According to this
simple rule, policy is based on an inflation forecast with a horizon of several years. If, in one or two
years' time, inflation exceeds the target, we have said that there is normally a case for raising interest
rates and vice versa. But there can be reasons for deviating from this rule. Some of these reasons are
given  in  the  clarification  issued  by  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  when  it  took  office.  Other
reasons have been presented in various speeches.1
Perhaps I should also say right at the beginning that what I am going to say today is nothing new. I
have presented the same message in varying forms in a number of speeches for several years.2 It is,
however,  important  to  emphasise  that  in  practice  there  are  seldom  any  straight  answers  when
decisions have to be taken on the repo rate. It is often possible to come to different conclusions based
on  convincing  arguments,  even  when  one  has  the  ambition  of  keeping  to  a  simple  and  clear  rule.
Diligent observers reading the minutes of the Executive Board meetings have also been able to see
that assessments have varied somewhat between the different members of the Executive Board.
Deregulation
1.
The first question concerns how monetary policy should deal with the effects on inflation caused by
deregulation  and  by  other  changes  in  price  developments,  which  can  be  considered  to  be  of  a
temporary nature. The background to this debate was that during the latter part of the 1990s and also
during last year, Sweden had a very low inflation rate. This was partly the result of deregulation and
increased international competition. Added to this was the fact that import prices fell strongly in  the
wake of the Asian crisis. The question is, therefore, whether deregulation hid excess inflation in other
areas, and whether monetary policy was too passive.
This is not a simple question to answer, either in practice or in theory. The effects of deregulation and
other structural changes on inflation are difficult to  assess in retrospect. Nevertheless the Riksbank
                                                     
1  Minutes of the Executive Board meeting on 4 February 1999. The clarification is also presented in Heikensten, L. (1999),
The Riksbank's inflation target - clarifications and evaluation, Quarterly Review 1, Sveriges Riksbank.
2  Heikensten, L. Six monetary policy issues. Speech at Umeå School of Business and Economics, 7 November 2000.
BIS Review 38/2001
1
must make assessments, which are presented in its Inflation Reports. In Sweden we have had several
deregulations, including those in the taxi industry, domestic air travel and dental care, which have not
caused  any  substantial  drop  in  prices.  Other  deregulations,  including  those  in  the  electricity  and
telephone markets, have had larger moderating effects on prices than expected.
The  difficulties  do  not  only  involve  evaluating  the  effects  on  inflation  of  each  single  deregulation  or
every new step in internationalisation. They also concern the more principal question of to what extent
this type of effect on inflation should be accepted. Where should one draw the line between a relative
price change, which leads to such inflationary effects that a monetary policy reaction is motivated, and
a  change  which  does  not  require  any  such  reaction?  Presumably,  today's  increased  competition  is
only part of the whole picture of developments, in the same way that tax increases were during the
1970s  and  1980s.  At  that  time,  not  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  tax  increases  were  part  of  the
inflation process was a considerable policy mistake. In the same way one can ask whether the effects
of deregulation and other effects of international competition should really be taken into account today.
There are fundamental arguments against the idea of discounting considerable aggregates of goods
that have been hit by price falls. What central banks should be trying to do is to stabilise general price
levels and not to counteract changes in relative prices. This is to do with the fact that it is general price
levels that can be influenced by monetary policy, and not the prices of items such as meat or nails.
This is also to do with the fact that the positive effects of stable monetary value manifest themselves
precisely because the players in the economy can rely on purchasing power which is not undermined.
At  the  same  time  the  Riksbank  has,  in  various  contexts,  maintained  that  there  can  be  reasons  for
ignoring effects on inflation which are thought to be temporary. The reason for this is that it is not often
possible  to  influence  inflation  quickly  enough  to  counteract  transitional  price  impulses  without  this
leading to larger real disruptions. We have said, however, that we shall give as clear an account as
possible of what the temporary effects are and how we deal with them.
When  examining  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy  in  situations  involving  considerable  price-
moderating  effects,  it  can  also  be  a  good  idea  to  give  some  reflection  to  the  time  perspective  of
monetary policy. One possibility is that the visible effects ebb away quickly, even though they occur
beyond the normal policy horizon. In that case, presumably, one should be careful not to stimulate the
economy too much. The opposite would apply if inflation were forced up strongly by some effect which
could be expected to dissipate beyond the 2-year horizon.
This is obviously a difficult question of judgement. Should a forecast change in prices be considered to
be temporary or not? Is there a future risk of inflation rising or falling rapidly?
Asset prices
2.
The  next  question  concerns  the  importance  of  asset  prices  as  regards  the  formation  of  monetary
policy. Asset prices are not included in the inflation index, which we normally try to stabilise.It is not
controversial to say that supply price trends should influence monetary policy to the extent that they
are part of the inflationary process. Asset prices can be a leading indicator of price developments in
other areas. They can reflect confidence in the future, both by households and by companies and thus
affect  inflation  by  influencing  demand.  Household  consumption  is  also  dependent  on  wealth,  which
means that property and share prices are important when predicting inflation. Share prices can also be
a  leading  indicator  for  industrial  production  and  investment.  Developments  in  the  stock  market
influence the will to invest.
With the guidelines followed by the Riksbank, the question arises as to the significance of asset prices
on inflation, primarily in the time perspective on which we focus, i.e. one to two years ahead. But it can
also happen that asset prices are judged not to have such a significant impact in this time perspective,
but to have an impact if one looks further ahead. For example, should inflation in two or three years'
time be thought to be higher than desirable if it results from various factors driving up asset prices at
the current time? If so, presumably this should be supported by other central inflation indicators, such
as the overall utilisation of resources in the economy. If one is sufficiently convinced about this, there
is,  as  I  see  it,  an  argument  for  taking  action.  But  precisely  as  with  the  previous  case  involving
deregulations,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  good  case  for  deviating  from  the  normal  rule.  It  is  also
necessary to make clear what one stands to gain by acting now.
This leads me to the question of what approach central banks should take to developments in asset
prices which are not thought to immediately endanger price stability, but which risk leading to financial
2
BIS Review 38/2001
imbalances or real imbalances. There is no consensus on this in the academic literature. The prospect
of intervening immediately poses the next question: how can we know if an asset is  over-valued or
not?  If  one  does  decide  to  act,  a  third  question  is  raised:  how  can  one  burst  the  "bubble"  in  an
organised  way?  Listing  these  problems  is  usually  sufficient  to  make  many  of  my  colleagues  in  the
central bank world come to the conclusion that monetary policy should not be used to try to stabilise
asset prices.
My own opinion on this question is, however, somewhat different. In any case, it is reasonable to put
the  argument  in  a  larger  perspective.  Apart  from  price  stability,  the  Riksbank  has  the  objective  of
promoting  an  efficient  and  stable  payment  system.  Also,  as  long  as  our  primary  objectives  are  not
threatened, we should do what we can to support other objectives of economic policy. These include
favourable economic growth, high employment, etc. It means that we should conduct monetary policy
in such a way that we do not cause unnecessary fluctuations in production and employment.
In  practice  this  again  comes  down  to  difficult  empirical  questions  which  need  to  be  weighed  up
carefully. If we see that financial imbalances are building up, and come to the conclusion that these
either threaten the security of the payment system or risk leading to an abrupt real adjustment in the
future, with negative consequences for economic growth or employment, we then have, in principle, a
motive for taking action with the interest rate. Whether the knowledge that we can act diminishes the
risk of "bubbles", is a different question, but it is a link in the chain of argument which strengthens the
case for monetary-political activism.
Another thing is that this is naturally not a simple decision to take in any given situation. There are also
possibilities  of  working  with  other  instruments,  for  example,  capital  requirements  on  financial
institutions, supervision, etc. Our Financial Stability Reports are intended to play a role in this context.
They  should  bring  problems  of  this  sort  into  the  open,  partly  with  the  intention  of  attempting  to
contribute to improvements on a voluntary basis. In these context there are reasons to remind that it is
normally the case that financial crises are caused by increases in house and property prices rather
than increases in share prices.
The actions of the Riksbank should also be put into proportion. The fact that prices on the Swedish
stock exchange have both risen and fallen more strongly than many other stock markets has little to
do  with  Swedish  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  the  Riksbank  could  have  raised  interest  rates  during
1998  and  1999  in  order  to  dampen  the  effects  of  share  price  increases.  But  I  have  difficulty  in
believing that increases within reasonable limits would have had any notable effect on the share prices
of  IT  companies  and  telecom  companies.  The  Riksbank  is  certainly  an  important  institution.  But
sometimes  there  can  be  reasons  to  emphasise  the  limits  of  our  effectiveness.  To  sum  up,  the
conclusion  is  the  same  as  in  the  previous  section.  Under  certain  conditions  it  is  quite  possible  to
deviate from the normal guidelines. For example, as regards taking care of price developments in the
long-term, or financial stability, or real stability. But the arguments should be good ones.
The exchange rate
3.
Now, some words about the importance of the exchange rate as regards our view of monetary policy.
In  this  area,  opinions  have  changed  a  lot  within  the  Riksbank  after  the  first  years  with  an  inflation
target.
According to the textbooks, exchange rates are governed, to a large extent, by differences in present
and future monetary policies between different countries. In principle, by raising and lowering the repo
rate you can control the exchange rate. This affects import prices directly and indirectly, with a certain
lag. The same applies to demand and to general price trends.
The conclusion has, however, been drawn many times during the last decade that the world is not as
simple as this. One recent example is from 1998 to 1999. It is hard to believe that the weakening of
the krona during the autumn of 1998, were effected in a larger extent of the interest-rate cuts which
were  made  at  that  time.  The  krona  strengthened  considerably  during  the  following  winter,  when
exchange rate differences, compared with the outside world, remained unchanged. The fact that the
krona has weakened during the past year can, of course, be to some extent due to monetary policy.
But stock market trends, fluctuations in expectations of growth and the outflow of portfolios have also
played their part. A reasonable conclusion is that short-term interest rates can have an effect on the
exchange rate, but that their importance varies quite a lot over time, and is dependent on many other
factors. These factors are not always as easy to identify, even after the event.
BIS Review 38/2001
3
One  comforting  factor  in  this  connection  is  that  the  link  between  exchange  rates  and  price  trends
seems  to  have  weakened  during  the  1990s.  At  any  rate,  this  is  the  picture  given  by  analyses  in
Sweden, the United Kingdom and Australia, for example. Despite periods of severe weakening of the
krona, price trends have  been restrained. However, no one  knows  whether  this  will  continue  in  the
future in exactly the same way.
Against this background, the Riksbank is primarily interested in the exchange rate in the same time
perspective  as  applies  to  inflation.  That  is,  one  to  two  years  ahead.  We  do  not  normally  react  to
exchange  rate  movements  in  a  shorter  perspective.  We  all  know  that  this  has  not  given  us  a
particularly stable krona, but as far as we can see, the krona has not fluctuated noticeably more than
other  currencies  during  the  last  five  or  six  years.  Nor  has  it  been  easy  to  make  good  forecasts
regarding the exchange rate. But it is difficult to see any really good alternative to this way of doing
things.  Experience  of  trying  actively  to  guide  the  exchange  rate  towards  some  given  level  has  not
been particularly promising.
In this context it is worth pointing out that the central bank which in many respects works most closely
to the way we do – The Bank of England – continually struggles with the opposite problem. That is, an
exchange rate which is too strong. This is one indication that it is not primarily the way monetary policy
is formulated which is the problem.
During the first years of floating exchange rates, the Riksbank used something called the  Monetary
Conditions Index (MCI). This was an attempt to show the combined effects of short-term interest rates
and the krona on inflation. The underlying thought was that if the krona strengthened, interest rates
could be lower and vice versa. This was something that the Index could only illustrate roughly. The
risk with such an index is that it can be interpreted too mechanically, as shown by experience from
New Zealand and elsewhere. When the exchange rate weakens it tends to be used as an argument
for  raising  the  interest  rate.  In  this  context,  MCI  is  a  very  good  example  of  the  risks  of  over-
simplification in monetary policy.
That  which  is  of  greatest  importance  as  regards  the  exchange  rate  is  precisely  the  same  as  with
deregulations and asset prices – to evaluate each situation in the context of our objectives and our
guiding principles. The important question is always why a certain movement in the exchange rate has
occurred. If we know – and that is not always the case – we can perhaps say something about how
long the movement might last. This can in turn guide us in how we use interest rates.
There  are  central  banks  which  now  and  again  have  to  devote  most  of  their  communication  to
discussing the latest movements on the foreign exchange market. This is not something we should try
to emulate. It is not the situation in which the Riksbank finds itself nowadays. But this has not always
been the case. It has taken us several years to become convinced that we should see the exchange
rate  primarily  as  one  of  several  inflation  indicators.  I  think  we  have  every  reason  to  keep  to  this
approach.
Closing comments
Finally, let me give some general reflections on clarity and flexibility.
It  is  sometimes  asserted,  with  quite  varying  overtones,  that  the  Riksbank  is  much  too  restricted  by
principles. We should act more pragmatically. This is maintained by those who think we should have a
higher interest rate and who point to the ECB variant of pragmatism, as well as by those who think the
interest rate should be lower and who see the Fed's pragmatism as their ideal. This is a debate which
in essence is based on misunderstandings. The constraints within which the Riksbank works, allow a
monetary  policy  which  is  both  flexible  and  pragmatic.  We  can  certainly  extend  our  target  horizon,
monitor risks of problems in the financial sector or act early in order to avoid major subsidence in the
economy  further  ahead.  But  this  places  requirements  on  us  to  motivate  our  actions  clearly  and
substantially.
It is, therefore, in this context – by setting very high standards as regards clarity and openness – that
we beg to differ.
In essence, I think that demands made on us that we should be more pragmatic in some general way
– and not keep to our way of reasoning with a target, with guidelines, etc. – are meaningless. Less
clear  principles  for  policy  in  combination  with  reduced  transparency  regarding,  for  example,  the
reasons for making decisions, will hardly lead to a policy which will be more successful in the future.
Many years' experience in the vicinity of economic policymakers suggests to me that the opposite is
4
BIS Review 38/2001
more probable. Among the most important things one can do in this type of work is to try to build up
clear processes which contribute to decision data, based on good economic analyses, being produced
in a systematic way. And that this decision data is subjected to as wide an examination as possible.
I am convinced that our ambition to be as clear and open as possible has served us well. Starting with
a numerical, symmetric objective and  a guiding rule, in the  way  that  we  have  done,  we  have  been
forced to think through every question with which we have been confronted in a more precise manner.
This has resulted in our gradually increasing our understanding in a way which I think would hardly
have been possible otherwise. Certainly it is not yet over, and in this context, future developments will
place new demands on us and impose further intensification and exactitudes.
There is also a connection between transparency in relation to the outside world on the one hand, and
internal work on the other. In getting rid of secrecy we were able to introduce a more realistic debate
on monetary policy. This has allowed sharper and more specific criticism from outside, something on
which we thrive.
In  addition,  I  think  that  decision  making  should  be  made  in  a  way  which  contributes  to  insight  and
which gives good possibilities for evaluation and requires responsibility. I think that this is something
the  Swedish  people  should  expect  from  an  institution  which  has  been  given  such  a  strong  and
independent position as the Riksbank now enjoys.
BIS Review 38/2001
5
