Bank of Japan’s April report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, 16 April 2001.
 The Bank’s view2
Adjustments in economic activities have been under way, as production is declining reflecting a fall in
exports.
With  regard  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  increasing.  The  recovery  in  private
consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole,  but  there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some
indicators. Housing investment is declining slightly. On the other hand, public investment is starting an
upturn.
While  domestic  demand  remains  steady,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  are  falling
rapidly reflecting a sharp slowdown in overseas economies such as in the U.S. and East Asia. Mainly
due to these developments, industrial production is declining more sharply, and excessive inventories
of electronic parts and some materials are building up. The pace of improvement in corporate profits
seems  to  be  slowing  significantly  as  exports  and  production  are  recently  declining,  and  business
sentiment  of  firms  are  worsening  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  industries.  Income  conditions  of
households  have  not  yet  deteriorated  but  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  production  are  starting  to  be
observed in new job offers and overtime working hours.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  expected  to  continue  increasing  for  the  time  being.  Net
exports, however, are likely to continue decreasing for a while, reflecting the ongoing adjustments in
overseas economies. Leading indicators suggest that business fixed investment is likely to peak out
gradually, although  the  implementation of a backlog of orders is expected  to  sustain  investment.  In
addition, the need for inventory adjustments, although not to a large extent, is intensifying for some
goods. Thus, industrial production is expected to follow a declining trend.  In these circumstances, the
increase  in  corporate  profits  is  likely  to  be  subdued,  and  recoveries  in  household  income  and
consumption are projected to be sluggish.
Overall, the adjustments are expected to continue for some time, mainly in production. Meanwhile, it is
generally thought that overseas economies, particularly the U.S., will follow a gradual recovery trend
from  the  latter  half  of  2001.  In  this  case,  helped  also  by  the  depreciation  of  the  yen,  exports  are
expected to underpin the economy once again. However, attention should still be paid to the possibility
of a prolonged deceleration of overseas economies and risks of a negative impact on the economy
induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and  domestic  capital  markets  via  corporate  and  household
confidence.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, mainly reflecting the depreciation of the yen. Domestic
wholesale prices are declining mainly due to the decrease in prices of electrical machinery. Consumer
prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to the decline in prices  of imported products and their
substitutes. Corporate service prices are falling slowly.
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the recent yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressure on prices. However, with the ongoing adjustments, the balance between supply and demand
in the domestic market is likely to exert downward pressure on prices. In addition, the declining trend
of machinery prices caused by technological innovations, the decrease in prices of consumer goods
arising from the streamlining of distribution channels, and the reduction  in  communications  charges
aided by deregulation will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are expected to be
weak for the time being. Moreover,  given the high  degree of uncertainty  regarding  future  economic
                                                     
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
April 12 and 13, 2001.
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on April 12 and 13 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 30/2001
1
developments, the possibility that weak demand will intensify downward pressures on prices warrants
careful monitoring.
In  the  financial  market,  the  overnight  call  rate  has  declined  reflecting  the  increase  in  the  current-
account balance at the Bank of Japan to around 5 trillion yen, following the decision at the Monetary
Policy  Meeting  held  on  March  19  to  adopt  new  procedures  for  money  market  operations,  and  is
currently moving around zero percent.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  declining  further  mainly  due  to  the  monetary  easing  by  the
Bank. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  increased  to  1.4-1.5  percent.  The  yield  spreads  between
private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds are mostly unchanged
or expanding somewhat.
Stock prices are rising reflecting the above-mentioned monetary easing and expectations toward the
progress in disposal of non-performing bank assets.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen has depreciated and is currently being traded in the range of
123-126 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  There  seem  to  be  no
significant changes  in firms’ perception on  the  lending  attitude of financial  institutions and the fund-
raising conditions of firms in the markets for such instruments as corporate bonds and CP.
On the other hand, credit demand of private firms continues to lack momentum as corporate demand
for external funds  is subdued,  since  firms’  cash  flow  is  at  a  high  level.  Moreover,  firms  continue  to
reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result, credit demand in
the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. The amount outstanding
of  corporate  bonds  issued  continues  to  be  above  the  previous  year’s  level  but  the  growth  rate  is
slowing somewhat. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of CP issued remains at a high level.
Recently, the growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) is increasing reflecting the  inflow from  postal
savings.
Funding  costs  for  firms  continue  to  decline  as  both  short-  and  long-term  prime  lending  rates  were
lowered, reflecting the decrease in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy. For the time being, attention should be paid to the effects of the additional
monetary easing measures taken by the Bank, while careful monitoring is still required for the effects
of stock price developments on the behavior of financial institutions and the fund-raising conditions of
firms.
2
BIS Review 30/2001
