Ian Macfarlane: The economy and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Ian Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic Society of
Australia (Victorian Branch), Melbourne, 10 April 2001.
 Introduction
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Melbourne  speaking  to  the  Economic  Society  again  at  this  very
interesting  time  in  the  evolution  of  the  world  economy,  the  Australian  economy  and  our  monetary
policy. With so much happening, I trust you will find what I have to say about our current economic
circumstances and monetary policy of interest.
There has certainly been a remarkable change over the past four or five months in virtually everyone’s
view of  the  economic  outlook.  I  think  the  biggest  change  is  at  the  global  level,  where  forecasts  for
economic growth in major countries have been lowered. The most important economy, and the one
that has been leading this reassessment, is the United States. But Japan has relapsed, and the rest of
Asia is also feeling some chill trade winds. The process of monetary policy easing that began in the
United  States  in  early  January  has  now  spread  to  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  New  Zealand,
Switzerland,  Japan,  many  other  Asian  economies,  and,  of  course,  Australia.  The  Euro  area  is  the
exception.  In  a  medium-term  sense,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  after  such  a  long  global
expansion, some aspects of the business cycle are reasserting themselves, or that developments in
the US economy are playing such a leading role and attracting so much attention.
As always, the evolution of the international business cycle and international financial markets has a
major bearing on economic developments in  Australia and therefore for  Australian  monetary  policy.
But  there  have  been  some  very  unusual  developments  in  Australia  which  call  for  explanation,  and
which  also  have  had  implications  for  our  monetary  policy.  Before  returning  to  the  bigger  picture,  I
would like to spend some time on these unusual developments.
Output developments in Australia
I have frequently said that under the inflation targeting approach to monetary policy, our aim was to
maximise the length of the economic expansion and, as a corollary, to delay and minimise the severity
of any downturn. Over the past decade, monetary policy, helped by other policies, has been relatively
successful in this endeavour in that the current expansion has been longer than its predecessors in
the 1970s and the 1980s. And when I last spoke publicly on this subject towards the end of last year, I
expected  this  state  of  affairs  to  continue.  Like  virtually  everyone  else  who  follows  economic
developments in Australia, I was surprised and disappointed to learn what the national accounts had
to say about our growth performance in the second half of 2000.
The  grounds  for  optimism  about  our  growth  prospects,  which  were  shared  by  most  private  sector
forecasters, have been spelled out on a number of occasions, but let me recap briefly:
• 
the Australian economy had strong momentum — it had been growing at about 4½ per cent
for a number of years, yet it had not built up any of the imbalances that are common late in
an expansion;
inflation, although rising slightly, was moderate, as was the growth of wages;
asset  prices,  although  on  a  rising  trend,  were  not  obviously  overheated  and  the  balance
sheets of the corporate and financial sectors were in good shape;
a similar situation applied to physical investment, which meant the risk of excess capacity
developing was minimal;
the current account of the balance of payments was being reduced under the influence  of
rapid export growth;
   BIS Review 29/2001
1
  the  fiscal  impact  of  the  various  tax  measures  associated  with  the  introduction  of  the  GST
was expansionary by all the conventional measures; and
although monetary policy had been tightened, the level of real interest rates was not high by
historical standards, credit was easily available, and the exchange rate had fallen to a point
where it was very competitive.
Of course, there were some worrying signs, but they seemed less significant than the factors listed
above.  Households  in  particular  had  taken  on  a  lot  of  debt  by  their  past  standards,  though  not  by
international  standards;  they  were  also  having  to  cope  with  higher  oil  prices.  There  were  a  few
rumblings from falls in the US share market which had been going on since March 2000 but, other
than that, the mood in the United States was still confident. Business surveys showed substantial falls
in confidence in the second half of 2000, just as they had in 1998, and employment fell for a time, but
these  things  were  consistent  with  a  slowdown,  not  a  contraction.  There  was  also  the  inevitable
uncertainty surrounding the GST and the Sydney Olympics.
What happened and why?
So the question is: Why was there such a sudden reversal in the second half of the year, particularly
the December quarter? Economies as well balanced as the Australian economy was at mid-2000 do
not just run out of steam: there has to be a reason, or perhaps several reasons.
I  think  it  is  now  generally  recognised  that  there  was  one  overwhelming  reason  for  the  change  in
direction. The feature of the national accounts that leaps out is the extraordinary role of house-building
in explaining the weakness of GDP. This was surprising in one sense, because house-building only
accounts for 5 per cent of the economy. But its decline in the second half of 2000 was so pronounced
that it meant that the figure for the total economy showed a decline of 0.4 per cent at an annual rate. If
we take out house-building and look at how the other 95 per cent of GDP performed, we see that it
rose at an annual rate of over 4 per cent. This is much the same as its rate of growth in the previous
year. Now I do not want to suggest that there was no slowing in some other sectors of the economy,
but if it was not for the extraordinary behaviour of house-building, the story would be in line with most
observers’ previous expectations. Similarly, the behaviour of aggregate employment in the second half
of  2000  can  largely  be  explained  by  the  construction  sector  and  those  parts  of  manufacturing
supplying it.
Table 1: Growth rates
Four quarters to
June 2000
4.9
3.8
Two quarters to
December 2000
(Annual rate)
-0.4
4.3
GDP
GDP
excluding
house-
building
Why did house-building have this extraordinary pattern? I do not think there is anyone who doubts that
it  was  due  to  the  bringing  forward  of  house-building  pre  1  July  2000  to  beat  the  GST,  and  the
subsequent  dearth  of  house-building  in  following  quarters.  We  all  knew  this  transition  effect  was
occurring, and our forecasts showed substantial falls in house-building in the second half of 2000, but
not falls big enough to outweigh everything else that was going on in the economy. The size of these
falls  was  truly  outside  the  range  of  previous  recorded  experience,  and  that  is  always  difficult  to
forecast.  Incidentally,  similar  large  shifts  in  expenditure  on  housing  did  not  happen  in  the  other
countries we had looked at that introduced GST (see Diagram 1).
2
BIS Review 29/2001
Diagram 1
Let me make a disclaimer before I go any further, lest anyone think I am trying to blacken the name of
the GST and imply it was all a horrible mistake. I have always thought that a GST is a good thing for
the economy, principally because it could take some of the weight off the high marginal tax rates on
middle incomes in Australia. I still do support it and note that it will still form an important part of the
Australian tax system beyond the next  election. My  only  point  is that  when making a major reform,
such  as  a  tax  reform,  the  transition  effects  associated  with  implementing  such  a  large  change  are
nearly always unpredictable and cause short-term dislocation. But that is not a reason not to do them,
otherwise we would never get any reform.
Monetary policy
I will now turn to monetary policy. Since early February, the Reserve Bank has reduced the overnight
cash  rate  by  125  basis  points  to  5  per  cent.  A  number  of  people  have  pointed  out  that  this  is  an
uncharacteristically large reduction over such a relatively short period of time. Why have we seen the
need for such a change?
My  response  revolves  around  two  points.  First,  even  though  the  outlook  for  the  economy  remains
positive,  the  risks  on  the  downside  have  increased  this  year.  Second,  the  continuing  good  inflation
performance of the economy provides scope for the Bank to be pro-active in trying to minimise these
risks.
Let me begin with the risks. The principal circumstance that has changed in recent months has been
international,  not  domestic.  All  countries,  at  about  the  turn  of  the  year,  started  to  revise  down  their
expectations  relatively  quickly  for  the  year  ahead.  The  reductions  in  forecasts  for  growth  were  not
drastic,  but  they  applied  to  most  countries,  and  hence  to  the  world  economy  in  aggregate.  The
reassessment  was  centred  on  the  United  States,  with  Japan  and  other  parts  of  Asia  prominent.  It
cannot be denied that the fall in share prices in the United States, which was largely matched by falls
in European and Asian exchanges, played a significant role in this reassessment, just as their earlier
buoyancy had held up economic activity. As a result of the reassessment, the year 2001 so far has
been  one  of  monetary  policy  easings  around  the  world,  just  as  its  predecessor  had  been  one  of
monetary policy tightenings.
The  reduction  in  forecasts  for  world  growth  is  not  alarming  —  for  example,  the  IMF  is  forecasting
growth of 3.4 per cent in 2001, compared with growth of 4.8 per cent in 2000. But forecasts are still
probably being revised down and the balance of risks has definitely shifted to worries about a larger
downturn. This is seen most clearly in the capital markets, where investors are moving out of equities
into  bonds,  and  some  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  their  lending  behaviour.  On  the  other
hand, labour markets around the world have so far shown very little deterioration.
The second risk relates to the domestic situation. I have already explained that the major change to
our circumstances was that we now needed to factor in the 2.2 percentage point subtraction from GDP
that was caused by the fall in housing in the second half of last year. Why should this be important if it
BIS Review 29/2001
3
has  already  happened?  Indeed,  you  could  make  a  case  to  say  that  if  the  world  economy  had
continued to grow at the same pace that it did in 2000, the housing effect would have  been purely
transitory, even if it was much bigger than we or anyone else expected. But the world economy has
slowed, which makes this reasoning somewhat academic. It is unlikely that such a large contraction in
housing, and attendant falls in demand for those industries supplying the housing sector, could occur
without some wider ramifications. I pointed out in my testimony to Parliament in December last year
that I thought the contraction in housing (even though I did not know how big it was at the time) was
the major reason for the fall in business confidence. We saw a similar setback to expectations recently
when consumer confidence, which had held at above average  levels until  March, fell sharply in the
latest survey, which unfortunately was taken a few days after the release of the December accounts
and was heavily influenced by the publicity surrounding it.
The other domestic change that influenced our thinking on monetary policy was the lower outlook for
inflation. The December quarter CPI followed the pattern set in the September quarter in showing a
level of inflation well below our expectation, and implied that our forecasts for inflation would need to
be revised downwards.
As I have noted earlier, this gave scope for monetary policy to be eased more quickly than would have
been possible on earlier occasions. Over most of the past 30 years, the classic dilemma for monetary
policy was that, even when there was a need to ease on domestic activity grounds, there were often
still strong inflationary pressures which cautioned against doing so. One of the many benefits of a low
inflation environment is that it restores to monetary policy a degree of freedom that is denied in a high
inflation environment.
With inflation not imposing a constraint, it has been possible for the Bank to respond quickly to the
need for a significantly lower level of interest rates. That is, we needed a level of real interest rates
that was unambiguously expansionary, just as it had been in the period from mid 1997 to end 1999.
The actual mechanics of getting from one level to another is a secondary issue. Whether to move by
25 points or 50 points, whether to move between meetings or not, or whether to have a pause or not,
are essentially tactical issues related to market perception, rather than fundamental economic ones. It
is  the  medium-term  effect  of  the  level  of  real  interest  rates,  not  the  number  or  size  of  individual
changes, that matters for the development of the economy. So once we realised that a significantly
lower  level  was required,  our aim was to move there  as  quickly  as  was  practicable,  without  unduly
unsettling markets.
Where does this leave us?
We have traversed a very difficult period. We knew well before we entered it that the second half of
2000,  which  included  the  introduction  of  the  GST  and  the  Olympics,  was  going  to  be  difficult  to
forecast.  We  also  knew  that,  even  while  we  were  living  through  it,  it  was  difficult  to  assess
developments,  especially  as  we  had  the  added  complications  of  rising  oil  prices  and  a  falling
exchange rate. A great range of surprises was possible, but now that the period has passed, we know
what the surprise was, and it is now part of history. We also know  with reasonable confidence that
housing should pick up strongly through the remainder of the year.
Looking  at  the  broader  picture,  the  major  influence  on  our  outlook  is  the  world  economy  and,
inevitably, the biggest influence on this will be the US economy. Obviously, there is nothing we can do
to  influence  world  economic  developments,  but  what  we  need  to  try  to  do  is  to  foster  as  much
resilience in the Australian economy vis-à-vis the world economy as we can.
For a start, we can move to a stance more supportive of growth, and we have done so over recent
months with monetary policy, using the scope to do so provided by good inflation performance.
More fundamentally, we should have some resilience given that, in several respects, we have a better
starting point than the United States. We did not have the extent of share price appreciation over the
past couple of years that the United States had, and therefore we have not seen the unwinding of this
that  they  have  recently  experienced.  The  United  States  has  had  an  investment  boom  which  has
created  some  excess  capacity  in  some  sectors,  whereas  in  Australia  there  is  no  such  problem.  In
Australia the current account deficit has been falling, and is back at the low points seen over the past
20 years, whereas in the United States it is at a 20-year high. The Australian dollar is low, and hence
supporting  economic  activity,  whereas  the  US  dollar  is  high,  and  hence  dampening  US  growth
prospects.
4
BIS Review 29/2001
This inevitably brings me to the exchange rate. The behaviour of the Australian dollar over the past 15
months has been difficult to explain, and those attempting to do so have moved from explanation to
explanation as developments have changed. There has been no doubt, however, that over the past
month  much  of  the  fall  has  been  due  to  the  general  gloom  that  accompanied  the  release  of  the
December  quarter  accounts,  and  this  should  fade  as  they  are  put  into  perspective.  Of  course,  the
other explanation has been the strength of the US dollar, which is in itself a bigger puzzle than the
Australian dollar. We were told last year that the US dollar strength was due to the strength of the US
economy, the high returns from investing in US equities, and the rising interest rates. In 2001, all three
of these factors have gone into reverse, yet the US dollar is over 5 per cent higher than at the end of
last year. There is not much doubt that a lower US dollar would be better for the United States and the
world economy in general.
The fall in the Australian dollar has been, in my view, an overshoot. It is not something I look upon with
any comfort. But it is also something which we could not hope to prevent in the short term, short of
drastic measures which in our judgement  were not in  the  best  interests  of  the  economy,  especially
given  the  risks  to  growth  from  abroad.  At  its  present  level,  or  even  one  appreciably  higher,  the
Australian dollar confers a major competitive advantage to Australian producers and has contributed
to an exceptional performance by the traded sector. Although exports may not be able to keep up this
growth rate over the next 12 months, they should still help to underpin the economy.
Conclusion
To conclude, developments in the world economy obviously pose a risk to economic performance in
the near term. Since there is  little  we can do  to change that,  we must focus on managing our own
affairs in Australia in the best possible fashion. Monetary policy has been eased, in recognition of the
changing  circumstances,  and  should  prove  to  have  some  expansionary  influence  over  the  period
ahead.
Domestically, the major risk we face is that public confidence over-reacts to the fact that we are not
going to be doing as well as we did a year ago, or, somewhat perversely, to the lower exchange rate
itself.  But,  in  order  to  put  these  things  into  perspective,  we  should  remember  that  the  large  list  of
positive factors I gave above still applies — we still have strong export growth, sound balance sheets
in the corporate and financial sectors, asset markets which  are not overheated,  no over-capacity in
physical  investment,  low  inflation  and  macro-economic  policies  that  are  exerting  an  expansionary
influence on the economy.
BIS Review 29/2001
5
