Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank,  at  a  meeting  of  Sparebanken
Nord-Norge, Tromsø, 25 September 2001.
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation Summary and charts.
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the
Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 19 September.
 Norway’s  economic  policy  is  based  on  new  guidelines  for  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.  The  new
guidelines were published by the Government on 29 March 2001 in connection with the presentation
of the Government’s Long-Term Programme. The inflation target for monetary policy came into force
immediately. The guidelines for fiscal policy were discussed in the Storting in June and were approved
by a majority.
Monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent.
In general, the direct effects on consumer prices resulting from changes in interest rates, taxes, excise
duties and extraordinary temporary disturbances shall not be taken into account.
In  the  1990s,  monetary  policy  gradually  moved  further  away  from  the  fixed-exchange-rate  regime
which was practiced from 1986 to 1992.
Low and stable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to growth, prosperity and
income distribution. In the long term, monetary policy has little effect on the real economy.
Low and stable inflation can, however, provide fertile ground for stability and growth.  It reduces the
possibility of unsound investments and bubbles in the financial and property markets. Nominal stability
will also reduce the risk of sudden changes and shocks that may lead to cyclical turnarounds.
Historically,  economic  growth  has  generally  been  strong  in  periods  with  relatively  low  inflation  and
weak during periods with especially high inflation. Hence, during the last 20 years, real wage growth,
which over time reflects productivity trends, has been strongest when inflation was low. In the 1980s,
nominal wage growth was strong without a basis for this in the real economy. The result was inflation
and  weak  real  wage  growth.  In  the  1990s,  more  moderate  nominal  wage  increases  until  1998
coincided with strong real wage growth because inflation was low.
It takes considerable time before monetary policy has an impact. The effects of interest rate changes
are uncertain. The key rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook. If it
appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate
will be increased. If it appears that  inflation  will  be  lower than 2½ per cent  with unchanged  interest
rates, the interest rate will be reduced. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low,
as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high.
The expression "it appears that" refers to our best estimate of inflation two years ahead. Norges Bank
publishes its inflation projections in the Inflation Report three times a year (every four months). The
Inflation Reports include both a point estimate and an uncertainty interval around the projection. In the
most recent Inflation Report which was published in June, we believed that there was approximately a
75 per cent chance that inflation would be between 2 and 3 per cent in 2003. We also believed that
the probability that inflation would be higher than 2 ½ per cent was about the same as the probability
that it would be lower than 2 ½ per cent.
Growth forecasts for the global economy this year have been lowered substantially. Earlier, a decline
in  some  regions  has  often  been  counteracted  by  an  upswing  in  other  regions.  The  changes  now
appear  to  be  more  concurrent  than  in  1975,  1982  and  1991.  The  summer  months  have  brought  a
great  deal  of  bad  news  from  the  global  community.  After  the  tragic  events  on  11  September,  the
uncertainty is even greater than before.
Industrial  output  is declining  markedly  in  all  major  regions  in  the  world  economy.  The  situation  has
shifted rapidly in the US, following strong growth throughout most of the 1990s.
The  contagion  effect  from  the  US  to  Europe  has  been  more  pronounced  than  expected.  Channels
other  than  trade  have  probably  had  a  greater  impact  than  expected.  Expectations  can  be  affected
BIS Review 80/2001
1
quickly.  High  correlation  between  share  prices  in  different  countries  may  be  an  important  carrier  of
contagion. Enterprises  with worldwide  operations may be  another. The economic  indicators  show  a
clear slowdown in growth in Europe’s industrial output.
The effect on the Swedish economy has been severe, resulting in a record-low exchange rate. One
Swedish krone now costs approximately 80 Norwegian øre. This is 30 per cent less than 10 years ago.
Vulnerable  emerging  economies  with  high  government  debt  must  pay  very  high  interest  rates  to
borrow capital.
Many central banks have reduced interest rates, most recently 17 and 18 September. Interest rates
have been reduced because of the prospect of a downturn in each of these economies. Real interest
rates are low in many countries.
The inflation component that is driven by domestic wage and price increases is still high. Growth in
Norwegian  labour  costs  has  been  around  5-6  per  cent  in  recent  years.  This  is  1½  -  2  percentage
points higher than among our trading partners. The higher interest rate level in Norway reflects this
fact. At the moment, there is no clear indication of a marked slowdown in the Norwegian economy.
The price of oil remained high for a long time, despite the international downturn, but fell more than
USD  3  yesterday,  24  September.  The  price  of  aluminium  has  fallen  somewhat  but  is  still  high
compared with the average price in recent years. The year-on-year increase in the export of metals,
excluding iron and steel, was 0.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2001. The price of fresh salmon
remains at the same level as in the last half of the 1990s. Exports of fish and fish products increased
by 3.9 per cent from the second quarter of 2000 to the second quarter of 2001. Due to international
developments, the uncertainties and the downside risks are now greater for many export industries.
The krone has appreciated recently measured against our trading partners (trade-weighted exchange
rate index). This partly reflects more than 20 per cent appreciation against the Swedish krone since
spring 2000. Measured by the trade-weighted exchange rate index, the krone is now about 2 per cent
weaker than in 1990 and on a par with the level in 1994-95.
So far this year, the volume of traditional merchandise exports have increased more than in the same
period  last  year,  but  growth  is  levelling  off.  The  exposure  of  Norwegian  exports  in  the  ICT  sector,
where the international downturn has been most severe, is limited. Norway’s manufacturing output has
declined  somewhat  this  year,  but  less  than  in  other  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  Norwegian
manufacturing  industry  did  not  experience  the  upswing  in  1999  and  2000.  The  business  sentiment
indicator does not suggest a severe decline. The order situation is still satisfactory in many industries.
This does not necessarily mean that the turnaround will not occur in Norway as well. A sharp fall in
share  prices,  tighter  borrowing  terms  and  an  imbalance  in  international  credit  markets  may  quickly
affect  investment,  prices,  profitability  and  expectations.  So  far,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any
conclusions except that uncertainty has increased.
The Norwegian economy is operating at capacity limits and there are few if any available resources in
the  labour  market.  Unemployment  has  declined  throughout  the  country.  Unemployment  in  Western
Norway, which increased marginally last year, has returned to its previous level. Unemployment has
risen slightly again in Eastern Norway. This reflects lower employment in private services that may be
a result of a slight downturn in the ICT industries and retail trade.
The Government’s Long-Term programme for 2002-2005, which was approved by the Storting in June
2001,  states:  "Considerable  emphasis  must  be  placed  on  stabilising  fluctuations  in  the  economy  in
order  to  ensure  appropriate  capacity  utilisation  and  low  unemployment.  Petroleum  revenues  will
gradually  be  phased  into  the  economy,  approximately  in  step  with  the  expected  real  return  of  the
Petroleum Fund."
Fiscal policy will contribute to stimulating activity in the economy because of the increase in spending
of oil revenues. The new guidelines imply that the non-oil deficit will increase in the years ahead. This
will provide a substantial fiscal stimulus every year.
Summary
The tragic events in the US on 11 September will contribute to a further dampening of activity in the
American, Asian and European economies. It is too early to predict the long-term effects. Reactions in
financial  markets  have  been  pronounced.  Share  prices  have  fallen  sharply.  The  U.S.  dollar  has
depreciated. Currencies of other economies such as Sweden have depreciated.
2
BIS Review 80/2001
Central banks have ensured the smooth functioning of markets by supplying liquidity to the banking
system. Interest rates have been cut in the US, Canada, the euro area, Switzerland, Sweden, Hong
Kong, Taiwan, Denmark, Japan, the UK, New Zealand, Korea and Malaysia. These cuts will contribute
to mitigating the negative effects on demand, output and employment.
The  Norwegian  economy  is  characterised  by  high  capacity  utilisation  and  strong  cost  inflation.  The
mainland economy appears to be expanding approximately in line with growth in output potential. At
present, we do not have sufficient evidence to assert that international developments will change this
situation.  The  announced  increase  in  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  may  lead  to  a  more
expansionary  fiscal  stance  than  in  recent  years.  According  to  Norges  Bank’s  assessment,  with  an
unchanged interest rate ahead, the probability that inflation two  years ahead will be higher than 2½
per cent is the same as the probability that it will be lower.
BIS Review 80/2001
3
