Tony Latter: Just another financial centre – or is Hong Kong special?
Address  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the
Foreign Correspondents Club, Hong Kong, 25 April 2001.
 A quarter of a century ago many people in Hong Kong were seriously worried about the shrinkage of
our manufacturing industry. Other locations in the region were showing signs of becoming increasingly
competitive, and there was the emerging prospect of activity migrating across the Mainland border.
In retrospect, should we have been worried at all? Hong Kong's economy was performing well enough
overall, and the service sector was growing at the expense of manufacturing as part of what proved to
be a progressive and relatively painless process.
Today people express concern about loss of competitiveness in those very services which have been
ensuring our continuing prosperity in the intervening years. Back-office functions, which first migrated
from Central to Quarry Bay or Kowloon, are now moving to Guangdong - or maybe India or wherever.
Should we worry? What will fill the gap? Is Hong Kong so expensive a place that it has priced itself out
of range of any prospective business growth?
At the microeconomic level there will always be understandable and, especially in the social context,
justifiable concern for the individuals who face uncertainties or job losses as a result of restructuring
within the  economy.  But  at  the  macro  level  this  is  part  of  evolution.  The  economy  cannot  progress
without it. If we have faith in the operation of the market economy, the answer to the question whether
we should worry is "No, we shouldn't ". What we are witnessing is no more than the inexorable playout
of the process of comparative advantage - perhaps one of the most proven laws of economics.
Comparative advantage hinges on relative factor endowments and their productivity. Some of these
characteristics are, in large measure, static. Thus, for example, relative to other locations Hong Kong
has an abundance of deep water but a dearth of flat land. This, very obviously, yields us a strength in
port  facilities  over  agriculture.  Other  characteristics  evolve  dynamically,  such  as  our  relatively  well
educated  and  qualified  labour  force;  when  this  is  set  against  the  shortage  of  space,  it  is  hardly
surprising  that  Hong  Kong  should  specialise  more  in  providing  high  value-added  services  than  in
labour-intensive or space-hungry manufacturing.
As regards absolute cost levels, it is the high value added by members of the workforce in particular
sectors which generates and justifies their high pay. The fact that Hong Kong appears to be, overall, a
rather  expensive  place,  relative  to  the  majority  of  neighbouring  economies,  is  a  consequence  and
symptom of its success. As anyone can see by just looking around, this doesn't mean that we can no
longer win any business. But we can only afford to pay ourselves what we are worth. If costs go too
high and Hong Kong suffers an absolute loss of competitiveness (as opposed to there merely being
shifts in relativities between sectors), then an adjustment process kicks in to restore competitiveness.
Since we have a fixed exchange rate, this adjustment occurs through downward pressure on domestic
costs and prices. We have seen this process very clearly and effectively at work over the past three
years  or  so;  for  instance,  the  loss  of  competitiveness  inflicted  on  Hong  Kong  by  the  currency
depreciations elsewhere in the region in 1997 was made good largely through internal deflation within
the space of about 18 months.
At risk of my labouring the point, look at cities such as London, Paris, Zurich, Tokyo and New York. In
absolute terms they are expensive places, but they all generally thrive. The citizens don't hang their
heads in shame at being in a high cost and high earning environment. Indeed, many relish it. But none
of the businesses there can afford not to search continuously for greater control of costs, for higher
productivity, for new  products and markets,  and  so  on.  Competitive  pressure  may  be  intensified  by
globalisation and by the emergence of significant competition even from third world cities, where basic
costs are hugely lower, but the very survival of the wealthy cities has not been seen to be seriously
threatened on that score. Over a period of time there may be marked shifts in relative income levels
between different locations – hopefully as the living conditions of the poor advance more rapidly than
those of the rich, although sadly there has been less evidence of that than one might have wished for
– but there is no reason to expect the great cities of the world to sink out of sight. And if you add Hong
Kong to that list, you will see the point I am trying to make.
BIS Review 33/2001
1
I'm  not  sure  whether  anyone  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  accurately  predicted  how  important  a
contribution  the  financial  and  business  services  sectors  would  now  be  making  to  the  Hong  Kong
economy.  Looking  ahead,  I  am  definitely  reluctant  myself  to  make  any  prediction  about  the  mix  of
activity  twenty-five  years  from  now.  Ask  anyone  involved  in  financial  services  what  path  for  this
particular sector in the years ahead would be best for Hong Kong and he would probably answer that
continued expansion would of course be best. Ask the same question to a neutral economist and he
would probably decline to commit himself, saying only that the optimal strategy would be to allow the
forces of comparative advantage to play out. Whether that favours further development of the financial
sector, or of something completely different, who can tell?
I  am  often  asked  what  we  on  the  official  side,  or  more  particularly  in  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority,  plan  to  do  in  order  to  ensure  that  our  financial  sector  remains  competitive  and  growth-
orientated. I find myself torn between replying "Nothing at all" and "Everything possible". In fact both
would be correct in their own way.
"Nothing at all" seems appropriate if one is content to allow market forces and the inexorable working
of comparative advantage to fashion economic development. It is also consistent  with Hong  Kong's
style of non-intervention. Picking winners is not easy. The offer of sweeteners, first to one sector then
another, now to one class of customer then another, may, unless it can be very convincingly justified
by  thorough  cost-benefit  analysis,  be  at  best  a  zero-sum  game  and  at  worst  a  recipe  for  eventual
higher taxation, the burden of which ultimately falls on those least able to shift it away from themselves
- typically employees and consumers.
"Everything  possible"  seems  appropriate  in  the  context  of  our  role  in  encouraging  and  catalysing
innovation,  spearheading  collective  initiatives  in  cases  where  there  is  insufficient  incentive  for  any
single entity to launch them, building infrastructure, and so on.
In  this  latter  regard  I  think  that  Hong  Kong  can  take  a  certain  amount  of  pride  in  some  of  the
achievements in the financial sphere in recent years. In the interests of time let me mention only some
of the developments in systems infrastructure with which we in the HKMA have been involved:
• 
first,  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Moneymarkets  Unit  as  an  electronic  clearing  and
custodial  system  for  debt  instruments;  although  this  dates  back  to  1990,  the  service  has
been progressively enhanced and extended since then, including, most recently, the building
of linkages with similar systems in other centres in order to facilitate cross-border trading in
bonds and other debt securities;
second, the introduction of real-time gross settlement into the Hong Kong dollar inter-bank
payments system in 1996 – we were one of the first economies in the  world to adopt this
procedure, which is nowadays regarded as the global standard;
third, the launch last year of our US dollar payment system, which replicates in Hong Kong
for US dollars all the existing payment facilities available for HK dollars, with the addition of
real-time payment-versus-payment settlement of  foreign exchange deals between HKD and
USD – itself a world first for any currency pair.
  You  may  reasonably  ask  what  is  the  point  of  such  projects  as  these.  Broadly  speaking,  they  have
been directed at enhancing the efficiency of financial intermediation and reducing the associated risks.
This in turn should both contribute to the soundness of the banks and other financial institutions, and
benefit,  even  if  only  indirectly,  all  users  of  the  financial  system.  And  by  continuously  adapting  and
refining  its  systems  Hong  Kong  seeks  to  retain  its  attraction  as  an  international  centre.  In  none  of
these projects was any huge injection of public money necessary.
These  developments  also  illustrate  very  clearly  the  "can  do"  culture  of  Hong  Kong.  Most  were
executed in a fraction of the time that similar projects required, or are projected to require,  in other
centres.  For  instance,  from  start  to  finish  the  US  dollar  payments  system  took  only  about  twelve
months to implement. And this "can do" capability extends much more widely than the few examples in
the financial sector which I have mentioned.
There  are  many  characteristics  of  Hong  Kong  which  may  help  explain  the  strength  of  its  "can  do"
culture. Let me mention just four:
• 
One is the limited amount of red tape. I don't say "absence", but, even though the creep of
bureaucracy may not have been held entirely at bay, it is certainly less intrusive here than in
many other places.
2
BIS Review 33/2001
   Secondly,  geography  has  an  influence.  I  am  thinking  in  particular  of  the  physical
concentration  of  business  within  Hong  Kong  itself.  Remote  communication  has  not  yet
displaced human contact completely as the medium for doing business; indeed, face-to-face
contact  has  survived  much  more  extensively  than  some  had  predicted;  and,  to  the  extent
that it is necessary or desirable to get people round a table in order to expedite some project,
Hong Kong, because it is small, is one of the easiest places in which to do so.
A third factor supporting the "can do" culture is the general quality and spread of people who
are on tap to help get things done: Hong Kong has a good critical mass of expertise in all
areas of financial and related services. Of course, I am not deaf to the difficulties sometimes
expressed  about  finding  extra  people  at  a  particular  time  with  particular  skills,  but  this  is
almost inevitable in a growing economy. Even then, some relief is normally available through
drawing in temporary resources from outside Hong Kong if the occasion demands.
Finally I would cite the work ethic. People work for long hours and with much loyalty in Hong
Kong. Of course, this is not enough in itself. It is productivity that counts, but that is probably
where Hong Kong scores; I don't have the impression that many people are passing the day
gazing idly out of the window. The corollary of high productivity is that, as I noted earlier, by
international comparison a lot of people here receive high salaries, but they certainly  earn
them. Otherwise they would not hold onto their jobs.
There is of course a downside to this strong work ethic. Many people appear not to have much time
for  fun.  It  worries  me  if  people  say  they  cannot  afford  the  time  for  their  favourite  recreations  or
pastimes.  It  worries  me  when,  late  in  the  evening,  someone  jumps  up  from  the  dinner  table
immediately  after  the  last  mouthful,  saying  that  he  must  get  back  to  the  office.  But  perhaps  such
people regard work itself as sufficient fun.
So, when people ask what is it that has made Hong Kong a leading business and financial centre, I
would reply that it's not just the position in the Asian time-zone, or low taxes, or the legal framework, or
the English language, or the entrepot trade with the Mainland, or the Convention Centre, or the airport
with  its  excellent  international  connections,  or  the  MTR,  or  the  rugby  sevens,  or  the  hotels  and
restaurants, or the shops. It is of course all of those, but additionally, and arguably foremost, I would
emphasise the people and the work ethic, and the fact that in Hong Kong you can get the job done. It
is in  this respect –  and relating back to the title of my  talk  -  that  there  is  perhaps  something  really
special  about  Hong  Kong.  We  may  take  it  too  much  for  granted,  but  our  "can  do"  mentality  is
acknowledged  by  outsiders  as  something  special  and  is  a  crucial  component  of  Hong  Kong's
reputation as a business and financial centre. It is something which we should continue to cherish and
nurture, whether through facilitative economic policies or the educational system or whatever.
And so, as you battle against the incoming surge while you try to exit the MTR train (probably beneath
a poster  exhorting  courtesy);  as  you  are  almost  decapitated  entering  the  lift  by  the  person  with  his
finger permanently on the doors-close button; as you are tripped over by the ubiquitous Hong Kong
trolley being raced in and out of the pedestrian crowd; as your boss explains that, although vacation
leave is of course an entitlement, it would be rather inconsiderate of you actually to take any; as the
waiter throws you into a seat at Mr Wong's table, thrusts the napkin onto your lap and demands rather
than enquires whether you'd like a drink - all before you've had a chance to explain that it is not in fact
Mr Wong whom you have come to join; as the taxi appears deliberately to accelerate through the large
puddle right by where you are standing; as your lunch guest spends the entire meal fiddling with his
mobile phone, making it quite clear that he resents having been invited to a restaurant where he is not
allowed actually to talk into it; as you discover that the dignitary who has agreed to propose the toast
at your modest office-opening ceremony can in fact stay for only five minutes because he or she has
to hasten along to your main competitor's gala dinner; if you are feeling increasingly stressed by all of
this, just relax and console yourself that this is Hong Kong, and Hong Kong wouldn't be where it is if
people had never been in a hurry to get on with things.
BIS Review 33/2001
3
