Edgar  Meister:  How  should  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities  be
shared among the national functional regulators?
Lecture  by  Mr  Edgar  Meister,  Member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  held  at  the
Multinational Banking Seminar in New York, 9 June 2001.
 I
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Voltaire, the famous French philosopher, once said: "If you see a banker jump out of the window, jump
after him – there is sure to be profit in it". Well, having experienced the latest financial crises, I am not
entirely convinced that it would be always wise to follow Voltaire's advice. The topics of this seminar
perfectly illustrate the potential risk of this kind of “herding behaviour” and – not least – the challenges
for regulators and supervisors. I am delighted to have been given the opportunity of speaking here this
morning,  and  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  the  issue  of  how  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions
should, or could, be shared between national authorities. Naturally, I wish to go into the current debate
on this topic in Europe.
II
The design of regulatory and supervisory responsibilities is one of the most important matters affecting
the  future  course  of  financial  market  policy.  There  is,  however,  no  universally  valid  answer  to  the
question of how this should be done. The best way of organising supervision cannot be derived from
theory. That is why we can see many forms of supervisory organisation in international practice that
function  well.  This  diversity  in  the  design  of  supervision  is  not  surprising;  after  all,  the  supervisory
systems are, in each case, incorporated into their respective economic and legal structures and have
evolved over time.
However, it may also be said about supervision that "the most constant thing is change". That is why,
in the recent past, some countries – such as the United Kingdom – have radically reorganised their
supervision or are discussing changes, as in Austria, Ireland and Germany, for example.
Although there is no ready-made solution as to how responsibilities should be assigned in order to put
in place an effective and efficient supervisory structure, there are nevertheless a few requirements that
should be fulfilled.
 
The  supervisory  structure  should  be  geared  to  the  financial  market  structures.  In  other
words, due account has to be taken of developments on the markets, such as national and
international  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  the  emergence  of  ever  larger  business
enterprises.
The institutions in charge must have expert knowledge and experience in their special field,
they  need  an  appropriate  number  and  quality  of  staff  as  well  as  an  efficient  internal
organisational structure in order to make possible efficient and cost-effective supervision.
Supervisors should be in close proximity to those who are to be supervised, and at the same
time not under too much political influence.
If regulatory powers are shared among several institutions, there has to be a clear definition
of powers and responsibilities. An efficient structuring of the flow of information and of the
cooperation between the supervisory bodies involved is also important.
Harmonised supervisory rules as well as their consistent application in practice are essential
for creating a "level playing field" for the financial institutions in the different sectors.
    Here in the United States, the role played by the Federal Reserve in financial supervision is not only
well  recognised  but  regarded  as  indispensable.  In  Europe,  however,  that  role  is  hotly  debated.  In
addition  to  the  above-mentioned  general  requirements,  I  would  also  like  to  mention  some  aspects
which argue for central banks having a substantial involvement in supervision.
 
Owing  to  the  globalisation  of  financial  markets  and  the  accompanying  profound  structural
changes within individual banking systems, not only microprudential institutional supervision
BIS Review 53/2001
1
 but also looking at the implications for the financial system as a whole are becoming ever
more important.
In this context, central banks are particularly affected since a stable financial system is an
essential prerequisite of monetary policy. Combining the practical supervision of institutions
with the analysis of the stability of the financial system as a whole - "the marrying of micro-
and  macro-prudential  analysis"  –  as  the  General  Secretary  of  the  "Bank  for  International
Settlements",  Andrew Crockett, once put  it –  brings benefits for supervision and monetary
policy.
how quickly crucial information is available to those parties who need it,
how extensive that information is,
that the information is interpreted correctly
and that an appropriate set of instruents for countermeasures is available.
Effective  financial  market  supervision  relies  on  its  own  direct  access  to  the  relevant  information.
Especially when there is an impending crisis, the key factors are
 
 
 
 
For direct access to information, proximity both to the financial markets and to the institutions is an
advantage. Supervisors, who are active in the markets themselves and know the market participants
from their own business relationships, possess major additional sources of information. It is precisely
the  central  banks  which  maintain  these  permanent  contacts  –  not  only  for  their  monetary  policy
operations but also because of their role in payment systems. Central banks are therefore in a position
to identify  problems within the financial system earlier than pure bank supervisors are able to.
The central bank’s own financial market analyses, which are needed for monetary policy in any case,
also  provide  valuable  information  for  the  purposes  of  system  supervision,  and  can  help  to  identify
irregularities or tensions within the financial system at an earlier stage. Moreover, central banks are
able to perform the necessary interpretation of prudential data within the context of the economy as a
whole. Ultimately, supervision has to serve the economy. And, finally, the central bank can also use
the infrastructure, which it has available for monetary policy, for purposes of crisis combating.
However,  there  are  also  synergy  effects  between  the  implementation  of  prudential  supervision  and
monetary policy, since, with access to confidential prudential information, the central banks are even
better able to judge the current economic situation and gain direct benefit from it in terms of monetary
policy.
Furthermore, central banks are in my opinion well suited to be crisis managers, as was illustrated by
the  action  undertaken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  case  of  the  hedge  fund  LTCM.  Under  the
leadership of the central bank, a private sector bail-out program was organised entirely without the use
of public funds.
When  struggling  for  the  best  possible  way  to  organise  supervision,  one  is  caught  in  a  dilemma
between the supervisor’s need to be close to the market and the global orientation, above all, of the
big market players. Equally, as far as supervision is concerned, market proximity and the need to take
due account of specific national features pose a conflict of aims with cost-effectiveness. The collection
of  information  and  its  analysis  could  –  in  theory  -  be  handled  more  cost-effectively  by  a
mega-supervisor – at least from the point of view of the global players. The global supervisor might
also be able to play a larger part in preventing global financial crises.
In practice, however, such theoretical considerations are faced with scarcely surmountable problems.
As  an  alternative,  the  conflicts  of  aims  which  I  have  described  are  therefore  to  be  solved  by
intensifying cooperation further among the responsible supervisors which in fact is already  in place.
This  holds  true  internationally  as  well  as  within  national  borders  –  if  different  institutions  are
responsible for supervision – and especially across sectors.
III
How has the question of supervisory organisation been solved  within the European Union?  Despite
the introduction of a single currency in most of the EU countries, the supervisory responsibilities have
remained with the member states. There is a wide range of models in the European Union, all of which
are  functional.  In  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Portugal  and  Spain,  the  central  bank  is
responsible for supervision. In France and Germany, the central bank is closely involved in this task.
Not  too  long  ago,  supervisory  functions  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  transferred  from  the  Bank  of
2
BIS Review 53/2001
England  to  the  FSA,  an  authority  with  a  very  wide-ranging  mandate.  There  are  similar  divisions  of
responsibility  in  Scandinavia.  In  Belgium,  banking  supervision  and  securities  supervision  are
combined  in  one  agency,  whereas  in  Austria  the  ministry  of  finance  has  so  far  conducted  banking
supervision in close cooperation with the central bank.
The  ECB  is  also  involved  in  supervision,  albeit  to  a  limited  extent.  This  is  based  on  the  relevant
European legislation contained in Article 105 (5) of the EC Treaty which provides that "the ESCB shall
contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  competent  authorities  relating  to  the
prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system".
Close  cross-border  cooperation  is  important  for  the  converging  European  financial  market.  On  a
multilateral level this is carried out, for example, by the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) residing
at  the  ECB.  This  body  consists  of  senior  representatives  of  the  central  banks  and  regulatory
authorities of all 15 EU countries and is thus well suited to covering the various aspects of supervision.
In the event of an impending systemic crisis with potential contagion effects, the BSC could also play
an important role in crisis management bringing the countries involved together.
In the public debate, reference is sometimes made to potential conflicts of interest with which a central
bank  might  be  faced  when  caught  between  the  aims  of  monetary  policy  and  its  responsibility  for
systemic  stability  within  the  context  of  supervision.  An  example  that  sometimes  is  mentioned  is  an
interest  rate  cut  for  the  purpose  of  stabilising  the  financial  system,  which  is  inappropriate  from  a
monetary policy standpoint. In practice, however, things look different. Within the European Monetary
Union, monetary policy is determined by the 18 independent members of the ECB Governing Council.
In  terms  of  an  appropriate  monetary  policy,  this  ensures  a  pluralistic  assessment  of  the  financial
market situation for Europe as a whole and not with a view to specific developments in one country.
Quite irrespective of the situation in Europe, I think that the argument of a "conflict of aims between
price stability and systemic stability" can be debated.
 
First, the central bank has the responsibility for systemic stability anyway and not only when
it assumes supervisory tasks.
Second, the conflict of aims alluded to would become apparent only in very rare cases when
serious  problems  have  already  emerged.  An  efficiently  functioning  prudential  supervision,
however, would prevent this.
And,  third,  a  potential  conflict  of  aims  cannot  be  settled  more  effectively  by  sharing
responsibilities among different institutions.
  Essentially,  in  a  specific  situation  it  is  a  matter  of  weighing  two  important  public  goods,  systemic
stability and monetary stability. There is no argument in support of this tending to be to the detriment
of  monetary  stability  if  these  two  goods  are  weighed  up  by  the  central  bank.  As  a  more  general
observation, I should mention that in the medium term, sound money contributes to the stability of the
financial system.
IV
On balance, central banks should be taken into consideration in an appropriate manner as far as the
distribution of supervisory powers is concerned. For that reason – in the light of the current debate
being conducted in Germany on the restructuring of the financial services supervision – I also regard a
major  participation  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in  prudential  supervision  as  being  essential.  The
Deutsche Bundesbank is not against an integrated supervision with banking, securities and insurance
supervision under one roof. However, it must be able to continue making a contribution to systemic
stability within the European System of Central Banks. The Bundesbank’s “invisible assets” such as
experience  and  knowledge  of  the  big  internationally  operating  institutions  are  indispensable  for  the
evaluation of systemic risks. The proposals which the Federal Government presented last week are
moving  in  the  right  direction.  Some  remaining  issues  need  to  be  clarified  and  settled  during  the
legislative process.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 53/2001
3
