 Jean-Claude Trichet: The Euro - a major structural reform of the European 
economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  at  the  NIKKEI  Euro 
Symposium, London, 5 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure and an honour for me to be speaking here today, at the 
Nikkei Euro Symposium, in front of such a distinguished audience. I am particularly pleased to express 
my views on the euro and its prospects following the launch of the notes and coins, which will be a 
reality within 8 weeks 
The economic and financial ties between Europe and Japan have been strengthened significantly over 
the  recent  period  :  European  investors  and  companies  have  stepped  up  their  market  presence  in 
Japan  these  last  two  years  ;  likewise,  Japanese  foreign  direct  investments  in  the  Euro  area  and 
Japanese  portfolio  investments  in  euro  since  January  1999  have  highlighted  the  confidence  in  the 
European single currency. 
I would like to explain why the euro and Monetary Union have been successful from the outset, 
and  the  conditions  and  prospects  for  building  on  this  achievement.  I  will  then  discuss  the 
historical event of the introduction of banknotes and coins at the end of this year. 
I. 
1. 
a) 
b) 
 The euro and Monetary union are based on a credible monetary policy, and contribute 
to an APPROPRIATE economic and monetary equilibrium in Europe 
The euro is based on a credible, stability-oriented monetary policy 
I  would  like  to  point  out  that,  from  a  technical  point  of  view,  the  launch  of  the  euro  on 
financial  markets,  on  1  January  1999,  has  been  an  indisputable  success,  and  that  the 
Eurosystem, made up of the ECB and the National Central Banks of the euro area, has fully 
achieved the objectives assigned to it in the following areas: 
– 
operational efficiency, highlighted by the precise adjustment of banking liquidity and 
effective steering of short-term interest rates; 
the  security  provided  by  the  procedures  and  systems  implemented,  both  for  the 
execution  of  interbank  transactions,  and  vis-à-vis  large-value  payments.  The  inter-
bank market became integrated in early January 1999, right from the start of Monetary 
Union, thanks to the setting up of the Target system for the real-time transfer of large-
value payments throughout the euro area and in other EU countries. 
and,  finally,  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  is  an  integrated 
organisation  in  which the  decision-making centre  works in constant contact  with the 
national central banks on the implementation of operations. 
  Together with many other factors, this technical and operational success has contributed to 
the high level of credibility of the single monetary policy which is based, in particular, on 
the  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  national  central  banks,  and  on  the 
store of confidence inherited from the latter. 
Moreover, contrary to popular belief, European  Monetary Union did not start from scratch. 
For no less than 12 years before the launch of the euro, six of the twelve currencies which 
now make up the  euro –  and represent almost two  thirds of euro-area GDP -  had proven 
remarkably stable, and were not realigned within the ERM. 
This  high  degree  of  confidence  also  stems  from  the  acknowledged  efficiency  of  the 
operational  set-up  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  is  based  on  the  principle  of  decentralisation 
stipulated  in  the  Treaty.  The  Eurosystem  is  a  team.  The  European  monetary  team  now 
comprises the ECB and the national central banks of twelve Member States, following the 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 1
 c) 
d) 
   2 
 Bank of Greece’s entry on 1 January 2001. All the members of the Eurosystem work in close 
co-operation. 
The  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem  lies,  fundamentally,  in  its  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy strategy.  
The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  given  us  a  mandate  for  maintaining  price  stability.  We  have 
decided to be as clear and as transparent as possible by providing a clear definition of price 
stability: that is to say a year-on-year increase in the overall Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) of the euro area of below 2%. 
The  aim  of  the  single  monetary  policy  is  to  ensure  medium-term  price  stability,  therefore 
creating  a  favourable  monetary  and  financial  environment  for  economic  growth.  Price 
stability offers an anchor for wage negotiators, and is a necessary factor for competitiveness, 
which is in turn essential for achieving balanced and therefore sustainable economic growth.  
The euro area is however a complex financial and economic zone. For this reason, we have 
adopted  a  broader-based  approach,  taking  into  account  all  relevant  data.  We  have  thus 
based our monetary policy on two “pillars”. 
In view of the monetary origins of inflation in the medium term, we have assigned a key role 
to  the  monetary  aggregate  M3,  which  constitutes  the  first  “pillar”  of  our  monetary  policy 
strategy.  This  pillar  is  based  on  a  reference  value  which  we  set  at  4.5%  for  the  annual 
growth  rate  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  This  monetary  indicator  is  regarded  as 
being the most compatible with medium-term price stability. Last December, we confirmed 
this 4.5% growth rate for M3. The concept of a reference value does not imply a commitment 
on the part of the Eurosystem to automatically correct deviations in monetary growth in the 
short term. The reference value of M3 is consistent with lasting price stability. Naturally, we 
also follow the counterparts of M3 closely, that is to say the sources of money creation, and 
especially lending to the economy and capital flows with the rest of the world. 
However, trends in monetary aggregates are not in themselves sufficient for assessing the 
risks  to  price  stability.  This  is  why  we  need  an  exhaustive  description  of  the  prevailing 
economic and financial situation. The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy is based 
on a broad range of variables acting as leading indicators of the outlook for euro area price 
developments. 
Our  monetary  strategy  ensures  a  continuity  from  the  monetary  policies  previously 
conducted by the national central banks, which now belong to the Eurosystem. This strategy 
has  been  well  received  by  financial  markets  and  the  general  public.  In  particular,  the 
relatively low yields on long-term euro-denominated bonds confirm that the Eurosystem has 
retained the credibility store it inherited. 
Lastly, the credibility of the euro also results from the Eurosystem's constant efforts in terms 
of transparency and communication. I must stress here that the Eurosystem is one of the 
most  transparent  central  banks  in  the  world.  Once  a  month,  immediately  after  the  ECB 
Governing Council meeting, the President of the ECB holds a press conference which starts 
with  a  precise  report  of  the  assessment  of  the  Governing  Council,  and  which  is  made 
available in real time on the ECB website. 
The Eurosystem was the first central bank in the world to introduce, on 1 January 1999, the 
concept  of  regular,  frequent,  real-time  communication  in  the  domain  of  monetary  policy. 
Other major central banks have since decided to follow us. 
Being accountable, for an independent institution in a modern democracy – or, as it is the 
case  for  the  Eurosystem,  in  a  subtle  constellation  of  democracies  like  the  European 
Union – means being accountable to public opinion. 
In  this  respect,  both  public  speeches  and  testimonies  by  the  President  of  the  ECB  to  the 
attention of the European Institutions and public opinion, as well as those by the Governors 
of National Central Banks to the attention of national Institutions and public opinion, are of 
vital significance. Indeed, a crucial part of our collective duty consists in tirelessly explaining 
the reasons and the arguments that underpin the decisions of the Governing Council.  
In  December  2000,  the  Eurosystem  decided  to  release,  for  the  first  time,  its  euro  area 
economic staff projections, with a view to improving transparency and communication.  
BIS Review 96/2001
 Thus,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  accountability  of  the  central  bank  in  a  democratic 
society – that is to say the duty to explain, justify, convince, whenever possible, and take full 
responsibility vis-à-vis public opinion for decisions taken –, the Eurosystem strives to meet 
the highest standards of the main central banks in the world. 
2. 
The euro significantly contributes to growth in Europe by enhancing the co-ordination 
of economic policies 
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great number of sceptics, in Europe as well as in the 
rest  of  the  world,  that  the  euro  would  really  be  launched.  Many  observers  believed  that  the  single 
monetary  policy  would  never  succeed  !  Facts  have  disproved  this  conclusion.  However,  other 
observers still sometimes evoke the supposed fragility of the euro area stemming from the supposed 
economic and structural divergences between euro area countries.  
How can we answer this important question? 
Firstly,  monetary  union  does  not  necessarily  imply  that,  at  any  given  point  in  time,  all 
participating countries will have the same rate of inflation or growth, even though the creation 
of the euro was based on the successful completion of a convergence process. 
Let us take inflation for example. Inflation divergences across countries or regions are quite natural in 
a monetary union.  
In the euro area, long-term convergence to a common level of prices naturally gives rise to different 
inflation rates across countries. The convergence of productivity and living standards creates a trend 
towards price convergence.  
Now, present differentials  in the  Euro  area are  not  very large,  in comparison  with those sometimes 
observed in the United States, which is a long established monetary union of comparable size. 
My intimate conviction is that we will witness further European integration and, in the medium term, an 
increasing  correlation  of  economic  developments  in  the  area.  Several  academic  studies  show  that 
business cycles are becoming more synchronous across Europe.  
Secondly,  the  question  has  often  been  raised  as  to  whether  EMU  can  be  a  success  without 
some form of enhanced political union. Indeed, to achieve this, the correct mix is required between 
fiscal, economic and monetary policies.  
In the European Union, Member States are responsible for conducting economic and fiscal policies. 
We therefore believe that these policies should be closely co-ordinated. Co-ordination is stressed in 
the Treaty itself, which requests that Member States treat national economic policies “as a matter of 
common concern” and subject them to a multilateral procedure. Naturally, this economic co-ordination 
can in no way undermine the independence of the ECB and the Eurosystem. 
Even more importantly, the euro area possesses institutional mechanisms which are conducive to an 
appropriate policy mix: the Stability and Growth Pact includes, on the part of the Member States, strict 
fiscal requirements. I will cite three economic justifications for the Treaty provisions that gave rise to 
the Stability and Growth Pact: 
– 
First, by keeping a rein on the fiscal policies of the EMU Member States, the Pact ensures a 
satisfactory policy mix within the euro area. This is essential for monetary policy, in order to 
counterbalance  the  fact  that  Europe  does  not  have  a  federal  government  and  hence  no 
significant “federal” budget. Mutual surveillance and close co-ordination of fiscal policies are 
the  responsibility  of  the  "Eurogroup"  and  of  the  Ecofin  Council.  Keeping  the  deficit  below 
3 % of GDP, and achieving budgets that are "close to balance or in surplus" in the medium 
term, ensure a balanced policy mix throughout the euro area.  
Second,  the  Pact  helps  to  prevent  well-managed  economies  from  having  to  bear  an 
unjustified risk premium on interest rates, resulting from the poor management of other EMU 
economies, by setting up a penalty system for excessive deficits. 
And lastly, the Stability and Growth Pact disproves the assertion that the euro area has no 
automatic  stabilisers  in  the  event  of  asymmetric  shocks  to  a  Member  State.  Indeed,  by 
urging governments to aim at a fiscal position "close to balance or in surplus" in the medium 
term, the Pact enables them to allow budget deficits to increase during periods of specific 
national difficulties without exceeding the 3% reference value. In short, it enables countries 
  BIS Review 96/2001 
 3
 to  create  a  fiscal  buffer  during  periods  of  normal  economic  conditions.  This  buffer  can  be 
drawn  on  to  counter  economic  divergences  or  asymmetric  shocks  during  economic 
downturns. But of course, the extent to which Governments can let automatic stabilisers play 
strictly depends on the initial level of the fiscal balance; obviously countries which still have 
fiscal deficits have less room than countries with budgets close to balance or in surplus. 
The Euro itself is a catalyst for further progress 
II. 
While many acknowledge that the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 was broadly successful, 
one may ask, at this juncture, what the conditions are for the full and ongoing success of the euro in 
the medium and long term. What is very encouraging in this respect is the fact that, in a number of 
areas, the euro in itself appears to be a catalyst for meeting these conditions. 
1. 
a) 
b) 
  4 
 The euro deepens and completes the single market 
The euro makes the completion of the single market possible. It enables the productive 
sector and companies to achieve significant economies of scale, and all European savings to 
be  allocated  to  the  most  efficient  investments.  It  also  enhances  the  transparency  of  the 
market  and  boosts  competition  and  innovation  to  the  benefit  of  consumers.  However,  the 
ultimate objective of the single market could not be fully achieved  while monetary  barriers 
continued to prevent the free flow of goods, services and capital by imposing unpredictable 
and erratic exchange rate movements and transaction costs. The last step in this process 
will be the euro cash changeover at the end of this year; it will enable not only companies but 
all our citizens to enjoy all the benefits of using the same monetary instrument throughout 
Europe, just like Americans do today with the dollar throughout the United States. 
Moreover, the introduction of the euro brings about a significant change in the economic 
and financial environment. 
The introduction of the euro has been a strong catalyst for mergers and acquisitions in the 
euro  area.  The  European  M&A  market  has  been  in  2000  one  of  the  most  dynamic  in  the 
world with operations totalling around one trillion euro. 
The single monetary policy encourages structural changes in the financial sector, in both the 
euro  area  money  market  and  longer-term  capital  markets.  This  gives  euro  area  investors 
greater possibilities and improved financing and investment conditions. 
From  the  beginning  of  January  1999,  cross-border  money  market  transactions  increased 
sharply,  to  reach  almost  two-thirds  of  total  activity  on  all  money  market  segments.  The 
unsecured  deposit  interbank  market  —which  is  mainly  concentrated  on  the  shortest 
maturities— is highly integrated. The integration of interest rate markets within the euro area 
is  a  key  achievement  which  deserves  to  be  underscored.  EONIA  and  EURIBOR  have 
provided  the  market  with  uniform  benchmarks  that  are  fully  accepted  by  all  market 
participants. This is reflected, for instance, in the amount of daily transactions and the huge 
development of the euro interest-rate swap market. 
These structural changes in the euro area money market have prompted market participants 
to concentrate their euro cash management activity in order to take advantage of the higher 
liquidity levels on the secondary market. Needless to say, such integration has to be brought 
to fruition in the other segments of the money market, i.e. the repo market and the short-term 
securities  market.  Further  integration  will  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  euro  area  financial 
markets and will be beneficial to both borrowers and investors. 
As regards stock markets and bond markets, major progress has been made in terms of 
integration. 
  According  to  recent  statistics,  the  euro,  together  with  the  dollar,  appears  to  have  been  a 
major  bond  issuance  currency  in  the  first  semester  of  2001,  with  the  euro  accounting  for 
close  to  40%  of  total  issuance.  Furthermore,  European  investors  have  substantially 
diversified their bond portfolios since the introduction of the euro, prompted by the removal 
of  the  exchange  rate  risk.  This  enables  them  to  achieve  better  performances  for  a  given 
level of portfolio risk. 
BIS Review 96/2001
 2. 
a) 
b) 
Additionally,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  current  trends  in  mergers  or  close  co-
operation  between  stock  exchanges,  securities  settlement  systems,  clearing  houses,  and 
similar  institutions.  Had  the  euro  not  been  created,  would  it  have  been  thinkable  that  the 
Paris,  Brussels  and  Amsterdam  exchanges  merge  to  create  EURONEXT  and  recently 
conclude another major alliance ? Undeniably, the introduction of the euro is fostering very 
large-scale market restructuring throughout Europe.  
There are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the 
Eurosystem has welcomed the objective of the European Council meeting in Lisbon in March 
2000, to accelerate completion of the internal market for financial services, and to set a tight 
timetable so that the Financial Services Action Plan may be implemented by 2005 ; a regular 
review of this Plan is made by European authorities, and progress is well under way. The 
Eurosystem  also  supports 
the  Committee  chaired  by 
A. Lamfalussy  on  the  integration  of  the  European  securities  markets,  ratified  by  the 
European  Council  meeting  in  Stockholm  in  March  2001:  we  are  convinced  that  the 
implementation  of  these  broad  guidelines  and  the  new  cooperation  structures  at  the 
European level will help to improve capital allocation in Europe and foster developments on 
equity markets in line with monetary policy requirements. 
the  strategic  conclusions  of 
The euro is an incentive for further structural reforms 
The  euro,  per  se,  is  also  a  strong  catalyst  for  structural  reforms  in  all  non-financial 
domains  in  Europe:  a  single  currency  facilitates  the  comparison  of  prices,  taxes  and 
earnings. The euro could encourage "cross fertilisation" of best practices through increased 
co-ordination  of  Member  States'  structural  policies  in  areas  such  as  the  labour  market, 
education  and  training,  job  creation  incentives,  effective  welfare  safety  nets,  etc.  For  this 
reason,  the  European  Council,  meeting  in  Luxembourg  in  December  1997,  explicitly 
mentioned  structural  policies  among  the  items  selected  for  reinforced  co-ordination.  The 
Lisbon  European  Council  further  enhanced  the  medium-term  strategy  necessary  for 
structural reform in the Union. The following developments are a step in the right direction: 
the emphasis on deepening the single market, the setting of indicators allowing comparisons 
of  best  practices  among  the  Member  States,  and  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines 
which will examine the structural issues closely. The recent European Council meetings in 
Stockholm  in  March  2001  and  Gothenburg  in  June  2001  confirmed  these  guidelines  and 
even  added  a  number  of  important  issues  such  as  the  consequences  of  the  ageing 
population in the European Union, the role of biotechnologies in economic growth, and the 
environment. The European Heads of State and Government, meeting in Ghent a couple of 
weeks ago, called for an acceleration of the whole process. 
All  European  countries  must  resolutely  pursue  the  reforms  they  have  already  initiated.  It 
must  be  acknowledged  that  much  has  already  been  done,  in  particular  with  the 
implementation of the single market. However, continental Europe is still experiencing levels 
of unemployment that are  too high, despite the fact that the unemployment rate has been 
declining significantly in most of its economies for the past three years. According to the IMF, 
the OECD and central banks, 75% of unemployment is of a structural nature, i.e. generated 
by an environment which handicaps job creation. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  EMU  stimulates  structural  reforms  on  the  labour  market.  With 
increased capital mobility and the smooth functioning of the single market, firms will become 
increasingly  sensitive  to  the  general  environment  in  terms  of  their  competitiveness  when 
choosing a particular location in the euro area. The actual process of selecting an investment 
location within the euro area will be a major incentive for undertaking the necessary reforms. 
Besides structural reforms, a strong emphasis must be placed on competitiveness. 
Pre-euro  economic  policy  required  careful  monitoring  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  the 
foreign exchange and interest-rate markets. The authorities received constant feedback on 
key  indicators  affecting  national  economic  performance  and  could  then  react  accordingly. 
These indicators were sensitive, multiple and very reactive. 
At  present,  with  the  advent  of  the  single  currency,  economic  managers  must  monitor  the 
relevant  competitiveness  indicators  with  even  greater  vigilance,  as  economic  policy  errors 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 5
 could  have  slower  and  more  insidious  repercussions,  such  as  rising  unemployment  and 
weak growth. 
The rules of a market economy continue to apply to all euro area countries. Jobs are created 
by consumers – totally free to purchase whatever they wish – when they choose the goods 
and services that they deem to be best value for money. Companies – totally free in their 
investment choices – locate their business according to the relative competitiveness of the 
different  possible  sites.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  monitor  competitiveness  even  more 
closely than before, in particular unit production costs, and the tax and regulatory framework. 
The  multilateral  surveillance  carried  out  in  the  context  of  the  Eurogroup,  will  help  monitor 
competition  trends  in  each  euro  area  country  and  in  the  zone  as  a  whole  and,  where 
necessary, suggest appropriate adjustments. 
III. 
A smooth changeover to the Euro will also be a determining factor for Europeans’ 
confidence in their new currency 
Of  course,  the  Eurosystem  is  at  the  heart  of  the  euro  cash  changeover  process.  Our  challenge 
consists in replacing all national monetary units by the euro in all monetary and financial relations of 
public administrations, banks, enterprises, businesses and citizens. 
The first contribution of the Eurosystem is the euro banknote production. Today, more than 12 billion 
banknotes have been manufactured, out of a total of 14.9 billion. The launch stock is almost ready. 
The manufacturing process has been carefully monitored, in accordance with state of the art security 
standards. The new banknotes combine many of the highly effective security features already used in 
the national banknotes of the euro area with a number of additional features specifically used for the 
euro. These security features provide all persons handling cash, especially the general public, with the 
means to carry out a rapid, easy, and effective examination of the euro banknotes. Special attention 
has also been given to the needs of the blind and partially sighted. 
The  Eurosystem  also  plays  a  key  role  in  the  supplying  process  of  euro  banknotes  and  in  the 
withdrawing process of former national monetary units. At the national level, each central bank of the 
euro area  works in close co-operation  with credit institutions, security companies, shopkeepers and 
police forces. This fruitful concertation is essential to the success of such a huge operation, on both 
fields of logistics and security. 
The “non-cash” euro is already in use 
The final stage of the introduction of the euro will include two changeovers: the changeover to the non-
cash euro, which concerns all book-entry transactions (cheques, bank accounts, bank card payments, 
transfers, loans, etc.) and the changeover to the cash euro, which concerns banknotes and coins. 
This summer, banks in France started to systematically convert bank accounts into euros and provide 
customers  with  euro  cheque  books.  In  various  participating  countries,  in  particular  France,  all  bank 
accounts have already been converted . It is now up to each citizen in the euro area to establish a new 
scale  of  values  for  the  currency  and  to  make  payments  in  euro.  In  this  respect,  retailers  have  a 
fundamental role to play: their active participation and their readiness to accept payments in euro will 
greatly facilitate the euro changeover as a whole. 
The cash euro will be in circulation within 8 weeks 
As regards the cash euro, the main task now consists in frontloading the banknotes and coins so that, 
on 1 January 2002, transactions can be carried out smoothly in the best possible security conditions. 
To achieve this, frontloaded coins are supplied to credit institutions. Banknotes will soon be provided 
to them (as of 1 December in France). Retailers will also be provided with frontloaded banknotes and 
coins.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  familiarise  the  public  and  to  facilitate  the  giving  of  change  as  of 
1 January 2002, individuals will be able to obtain, as of mid-December, packs of euro coins known as 
‘euro starter kits’; these coins cannot be used for payments before 1st January 2002. 
As of 1 January 2002, banks will only deliver euros, retailers will give change in euro and ATMs will 
supply euro banknotes only. A few days after this date, almost all transactions will be carried out in 
euro.  
6 
 BIS Review 96/2001
 Beyond  technical  aspects,  the  Eurosystem  –and  also  public  authorities-  have  an  important 
responsibility  in  informing  the  general  public  on  the  challenges  ahead,  the  deadlines  and  the 
practical aspects of the euro cash changeover. The success of the global process depends heavily on 
the confidence of the general public and cash handlers as well. Preparing people to be well informed 
and to feel confident in using the euro banknotes and coins is the overall objective of the Euro 2002 
Information Campaign conducted by the Eurosystem. This campaign aims to reach the general public 
through the mass media. It is closely supported by a Europe-wide Partnership Programme with more 
than 2 600 national and international organisations. It has now entered into an intensive information 
phase,  since  the  unveiling  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  their  security  features  by  our  President,  W. 
Duisenberg, on 30th of August. As Mr Duisenberg stressed, this event was more than a mere technical 
presentation, but took on an historical and symbolic dimension. On 1 January 2002, we will have the 
honour of witnessing the largest currency changeover that the world has ever experienced. This will be 
the  crowning  achievement  of  a  long  economic  and  political  process  which  led  to  the  creation  of 
Monetary Union on 1 January 1999. This unique event in European history will help to ensure lasting 
prosperity, which is not only in Europe’s interest but that of the rest of the world as well. 
Lastly, speaking in front of bankers, financial institutions, business executives and journalists, I would 
like to make the following remarks as regards the present situation: 
-first,  the  main  message  in  the  present  exceptional  circumstances,  is  that  the  first  quality  of  all 
Institutions, all economic leaders, all enterprises as well as households is to keep one’s nerves. The 
best gift  we could give the terrorists would be to change our plans, to cancel endeavours, to delay 
decisions,  to  reduce  investment  or  consumption.  We,  Institutions,  enterprises,  individuals  had  and 
have projects : let us realize them, in time, and unchanged. 
-second, let us beware of fashion. It was still fashionable, a year ago, to embark on vibrant eloge of 
the new economy, to predict the end of the business cycle and to forecast for ever very high level of 
productivity progress and buoyant economic growth. To-day some kind of herd behaviour drives a lot 
of  observers  and  actors  in  the  opposite  direction:  overwhelming  pessimism  as  regards  the  present 
situation  and  the  economic  future.  Both  attitudes  are  equally  totally  inappropriate.  It  is  up  to  the 
Central  Banks  to  remain  moderate  in  their  judgments,  pragmatic  and  lucid  in  the  various 
circumstances and to offer an anchor not only for monetary and financial stability but also for stability 
of judgment. 
-third, fostering confidence is a major contribution of the Eurosystem to the prosperity of the European 
economy. Confidence is a very precious ingredient in the present European conjuncture, as recently 
emphasized by the European Council in Ghent : confidence in the euro, in price stability, in its ability to 
be  a  highly  reliable  instrument  for  savings,  in  its  medium  and  long  term  solidity.  Confidence  of  the 
consumers  in  price  stability  underpins  growth  through  dynamic  household  consumption  –  which  is 
today  a  major  motor  of  economic  growth.  Confidence  of  the  savers  underpins  growth  through  a 
favourable financial environment.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 7
