Bäckström: The monetary policy situation in Sweden
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Riksdag’s  Finance
Committee, Stockholm, 16 October 2001.
 The  Riksbank  has  a  statutory  duty  to  present  the  Finance  Committee  with  a  written  account  of
monetary policy at least twice a year. The second account in 2001 was presented this morning. In my
opening  remarks  I  shall  briefly  describe  the  Riksbank’s  view  of  monetary  policy  and  economic
developments  in  Sweden.  I  also  look  forward  to  the  ensuing  discussion  with  members  of  the
Committee and will do my best to answer your questions.
First let me say that in the period since I last met the Committee a great deal has happened, some of it
very  dramatic  and  tragic.  What  I  have  in  mind  above  all  is  the  terrorist  attacks  in  New  York  and
Washington  on  11  September.  But  much  has  happened  in  the  economic  sphere  as  well.  The
slowdown  has  become  more  pronounced  at  the  same  time  as  inflation  has  been  surprisingly  high.
Meanwhile, the Riksbank has adjusted the interest rate. Major political events are currently unfolding
in connection with all that is happening in Afghanistan. On top of this there was last week’s air disaster
at Milan airport, with many people from Sweden among the victims in the wrecked SAS plane. In the
midst of all the human suffering, I and my colleagues at the Riksbank still have the task of presenting
our general assessment of the economy and inflation to the Committee, an assessment that has to
include consequences of these tragic events. But I want to underscore that in the coming quarters the
economic future is unusually uncertain. I shall begin by briefly recapitulating developments in recent
months and accounting for the Riksbank’s monetary policy measures.
Developments in recent months
Shortly after the May Report had been published the Swedish krona depreciated markedly from a level
that was already low. That meant that an even more marked appreciation  would  be needed for the
exchange rate to reach the levels the Riksbank had counted on. This seemed unlikely. The combined
effect of relatively high resource utilisation, unexpectedly rapid price increases and greater uncertainty
about  the  krona’s  future  path  was  considered  to  constitute  an  increased  risk  of  rising  inflation
expectations.  That  was  the  background  to  the  Riksbank’s  decision  in  mid  June  to  intervene  in  the
currency market. Although interventions have proved to be a difficult matter in the past, the Riksbank
considered they were worth trying. Judging from some comments, one also gets the impression that
the  operation  cost  the  Riksbank  a  lot  of  money.  That  seems  rather  unlikely,  however,  since  we
purchased kronor in a situation where we judged that the krona was under-valued.
At  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  5  July,  the  risk  of  the  inflation  target  being  exceeded  in  the
Riksbank’s normal time horizon of one to two years still existed. The situation was the same as when
the  interventions  began  except  that  the  krona’s  dramatic  weakening  had  been  checked.  Resource
utilisation was judged to be high, notwithstanding the ongoing slowdown, and there were no grounds
for being more optimistic about the krona’s future path in a longer perspective. Moreover, although the
substantial price increases in recent months were considered to be mainly transitory, there was a risk
of them influencing inflation expectations. There were signs of slackening growth in the euro area and
Japan but it was judged that towards the end of the year, developments in the United States would
result  in  a  gradual  recovery  that  would  spread  to  other  countries.  An  overall  assessment  of  these
factors led to the Riksbank’s decision to raise the repo rate from 4 to 4.25 per cent.
Inflation  expectations,  which  according  to  some  indicators  had  tended  to  move  up  in  the  spring,
returned during the summer to a level in line with the inflation target. The exchange rate stabilised.
At the monetary policy meeting on 23 August the Riksbank’s forecast was that the rate of inflation two
years  ahead  would  be  approximately  2  per  cent.  Against  this  background  the  repo  rate  was  left
unchanged.  It  was  considered  that  demand  had  continued  to  weaken,  both  in  Sweden  and
internationally, which should reduce the risks associated with the weak exchange rate.
BIS Review 86/2001
1
In connection with increasing signs in August of a more marked economic slowdown in the rest of the
world as well as in Sweden, share prices started falling again. For the krona, which had appreciated in
July, this was a negative factor in the same way as it had been during the spring.
Early  in  the  autumn  the  picture  of  an  international  economic  slowdown  became  even  more
accentuated.  A  number  of  indicators  pointed  to  a  worsening  of  demand  in  the  United  States  even
before the terrorist attacks. The uncertainty stemming from the attacks was liable to subdue demand in
the rest of the world even more. After the U.S. Federal Reserve and other central banks had cut their
instrumental rates on 17 September, on the same day the Riksbank decided to lower the repo rate
0.5 percentage points. An increased risk was perceived of inflation two years ahead being below the
target, mainly because business and household confidence in the future might weaken and lead to a
slowdown that was deeper and more protracted. The terrorist attacks led to great uncertainty in the
financial markets.
From what I have now said it will be clear that in recent months monetary policy has taken its cue from
declining economic activity. GDP growth has slackened from a level of 3 to 4 per cent in recent years
to  a  rate  of  between  1  and  1.5  per  cent.  Meanwhile,  since  last  year  the  krona  has  depreciated  by
around 15 per cent. Another consideration is that notwithstanding the low growth of demand, inflation
has been surprisingly high.
These forces have acted with varying strength on the Riksbank’s inflation forecasts in recent months.
Roughly speaking, when economic activity is slowing — with a given potential growth rate — after a
time inflation falls back. A weak exchange rate pulls in the opposite direction, however, and can lead
to higher price increases: directly through rising import prices and indirectly by stimulating production
for export. In addition, abrupt exchange rate movements are liable to affect inflation expectations, a
problem that is accentuated when inflation is springing unpleasant surprises.
The  krona’s  weakening  in  the  early  summer,  after  the  Riksbank  had  presented  this  year’s  second
Inflation  Report,  probably  had  to  do  with  a  combination  of  slackening  export  activity  and  portfolio
adjustments.  Moreover,  inflation  outcomes  in  the  late  spring  had  been  surprisingly  high.  If  higher
inflation expectations are allowed to take root and  also show up in time in a  currency depreciation,
public  confidence  in  monetary  policy’s  systematic  commitment  to  a  rate  of  inflation  in  line  with  the
2 per cent target may be shaken. The weakening of the exchange rate in that period was an isolated
Swedish phenomenon, which made it particularly serious.
The  krona  also  weakened  in  the  aftermath  of  the  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  but  the
circumstances then warranted a different interpretation. General uncertainty in the financial markets
was accompanied  by  extensive  portfolio  adjustments  after  the  terrorist  attacks.  The  pattern  is  clear
from similar periods in the past, for example the autumn of 1998 when Russia suspended payments
on parts of it s government debt and a major American hedge fund collapsed. What happens is that
certain currencies weaken, others, particularly large ones, appreciate, share prices fall, bond rates are
unchanged or rise, short-term interest rates decline and the price of gold moves up. Exchange rate
shifts of this type are normally transient. The krona has in fact strengthened just recently as markets
have become more stable.
The IT bubble has burst
At the time of our previous meeting in March, economic activity was slowing generally throughout the
world but above all in the United States. This tendency had also reached Sweden.
Important factors behind the almost simultaneous and marked deterioration of the global picture and
perhaps  particularly  in  the  United  States  were,  for  example,  energy  price  increases,  rising  interest
rates, falling stock markets and the sudden downturn in corporate investment. The prospect of lower
profits, a clear slump on the world’s stock exchanges and more pessimistic expectations have led to a
marked worsening of investment activity.
To illustrate how they believe the American economy will develop, observers have resorted to letters
of the alphabet. A V implied a quick recovery, where the favourable outlook for profits meant that the
accumulated  imbalances  would  not  be  a  major  problem.  This  alternative  rested  on  a  persistently
strong belief in a high potential growth rate, with investment in new technology continuing to play an
important part. This was the path that most observers counted on last spring.
It was, however, questioned by others, particularly outside the United States. In general, they foresaw
a  more  protracted,  U-shaped  recovery.  Time  would  be  needed  for  the  adjustment  of  the  over-
2
BIS Review 86/2001
investments  that  excessive  optimism  had  generated.  There  is  a  lag  before  measures  of  economic
policy have tangible effects.
In some quarters, finally, there is an even more pessimistic scenario, an L. This envisages that growth
in the U.S. economy comes more or less to a halt as the imbalances undergo a painful correction and
measures of economic policy have little effect.
In my discussion with you last spring I believe I likened my version to a banana. This was because the
Riksbank  believed  that  in  many  respects  the  cyclical  path  would  follow  the  normal  pattern.  An
expansionary phase is usually followed by a period of slacker activity. The  longer the upward trend
has  lasted,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  take  a  pause.  That  made  it  difficult  to  believe  in  the  V-shaped
scenario that the financial markets were mainly counting on at that time.
The  path  has  been  accentuated  by  the  recoil  from  the  excessive  optimism  that  had  attended  the
technological breakthrough and given rise to the notion of a new economy. With rising demand, the
supply side of the American economy had been expanded  on the basis of expectations that simply
were not realistic.  American  households  pledged  future  income  for  current  consumption  to  such  an
extent  that  no  savings  were  left  with  which  to  finance  corporate  investment.  The  growing  savings
deficit showed  up as  a rising deficit on the current  account  and large amounts of capital had  to  be
imported.  The  capital  inflow  was  stimulated  in  turn  by  apparently  boundless  expectations  that
American  stock  markets  would  continue  to  rise  and  it  persisted  to  such  a  degree  that  the  dollar
appreciated markedly against other currencies.
In some respects, developments in Sweden resembled those in the United States, not least the rapidly
rising  share  prices,  the  new  technology’s  major  significance  for  investment  and  highly-strung
expectations  of  future  income  and  profits  among  households  and  firms.  That  is  one  reason  why
Sweden and a number of other countries have been heavily hit now that the IT bubble has burst.
But history teaches us that after a period of what I would call growing pains, optimism about the new
technology’s  potential  will be restored.  Neither  the  sudden  downturn  in  the  global  economy  nor  the
terrorist attacks should have changed the new technology’s potential in the somewhat longer run.
Inflation too high at present
In Sweden, inflation rose surprisingly in the spring and the higher rate then persisted. The high figures
at present are mainly, though not exclusively, a consequence of price increases that can be regarded
as fairly transitory. The causes include foot-and-mouth disease, higher energy and telecom prices and
certain changes in the method for measuring electricity prices. This has partly been a matter of supply
shocks that do not normally have lasting effects on the rate of inflation. There is therefore reason to
believe that when the increased price levels drop out of the twelve-month change figures from next
spring onwards, inflation will fall back from the relatively high rates at present.
The picture of inflation does, however, include other features that probably have to do with the high
resource  utilisation  during  the  latest  upward  phase.  The  fact  that  domestic  inflation  has  moved  up
even though economic activity is slowing could point to some underestimation of resource utilisation or
to a relationship between growth and inflation in a wide sense that for other reasons is less favourable
than assumed earlier.
Recovery with prospective inflation in line with the target
In the Inflation Report that now lies on the table we have opted for a main scenario where growth in
the rest of the world is lower than we foresaw in the previous Report in May.
The  situation  is  particularly  complicated  in  that  the  usual  difficulties  in  determining  exactly  when
activity  is  likely  to  turn  upwards  are  compounded  by  the  occurrence  of  a  structural  adjustment  of
saving and investment, above all in the United States, at the same time as economic policy there is
undergoing  a  marked  expansionary  realignment.  A  further  major  complication  is  the  future  security
policy situation, which is naturally hard to assess with traditional economic tools. With due respect for
all the forecasting difficulties at present, the Riksbank counts on demand in the industrialised countries
turning upwards during the second half of next year. GDP growth in the OECD area is calculated to be
1 per cent this year, followed by 1,5 per cent in 2002. Under present circumstances the uncertainty
around our main scenario is, of course, considerable.
BIS Review 86/2001
3
We count on GDP growth in Sweden in the coming years being lower than we assumed earlier. The
combined  economic  effect  of  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  is  therefor  stimulatory.  As  the
Committee is no doubt well aware, in the years ahead both increased transfers and tax cuts will also
contribute to a rapid increase in household disposable income. Given a gradual recovery in the rest of
the  world,  this  appreciable  overall  stimulus  from  economic  policy  will  lead  to  a  gradual  upturn  in
Sweden’s economy. GDP growth is expected to be 1.3 per cent this year, followed in 2002 and 2003
by rates of 2.2 and 2.8 per cent, respectively.
The lower GDP growth — particularly this year — compared with our earlier assessment implies lower
resource utilisation. At the same time, the recovery towards the end of the forecast period means that
resource utilisation will then be rising again.
Monetary policy is currently formulated on the basis of an assessment of inflation excluding transitory
effects  from  indirect  taxes,  subsidies  and  house  mortgage  interest  expenditure  (UND1X).  In  the
Inflation Report’s main scenario, which assumes an unchanged repo rate, UND1X inflation one and
two years ahead is judged to be 1.7 and 2.0 per cent, respectively.
As  I  just  said,  the  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  is  greater  than  at  the  time  of  the  May  Report.
Considering the Swedish economy’s present cyclical position and the events that have occurred, that
is natural. But it does accentuate the importance of the risk spectrum, that is, a combined assessment
of various factors that may affect future inflation. Today the Riksbank judges that this spectrum of risks
is  balanced;  the  downside  risks  associated  with  international  developments  are  balanced  by  the
upside  risks  from  the  weak  exchange  rate  and  a  less  favourable  relationship  between  growth  and
inflation in a wide sense. As developments unfold, that balance can change so that interest rate policy
may need to be adjusted in one direction or the other. That would be something the Executive Board
would have to discuss as usual at its future monetary policy meetings. I particularly want to underscore
that perhaps it is more than usually important to pay close attention to the future course of events.
In the light of the analysis in the Inflation report, at yesterday’s meeting the Executive Board decided to
leave the repo rate unchanged.
4
BIS Review 86/2001
