David Clementi: Maintaining financial stability in a rapidly changing world -
some threats and opportunities
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the launch of the Oxford
Centre for Computational Finance, University of Oxford, 10 October 2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure to be here this evening, and to be part of the launch of the Oxford Centre for
Computational  Finance.  Responding  to  new  types  of  risk  demands  an  increasingly  sophisticated
combination of technology and intellectual thought, and I can think of few places as well suited to this
exciting and challenging task as Oxford. As an honorary  Fellow at  Lincoln  College,  I  know  that  the
drive for excellence remains as high as ever, and I have to say that I look back at my time here as an
undergraduate with great affection. That was some time ago, of course - back in the 1960s, when a
photocopier or calculator was pretty high tech - and if you knew the current prices of equities on the
exchange you had a five minute information jump on most of the market. The world today of course is
much more complex and the risks correspondingly more difficult to analyse.
What I'd like to do tonight is to cover three main topics. First, I want to explain the Bank of England's
role in financial stability issues, and discuss some of the threats to that stability which have emerged
recently. I want to say a little about the tragic events of September 11th, which have further underlined
the complex nature of the world we live in. Second, I would like to look at some of the ways in which
formal models of market and credit risk of the type you will be studying here have already influenced
the design  of  our  regulatory  regimes.  Much  has  been  achieved  here,  but  much  also  remains  to  be
done, and the current state of the art by no means captures every type of risk run by financial firms.
So, third, I want to talk about some other safeguards which will continue to be necessary to improve
the chances of maintaining financial stability.
The Bank of England's role in financial stability
The maintenance of stability in the overall financial system is one of the Bank of England's three core
tasks - the other two being responsibility for monetary stability, and promotion of the  efficiency  and
effectiveness  of  the  UK  financial  system.  That  concern  for  system-wide  financial  stability  does  not
reflect a paternalistic belief that central banks know better than the markets - indeed market disciplines
have a very important role to play in maintaining stability. Rather, it derives from the fact that some
types of problem which initially affect only individual financial institutions may subsequently threaten
the stability of the system as a whole. This contagion may not be fully in any individual firm's interests
- or powers - to resolve, and it is this 'gap in the market' which creates the need for public involvement
via central banks. Fortunately, banking crises do not occur every day of the week. But they do happen:
an IMF study counted 54 across the world between 1975 and 1997, of which 12 were in developed
countries.  Such  crises  can  have  enormously  harmful  effects:  recent  Bank  of  England  analysis
suggested that, over the past quarter century, total output losses during banking crises have averaged
around 15-20% of GDP in the countries in which they occurred.
Whilst  the  Bank  has  responsibility  for  maintaining  systemic  stability,  the  day-to-day  supervision  of
individual  banks  and  other  financial  firms  in  the  UK  has  been  the  responsibility  of  the  Financial
Services  Authority  (FSA)  since  1997.  Co-ordinating  our  system-wide  perspective  with  the  FSA's
supervision of individual  institutions  and  the  Treasury's  legislative  responsibilities  is  essential  to  the
smooth functioning of the new arrangements. A Memorandum of Understanding, signed by the Bank,
the FSA and the Treasury in October 1997, sets out our respective responsibilities, both in 'normal'
times, and in a crisis. And we work hard to foster these relationships, helped by the fact that I am a
member  of  the  FSA  Board  and  Howard  Davies  is  a  non-executive  director  of  the  Bank.  The  three
institutions also get together each month in the so-called 'tripartite Standing Committee' to exchange
information and discuss current threats to financial stability. I say once a month, but we meet more
frequently than that when needed, as we have done for example over the past few weeks.
What  are  some  of  those  threats  as  I  speak  here  today?  We  are,  of  course,  still  working  our  way
through the implications of the dreadful events in the United States last month. Uncertainty about the
near-term  outlook  increased  quite  markedly  following  the  attack,  and  this  -  together  with  the
BIS Review 83/2001
1
possibilities of supply-chain and market disruption, particularly in the US - contributed to some sharp
adjustments in equity values. A number of sectors most closely affected by the terrorist attacks - in
particular  air  travel  and  insurance  -  were  badly  hit.  More  recently,  equities  have  rallied  somewhat,
suggesting that some of the earlier concerns may have been overdone. But the market is still clearly
lower than it was at the start of September.
These  factors  have  potentially  important  implications  for  the  inflationary  outlook,  and  therefore  for
monetary policy. The Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee - in common with a number of
other central banks around the world - reduced interest rates last month, citing in our press release the
increased risks of a further slowdown in world growth. Interest rates were cut by a further quarter of a
per cent following our meeting last week, and  you  will  be  able to read  about  our reasoning  for  this
decision when the minutes are published on 17 October.
In other ways, though, the aftermath of the attacks on the US has highlighted the robustness of the
international financial system. Although several firms suffered grievous losses of staff and destruction
of equipment, overall the market place was back up and functioning remarkably quickly. I think there
were a number of reasons for this. In the first place the Federal Reserve System did an excellent job in
making the necessary liquidity available to markets, both in the United States  and  in  other financial
centres  through  swap  arrangements  with  the  ECB,  the  Bank  of  England  and  other  central  banks.
Second, the authorities and systems providers were able to keep the main payment systems (Fedwire
and  Chips)  open  during  and  after  the  evening  of  September  11th  itself.  This  was  a  significant
achievement,  enabling  the  huge  daily  volume  of  dollar  payments  to  be  made,  including  of  course
substantial dollar flows from the foreign exchange and other dollar markets based in London. Equally
impressive  was  that  most  of  the  big  firms  affected  were  using  their  back-up  contingency  sites  very
quickly, allowing them to continue in business with a minimum of obvious disruption. Some of those
contingency sites were in New Jersey, others put increased volumes through their London office. In
New York itself, connectivity of telephone traffic was initially badly affected because of the routing of
so much traffic through connections located downtown. But this problem was short lived. Overall, we
salute the US firms and the US authorities for their actions, achieved at a time which for many involved
was one of acute personal anxiety.
There are a number of lessons for firms based in this country. All of those firms, including in particular
those providing key infrastructural services, will want to review the robustness of their contingency and
back-up plans.
Risk modelling and regulatory capital
That  takes  me  to  my  second  topic  this  evening.  The  damage  to  physical  infrastructure  in  the  US
represents an extreme example of a particular type of risk - "operational risk" in the jargon of financial
regulators. But the more general question of risk measurement and risk management has assumed a
central position in both private and public sector efforts to reinforce the stability of the financial system.
From the regulators' point of view, perhaps the first attempt to answer this question at a global level
came with the  1988 Basel Accord,  which required that all  internationally  active  banks  should  -  at  a
minimum - carry capital equivalent to 8% of risk weighted assets. The risk weights were very broad
brush, and related only to credit risk. Set against the background of a concern about decline  in the
capital held by banks in the late 1980s, however, the Accord was a clear success. The average capital
ratios of G10 banks rose substantially in the following ten years, and a more level playing field was
established between banks based in different countries. That success was due in no small measure to
the Accord's simplicity. But over time it did become clear that the lack of very precise differentiation
between different kinds of borrower was introducing serious distortions by opening up gaps between
the  capital  required  for  regulatory  purposes  and  the  'economic'  capital  suggested  by  banks'  own
increasingly sophisticated risk management systems.
Another weakness in the 1988 Accord was the lack of any proper treatment of market risk - that is, risk
associated with fluctuations in interest rates, exchange rates and so on. The intensive application of
information technology and advances in the theory of finance  drove significant improvements in the
ability of larger banks to measure and manage market risk during the 1990s. Of particular importance
was the development of 'Value at Risk' (VaR) models, which allowed banks to calculate measures of
the aggregate risks being run on entire portfolios. Using the latest thinking on how to price individual
assets, and exploiting data on past movements and correlations in asset values, these models provide
2
BIS Review 83/2001
estimates of the statistical distribution of value for an entire portfolio of marketable assets. Estimates of
the amount of capital at risk can then be read off from the lower tails of these distributions.
VaR models have proved enormously useful to firms in managing the day-to-day risk on parts of their
business. And the Basel Accord was modified in 1996 to allow VaRs to be used as an input to the
regulatory capital calculation for market risk. But care is needed, not least because these models tend
to be least robust in precisely the circumstances of most interest - ie those rather rare cases in which
losses are very large, hidden away in the lowest parts of the bottom tail of the probability distributions.
The  evidence  suggests  that  such  events  are  not  well  captured  by  the  normal  distributions  typically
used  in  standard  risk  models.  Markets  tend  to  behave  in  highly  non-linear  ways  -  moving  within
relatively  narrow  ranges  for  long  periods,  but  then  adjusting  quite  sharply.  Sometimes  these
adjustments can be related to clear external events - such as the World Trade Centre attack. But often
there is no such trigger. The types of circumstances that generate these outcomes are not particularly
well  understood.  This  is,  I  believe,  a  central  theme  of  the  recent  work  of  some  of  your  founder
members, and it is one with significant operational as well as theoretical implications.
I noted a  few  minutes  ago  that  the  original  Basel  Accord  had  given  rise  to  a  number  of  distortions
between economic and regulatory capital. This problem came to a head during the course of 1990s as
banks  increasingly  engaged  in  so-called  'regulatory  arbitrage'.  Better  credits,  over-weighted  by  the
Accord, were progressively being securitised, leaving relatively poorer credits on the banks' balance
sheets.  And  banks  were  getting  little  allowance  for  risk  reductions  achieved  through  portfolio
diversification and the use of risk mitigation instruments.
To address these issues, the Basel Committee has proposed a new Accord which would allow firms to
use  externally  or  internally  generated  credit  risk  ratings  to  differentiate  more  precisely  between
different  risks.  There  would  also  be  a  significant  expansion  in  the  recognition  of  collateral,  credit
derivatives and guarantees as means of reducing overall risks. These proposals are currently under
discussion  by  central  banks,  regulators  and  market  practitioners.  Given  our  financial  stability
responsibilities, the Bank of England has been closely involved in this process. A team led by Patricia
Jackson at the Bank has been providing technical and policy support to the Basel Committee, and we
hope to have an agreement in the course of next year.
The new Accord  does  not, however, go to the  point of recognising VaR-type models for measuring
credit risk on portfolios as whole. At present, these models are not judged to be sufficiently robust to
form the basis of a regulatory regime. A central issue is the sheer lack of information. Many types of
loan have no publicly visible price, so the models lack a large and reliable data base. The behaviour of
loans under different scenarios, and the correlations between different assets - both key inputs to any
VaR  model  -  have  in  many  cases  to  be  assumed  rather  than  measured.  And  testing  the  ex  post
performance of the models is difficult. Where credit instruments lack market prices, model predictions
can only be compared to data in the event of defaults, which are relatively rare. Investment horizons
are usually so long that it would take many years to gather sufficient data for a statistically reliable test.
Credit risk models have clearly improved banks' understanding of the risks they face, and are slowly
being implemented into their own internal systems. But the main challenge here in the next few years
will be to refine the operation of these models,  and seek answers to  some  of  the  questions  I  have
raised.  This  is  a  fascinating  research  agenda,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  academics  will  treat  these
questions as challenges rather than causes for despair!
Ensuring adequate safeguards for the system as a whole
That leads me to my final topic tonight - how, given our imperfect knowledge, we design a regulatory
capital regime which adequately captures the full range of risks run by financial firms.
There are, first, a number of important points which remain unresolved in the discussions on the new
Basel  Accord.  One  issue  relates  to  the  appropriate  overall  level  of  capital  in  the  banking  system.
Overall  capital,  as  with  many  regulatory  issues,  is  at  root  a  public  policy  choice  about  the  balance
between safety and economic efficiency. Higher capital requirements increase the costs of financial
intermediation.  Against  this,  the  total  pool  of  capital  coming  out  of  the  new  Accord  must  be  large
enough to protect the system against reasonable levels of risk.
Second, we need to be sure that the new rules do not give rise to movements in bank capital which
excessively reinforce cycles in the real economy. Bank capital is inherently somewhat procyclical. In
an  economic  downturn,  banks  will  increase  provisions  and  tighten  loan  standards.  In  some
BIS Review 83/2001
3
circumstances,  this  could  reduce  the  supply  of  credit,  intensifying  the  decline  in  activity.  But  the
introduction of a regime in which regulatory capital is linked to ratings could amplify that effect to the
extent that those ratings themselves deteriorate rapidly in a downturn. There are various ways round
these  problems  of  procyclicality,  but  they  will  need  to  be  resolved  before  the  new  Accord  can  be
finalised.
I have talked a lot about the structure of public regulation. But it  is also important  to remember the
powerful role that effective market discipline can play in maintaining financial stability. Both the new
Accord, and a number of other, broader international initiatives, put substantial emphasis on improving
the  disclosure  of  information  by  financial  firms.  Disclosure  of  an  appropriate  kind  should  help  the
market distinguish clearly between well-managed and adequately capitalised banks on the one hand,
and  their  less  sound  counterparts  on  the  other.  This  should  act  as  a  spur  to  the  weaker  firms  to
improve their performance. Disclosure should also help to reduce  uncertainties,  which may mitigate
the tendency of financial markets to lurch into periodic self-fulfilling crises. It is certainly arguable that
greater,  and  earlier,  disclosure  of  the  exposures  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management,  for  example,
could have avoided the problems seen in world financial markets following its collapse in the autumn
of 1998.
I would like to end by raising a couple of questions about the future shape of financial markets. The
first  is  the  extent  to  which  we  should  be  integrating  both  our  analysis  of  risk  and  our  approach  to
regulation between the insurance industry on the one hand and capital markets on the  other. Quite
apart from the increasing institutional interlinkages, the extent of risk transfer now going on between
different parts of the financial sector demands a consistent approach to capital requirements across
the sector as a whole.
A second issue is the need to reflect liquidity conditions in determining the appropriate level of capital.
If  an  asset  can  be  disposed  of  quickly  - that  is  if  there  is  a  robust  liquid  market  for  the  asset
concerned - the capital needed to guard against unexpected price movements will be less than if the
prospective  holding  period  is  long.  Liquidity  conditions  can  of  course  vary  dramatically  not  just
between different instruments but over time and understanding how and why they vary will, I think, be
an important area of investigation for the future.
Conclusion
That concludes a quick summary of some of the financial stability issues relating to risk and capital
levels that  we at the Bank of England  are  working  on  at  the  moment.  Central  bankers  are  by  their
nature a worrying breed (in both senses of the word!), and commentators often note the regularity with
which the Monetary Policy Committee says that it finds the outlook 'more than usually uncertain'. Well
- if ever there were a time when that phrase were true, it is now. I have spoken a little tonight about
operational risk, and then about different types of financial risk. These are all areas where I believe
this Centre can make an important contribution. The Bank of England is a voracious consumer of such
analysis and expertise, and I  very much hope that  we  will retain a close  working relationship going
forward.
Thank you for asking me here this evening - I wish you all the best in your future work.
4
BIS Review 83/2001
