European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in
Vienna, 11 October 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank met today for the fourth
time  outside  Frankfurt.  Let  me  first  of  all  thank  our  host,  Governor  Liebscher,  and  the  staff  of  the
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, for the invitation to Vienna and for the generous hospitality offered to
us.
As  usual,  the  Governing  Council  conducted  its  examination  of  monetary  and  economic
developments and analysis of their implications for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area.
Based  on  its  assessment  under  both  the  first  and  second  pillar,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to
keep the key ECB  interest rates unchanged. The level of the key ECB  interest  rates  at  the  current
juncture is therefore seen as consistent with maintaining price stability over the medium term. Given
the high level of uncertainty in the international environment, we will continue to monitor developments
very closely and thoroughly, and we will assess new information in the context of our medium-term-
oriented monetary policy strategy aimed at delivering price stability in the euro area.
Let me elaborate somewhat on the assessment provided under the two pillars of the monetary policy
strategy of the ECB.
Looking at the first pillar,  we  have seen a strong  increase  in  M3  growth over the past  few  months.
However,  a  number  of  temporary  factors  play  an  important  role  in  explaining  recent  monetary
developments. Notably the uncertainty in stock markets and the relatively flat yield curve until August
have led to portfolio shifts by private investors from longer-term assets to short-term assets included in
M3.  Furthermore,  the  growth  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  continued  to  slow  down  in  August.  For
these  reasons,  we  do  not  judge  that  monetary  developments  signal  risks  to  price  stability  at  this
juncture.  This  notwithstanding,  the  developments  of  M3  will  have  to  be  monitored  carefully  in  the
coming months.
As regards the second pillar, the assessment is currently surrounded by a particularly high degree of
uncertainty.  This  concerns  in  particular  the  international  environment.  Last  month's  terrorist  attacks
had  a  negative  impact  on  economic  activity  and  confidence,  which  could  delay  the  resumption  of
higher economic growth. Against this background, it  was  important that policy-makers in the United
States,  the  euro  area  and  in  other  countries  around  the  world  acted  with  measures  to  support
confidence.  A  further  positive  feature  is  the  recent  fall  in  oil  prices,  which  should  be  helpful  in
containing  inflationary  pressure  and  supporting  the  real  disposable  income  of  households,  thereby
sustaining consumption in many countries.
With regard to economic growth in the euro area, it would be premature to offer a firm assessment of
the macroeconomic impact of the tragic events in the United States and current activities to combat
global terrorism. At present, there are no major imbalances in the euro area  which would require  a
longer-term adjustment process. On account of policies  aimed at price stability, fiscal consolidation,
wage moderation and structural reform, the euro area fundamentals remain very positive. Financing
conditions are favourable and inflation is declining. The mere existence of the euro has sheltered the
countries of the euro area from adverse intra-European exchange rate tensions, which had typically
plagued  many  countries  when  external  shocks  occurred  in  the  past.  Taken  together,  all  these
elements should provide a much better base than in the past for a recovery in the course of next year
once the initial shock has been absorbed. However, notwithstanding all these positive aspects, we will
continue to monitor downside risks to the current situation.
Against this background, we are confident that inflation in the euro area will continue to decline to a
level  consistent  with  price  stability.  Receding  external  price  pressures,  combined  with  the  expected
continuation of wage moderation, underpin this expectation.
For the time being, we thus see a confirmation of our earlier assessment, which led us to reduce the
key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points on 17 September. In fact, the recent events strengthened
tendencies towards lower rates of inflation that were already prevailing before. Given their nature and
their expected economic consequences, the terrorist attacks clearly warranted a prompt, flexible and
BIS Review 83/2001
1
appropriate response by the Governing Council, in the context of the medium-term-oriented monetary
policy strategy of the ECB.
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  there  have  been  very  encouraging  signs  of  firm  fiscal  consolidation  in  a
significant number of euro area Member States over past  years,  whereas, in a few other countries,
progress towards balanced fiscal positions has been slower. It is natural for an economic slowdown to
have  adverse  effects  on  member  countries'  budget  positions,  and  there  is  no  need  for  immediate
countervailing actions. However, a short-lived slowdown should not drastically change the scope for
reaching the targets set in the countries' stability programmes. For countries with a budget position still
not close to balance or in surplus it is important to adhere to their medium-term consolidation plans.
Turning to the long-term prospects, in order to raise the rate of potential economic growth in the euro
area, structural reforms in the size and composition of public revenue and expenditure, as well as in
product and labour markets, have to continue. Advances have been made in times of high real GDP
growth,  although  in  many  areas,  including  in  labour  markets,  more  could  have  been  achieved.  As
adjustment  needs  are  likely  to  become  more  visible  in  periods  of  less  vigorous  economic  growth,
policy-makers must now intensify the acceleration of reforms rather than allow efforts to abate. Moving
forward the reform agenda decisively will enable the euro area economy to respond flexibly in future
and thereby underpin our confidence that external shocks can be more easily absorbed  than in the
past.
2
BIS Review 83/2001
