 David Dodge: Monetary policy and inflation targets in Canada 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the Standing Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 29 November 2001. 
 Malcolm and I are pleased to appear before this Committee. We hope that we will be able to do so, on 
a regular basis, in the future.  
Today, I would like to start our discussion by spending a few minutes explaining how we at the Bank of 
Canada go about setting monetary policy.  
The Bank has a commitment to contribute to the economic well-being of Canadians. This means that 
we must conduct monetary policy so that it fosters sustained solid economic growth.  
As I said to you last March, the unique contribution that monetary policy can make to good economic 
performance is to preserve confidence in the future value of money. When people can count on their 
central bank to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable, they can make sounder economic decisions. 
The Bank pursues low inflation within a framework based on an explicit inflation target, supported by a 
flexible exchange rate. The current target is to aim at the 2 per cent midpoint of a range of 1 to 3 per 
cent over the medium term. I say “over the medium term” because monetary policy actions take time 
to have their effects on the economy and on inflation. Some effects are felt fairly quickly. But the full 
impact on inflation can take up to 18 to 24 months. So, in setting monetary policy, we have to look 
ahead and make judgment calls about future economic developments and about the timing and final 
outcome of any actions we take today.  
Since their adoption in 1991, inflation targets have proven very effective in keeping inflation low and in 
anchoring people’s inflation expectations. They have also provided the Bank with a useful mechanism 
for assessing and dealing with demand pressures on future inflation in a way that helps to keep the 
economy on a more even keel.  
Let me explain how the inflation targets work to guide monetary policy and to allow the Bank to help 
stabilize the economy.  
At any point in time, there is a certain level of output that an economy can produce without putting 
either upward or downward pressure on inflation. Economists refer to that level of output as “potential 
output” or “production capacity.” The level of potential rises over time as more workers join the labour 
force;  businesses  increase  their  investments  in  new  technology,  machinery  and  equipment;  policy 
measures are taken to make product and labour markets more flexible; and all of us become more 
efficient and productive in what we do. Because potential output depends on many factors and their 
interaction, it is not something we can measure precisely—either in level or growth terms. But we can 
roughly estimate it, by analyzing the trends in those factors. At the Bank, we estimate that potential 
output in Canada  is likely  to rise by  about 3 per cent per  year over the medium term (as shown  in 
Chart 1).  
In  estimating  potential  output,  we  find  the  emphasis  on  inflation  control  to  be  particularly  helpful.  It 
helps  us  to  avoid  systematic  errors  in  assessing  potential.  For  example,  if  inflation  was  coming  in 
persistently below our expectations, it would be a strong signal that production capacity was higher 
than our estimate, and vice versa.  
Now, in terms of setting monetary policy, the key question is where the economy is likely to be relative 
to potential several quarters down the road, and how that will affect future inflation.  
If the economy is likely to be operating close to, or above, its capacity to produce, it is reasonable to 
expect that this will put upward pressure on inflation in the future (Chart 1). If this seemed likely to take 
inflation above target, the Bank would tighten monetary policy (that is, raise its key policy interest rate) 
to moderate demand and head off those pressures. On the other hand, if the economy is likely to be 
operating below potential, then there will be downward pressure on future inflation. If it looked that this 
would take inflation below target, the Bank would ease monetary policy to provide more room for the 
economy to expand.  
 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
  
Thus, the emphasis on inflation control works symmetrically. It allows the Bank to take policy actions 
to prevent overheating, when the economy is strong and is pushing against its capacity limits, and to 
support growth when the economy is weak.  
Let me now try to relate this to our recent experience in Canada.  
If we go back to the fall of 1998, when the worldwide reverberations of the Asian and Russian financial 
crises were still very much with us, we can see from Chart 2 that our economy was operating below 
potential. Since this implied that there was a good chance future inflation would be below target, we 
eased  monetary  policy  through  the  latter  part  of  1998  and  the  first  part  of  1999.  Our  economy 
rebounded  strongly  during  1999,  and  expectations  were  that  it  would  continue  to  grow  robustly—
above  potential—for  some  time,  bolstered  by  strong  domestic  and  U.S.  demand.  With  signs  of 
emerging capacity pressures, we then moved to gradually tighten policy in late 1999 and through the 
first part of 2000, to cool off demand and prolong sustained non-inflationary growth.  
 
The slowing of the U.S. economy that began in the second half of 2000 was welcome because that 
economy had been growing very rapidly for some time and it was in danger of overheating. But what 
we,  and  most  other  analysts,  did  not  anticipate  was  the  collapse  in  U.S.  business  investment, 
particularly in the information and telecommunications sectors. This led to a sharper slowdown than 
expected. When this became apparent early in 2001, the Bank’s assessment was that it would lead to 
a  moderation  in  growth  in  Canada,  which  would  leave  our  economy  operating  somewhat  below 
potential by mid-year. But we also expected that the pace of expansion would pick up in the second 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 half of 2001 and strengthen further in 2002, returning us to potential output levels. So, although we 
proceeded to loosen monetary policy, we did so at a measured pace.  
In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  available  economic  information  was  broadly  in  line  with  the  Bank’s 
expectations.  By  midsummer,  however,  evidence  began  to  accumulate  that  the  recovery  in 
U.S. investment—a key factor in the expected pickup in growth in the second half of 2001—would be 
delayed  and  that  the  slowdown  in  that  country  would  be  deeper  and  last  longer  than  anticipated. 
Economic activity outside North America had also begun to show more clearly the effects of weaker 
U.S.  growth  and  of  the  ongoing  global  retrenchment  in  the  information  and  telecommunications 
sectors. In Canada too, there were signs that domestic demand, which had held up through the first 
part of 2001, was softening and that the inventory adjustment was not as well advanced as expected.  
So we revised down our growth projections. The implication of this, as we looked out several months 
down  the  road,  was  that  the  economy  would  be  operating  substantially  below  potential  and  that 
inflation would be below target. That is why, at the end of August, we again lowered interest rates to 
support domestic demand growth.  
The terrorist acts in  the  United States,  and their  worldwide fallout,  introduced a whole new  layer of 
uncertainty into the global economic picture, further dampening near-term growth prospects.  
I  do  not  have  to  tell  you  how  difficult  it  is  to  assess  the  ongoing  economic  effects  of  those 
disturbances,  which  may  have  had  a  significant  effect  on  the  psychology  of  North  American 
households  and  businesses.  But,  as  I  said  before,  because  monetary  policy  is  forward-looking,  we 
have to make a best possible evaluation of likely developments several quarters ahead.  
As we look to 2002, the timing and extent of a recovery in economic activity will depend crucially on 
geopolitics  and  on  how  quickly  confidence  returns  to  normal.  As  we  discussed  in  our  November 
Monetary Policy Report, one can envisage two scenarios (Chart 3). In the first, confidence could be 
restored quickly, and robust growth could resume in early 2002, supported by the substantial monetary 
and fiscal stimulus already in place. In the second, confidence could stay fragile for some time, and 
growth would be anemic through most of 2002.  
 
Note  that,  under  either  scenario,  the  Canadian  economy  would  still  be  operating  at  levels  that  are 
below  capacity  by  the  end  of  2002.  This  means  that  inflation  would  continue  to  be  below  target 
through next year.  
How  has  the  Bank  responded  to  all  this?  To  underpin  confidence  in  the  wake  of  the  extraordinary 
uncertainty  generated  by  the  terrorist  acts,  we  took  the  exceptional  step  of  lowering  our  key  policy 
interest rate by 1/2 of a percentage point on 17 September, outside our regular fixed announcement 
schedule. And we moved again to ease rapidly—by 3/4 of a percentage point, on 23 October, and by 
1/2 of a percentage point, on 27 November.  
The  cumulative  reduction  in  policy  interest  rates  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  amounts  to 
3 1/2 percentage  points,  of  which  more  than  half—2  full  percentage  points—occurring  since  late 
August.  This  substantial  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  will  work  to  support  a  resumption  of  healthy 
growth in output, investment, and employment, given Canada’s solid economic foundations.  
BIS Review 99/2001 
 3
 In view of the ongoing uncertainties, it is still too early to characterize the economic outlook with great 
assurance. Nonetheless, signs that the geopolitical situation may be stabilizing and that households 
and firms are beginning to adjust to the new environment, suggest a somewhat greater likelihood that 
the Bank’s more optimistic scenario may come to pass than was the case a month ago.  
In  closing,  let  me  stress  that  I  have  oversimplified  how  the  Bank  judges  the  performance  of  the 
economy relative to its potential. In addition, I have not mentioned all the factors that can influence the 
growth  of  potential  or  the  future  path  of  inflation.  But  I  have  provided  the  basic  elements  of  the 
inflation-targeting approach that the Bank uses to help promote good economic performance.  
Mr. Chairman, in my remarks today I focused, appropriately, on the contribution monetary policy can 
make to sustained economic growth. But I want to emphasize that, while low inflation is essential in 
this context, it is not sufficient by itself. Other policies, both macro- and micro-economic, must continue 
to focus on enhancing productivity and raising our production potential over the medium term.  
This  focus  is  extraordinarily  important  if  we  want  to  achieve  sustained,  solid  economic  growth  and 
rising  standards  of  living  over  time.  We  should  not  lose  sight  of  it  as  we  go  through  the  current 
short-term difficulties.  
4 
 BIS Review 99/2001
