 Hermann Remsperger: Financial market trends in Germany 
Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the European Summit of Financial Journalists, Frankfurt, 29 October 2001. 
 Banks play a relatively dominant role in the German financial system. At the end of 2000 bank lending 
amounted to Ε 3 trillion, and Ε 2.2 trillion worth of debt securities were in circulation. That means loans 
by  banks  accounted  for  most  of  the  finance  raised  by  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Of  those  debt 
securities  again,  Ε 1.4 trillion  were  issued  by  banks,  which  used  this  instrument  to  refinance  their 
lending business. The market capitalisation of all companies listed on German stock exchanges was 
Ε 1.4 trillion in December 2000. That is around 70 % of GDP, which is relatively low by international 
standards. 
However, the German financial system is going through a period of considerable change. Important 
longer-term 
increasing 
institutionalisation  of  investment  and  the  German  financial  system’s  deepening  integration  with 
international financial markets in general and with other European financial markets in particular. Entry 
into Stage Three of EMU at the beginning of 1999 caused the elimination of intra-European exchange 
rate risk and the lifting of foreign exchange restrictions on investors in the euro area, and therefore 
made a major contribution to broadening the base of investors in bonds and equities and to fostering 
an increasingly European outlook in investment strategy. 
importance  of  securities  markets, 
the  mounting 
include 
trends 
the 
1. Increased significance of securities markets 
The sharp increase in sales of corporate bonds in 1999 and 2000 as well as the record amounts of 
stock market issues during the same period are particular testimony to the increasing importance of 
the  securities  markets  in  Germany.  Over  80  %  of  the  total  amounts  outstanding  of  Ε 200  billion  of 
German companies’ debt securities are issued via their foreign financial subsidiaries. These financial 
resources are then channelled back to the parent company as loans. Advantages relating to the trade 
earnings tax are likely to be the main reason for this “indirect” method of raising finance in the capital 
market; 50 % of the interest on long-term debt (bonds) is included in the tax base, whereas interest on 
short-term  loans – lending  by  the  foreign  financial  subsidiary  to  the  parent  institution –  remains 
tax-free.1 The increasing substitution of bonds for bank loans has proved to be particularly effective in 
raising  the  large  volume  of  funding  needed  by  the  telecommunications  sector  and  other  big 
corporations.  
Whereas the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and commercial paper rose by nearly 80 % in 
each of the last two years, it grew at a considerably slower pace in the first six months of this year. In 
August  of  this  year,  in  particular,  hardly  any  long-term  corporate  debt  instruments  were  issued  in 
Germany. That is probably because companies, facing increasingly bleak economic prospects, have 
reduced their demand for capital. The larger spread of premiums for varying risk categories of bonds 
shows in  addition,  that investors are increasingly aware of higher risks. That development has also 
been observed in the “more mature” Anglo-American bond markets.  
Following the two boom years of 1999 and 2000, share-issuing activity in Germany also slowed down 
as prices began to slide. The value of equities issued in German markets was less than Ε 3 billion in 
the first half of 2001, whereas in the first half of the preceding year the volume of IPOs overshot the 
Ε 17 billion mark. 
Despite  the  currently  very  volatile  state  of  equity  markets, marked  by  setbacks in  share  prices,  the 
establishment  of  new  market  segments  –  examples  being  the  Neuer  Markt  for  innovative  growth 
industries  or  the  SMAX  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  –  will  in  the  long  run  represent  an 
additional  source  of  external  own  funds  for  corporations.  The market for  venture  capital,  which  has 
been growing strongly since 1997 – although at a slower pace in the first half of the year 2001, will 
also  make  it  increasingly  possible  to  raise  equity  finance  rather  than  debt  finance  for  risky  new 
                                                      
1   See:  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  The  relationship  between  bank  lending  and  the  bond  market  in  Germany,  Monthly  Report, 
January 2000. 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 1
 enterprises through holding companies as well as through insurance companies, banks and pension 
funds. The tax-exempt status of corporate capital gains from the sale of participating interests, which 
will take effect from 2002, will have a positive impact.2 Corporate bonds are attractive to yield-oriented 
investors  and  can  help  brand-name  enterprises  raise  large  amounts  of  funds. On  the  whole,  in  the 
future capital market-based corporate finance will probably gain in importance. 
2. Institutionalisation of investment 
A  further  development  which  can  be  observed  in  German  capital  markets  is  the  growing 
institutionalisation of investment through the increased involvement of insurance companies and asset 
management  companies.  At  the  end  of  2000  insurance  companies  held  over  Ε 600  billion  worth  of 
securitised  capital  investments  (debt  securities,  shares  and  investment  fund  certificates  issued  by 
residents  and  non-residents).3  Along  with  the  growing  involvement  of  institutional  investors  in  the 
markets,  an  increasing  volume  of  funds  is  being  invested  in  professionally  managed  products  and 
thereby  entering  the  capital  market  indirectly  rather  than  directly.  In  the  past  ten  years  this  kind  of 
institutionalisation  has  led  to  an  eightfold  rise  in  the  value  of  investment  fund  certificates  issued  by 
residents  and  non-residents  held  in  safe-custody  accounts  with  credit  institutions.  In  2000  these 
investment fund certificates represented a value of over Ε 800 billion.4 
With the introduction of a government-promoted funded pension scheme, the additional promotion of 
corporate pension funds and the growth of private retirement plans due to demographics, the demand 
for  professionally  managed  investment  instruments  will  probably  expand  strongly  in  the  future.  The 
institutionalisation of investment in German capital markets will continue to grow. 
3. European and international integration 
German  financial  markets’  fortunes  are  increasingly  tied  up  with  those  of  other  European  financial 
markets,  and  international  integration  is  also  on  the  rise.  Whereas  European  financial  market 
integration is being given a special boost by the introduction of the euro, international integration on 
the supply side is based on increasing cooperation with the world’s financial centres. On the demand 
side, international integration is being propelled by the increasingly global orientation of investors and 
the rise in world trade. In the past five years, the value of foreign sales and purchases of equities by 
residents  has  gone  up  more  than  tenfold,  reaching  Ε 1.5  trillion  in  2000.  In  the  same  year,  foreign 
investors  sold  and  purchased  German  stocks  to  the  same  value,  a  sixfold  increase  compared  with 
1995. The volume of foreign bonds traded in Germany trebled in the same period, to Ε 2.4 trillion in 
2000.  During  that  time,  sales  of  German  bonds  abroad  remained  largely  unchanged;  these  also 
amounted to Ε 2.4 trillion in 2000. 
The integration of securities markets, however, has not always been accompanied by a harmonisation 
of  structures  and  uniformity  in  European  products.  In  some  sub-segments,  national  methods  of 
launching issues have certainly been preserved. Whereas the bond market can now be described as a 
largely  single  European  market  for  corporate  bonds,  individual  segments  of  the  government  bond 
sector are still marked by the use of national debt securities as benchmarks. Ten-year German Bunds 
are  a  benchmark  for  long-term  capital  market  yields  in  the  entire  euro  area.  This  position  is 
underscored by the fourfold increase in option contracts on the Bund future issued since the end of 
1998.  For  indexed  bonds  the  French  OATis  (Obligations  Assimilables  du  Trésor  inflation-indexed) 
have established themselves as the benchmark used to derive inflation expectations and real interest 
rates for the entire euro area. 
Bank-issued Pfandbriefe have also prevailed in competition; they provide security independently of the 
individual  debtor  by  having  a  public-sector  body  provide  a  guarantee  or  through  the  existence  of  a 
real-estate  lien.  With  the  introduction  of  Jumbo  Pfandbriefe,  with  an  issue  volume  of  over 
Ε 500 million,  the  establishment  of  book-building  as  a  method  of  issue  and  the  assignment  of  an 
                                                      
2   This  tax  exemption  applies  to  participating  interests  held  by  the  seller  for  at  least  one  year  and,  in  the  event  of  a 
disinvestment, will increase yield after taxes.  
3   Data are from aggregate financial flows account. 
4   Data are from the Deutsche Bundesbank’s securities deposit statistics. They do not include safe custody accounts held by 
foreign subsidiaries; therefore, data are distorted downwards. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2001
 external  rating,  which  is  not  yet  standard  practice  for  private  bonds  in  the  euro  area  –  for  German 
Pfandbrief issuers this rating is mostly AAA – Pfandbriefe have evolved from a German speciality to an 
international investment vehicle.5  
German share markets have been marked by a tendency to adapt to Anglo-American structures. In 
addition  to  the  increasing  importance  of  sector  indices  –  including  pan-European  indices  –  and  the 
establishment of a market segment for high-tech, innovative enterprises, the number of cross-listings 
of German shares abroad and foreign shares here in Germany has increased. In 1997 there were 700 
domestic companies and 2,784 foreign companies listed on German stock exchanges; by August of 
this  year  the  figure  had  ballooned  to  1,080  domestic  companies  and  9,964  foreign  companies. 
However, it remains to be seen whether the stock market downturn could lead to greater concentration 
on the more familiar domestic markets. 
Outlook 
On the whole, the German financial system can expect to see a further expansion of more market-
oriented structures. However, the identity of the German financial system will remain intact. That will 
be  particularly  true  of  historically  evolved  financial  relationships,  especially  the  bank-lending  based 
financing  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  And  that  will  also  be  true  of  the  particularly 
prominent position of Pfandbriefe in Germany. 
                                                       
5   Over 95 % of the market volume of public-sector Pfandbriefe, and over 40 % of that of mortgage Pfandbriefe, are German-
issued. Of those, more than 40 % are sold abroad. 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 3
