 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Monetary issues in the European Union and Iceland 
Speech by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, at a seminar organised by the Iceland Trade Council, Euro Info office in Iceland and the EU 
Commission on the theme: Does the Euro affect Iceland?, Reykjavik, 31 October 2001. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The evolution of European integration during the second half of the last century is remarkable in many 
ways.  This  process  began  soon  after  the  end  of  World  War  II  and  represented  an  effort  to  forge 
stronger bonds between European nations and thereby, among other things, reduce the likelihood of 
further conflict on the continent. Although I shall not go into its history here, many notable milestones 
can  be  cited  along  the  course  that  has  been  taken.  One  of  the  most  notable  was  the  formal 
establishment of the Economic and Monetary Union in the beginning of 1999. Now the abolition of the 
individual member nations’ separate currencies  is in  sight.  As of next  year they will be replaced by 
Euro notes and coin. Not only will prices of goods and services be calculated and stated in a single 
currency in the twelve EMU countries, but the same notes and coin will be used for business in them 
all. One consequence of pricing in a single currency in all member countries will be to facilitate buyers 
of  goods  and  services  greatly  in  making  price  comparisons,  and  competition  within  the  EU  will 
certainly become more active than it has been until now.  
Economic and Monetary Union 
The EMU has a population of more than 300 million and accounts for 16% of global GDP. By way of 
comparison, the USA has a population of 280 million and accounts for 22% of global GDP. Exports of 
goods and services are equivalent to 19% of EMU GDP, while the corresponding figure for the USA is 
under 11%. Some 19% of total world merchandise exports come from the EMU, and 15% from the 
USA. 
Twelve of the fifteen EU nations belong to the EMU. The UK, Denmark and Sweden remain outside it, 
but their positions differ somewhat. Denmark and the UK have stated reservations about membership, 
on which they have reached agreement with other EU states. Sweden, on the other hand, has opted 
to  remain  outside  the  EMU,  although  no  special  reservations  have  been  agreed  upon  for  them. 
Denmark is involved in currency cooperation with the EMU, one aspect of which is that the exchange 
rate of the Danish krone may not deviate from the Euro by more than 2.25% from a defined central 
rate. Denmark therefore enjoys limited monetary independence. This is reflected in the fact that the 
Danish Central Bank invariably alters its interest rates in the wake of announcements of changes in 
the European Central Bank (ECB) policy rate. Sweden and the UK have opted for inflation targeting as 
their  monetary  policy  framework,  which  therefore  does  not  have  the  objective  of  keeping  these 
countries’ currencies stable against the Euro. 
European Central Bank 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  stipulates  monetary  arrangements  in  the  EMU.  The  EU  countries  created  a 
framework  for  the  ECB’s  activities  which  was  to  some  extent  modelled  on  the  Central  Bank  of 
Germany  but  differed  in  many  ways  from  the  arrangements  in  others.  Various  conditions  were  set 
which  EU  members  had  to  fulfil  in  order  to  be  granted  EMU  membership.  On  the  one  hand  these 
related to major components of economic developments, such as inflation, fiscal deficit, government 
debt and interest rates. On the other hand they addressed the framework that the Maastricht Treaty 
lays down for monetary policy implementation in the EMU.  
This policy was consistent with growing support for the view that it was natural to set a simple target 
for central banks – i.e. promoting price stability – and to increase their independence from the political 
leadership in pursuing their main objectives, and to strengthen their financial independence. Another 
emphasis was that, at the same time as the central banks’ independence was strengthened, stricter 
demands would need to be made of them regarding transparency in their activities and actions, and 
regarding accountability towards the government and general public.  
BIS Review 95/2001 
 1
 All  this  was  reflected  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  The  European  Central  Bank,  which  formally  began 
operation  in  the  middle  of  1998,  enjoys  extensive  independence  and  is  subject  to  requirements  for 
transparency and accountability. Even though Sweden is not yet a member of the EMU, it amended 
legislation  on  its  own  Central  Bank  which  now  largely  fulfils  the  Maastricht  terms.  The  Bank  of 
England’s legislation does not entirely fulfil the terms of the treaty, but it was granted greatly increased 
independence a few years ago. Denmark has still not amended its central bank legislation, although 
this will need to be done in the event of Denmark joining the EMU, not least to give legal sanction to its 
independence.  
Price stability is the main objective 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  set  a  single  objective  for  the  European  Central  Bank,  namely  ensuring  price 
stability. Price stability was not defined in the treaty, however; this was done by the ECB itself, which 
specified it as an annual rise of under 2% in the Harmonised Consumer Price Index. A separate treaty 
on stability and economic growth stipulates that EMU members should aim for long-term fiscal balance 
or a surplus, and a public sector deficit of less than 3% of GDP. 
The  decisive  viewpoints  behind  the  formulation  of  the  European  monetary  framework  were  also 
dominant in many other parts of the world. Examples are industrialised nations such as Australia and 
New Zealand, while numerous others, such as the transformation economies of Eastern Europe and 
newly industrialised countries in Latin America and Asia amended their legislation to reflect the main 
principles of simple target-setting, independence and transparency.  
Even though Iceland was not a party to European monetary cooperation and there was no outlook for 
a change in this situation for the foreseeable future, the Central Bank of Iceland felt that it ought to 
monitor  developments  as  closely  as  possible.  The  forerunner  of  the  ECB,  the  European  Monetary 
Institute,  was  founded  in  the  beginning  of  1994  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  soon  established 
formal relations with it. This continued after the ECB began operation. Central Bank experts have also 
had  ready  access  to  ECB  experts  on  various  issues  concerning  the  formulation  and,  not  least,  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  One  fruit  of  the  Central  Bank’s  work  in  this  area  was  a 
comprehensive report published in mid-1997 on the Economic and Monetary Union.  
The Central Bank of Iceland changed its monetary instruments 
In March 1998 the Central Bank of Iceland made an extensive reform of its monetary instruments. The 
guiding principle was to bring these instruments into line with those already decided for the ECB, even 
though it had not yet become functional. Consequently, since this time the Central Bank of Iceland has 
employed working procedures which in principle are analogous to those used by the ECB. The main 
difference is in the repurchase agreement auction format. Hitherto, the Central Bank of Iceland has 
auctioned unlimited amounts at a fixed rate of interest. Initially the ECB decided both the interest rate 
and total amount of its repo auctions at any time. The result was that the ECB only accepted a fraction 
of  the  bids  made  for  its  repos.  This  arrangement  was  abandoned  and  more  recently  the  ECB  has 
invited bids for a specific amount, but not at any predetermined rate of interest. Amounts are decided 
on the basis of the ECB’s assessment of the credit institutions’ liquidity requirement and the money 
market interest rates which it aims to achieve. One reason for the ECB’s choice of this format is that 
the various EMU central banks operated different arrangements for liquidity facilities before the ECB 
was established, and different viewpoints needed to be reconciled.  
Regarding other aspects of central bank activities and their effect in Iceland, it should perhaps first be 
pointed  out  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  began  increasing  the  transparency  of  its  activities  and 
actions long ago. Among other things, this is reflected in the Bank’s efforts to explain more clearly its 
policy and assessment of the economic and monetary situation and outlook. One step in this direction 
was taken towards the end of 1999 with a thorough review of the Bank’s publishing activities. It ceased 
publication  of  Monthly  Statistics,  which  had  appeared  since  1974,  and  launched  the  quarterly 
Monetary Bulletin which provides a much better forum than earlier publications for presenting in-depth 
explanations  of  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation  and  outlook,  its 
measures in domestic markets and its policies. Furthermore, the new bulletin created an opportunity to 
present other material which directly or indirectly concerns the Bank’s policy. It was also decided that 
the bank’s quarterly inflation forecast would be published in Monetary Bulletin. Thus Monetary Bulletin 
can  be  described  as  the  main  platform  today  for  the  Central  Bank’s  accountability  towards  the 
Government and general public.  
2 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 New Central Bank Act 
The most important milestone in the changes affecting the Central Bank, however, was reached this 
year with new legislation passed by parliament. A committee appointed by the Prime Minister at the 
end of last year submitted its proposals for a draft Central Bank Act in March. The bill was presented 
to parliament in the beginning of April and such a broad consensus was reached that it was passed 
with  the  unanimous  votes  of  all  56  members  of  parliament  who  attended  the  final  vote.  The  new 
Central Bank Act is closely modelled on the legislative framework that had been created for central 
banks in other countries in recent years, including the EMU. A simple target was set for the Central 
Bank of Iceland, i.e. to promote price stability, it was granted full independence to use its instruments, 
its  financial  independence  was  ensured  and  legal  requirements  were  made  for  transparency  and 
accountability, along with other points. I think it is fair to say that the new Central Bank Act generated 
interest  internationally,  not  least  for  the  speed  at  which  the  legal  review  was  made  and  the  broad 
consensus achieved on the reforms.  
The Central Bank Act authorises the declaration of a numerical target for inflation, subject to the Prime 
Minister’s approval. This provision incorporates into law the policy introduced on March 27 this year 
when the monetary framework was changed and the flexible fixed exchange rate was replaced with an 
inflation target and floating exchange rate. Despite very detailed discussion of the framework changes 
and  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  new  policy,  the  Bank  has  often  noticed  widespread 
misunderstandings. I shall therefore outline the broad principles of monetary policy.  
Inflation is a monetary phenomenon 
The Central Bank was assigned a specific inflation target in the joint declaration which it issued, with 
the Government, on March 27. This stipulated that the Bank should aim for a rate of inflation as close 
as  possible  to  2½%.  Tolerance  limits  were  also  set,  1½%  higher  than  the  inflation  target  and 
1½% lower. The inflation target was defined as the twelve-month rise in the CPI. If inflation exceeded 
the tolerance limits, the Bank would be obliged to bring it back within them as quickly as possible. At 
the same time the Bank would be obliged to submit a report to the Government, which would be made 
public, stating the reason for the deviation, its planned response and the length of time that it expected 
to take to bring inflation back within target. When the target was set, inflation was running relatively 
high in Iceland. Bearing that in mind, the upper tolerance limit was set for 6% this year, 4½% in 2002 
and then 4% from the year 2003 onwards.  
Upheavals in the foreign exchange market in the spring and a sharp depreciation of the króna caused 
a  substantial  rise  in  inflation,  which  exceeded  the  upper  tolerance  limit  in  June.  The  Central  Bank 
submitted  a  detailed  report  to  the  Government  on  June  20.  Other  aspects  of  the  joint  declaration 
included a provision that, notwithstanding the abolition of the exchange rate target band, the Central 
Bank would intervene in the interbank market in foreign exchange by buying and selling currency if it 
deemed  this  necessary  in  order  to  contribute  towards  attaining  the  inflation  target,  or  if  it  viewed 
exchange rate swings as a threat to financial stability. At the same time, the Central Bank undertook to 
produce a quarterly inflation forecast projecting two years into the future.  
It should be remembered that one of the main reasons for the simplification of central bank targets in 
recent years, and for assigning them the main objective of price stability, is that inflation is primarily a 
monetary phenomenon and the long-term impact of monetary policy is above all on prices. Its impact 
on  economic  growth  and  employment  is  therefore  generally  only  temporary.  Since  central  banks 
broadly speaking have only one instrument, i.e. interest rates, and can therefore only achieve a single 
long-term macroeconomic goal, it is natural to set price stability as the ultimate monetary goal. This is 
not  to  say  that  price  stability  is  a  more  important  goal  than,  say,  full  employment,  but  simply  that 
monetary  policy  instruments  are  inherently  better  suited  to  impacting  prices.  It  is  pointless  to  set 
objectives  for  monetary  policy  which  it  cannot  achieve.  Through  price  stability,  a  forward-orientated 
monetary  policy  can  contribute  towards  creating  a  stable  economic  environment  on  which  the 
long-term growth potential of the economy is based.  
From the above it is clear that the Central Bank’s main task is to achieve the inflation target, and this is 
what  it aims to do. There have been  vocal calls recently for the Central Bank to ease  its monetary 
stance in order to soften or even prevent a looming economic contraction. The growth outlook has an 
impact on the output gap, i.e. the deviation in demand from a level which is consistent with balanced 
supply and demand for domestic goods and factors of production. The output gap is subsequently one 
of the factors that play a key role in the inflation cycle. All things being equal, the growth outlook thus 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 3
 exerts an influence on monetary policy, namely the worse the outlook, the lower the interest rate, and 
the contrary. For as long as inflation remains at its present high level, however, it is unavoidable to 
allow the output gap to shrink sufficiently and the Central  Bank cannot apply  its instruments at this 
stage to prevent that happening.  
High interest rates are counter-inflationary 
The Central Bank has held the view that, until clear signs emerge that its August inflation forecast will 
hold good, it is still not safe to lower interest rates. Impulsive action could entail a risk that inflation will 
magnify even further, with very dire consequences for households, businesses and economic growth 
conditions. Claims have also been heard that Iceland’s high interest rates are inflationary rather than 
counter-inflationary. The Central Bank does not agree with this view, which cannot be supported with 
economic theories, studies or research. On the contrary, there is every indication that interest rates 
have a similar effect in Iceland to that elsewhere. The Icelandic economy was showing signs of strong 
overheating which apparently peaked last year. It is beyond doubt that the tight monetary stance made 
a  major  contribution  towards  cooling  the  economy.  And  such  a  winding  down  was  necessary,  too, 
since  great  macroeconomic  imbalances  had  emerged,  reflected  most  clearly  in  an  unacceptable 
current  account  deficit  and  inflationary  pressures.  It  is  therefore  inevitable  that  the  output  gap  will 
narrow  in  order  to  bring  down  inflation,  and  that  national  income  will  drop  even  further  in  order  to 
achieve  a  significant  reduction  in  the  current  account  deficit,  which  is  far  beyond  a  sustainable 
long-term level.  
High  interest  rates  can  be  painful,  not  least  for  the  households  and  businesses  that  have  been 
imprudent in their consumption and investments recently and have relied too heavily on the facilities of 
credit institutions. It is out of the question for the Central Bank to base its interest rate policy on the 
actions of the least prudent members of the community. This can only be based on provisions made in 
laws  and the joint  declaration by the Government and the Central  Bank this March, i.e.  to  promote 
price stability. This is the guiding aim of central bank activities in industrial countries around the world, 
because it creates a climate for economic growth and greater well-being for citizens. In a world of free 
capital  movements  and  greatly  enhanced  access  to  credit  compared  with  earlier  times,  businesses 
and households, and credit institutions too, must find their bearings for themselves.  
Understandably,  many  people  complain  about  high  interest  rates,  but  the  lively  debates  in  recent 
weeks  have  often  revealed  excessive  faith  in  the  effect  that  an  interest  rate  cut  would  have  on 
economic developments. A slowdown in economic activity is not solely caused by interest rates. Other 
factors that deserve to be mentioned are the contractionary impact of fishing quota cuts, the downturn 
in  the  IT  sector  which  is  closely  linked  to  global  trends,  and  fluctuations  in  power-intensive 
development  projects  which  are  unaffected  by  domestic  interest  rates.  Cutting  interest  rates  now 
would have a limited immediate effect on the supply side of the economy, while high interest rates act 
with full force on the demand side where they serve to reduce inflation and domestic demand, which 
will contribute to improved macroeconomic balance and low inflation.  
Iceland’s currency options 
I have outlined various aspects of the Central Bank’s monetary policy. As I mentioned, Iceland has not 
taken part in European currency cooperation. Various currency framework options that Iceland ought 
to consider are often named in public discussions. A detailed account of most of them was given in the 
Central Bank’s 1997 report on the EMU. It is frequently said that Iceland ought to adopt the Euro as its 
currency,  either  unilaterally  or  through  associate  membership  of  the  EMU.  I  strongly  warn  against 
simplifying  the  options  available  to  us  in  this  respect.  Even  if  associate  membership  were  being 
offered, which does not seem likely, it seems fair to assume that any country which was interested in it 
would need to fulfil the Maastricht Treaty requirements for EMU membership. These include a rate of 
inflation no higher than 1½% above that in the three EU countries where it is lowest, a one-year record 
of average nominal interest rates on long-term bonds no more than 2% higher than in the three EU 
countries  where  inflation  is  lowest,  and  membership  of  the  ERM  for  at  least  two  years  without 
devaluing the currency and without exceeding the deviation band. Iceland will obviously not be fulfilling 
these conditions in the immediate future. Some form of EMU membership in the future would therefore 
not  release  Iceland  from  the  obligation  to  bring  inflation  down  to  a  similar  level  to  that  among  its 
trading  partner  countries.  It  may  be  added  that  even  if  Iceland  fulfilled  all  these  conditions,  it  is 
extremely unlikely that it would be able to negotiate, in the foreseeable future, associate membership 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 of  the  EMU  or  some  kind  of  other  bilateral  currency  cooperation  with  it.  All  the  signs  point  in  the 
opposite direction, whatever the phrasing of individual articles in the Treaty of Rome and Maastricht 
Treaty might suggest. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that twelve Eastern European countries 
are  waiting  to  be  admitted  to  the  European  Union  and,  later,  the  EMU.  The  ECB  and  Community 
leadership have firmly underlined that these nations should fulfil all the conditions for participation in 
EMU.  Thus  the  EU  is  highly  unlikely  to  agree  to  set  any  precedent  which  these  nations  could  take 
advantage of as a short-cut into the EMU.  
Iceland  has  chosen  to  remain  outside  the  EU  and  has  not  declared  an  interest  in  membership.  If 
Iceland were to show an interest in adopting the Euro as its currency, the most obvious course would 
be to join the EU with all the advantages and obligations that this entails, including membership of the 
EMU.  Such a decision, however, depends on more factors than just the national currency, and this 
process  would  take  a  good  many  years.  Of  course,  this  is  a  highly  political  question  and  therefore 
outside the scope of this address. We need to continue to find our bearings in the global community as 
a  nation  with  its  own  currency,  which  in  an  environment  of  free  capital  movements  calls  for  very 
disciplined economic policy implementation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Representatives of all EU  countries  were  involved  in formulating and developing the Economic and 
Monetary Union. They created a monetary framework within the EMU which they regarded as serving 
the Community’s citizens best. Although Iceland stands outside the EMU, we have incorporated into 
our  monetary  policy  implementation  much  of  what  the  EU  countries  agreed  that  best  served  their 
interests. I am convinced that we will benefit from this. 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 5
