 Bruno Gehrig: Review of the Swiss economy: end-of-year media news 
conference 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Dr  Bruno  Gehrig,  President  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the 
End-of-year Media News Conference, Zurich, 7 December 2001. 
 Financial markets characterised by economic slowdown 
Development  on  the  financial  markets  during  the  current  year  was  characterised  by  a  surprisingly 
significant weakening of the economy affecting all the major economic regions around the world. The 
slowdown  was  most  pronounced  in  the  US,  but  Europe  is  experiencing  a  considerable  setback  in 
growth  as  well.  Inflationary  pressure,  already  weak,  thus  eased  further.  The  central  banks  took 
advantage  of  the  rapidly  increasing  flexibility  and  lowered  their  key  rates,  in  some  cases  down  to 
historical lows. 
Up until the middle of the year, the prevalent opinion in the financial markets was that - buoyed by the 
Fed's marked interest rate cuts - the US economy, along with the global economy, would stage a fairly 
swift  recovery  from  the  deterioration  in  the  technology  sector  and  the  associated  weak  investment 
activity. For this reason, the second quarter was characterised by a recovery on most stock markets, 
increasing bond yields and a US dollar defying gravity. By mid-year it became clear that the cyclical 
decline  was  likely  to  be  more  serious  and  to  last  longer.  This  reversal  of  opinion  led  to  investors 
gradually becoming more risk averse. Equities portfolios were regrouped and invested in the money 
market and in bonds. Growing pessimistic sentiment vis-à-vis the economy led to lower capital market 
yields, declining stock valuations and a weaker US dollar. 
The general pattern of activities on the financial markets was and still is characterised by a marked 
parallelism  in  price  fluctuations.  On  the  one  hand,  this  is  a  reflection  of  the  synchronisation  of  the 
current and expected economic development which has been apparent for several quarters and which 
in turn leads to parallel monetary policy reactions. On the other hand, the widespread globalisation of 
capital  market  processes  has  considerably  intensified  -  at  the  expense  of  country-specific 
differentiations - the impact of the valuation factors effective worldwide. 
The shock of 11 September 
The attack of 11 September hit the world economy and the financial markets in a state of instability. It 
did not trigger any new trends, but magnified developments which were already under way. Business 
and consumer confidence suffered a severe blow, which further dimmed economic prospects in the 
US and in Europe. The sudden increase in risk aversion led to drastic corrections on all major stock 
exchanges and to a veritable flight into the Swiss franc. The record highs the Swiss franc reached on 
21 September went in tandem with the stock markets hitting record lows. In response to the rapid and 
marked  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc,  we  cut  interest  rates  in  an  extraordinary  move  on 
24 September.  Following  this  step,  and  in  the  course  of  a  broader  normalisation  of  the  financial 
markets,  the  euro  rebounded  somewhat  vis-à-vis  the  Swiss  franc.  Our  currency  nevertheless 
remained strong against the euro. At the end of November, it was quoted at 3.5 % above its average 
rate during the first eight months of the year. The euro-Swiss franc rate was somewhat more volatile 
as well. Its volatility in additional currencies now stands at about the same level as previously against 
the D-mark. 
On  the  stock  markets,  a  distinct  corrective  movement  set  in  even  before  the  end  of  September. 
Meanwhile,  most  stock  indices  are  above  the  level  obtaining  on  10  September.  Bond  yields  have 
increased a little in the last few weeks as well. Both effects can be interpreted as a sign of renewed 
optimism concerning the economic development in the medium term. 
In the days after the terror attacks, the resiliency of the financial system was put to a test never before 
described  or  even  considered  in  any  emergency  plan.  Payment  transactions  in  US  dollars  were 
affected directly. Faced with the possible breakdown of individual banks and parts of the system which 
are  crucial  for  carrying  out  transactions,  the  Federal  Reserve  -  by  way  of  the  discount  window  - 
pumped  massive  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the  system.  On  the  basis  of  a  swap  agreement,  the 
European Central Bank supplied banks in the euro area directly with dollar liquidity. The National Bank 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 1
 was in close touch with the Swiss banks and - should this have been necessary - we would have been 
in a position to lend support as well. The demand for Swiss franc liquidity also rose sharply. Naturally, 
we made the necessary amounts available to the full extent. As was to be expected, it became evident 
that only a part of this liquidity was needed, and we were able to reabsorb it through repo transactions 
as  early  as  12  September.  On  the  two  days  following  the  attacks,  repos  totalling  approximately 
Sfr 40 billion were turned over. 
The experiences gained in the aftermath of 11 September have shown three things. Firstly, that the 
financial system - even in this unique and completely unexpected situation - still managed to function 
relatively smoothly. Different players contributed to this, but it was mainly the banks themselves which 
supported one another with creative flexibility in the interest of the situation as a whole. Secondly, our 
repo system enabled us to take the necessary steps without problems. Had we still been dependent 
on foreign exchange swaps with US dollars, conducting monetary policy under the given conditions 
would have been eminently more difficult. Thirdly, these experiences prove how vulnerable the highly 
integrated global financial system really is. They clearly underscore that securing the stability of the 
financial system must constitute an important part of the role of central banks. 
The Swiss franc on the foreign exchange and capital markets 
We do not expect that the introduction of euro cash, which is upon us in a little less than a month, will 
have any significant impact on the financial markets. However, it will be interesting to see if, to what 
extent,  and  in  what  areas  people  in  Switzerland  will  use  the  euro  as  a  means  of  payment.  Certain 
structural  effects  of  the  euro  have  already  become  evident  for  quite  a  while,  for  example  on  the 
primary  bond  market,  where  the  Swiss  franc  is  losing  in  weight  while  the  euro  capital  market  is 
enjoying growing popularity due mainly to its excellent liquidity. 
According to the survey conducted by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) for the trading days 
of  the month  of  April,  the  trading  volume  in  international  foreign  exchange  transactions  dropped  by 
nearly  20%  within  three  years.  Another  contributing  factor  to  this  development  was  the  advance  of 
electronic  trading  and  the  discontinuation  of  trading  between  the  euro's  predecessor  currencies. 
Roughly  6%  of  all  global  foreign  exchange  transactions  include  the  Swiss  franc.  This  share  still 
amounted to 7% three years ago and to just over 8% nine years back. The fact that the Swiss franc 
has lost relative significance in foreign exchange trading is probably largely attributable to institutional 
conditions  for  trading  in  additional  currencies  having  improved.  By  far  most  of  the  Swiss  franc 
transactions  were  effected  against  the  US  dollar.  This  currency  pair  was  traded  approximately  five 
times as frequently as the Swiss franc-euro pair. This volume ratio, however, is likely to be subject to 
strong fluctuations depending on specific exchange rate developments. At any rate, the National Bank 
will be pleased to see the historic, special role played by the Swiss franc as a foreign exchange trading 
currency continuing to diminish. 
 
 2 
 BIS Review 101/2001
   BIS Review 101/2001 
 3
