   Raghuram Rajan: Towards rules of the monetary game 
Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF/Government 
of India Conference on “Advancing Asia: Investing for the Future”, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. 
 This talk draws extensively on a paper entitled “Rules of the Monetary Game” with Dr. Prachi Mishra at the Reserve 
Bank of India. 
There are few areas of robust growth around the world, with the IMF repeatedly reducing its 
growth  forecasts  in  recent  quarters.  This  period  of  slow  growth  is  particularly  dangerous 
because both industrial countries and a number of emerging markets need high growth to quell 
rising domestic political tensions. Policies that attempt to divert growth from others rather than 
create new growth, or that create growth while fostering instability elsewhere, are more likely 
under these circumstances. Even as we create conditions for sustainable growth, we need 
new rules of the game, enforced impartially by multilateral organizations, to ensure countries 
adhere to international responsibilities. I propose to sketch how we could do this in this talk. 
Why is growth weak? 
Why is the world finding it so hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates? The immediate 
answer is that the financial boom preceding the Great Recession left industrial countries with 
an overhang of debt, and debt, whether on governments, households, or banks, is holding 
back growth.1 While the remedy may be to write down debt so as to revive demand from the 
indebted, it is debatable whether additional debt fueled demand is sustainable. At any rate, 
large-scale debt write-offs seem politically difficult even if they are economically warranted. 
But perhaps the debt overhang points to a deeper cause; the debt-fueled demand before the 
Great Recession, which has led to the debt overhang now, hid a structural slowdown in global 
potential growth, perhaps because of the difficult-to-understand consequences of population 
ageing across the industrial world, and the slowdown in productivity growth. 
Structural  reforms,  typically  ones  that  increase  competition,  foster  innovation,  and  drive 
institutional  change,  are  the  way  to  raise  potential  growth.  But  these  hurt  protected 
constituencies  that  have  become  accustomed  to  the  rents  they  get  from  the  status  quo. 
Moreover, the gains to constituencies that are benefited are typically later and uncertain. No 
wonder Jean-Claude Juncker, then Luxembourg’s prime minister, said at the height of the Euro 
crisis, “We all know what to do, we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we’ve done it!” 
The growth imperative 
If indeed fundamentals are such that that the industrial world has, and will, grow slowly for a 
while before new technologies and new markets come to the rescue, would it be politically 
easy to settle for slower growth? After all, per capita income is high in industrial countries, and 
a few years of slow growth would not be devastating at the aggregate level. Why is there so 
much of a political need for growth in industrial countries? 
One reason is the need to fulfil government commitments such as debt and social security 
entitlements.  Another  reason  is  that  growth  is  necessary  for  inter-generational  equity, 
                                                
1  See the interesting evidence in Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, House of Debt (Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 
2014) and the cross-country evidence in Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different (Princeton 
University Press, New Jersey, 2008). For an illuminating overall view of the global financial crisis and the policy 
remedies, see Martin Wolf, The Shifts and the Shocks: What We’ve Learned and Have Still to Learn from the 
Financial Crisis (Penguin USA 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   especially because the young, who are most benefited from job creation, are the generations 
that will be working to pay off commitments to older generations. Given the young are also the 
cohorts that can take to the streets, growth is essential for social harmony. A third reason is 
that, within country, long periods of below par growth can lead the unemployed to become 
unemployable. 
Growth  is  also  extremely  important for  emerging  markets  and  developing  countries,  where 
populations are typically younger, poorer, and social safety nets thinner. With everyone looking 
for growth, but limited political room for structural reforms and substantial time lags before they 
pay off, every country is looking for alternatives. 
The monetary dilemma 
Industrial country central bankers know that monetary policy cannot substitute for structural 
reforms and elevate growth potential. They have a different problem from the country’s political 
authorities, though its roots may be common. Inflation is flirting with the lower limit of their 
inflation mandate and threatens to stay lower for long. With interest rates already very low, and 
with pundits constantly reminding them that “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary 
phenomenon” they have to go beyond ordinary monetary policy, or lose credibility and risk 
violating their domestic mandate. 
No central banker can claim they are out of tools. For after all, if all else fails, there is the 
“helicopter drop”, where the central bank prints money and literally sprays it on the streets to 
create inflation (more prosaically, it sends a check to every citizen, perhaps more to the poor 
who are more likely to spend). But before it reaches this pass of monetary financing of the 
fiscal deficit, there are a whole range of unconventional tools ranging from various forms of 
asset purchases termed “quantitative easing” to negative interest rates. 
But as central bankers flirt with ever more unconventional policies, it is worth asking if these 
policies  really  move  the  economy  towards  the  desired  objective.  Monetary  policy  works 
through the  public’s  expectations.  If  ever more aggressive  policy  convinces  the  public  that 
calamity is around the corner, it may tempt large segments to save rather than spend. The 
effect is magnified if there is a sense that the consequences of today’s policies (distorted asset 
prices, high government debt, high private debt etc.) will have to be reversed in the future at 
great cost to the system. 
Perhaps worse is if the public believes that policies will never change, and takes on leverage 
and positions in assets commensurate with that. While this may help the central bank achieve 
its objectives in the short run, the shifts in asset price when policy does inevitably change, with 
effects exacerbated by enhanced leverage, could create enormous dislocation. 
While the jury is still out on the effects of unconventional monetary policy on the domestic 
economy, it seems fair to say that the benefits seem to be diminishing after years of effort, and 
the costs increasing. Also, if structural impediments are the primary cause of slow growth, one 
could ask if unconventional monetary policy, by giving the public the impression that something 
is being done, actually takes the pressure off politicians to undertake the required policy actions 
– by stating monetary policy is the only game in town, central bankers make it the only game 
in town. Unfortunately, given their domestic inflation mandate, central bankers cannot but try 
anything that could work. And this leads to an important consequence of their policies that is 
neglected, the external spillovers effects. 
Spillovers from monetary policy 
All monetary policies have external spillover effects. If a country reduces domestic interest 
rates, its exchange rate also typically depreciates, helping exports. The key, however, is that 
under normal circumstances, the “demand creating” effects of lower interest rates on domestic 
consumption and investment tend to be substantial, and the “demand switching” effects of the 
lower exchange rate in enhancing external demand for the country’s goods are likely to be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   relatively small. Indeed, one could argue that the spillovers to the rest of the world could be 
positive on net, as the enhanced domestic demand draws in substantial imports, offsetting the 
higher exports. 
Matters  are  less  clear  in  the  circumstances  we  find  ourselves  in  today,  and  with  the 
unconventional  policies  countries  are  adopting.  For  instance,  if  the  interest  rate  sensitive 
segments of the economy are constrained by existing debt, lower rates may have little effect 
on enhancing domestic demand, but continue to have demand switching effects through the 
exchange rate. 
Similarly, the unconventional “quantitative easing” policy of buying assets such as long term 
bonds from domestic players may certainly lower long rates but may not have an effect on 
domestic investment if aggregate capacity utilization is low. Indeed, as argued earlier, savers 
may respond to the increased distortion in asset prices by saving more. And if certain domestic 
institutional investors such as pension funds and insurance companies need long term bonds 
to meet their future claims, they may respond by buying such bonds in less distorted markets 
abroad. Such a search for yield will depreciate the exchange rate. The primary effect of this 
policy  on  domestic  demand  may  be  through  the  “demand  switching”  effects  of  a  lower 
exchange rate rather than through a demand creating channel. 
Of course, if all countries engage in demand switching policies, we could have a race to the 
bottom, with no one any better off. Nevertheless, countries may find it hard to get out of such 
policies because the immediate effect for the country that exits might be a serious appreciation 
of the exchange rate and a fall in domestic activity. 
The  bottom  line  is  that  simply  because  a  policy  is  called  monetary,  unconventional  or 
otherwise, it may not be beneficial on net for the world. That all monetary policies have external 
spillovers does not mean that they are all justified. What matters is the net spillovers. One 
source of spillovers is through the trade channel, the relative magnitude of demand creating 
versus demand switching effects. Another source of spillovers is through cross border capital 
flows, and their effect on financial stability elsewhere. 
Of course, a country’s international responsibilities in this regard are murky, while the central 
bank’s  domestic  mandate  is  explicit.  This  leads  to  a  possibly  serious  asymmetry  in 
responsibility. If the central bank is in danger of falling below the lower bound of its inflation 
mandate, for example, it is required to adopt all possible policies to get inflation back on target, 
no matter what their external effect. Indeed, it can even intervene directly in the exchange rate 
in  a  sustained  and  unidirectional  way,  though  internationally  this  could  be  seen  as  an 
abdication of international responsibility according to the old standards. In the current state of 
affairs,  industrial  country  central  banks  find  all  sorts  of  ways  to  justify  their  policies  in 
international fora, without acknowledging the unmentionable – that the exchange rate may be 
the primary channel of transmission, and that adverse capital flow spillovers may be sizeable. 
Of course, central banks consider “spillbacks” to their policies from abroad, but these may be 
a small fraction of overall spillovers. In what follows, I will examine sensible rules of monetary 
behavior assuming the domestic mandate does not trump international responsibility. 
Rules of the game 
What would be the basis for the new rules? As described elsewhere, the state of theoretical 
models  and  empirical  work  do  not  allow  for  clear  cut  identification  of  spillovers  and  their 
consequences.2 Rather than wait for clear identification, which may be a long while coming, 
perhaps as a start policies could be broadly rated based on analytical inputs and discussion. 
To use a driving analogy, polices that are generally seen to have few adverse spillovers, and 
are  even  to  be  encouraged  by  the  global  community  should  be  rated  Green,  policies  that 
                                                
2   See Prachi Mishra and Raghuram Rajan, “Rules of the Monetary Game”, 2016, mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   should be used temporarily and with care could be rated Orange, and policies that should be 
avoided at all times could be rated Red. To establish such ratings, the effects of any policy 
have to be seen over time, rather than at a point in time. 
In general, policies that are likely to have net adverse outside spillovers over time could be 
rated red and should be avoided. Such policies obviously include those that have small positive 
effects in the home country (where the policy action originates) combined with large negative 
effects  in  the  foreign  country  (where  the  spillovers  occur).  For  example,  if  unconventional 
monetary policy actions lead to small positive effects on exports to emerging economies (EMs) 
and a feeble recovery in the source country but large capital outflows and asset price bubbles 
in the EMs, these policies could be rated Red. Global welfare would decrease with this policy. 
If a policy has positive effects on both home and foreign countries, and therefore on global 
welfare, it would definitely be rated Green. Conventional monetary policy would typically fall in 
this category, as it would raise output in the home economy, and create demand for exports 
from the foreign economy. A Green rating for such policies would, however, assume that the 
stage of the financial and credit cycle in the home and foreign economies is such that financial 
stability risks from low interest rates are likely to be limited. 
A policy could also be rated Green if it acts as a booster shot and can jump-start a large home 
economy, but creates temporary negative spillovers for the foreign economy. Even if there are 
temporary  adverse  spillovers  on  foreign  countries,  the  policy,  through  its  effect  on  home 
economy growth and demand for foreign goods, can eventually provide offsetting large positive 
spillovers  to  the  rest  of the  world.  Of  course,  it  is  important  that  the  home  economy,  after 
receiving the booster shot and picking up growth, not follow policies (such as holding down its 
exchange rate) that minimize positive spillovers to other countries. A policy rated Red on a 
static basis could thus be deemed Green based on implicit commitments over time. 
It is possible to visualize other policies that have large positive effects for the originating country 
(because of the value of the policy or because of the country’s relative size) and sustained 
small negative effects for the rest of the world. Global welfare, crudely speaking, may go up 
with the policy, even though welfare outside the originating country goes down. While it is hard 
to rate such policies without going into specifics, these may correctly belong in the Orange 
category  –  permissible  for  some  time  but  not  on  a  sustained  basis.  Even  conventional 
monetary policies to raise growth in the home economy could fall in the Orange category if 
countries are at a stage of financial cycle where low interest rates lead to significant financial 
stability risks in the home and foreign economies. 
Clearly, foreign  countries may  have  policy  room  to respond,  and  that  should  be  taken  into 
account. Perhaps the right way to measure spillovers to the foreign country is to measure their 
welfare without the policy under question` and their welfare after the policy is implemented and 
response initiated. So, for instance, a home country A at the zero lower bound may initiate 
Quantitative Easing (QE), and a foreign country B may respond by cutting interest rates to 
avoid capital inflows and exchange rate appreciation. The spillover effects of QE would be 
based on B’s welfare if QE was not undertaken versus B’s welfare after QE is initiated and it 
responds. 
Overall,  whether  policies  are  rated  Red,  Green,  or  Orange  would  depend  on  a  number  of 
factors such as the time dimension; stage of the financial and business cycle in the home and 
foreign  countries;  whether  the  policy  action  constitutes  a  booster  shot  to  jump  start  the 
economy or gives only a mild boost and has to be employed for a sustained period; whether 
standard transmission channels are clogged to warrant the use of unconventional policies; 
whether the foreign country has room to adopt buffering policies; whether the spillovers impact 
poor countries which have weak institutions and less room to respond, etc. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Moving forward 
The next crucial question is: who should measure and analyze spillovers, what would be an 
appropriate forum to discuss spillover effects from specific policies, and the ratings of these 
policies? How should we proceed? 
International Discussion 
Given the constraints and political difficulties under which international organizations operate, 
it  may  be  appropriate  to  start  with  a  group  of  eminent  academics  with  reasonable 
representation  across  the  globe,  and  have  them  measure  and  analyze  the  spillovers,  and 
grade policies. 
Perhaps  the  next  step  would  be  an  agreement  to  discuss  policies  and  their  international 
spillover effects at meetings such as those of the IMF Board, the IMFC, the BIS and the G-20. 
The discussion would be based on background papers, which would be commissioned from 
both  traditional  sources  like  the  IMF,  as  well  as  non-traditional  sources  like  the  group  of 
academics and EM central banks. 
These papers would attempt to isolate the nature of spillovers as well as their magnitude, and 
attempt  a  preliminary  classification  of  policy  actions.  Almost  surely,  there  will  be  a  lot  of 
fuzziness about which color to attribute to a wide range of recent policies. But discussion can 
help participants understand both how the policies could be classified if we had better models 
and data, as well as how the models and data gathering can be improved. 
Country Responsibilities before Formal Rules 
When policies are being discussed so as to get better understanding, no policies that affect 
the international monetary system should be off the table. Importantly, simply denoting a policy 
with the label “monetary” should not give it an automatic free pass because it falls under the 
central bank’s domestic mandate. What will be important is neither the policymaker’s mandate, 
professed intent, or instruments, but actual channels of transmission and outcomes, including 
spillovers. 
Policymakers  will  respond  to  the  background  papers  by  stating  and  explaining  their  policy 
actions, attempting to persuade the international community they fall in the Green and Orange 
zones. 
International conference 
Perhaps  free  and  frank  discussion  may  be  enough  to  get  countries  to  adopt  responsible 
policies.  If  not,  as  the  international  community  builds  understanding  on  what  constitutes 
sensible rules of the game, and how to label policies in that context, perhaps an international 
conference may be warranted to see how the community’s understanding of beneficial rules 
can  be  implemented.  At  that  time,  a  discussion  of  how  a  central  bank’s  international 
responsibilities  fit  in  with  its  domestic  mandate  may  be  warranted.  While  recognizing  the 
political difficulty of altering any central bank’s mandate, the conference will have to deliberate 
on how international responsibilities can be woven into existing mandates. It will also have to 
decide whether a new international agreement along the lines of Bretton Woods is needed, or 
whether much can be accomplished by small changes in the International Monetary Fund’s 
Articles of Agreement. 
Role of the fund 
What role would the Fund play? The obligations of members and the authority of the Fund are 
derived from the Articles of Agreement. Section 1 of Article IV makes clear that IMF members 
are under general obligation “to collaborate with other members of the Fund to assure orderly 
exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates”. The meaning of 
“general obligation” is unclear in the Articles but could be “relied upon as a basis for the Fund 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   to call on its members to take specific actions or to refrain from taking specific actions” (IMF, 
2006). Article IV further states that “In particular, each member shall … (iii) avoid manipulating 
exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent effective balance of 
payments  adjustment  or  to  gain  unfair  competitive  advantage  over  other  members  …..”. 
Further, The Principles for the Guidance of Members’ Exchange Rate Policies (originally 1977, 
amended in 2007) notes that “ … C. Members should take into account in their intervention 
policies the interests of other members, including those in whose currency they intervene”. 
Although the Articles of Agreement or The Principles do not define “manipulation” in any detail, 
IMF (2007) narrows the scope of manipulation by noting that “manipulation of the exchange 
rate is only carried through policies that are targeted at – and actually affect – the level of 
exchange rate. Moreover, manipulation may cause the exchange rate to move or may prevent 
such movement.” 
In practice, it may be difficult to determine if a policy is targeted at attaining a level of exchange 
rate.  Direct  policy  actions  such  as  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  or  indirect 
policies  such  as  monetary,  fiscal,  and  trade  policies  or  regulations  of  capital  movements, 
regardless  of  the  intent  or  purpose,  can  affect  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate,  and  can  be 
interpreted as “manipulation”. The interpretation of the Articles of Agreement could perhaps be 
broadened in scope to include a wider range of policies, which can primarily have effects on 
the exchange rates, and therefore beggar-thy-neighbor consequences. 
While  the  Articles  of  Agreement  include  members’  obligations  in  relation  to  exchange  rate 
policies, global financial stability implications of country specific policies are not touched upon 
anywhere  in  the  Articles.  Members’  obligations are  considered  only  in  relation  to  domestic 
growth objectives. For example, based on the Articles, a country with a weak economy can 
pursue loose monetary policies to stimulate output and employment. Despite the implications 
of such policies for financial stability in other countries, the country would argue that its policies 
are in line with Article IV, Section 1(i) which allows each member to “(i) … direct its economic 
and  financial  policies  toward  the  objective  of  fostering  orderly  economic  growth  with 
reasonable price stability …”. More generally, the Fund’s Articles may need altering based on 
the discussion of the rules of the game. 
Moreover, although broader surveillance by the Fund of its members’ exchange rate policies, 
and other policies with significant financial sector spillovers, and perhaps public statements 
about  such  policies  can  have  signaling  effects,  countries  are  not  obligated  to  follow  Fund 
advice unless in a program. The more pertinent question, therefore, might be what can the 
Fund really do once its Executive Board determines that a particular country is in violation of 
its obligations under the new rules of the game? Hopefully, the clear focus on the downsides 
of the particular country’s actions for the rest of the world will lead to political and economic 
pressures from  around the  world  that  make  the country  cease  and  desist. The  clearer  the 
eventual rules of the game, the more likely this outcome. 
Conclusion 
Given the importance of spillovers from monetary policies, especially in the face of globally low 
inflation, it is important we start building a global consensus on how to get better outcomes for 
the world. Nevertheless, with economic analysis of these issues at an early stage, it is unlikely 
we  will  get  strong  policy  prescriptions  soon,  let  alone  international  agreement  on  them, 
especially given that a number of country authorities like central banks have explicit domestic 
mandates. 
This  paper  therefore  suggests  a  period  of  focused  discussion,  first  outside  international 
meetings, then  within  international  meetings.  Such  a  discussion  need  not take  place  in  an 
environment of finger pointing and defensiveness, but as an attempt to understand what can 
be reasonable, and not overly intrusive, rules of conduct. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   As consensus builds on the rules of conduct, we can contemplate the next step of whether to 
codify them through international agreement, see how the Articles of multilateral watchdogs 
like the IMF will have to be altered, and how country authorities will interpret or alter domestic 
mandates to incorporate international responsibilities. 
The international community has a choice. We can pretend all is well with the global financial 
non-system and hope that nothing goes spectacularly wrong. Or we can start building a system 
for the integrated world of the twenty first century. I do hope we can consider some initial steps. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
