   François Villeroy de Galhau: Identifying various forms of savings in 
France 
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
25th Parliamentary Conference on Savings, Paris, 2 February 2016. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  take  part  in  this  25th  Parliamentary  Conference  on  Savings. 
Before answering your questions, I’d like to share with you an observation followed by a few 
possible avenues for thought.  
I 
First, the observation, which is that here in France, we have plenty of savings, 
but not enough goes towards financing investment and hence growth.  
a)  
France  certainly  doesn’t  lack  savings.  It  has  one  of  the  highest  household  saving 
ratios in the euro area, at 15.2%1 in the third quarter of 2015 compared with 12.7% for single 
currency bloc. The vast majority of these funds are invested in property; however, nearly 7% 
of household income is channeled into financial investments. At end-September 2015, close 
to EUR 4.4 trillion were invested in financial products – that’s twice the size of French GDP. 
b)  
That said, French savers are increasingly opting for safer forms of investment, 
primarily  bank  deposits  and  regulated  savings  products,  which  are  highly  liquid,  and  euro-
denominated  life  insurance  products,  essentially  bond  funds:  63%  of  household  financial 
assets in Q3 2015 compared with 56% in 2006. The share of household wealth invested in 
risky assets2 is much higher in the euro area than in France (89% of GDP in Q4 2014, versus 
74% for France), and nearly three and a half times higher in the United States (250% of GDP). 
A large part of the gap with the United States can be attributed to the significant role played by 
US pension funds; however, rates of share ownership are also markedly higher among US 
households than they are in France. 
c)  
On  the  one  hand,  this  means  that  French  savings  generate  smaller  returns, 
especially  in  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment;  on  the  other,  it  also  undermines 
France’s economic growth potential, as insufficient savings are used to finance innovative 
business  investments  –  an  area  which  requires  large  amounts  of  capital,  particularly  equity 
capital. Let me just give you a few figures by way of comparison: in the United States, the net 
equity of non-financial corporations amounts to 123% of GDP, compared with an average of 52% 
in the euro area, which is less than half, and 66% in France. The challenge is therefore this: how 
can we encourage French savers to take on a greater, sensible amount of risk in order to better 
finance our economy? The question is even more relevant in light of our current financial and 
monetary policy stance: interest rates are low and are likely to remain so for a significant length 
of time. You shouldn’t see this as too accurate a prediction of the future path of monetary policy; 
rather it’s what is right today for our current level of inflation, for the state of the economy and for 
growth.  Low  rates  provide  an  incentive  to  diversify  savings,  but,  as  we  all  know,  this  raises 
important  challenges.  Therefore,  without  claiming  to  have  any  clear-cut  answers,  I’d  like  to 
suggest three avenues worth exploring in this important debate. 
                                                
1   Gross average over four quarters. 
2   Risky assets are defined here as debt securities, listed shares, unlisted shares and other equity interests, shares 
in non-money market funds, shares in pension funds and shares in unit-linked life insurance products. Risk-free 
assets  include  cash,  sight  deposits,  term  deposits,  shares  in  money  market  funds  and  shares  in  euro-
denominated life-insurance products. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   We need to act in two main areas, while taking one essential precaution.  
II  
a)  
First we need to gradually pass the decrease in interest rates through to the 
returns on risk-free investments. This is why I proposed lowering the interest rate on new 
French housing savings plans (PEL), which since yesterday has been set at 1.5%; it’s also 
why  we  need  to  continue  lowering  the  returns  on  life  insurance  savings  invested  in  euro-
denominated funds, in addition to the cuts already announced this year.  
b)  
The second focus for action is the development of new savings products. Let’s 
be clear on this: French and European savers aren’t going to become Americanised in their 
savings behaviour or appetite for risk. These transatlantic differences have historical, cultural 
and sociological roots. And it’s not our role to go into them here, even less try to change them. 
However,  the  French  debate  would  be  made  much  easier  if  we  distinguished  clearly 
between  the  two  main  objectives  underlying  savers’  aversion  to  risk:  security  and 
liquidity. With regard to security, or capital protection, this is something that is important for 
savers. Genuine risk-taking, with all the potential gains it entails, will only ever be for a minority 
of  investors.  In  the  case  of  liquidity,  however,  increased  life  expectancy,  lower  pension 
replacement rates and the greater health risks associated with living longer are all pushing 
French savers to adopt longer and longer investment horizons. We need to be able to offer 
them suitable savings products: ones that are less liquid, with or without a long-term capital 
guarantee, and that allow savers to benefit from the higher returns offered by equities over the 
long term. A crucial point is to avoid any tax distortions that might mean these products are 
penalised more than liquid and risk-free investments. This level playing field in terms of taxation 
should also apply to the companies that are financed: in other words we need to avoid making 
debt financing more attractive than equity financing. 
c)  
The  third  focus  is  a  precaution:  it  is  vital  that  we  increase  transparency  and 
provide savers with more information on the risk/return profile of their investments 
over different time horizons. Financial intermediaries’ role is precisely to pool individuals’ 
savings, and transform safe liabilities – i.e. savings – into riskier assets – i.e. investments. 
But it is also the role of financial professionals to inform their customers about the type of 
investments they are making, including via multi-vehicle life insurance policies (and notably 
unit-linked  policies).  As  for  disintermediated  financing,  such  as  crowdfunding,  which  is 
attracting increasing numbers of savers, this is indeed a useful tool, but customers need to 
be informed of the risks they are taking and encouraged to diversify their assets.  
Let me conclude with two more general remarks: 
– 
To  better  identify  “the  various  forms  of  savings  on  offer”  –  the  topic  of  today’s 
conference – we also need to look at the issue from different perspectives: a French 
perspective, of course, but also a European perspective, as many of the solutions we 
need can be found at this level. I am convinced that by combining the work of the 
European Commission’s Capital Markets Union, the Juncker Plan and the Banking 
Union, we can create a genuine Financing and Investment Union within the euro area, 
one that benefits both savers and businesses alike. This is another promising channel 
for  improving  the  allocation  of  household  savings,  the  pooling  of  risks  and  the 
financing of the economy.  
This debate on savings is both technically complex and impassioned – deservedly so 
as  it  concerns  the  wealth  of  ordinary  French  citizens.  Parliament  has  worked 
extensively on the issue, publishing a number of vital reports. It is not my role to decide 
when  or  how  we  go  about  it,  but  I firmly  believe  our  country  needs  to  take  a 
dispassionate look at the way it saves. Savings are one of our foremost resources 
and they are in abundant supply; business investment is one of our foremost needs. 
We mustn’t miss out on this opportunity in the current context of low interest rates.  
 Thank you for your attention and please feel free to ask any questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
