  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr 
Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 21 July 
2016. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels 
for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases. 
Regarding  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  confirm  that  the  monthly  asset 
purchases  of  €80  billion  are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  March  2017,  or  beyond,  if 
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. 
Today  we  discussed  developments  since  our  last  monetary  policy  meeting  in  early  June. 
Following the UK referendum on EU membership, our assessment is that euro area financial 
markets have weathered the spike in uncertainty and  volatility  with encouraging resilience. 
The  announced  readiness  of  central  banks  to  provide  liquidity,  if  needed,  and  our 
accommodative monetary policy measures, as well as a robust regulatory and supervisory 
framework,  have  all  helped  to  keep  market  stress  contained.  Financing  conditions  remain 
highly  supportive,  which  contributes to  a  strengthening  in  credit  creation. They  continue to 
support our baseline scenario of an ongoing economic recovery and an increase in inflation 
rates. 
At  the  same  time,  given  prevailing  uncertainties,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to 
monitor  economic  and  financial  market  developments  very  closely  and  to  safeguard  the 
pass-through of its accommodative monetary policy to the real economy. Over the coming 
months,  when  we  have  more  information,  including  new  staff  projections,  we  will  be  in  a 
better position to reassess the underlying macroeconomic conditions, the most likely paths of 
inflation and growth, and the distribution of risks around those paths. If warranted to achieve 
its objective, the Governing Council will act by using all the instruments available within its 
mandate. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP increased by 0.6%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2016, after 
0.4%  in  the  last  quarter  of  2015.  Growth  continues  to  be  supported  by  domestic  demand, 
while  export  growth  has  remained  modest.  Incoming  data  point  to  ongoing  growth  in  the 
second quarter of 2016, though at a lower rate than in the first quarter. Looking ahead, we 
continue to expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate pace. Domestic demand 
remains  supported  by  the  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  to  the  real 
economy.  Favourable  financing  conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability 
continue to promote a recovery in investment. Sustained employment gains, which are also 
benefiting  from  past  structural  reforms,  and  still  relatively  low  oil  prices  provide  additional 
support for households’ real disposable income and thus for private consumption. In addition, 
the fiscal stance in the euro area is expected to be mildly expansionary in 2016 and to turn 
broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018. 
At the same time, headwinds to the economic recovery in the euro area include the outcome 
of  the  UK  referendum  and  other  geopolitical  uncertainties,  subdued  growth  prospects  in 
emerging markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. Against this background, the risks to 
the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside. 
According  to  Eurostat,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  in  June  2016  was  0.1%,  up from  -
0.1% in May, mainly reflecting higher energy and services price inflation. Looking ahead, on 
the basis of current futures prices for oil, inflation rates are likely to remain very low in the 
next few months before starting to pick up later in 2016, in large part owing to base effects in 
the annual rate of change of energy prices. Supported by our monetary policy measures and 
the expected economic recovery, inflation rates should increase further in 2017 and 2018. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continued to increase at a robust pace 
in  May  2016,  with  its  annual  rate  of  growth  standing  at  4.9%,  after  4.6%  in  April.  As  in 
previous months, annual growth in M3 was mainly supported by its most liquid components, 
with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 9.1% in May, after 
9.7% in April. 
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) increased to 1.4% in May 2016, compared with 1.2% in April. Developments in 
loans to enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit 
risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The 
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation) 
remained broadly stable at 1.6% in May, after 1.5% in April. 
The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  second  quarter  of  2016  indicates  further 
improvements  in  loan  supply  conditions  for  loans  to  enterprises  and  households  and  a 
continued increase in loan demand across all loan categories. Furthermore, banks continued 
to  report  that  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  had  contributed  to  more 
favourable terms and conditions on loans. 
The  monetary  policy  measures  in  place  since  June  2014  have  significantly  improved 
borrowing conditions for firms and households, as well as credit flows across the euro area. 
The comprehensive package of new monetary policy measures adopted in March this year 
underpins  the  ongoing  upturn  in  loan  growth,  thereby  supporting  the  recovery  of  the  real 
economy.  In  the  light  of  the  prevailing  uncertainties,  it  is  essential  that  the  bank  lending 
channel continues to function well. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  to  preserve  an  appropriate  degree  of 
monetary accommodation in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are 
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  supports  economic  activity.  As  emphasised  repeatedly  by  the 
Governing Council, and as again strongly echoed in both European and international policy 
discussions, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy 
areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the national and at the European level. 
The implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up to reduce 
structural  unemployment  and  boost  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Structural 
reforms are necessary in all euro area countries, although specific reform needs differ across 
the individual economies. The focus should be on actions to raise productivity and improve 
the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public infrastructure, which 
are  vital  to  increase  investment  and  boost  job  creation.  The  enhancement  of  current 
investment  initiatives,  including  the  extension  of  the  Juncker  plan,  progress  on  the  capital 
markets union and reforms that will improve the resolution of non-performing loans will also 
contribute positively to this objective. In an environment of accommodative monetary policy, 
the  swift  and  effective  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  in  line  with  the  2016  country-
specific recommendations recently approved by the European Council, will not only lead to 
higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but will also make the euro area more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
resilient to global shocks. Fiscal policies should also support the economic recovery, while 
remaining  in  compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  European  Union.  Full  and  consistent 
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact over time and across countries is crucial to 
maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should strive for 
a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
