  François Villeroy de Galhau: Challenges for France’s economy and 
financial sector in 2016 
New  Year  Address  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France, 
Paris, 18 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for coming here today to this magnificently restored Golden Gallery. This is the 
first  time  that  I  am  giving  this  address  as  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  but  it  is  an 
auspicious  tradition  that  brings  us  together.  I  would  like  to  start  by  extending  my  warmest 
wishes to you, your colleagues and your institutions. 
2016 has already been marked by volatility: weak financial markets and commodity prices, 
from  China  and  the  Middle  East;  political  uncertainty  in  Europe,  in  Southern  Europe,  in 
Eastern  Europe,  North-Western  Europe  with  the  British  referendum,  and  even  in  Central 
Europe with the refugee crisis. It is our duty to be vigilant, but we must also, on the one hand, 
distinguish real information from background noise and real challenges – and there are no 
shortages of them – from the sensational and sometimes excessive statements at this start 
of this year; on the other hand, in the face of current volatility, we must stick to our medium-
term objectives. This evening I will not discuss the Eurosystem’s monetary policy as we are 
in the “silent period” leading up to the Governing Council meeting this Thursday. Such long-
term strategies also apply to the reforms in Europe and in France. 
I would like to broaden my personal wishes to three collective wishes: for our country and its 
economy first; for its smooth financing second; and for financial stability and the soundness 
of your institutions lastly. 
Today  a  confirmed  recovery  is  underway,  with  growth  of  over  1%  in  France  in 
1) 
2015,  and  1.5%  in  the euro  area. In  2016,  despite  the  uncertainties,  all  indicators  point  to 
higher growth. France must now transform this modest but real recovery into strong, lasting, 
job-creating growth. To do this, two conditions must be met in 2016: public reforms must be 
pursued, and corporate investment must be stepped up. 
As regards the reforms, France is currently being penalised by excessive debt levels in its 
public  sector  (differential  of  25%  of  GDP  vis-à-vis  Germany,  whereas  both  countries 
displayed  the  same  level  in  2010)  and  the  deterioration  in  its  trade  balance  and 
competitiveness. The fight for growth and against unemployment can only be won over time, 
with the great virtue of steadfastness. We must therefore keep up all efforts with regard to 
containing  government  expenditure  and  hold  firm  on  that  which  is  starting  to  work:  the 
Responsibility and Solidarity Pact and the Tax Credit for encouraging Competitiveness and 
Jobs  (CICE)  should  enable  us  to  catch  up,  between  2014  and  2017,  one-third  of  our 
competitiveness  lag  with  Germany  which  built  up  over  the  first  years  of  the  euro  (1999–
2007).  Transforming  the  CICE  into  a  permanent  reduction  in  social  contributions  for 
corporations would be a very welcome development. But more is required; the unemployed 
and youth cannot afford to wait. In addition to emergency plans, at least four reforms appear 
obvious  since  they  have  worked  for  our  European  neighbours:  apprenticeships  on  a 
widespread  level;  simplifications,  including  in  the  area  of  labour  law;  the  development  of 
entrepreneurship; and lastly the decentralisation of social dialogue to the company level, i.e. 
as close as possible to the economic and human reality. 
Corporate investment depends first and foremost on the willingness and the confidence of 
thousands of entrepreneurs, but it must naturally be promoted by financing… and therefore 
by you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2) 
This brings me to my wish concerning the smooth financing of the economy, against 
the backdrop of persistently low interest rates. Monetary policy is proving to be effective: in 
18 months, since June 2014 and the announcement of non-standard policies, bank lending 
rates to business have fallen by around 80 basis points in the euro area, and outstanding 
bank  loans  have  risen  from  a  negative  growth  of  2.5%  in  June  2014  to  positive  growth  of 
0.9%  in  November  2015.  According  to  estimates,  including  the  decisions  of  3  December 
2014,  non-standard  policies  improve  the  growth  outlook  for  the  euro  area  by  1%  between 
2015  and  2017,  and  that  of  inflation  by  0.5  percentage  point  in  2016  and  0.3  percentage 
point in 2017. 
Bank  lending  must  therefore  remain  accessible.  In  this  respect,  French  banks  have 
achieved  good  results.  Bank  lending  to  business  has  risen  more  sharply  in  France  than 
anywhere else in Europe: up 4.5% in annual terms at end-November 2015, compared with a 
rise of 1% in Germany, and 0% in Italy. Moreover, interest rates in France are among the 
lowest  in  Europe.  Interest  rates  on  new  bank  lending  are  currently  below  2%  on  average, 
compared to 5% in 2007. However, I would like to stress the fact that access to cash loans is 
more difficult for very small enterprises. Their fragile financial position may be one reason; 
but  there  is  an  ongoing  misunderstanding  with  the  banks  that  the  latter  must  seriously 
address. 
French households’ savings must also adjust to the low interest rate environment. This is 
an  opportunity  to  encourage  more  “risky”  and  more  long-term  investments,  both  in  the 
interest of investors themselves and of our economy. Today only 31% of French households’ 
financial  investments  are  made  up  of  risky  assets,  against  45%  in  the  euro  area.  This 
requires  taking  action  in  two  directions.  First,  the  decrease  in  interest  rates  should  be 
gradually passed on to risk-free investment returns – this is why I proposed lowering the rate 
on the PEL, the French housing savings plan, this is also why we must resolutely continue to 
lower the returns on life insurance invested in euro funds. Second, new products should be 
developed: probably less liquid, with or without a capital protection over the long term, and 
possibly offering the best equity performance over time. A crucial point is to avoid any tax 
distortions to the detriment of these products compared to liquid and risk-free investments. It 
remains  all  the more  essential  to fully  inform  investors  about the risks  involved  when  they 
invest their savings; two examples come to mind today, unit-linked contracts, and managers 
offering disintermediated financing. 
3) 
financial institutions.  
Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  regulatory  framework  and  the  supervisory  and  oversight 
architecture  have  been  considerably  strengthened.  This  was  necessary,  I  believe  no  one 
here  doubts  it.  In  the  banking  sector,  this  involved  implementing  Basel  III  /  CRD4-CRR, 
finalising the TLAC, the new anti-shock weapon, and setting up the European banking union, 
which now includes two effective mechanisms: the single supervisory mechanism, and -since 
1  January-  the  single  resolution  mechanism. Today,  French  banks  are sounder: their  core 
Tier 1 solvency ratio stood on average at 12% in September 2015, against 6% at end-2007. 
And  contrary  to  the  fears  that  have  often  been  expressed,  including  by  some  of  you,  the 
current situation shows that these rules have not impacted lending and growth, in particular 
thanks to the positive effects of monetary policy. In 2016, the projects still underway should 
be  completed.  In  particular  in  order  to  improve  the  comparability  of  internal  models  –  and 
thus improve their credibility –, not to substantially increase overall capital requirements. To 
finalise and stabilise Basel III, not to open a new Basel IV. 
The insurance sector has not been left out. The entry into force of the European regulatory 
reform Solvency 2, also on 1 January, marks a profound break. We all know that “Solva 2” 
may still be improved; but it is a significant step forward. In this respect, it is important that all 
institutions continue their efforts to improve governance and enhance the quality of estimates 
and  data  submitted  to  supervisors,  in  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  monitoring  of  risks,  in 
My third and last collective  wish for 2016 is that of financial stability and sound 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  particular those linked to the persistence of very low interest rates. At the international level, 
other challenges lie ahead, notably the definition of systemic groups – it must be similar on 
both sides of the Atlantic, like you I am sensitive to this–, harmonised capital requirements 
and resolution strategies. 
However,  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  does  not  depend  solely  on  prudential 
regulations.  It  also  depends  on  the  confidence  that  economic  players  and  the  public, 
households  and  businesses,  have  in  their  financial  system.  In  this  respect,  the  efforts  of 
financial institutions to protect their clients are essential. In 2016, what is needed is a firm 
implementation  of  the  Eckert  law  on  dormant  bank  accounts  and  unclaimed  life  insurance 
policies,  and  greater  freedom  of  choice  of  loan  insurance  on  real  estate  loans.  And,  of 
course,  more  than  ever,  we  need  to  step  up  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing. New measures have already been taken, some are being strengthened. 
I expect from financial institutions – both insurers and banks – an exemplary participation in 
this fight. I know that they fully agree to the principle, but they must now carry it through in 
their  daily  management;  it  is  in  your  interest  as  compliance  risk  has  become  as  vital,  as 
strategic, as credit risk. 
May  your  institutions  be  strong  on  both  fronts;  may  our  country  be  as  involved  in  the 
economic battle as in the fight against terrorism, with the contribution of all of us; and may 
each one of you remain vigilant and active, yet as serene as possible in 2016. Thank you for 
your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
