  Benoît Cœuré: People are not only savers 
Opinion  piece  from  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, for the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, 1 May 2016. 
 Is  the  ECB  stubborn  because  we  are  adhering  to  our  monetary  policy  despite  strong 
criticism?  No.  We  are  complying  with  a  precise  task  that  was  conferred  on  us.  The  EU 
treaties  gave  the  ECB  a  narrow  price  stability  mandate.  In  2003  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council clarified that euro area inflation should be below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. This interpretation has not changed since. To pursue this deliberately narrow objective, 
the  ECB  has  been  given  a  great  amount  of  independence,  building  on  the  successful 
experience of the Deutsche Bundesbank. This focus is in line with the economic concept of 
“monetary  dominance”.  To  ensure  this,  central  banks  must  be  assigned  a  well-defined 
objective. They must also be granted sufficient discretion when determining and carrying out 
their measures. 
Monetary dominance implies that in carrying out its mandate a central bank may not make 
itself  dependent  on  the  specific  decisions  of  other  institutions.  A  fundamental  assumption 
underlying  European  monetary  union  is  therefore  that  different  institutions  must  act 
independently within their mandates. 
Several times in the past, the ECB faced the risk of inflation remaining high for too long in an 
environment  of  expansionary  economic  policies.  Did  we  wait  for  other  authorities  to  take 
measures before raising interest rates? No, and rightly so. Similar considerations apply to the 
current environment. At present, inflation in the euro area is around 0% and is expected to 
remain low for a considerable period of time. In this environment, we had to act decisively 
and  provide  significant  monetary  stimulus  through  a  set  of  measures  which  were  carefully 
prepared  and  discussed  by  the  Governing  Council.  Our  latest  package,  with  its  increased 
size  of  purchase  volumes  and  its  emphasis  on  credit  to  households  and  companies,  is 
proving effective, as recently confirmed by our bank lending survey and, more generally, by 
the recovery of economic activity throughout the euro area.  
We are confident that our measures will bring inflation back on a sustainable path consistent 
with our objective of price stability. However, there are compelling reasons to suggest that 
inflation in the euro area will go up only gradually. They include a legacy of private and public 
debt  that  was  too  high,  which  led  to  a  fall  in  economic  activity  and  an  increase  in 
unemployment. More recently, global developments which are having a negative impact on 
inflation have added to this. 
But  even  under  a  very  flexible  interpretation  of  our  medium-term  inflation  objective,  I  am 
convinced that not acting would have meant failing in our mandate. Without our measures, 
current  inflation  would  be  much  lower  and  the  inflation  outlook  would  be  much  worse. 
Moreover,  economic  activity  would  be  subdued,  there  would  be  fewer  jobs,  and  a  sound 
public budget would be more difficult to achieve, even in Germany.  
Silently giving up on the commonly agreed inflation objective, which has served the ECB well 
for the last 13 years, is not an option. This would make our monetary policy less credible and 
would  in  itself  create  instability.  We  shouldn’t  return  to  a  policy  that  constantly  redefines 
monetary policy objectives on the basis of short-term considerations. 
In a monetary union, the single monetary policy, through its focus on stable prices, acts as 
the indispensable anchor to a range of economic policy decisions established at national and 
regional level. This makes keeping a steady hand in monetary policy particularly important. 
De-anchoring  inflation  expectations  would  be  a  source  of  instability  in  its  own  right.  This 
would  be  counterproductive  at  a  time  when  Europe  is  already  confronted  with  so  many 
challenges.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This principle of stability needs to prevail over the often one-dimensional and short-sighted 
criticism  of  the  ECB’s  measures  expressed  in  various  places.  In  Germany,  the  ECB  has 
recently been repeatedly criticised for hurting savers through the currently very low interest 
rates. But people are not just savers – they are also employees, taxpayers and borrowers, as 
such benefiting from the low level of interest rates. Thanks to improved economic conditions, 
stimulated  not  least  by  monetary  policy,  real  income  and  employment  in  Germany  have 
increased  in  recent  years.  In  other  words,  we  need  low  interest  rates  now  to  ensure  a 
normalisation of economic conditions, including higher returns on savings in the future. 
The  origins  of  the  current  worldwide  low  level  of  interest  rates  are  not  only  monetary, 
however. The euro area, for example, generates excess savings of over 3% of its GDP. In 
conjunction with other factors, this export of savings adds at a global level to the downward 
pressure  on  interest  rates.  In  other  words,  low  interest  rates  are  a  symptom  of 
macroeconomic interdependencies and measures which go well beyond monetary policy.  
Certainly, monetary policy would become more effective if other euro area policy areas did 
more to generate stable and sustainable growth, embedded in a credible set of rules.  
The first set of measures should therefore create the conditions for sustainable growth in 
the  respective  Member  States.  This  starts  by  enforcing  the  commonly  agreed  fiscal  rules, 
using  exsiting  fiscal  space  .  And  in  all  countries,  budgets  should  be  made  more  growth-
friendly,  for  instance  by  redirecting  spending  to  research  and  education  and  lowering  the 
charges on labour. Furthermore, growth-enhancing structural reforms are important. The rate 
of  implementation  of  the  EU  country-specific  recommendations  is  dismal,  and  the 
Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure  is  hardly  being  used.  But  making  Europe  credible 
starts with delivering on what has already been agreed. 
The  second  package  of  measures  concern  what  can  be  done  collectively  by  euro  area 
countries  to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  our  single  currency.  An  improved  governance 
structure is needed to rule out the possibility of the euro area gradually sliding into a regime 
of fiscal or financial dominance. Or even worse, a combination of the two if we don’t find a 
clear  solution  to  the  infamous  sovereign-bank  nexus.  We  must  consistently  guard  against 
such  developments.  The  priority  must  therefore  be  to  complete  the  banking  union  and  to 
establish the capital markets union, as well as regulatory clarity on how to avoid excessive 
risk concentration on banks’ balance sheets. Deeper institutional changes can be considered 
in the longer term, as proposed in the Five Presidents’ Report in 2015. 
These  are  the  conditions  for  stable  growth  in  a  stable  environment.  This  will  unleash  the 
investment which our continent needs to lift its long-term growth rate and secure its future. 
This is the best conceivable way to support Europe’s savers. In order to guarantee this, the 
ECB’s monetary policy will remain committed to its price stability objective. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
