  Carolyn Wilkins: Fintech and the financial ecosystem – evolution or 
revolution? 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at 
Payments Canada, Calgary, Alberta, 17 June 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Scott  Hendry,  Grahame  Johnson,  Ron  Morrow  and  Stephen  Murchison  for  their  help  in 
preparing this speech. 
institutions,  giving  businesses  and  households  access 
Introduction 
It is no exaggeration to say that we are in the midst of a defining moment for innovation in 
financial  services.  Some  expect  that  new  technology  will  cause  a  complete  disruption  of 
traditional  financial 
to  more 
convenient and customized services. Entrepreneurs are also finding applications well beyond 
finance, and these new technologies could transform other fields, such as humanitarian aid.1  
Fintech, which is the term people use to refer to innovation in financial services, has created 
a  lot  of  excitement,  but  also  quite  a  lot  of  hype,  depending  on  your  perspective.  Google 
searches for “fintech” have increased by more than 30 times in the past six years. Fintech 
has also attracted real money: over the same period, around 100 fintech start-ups in Canada 
have raised more than $1 billion in funding.2 At a global level, almost $20 billion was poured 
into fintech last year alone.3  
There is a vast array of services being deployed in Canada and elsewhere. Many of you may 
be using Apple Pay or Google Wallet. You may also be getting investment advice from “robo 
advisors.” There is peer-to-peer lending, such as the Lending Club, and even more services 
are in the works. 
I have had the opportunity to participate in a number of fascinating discussions about fintech 
in recent months – with my colleagues at the Financial Stability Board and other international 
organizations,  as  well  as  with  fintech  entrepreneurs  and  traditional  financial  institutions 
around the world. I can tell you that, despite the hype, no one knows yet what the social and 
economic payoff of these investments will be. And because it is early days, no one knows for 
sure what fintech developments will ultimately mean for business models or for the financial 
system more generally. But we are all trying to figure it out. 
I know  this  interest  extends  to  all  of  us  in the  payments  business,  which  is  undergoing  its 
own transformation. This conference is a great setting to offer a central banker’s perspective 
on fintech. So I want to thank Payments Canada for the invitation to speak here today. 
The Bank of Canada is doing a lot of work in this area. Today I will explore three points with 
you that frame our thinking on the issues. 
First,  fintech  has  the  potential  to  transform  the  financial  system  across  a  broad  range  of 
services. And that is a good thing, because there is a lot of inefficiency that can be shed. 
Second,  although  some  of  the  technology  may  be  revolutionary,  its  overall  effect  on  the 
financial system is likely to be evolutionary. Financial institutions that adapt will survive, and 
                                                
1  See, for example, D. Tapscott and A. Tapscott, Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin Is 
Changing  Money,  Business,  and  the  World  (New  York:  Portfolio,  2016);  Mark  Walport,  Distributed  Ledger 
Technology: Beyond Block Chain (London: Government Office for Science, 2016). 
2  OMERS Ventures, “Canadian Next-Gen Financial Technologies & Services,” September 2015. 
3  This  is  about  five  times  the  $4  billion  that  was  invested  two  years  earlier.  See  R.  Ghose  et  al.,  “Digital 
Disruption – How FinTech Is Forcing Banking to a Tipping Point,” Citigroup Inc., March 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  new  service  providers  will  become  part  of  the  financial  ecosystem.  In  some  areas,  this 
evolution is happening fast, while in others, the most transformative technologies still have 
developmental hurdles to clear. 
Finally,  now  is  the  time  for  financial  institutions,  new  entrants  and  policy-makers  to  work 
together. That is the best way to create the right environment for modernizing the financial 
sector and sensibly managing the risks that arise. This applies to many areas. For the Bank, 
the focus is on preserving financial stability and maintaining the safe and sound operation of 
core payment systems in Canada. 
Change is in the air 
My first point is that change is definitely in the air. In many cases, financial innovations are 
simply  interesting  twists  on  existing  technologies  and  business  models.  They  promise  to 
lower costs, improve services and broaden access. Peer-to-peer lending is one example. As 
we  have  already  seen  with  the  taxi  and  hotel  industries,  peer-to-peer  services  challenge 
traditional intermediaries. 
This  new  competition  could  fundamentally  change  the  relationship  that  traditional  financial 
institutions have with their customers. From a regulatory perspective, the main issues relate 
to consumer protection, market integrity and rules that guard against money laundering and 
terrorism financing. Authorities are working to close significant gaps in these areas and are 
monitoring implications for financial stability. 
Then we have financial services enabled by fundamentally new technology. A prime example 
is  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT).  This  technology  has  the  potential  to  replace  entire 
transaction systems, including core payment systems, and offer new products, such as smart 
contracts. Smart contracts are agreements written in computer code that do not need human 
intervention to be executed. 
This  strand  of  fintech  could  take  us  into  uncharted  territory.  As  I  will  explain  in  a  minute, 
regulators could face issues related to governance, legal environments and financial stability. 
One might  argue  that the financial  sector  is  always  changing  and  that fintech  is  a  case of 
déjà vu. We have seen important innovations in the past – such as credit cards, automated 
banking  machines  and  online  banking  –  that  did  not  revolutionize  the  financial  landscape, 
even  if  they  provided  huge  advances  in  convenience  for  consumers.  That  is  because 
financial institutions remained the dominant players and adapted to these changes, often by 
buying  emerging  competitors,  adopting  the  technology  and  reducing  access  to  legacy 
services to compel customers to adapt.4  
I see a combination of factors that point to the potential for greater change this time. 
First, customers are more demanding than in the past. They are looking for more convenient 
and cheaper access to financial services that are well integrated with the rest of their online 
activities. Customers expect these services to be personalized, and faster, in part because of 
the widespread use of smartphones and the speed with which new apps can be pushed out.5 
Given how accustomed people have become to instant access to goods and services, it is no 
surprise  that  they  expect  instant  access  to  their  money.  That  is  why  we  see  a  push  to 
                                                
4  J. Allen, R. Clark and J.-F. Houde, “Market Structure and the Diffusion of E-Commerce: Evidence from the 
Retail Banking Industry,” Staff Working Paper No. 2008–32, Bank of Canada, 2008. 
5  According to the Millennial Disruption Index produced by Scratch, a third of Americans between the ages of 15 
five  years.  Available  at 
they  will  not  need  a  bank  at  all  within 
the  next 
and  34  believe 
http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  implement real-time retail payment systems in nearly all major jurisdictions.6 This will be an 
important point to consider for the modernization of the Canadian payments system. 
Second,  we  are  seeing  large,  well-funded  companies  outside  the  financial  space,  such  as 
Apple  and  Google,  starting  to  offer  financial  services.  One  of  the  main  advantages  of 
traditional financial institutions is the trust they have built with their customers. Tech giants 
also  have  wide  customer  bases  and  brand  loyalty  that  could  help  drive  adoption.  These 
companies  are  using  their  customers’  information  and  their  existing  platforms  to  offer 
attractive  and  cost-competitive  services  and  to  pick  away  at  the  most  profitable  business 
lines of financial institutions. The range of services they offer could grow over time. 
Finally,  some  existing  financial  institutions  and  infrastructures  have  become  relatively 
inefficient,  while  new  technology  has  reduced  barriers  to  entry  in  this  space.  Supporting 
systems  can  date  back  several  decades  and  are  often  not  interoperable,  even  within  an 
institution. So the door for competition is open. 
Talking about an evolution 
This  brings  me  to  my  second  point,  which  is  about  the  kind  of  change  we  can  expect. 
Traditional players will have to adapt to survive, and there will be new players. And the new 
technologies that could be truly transformative have some way to go before they are ready 
for prime time. So I expect we are in for more of an evolution than a revolution. 
Since  we  are  all  talking  about  distributed  ledgers  –  or  blockchain  –  let  me  use  that 
technology to illustrate my point. Ledgers may sound incredibly dull, but innovations in this 
space  have  been  game  changers  in  the  past.  Indeed,  the  invention  of  double-entry 
bookkeeping has been credited as one factor enabling capitalism.7  
It makes me wonder what people will say about distributed ledgers 100 years from now. 
Let us first remind ourselves what this technology brings to the table. The exact features of 
DLT vary, depending on the needs it fulfills. At its core, it is a computer protocol that allows 
many participants to record information on a single ledger that is shared among users, so 
each one sees the same data. A consensus mechanism and modern cryptography ensure 
that stakeholders agree that entries to the ledger are authentic. The ledger’s key benefit is 
that  you  do  not  need  a  trusted  third  party  to  guard  against  double-spending  or  expensive 
processes to reconcile information between ledgers. 
The best-known application of DLT is Bitcoin, which is a decentralized digital currency. The 
ledgers  used  for  these  currencies  are  “permissionless,”  which  means  that  anyone  with  a 
computer can download the software, see the ledger and start authorizing transactions. 
The decentralized aspect of the technology is why some predict that widespread application 
of  DLT  could  revolutionize  entire  industries.  They  contemplate  alternative  futures,  such  as 
one in which there is complete disintermediation of banks and even central banks, with state 
currencies being replaced by decentralized digital currencies. 
I see this as highly unlikely. People have not widely embraced digital currencies like Bitcoin 
because  these  currencies  cannot  outshine  the  competition  when  it  comes  to  serving  as  a 
store  of  value  and  a  medium  of  exchange.  National  authorities  will  want  to  run  their  own 
monetary  policy,  and  so  the most  that  could  happen  is  that  national  currencies  and  digital 
                                                
6  M.  Tompkins  and  A.  Olivares,  “Clearing  and  Settlement  Systems  from  Around  the  World:  A  Qualitative 
Analysis,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2016–14, Bank of Canada, 2016. 
7  Max Weber, one of the founders of modern sociology, described double-entry bookkeeping as an essential 
element of a modern economy in his 1904 book, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (London: 
Routledge,  2001).  The  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter makes  a  similar  claim  in  his  1942  book,  Capitalism, 
Socialism and Democracy (New York: Harper Perennial, 1975). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  currencies coexist. The Bank of Canada is studying digital currencies closely because of our 
role  in  issuing  the  nation’s  currency  and  the  implications  these  currencies  could  have  for 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Like  many  other  central  banks,  we  are  also 
researching the conceptual merits of issuing electronic money ourselves.8  
In fact, the potential for DLT is actually stronger for applications outside of digital currencies. 
We  have  seen  test  cases  related  to  payments  and  post-trade  processes,  including  the 
clearing  and  settlement  of  financial  instruments  such  as  repos,  bonds,  derivatives  and 
equities.9  
One  interesting  application  is  in  the  syndicated  loan  market,  where  loans  can  take  up  to 
20 days to go through the clearing and settlement process. DLT could reduce this to about 
seven days by providing a secure database that all participants share across a distributed 
private  network.10  Looking  at  a  single  source  of 
information  would  help  reduce 
disagreements  and  make  it  easier  to  comply  with  legal  requirements,  speeding  up  the 
process at every stage. 
We  may  also  see  applications  in  areas  such  as  trade  finance  and  supply  chains,  where 
information cuts across jurisdictions and is difficult to centralize. One estimate suggests DLT 
could  enable  banks  to  save  as  much  as  $20  billion  a  year  in  global  back-office  costs  if 
applied  to  cross-border  payments,  securities  trading  and  regulatory  compliance.11  So  it  is 
easy to see why private enterprise is investing a lot of money in this type of technology. 
If  these  ventures  deliver  on  their  promises,  improvements  could  extend  beyond  efficiency 
and  cheaper  processing.  Transactions  could  be  settled  almost  immediately,  which  would 
reduce  counterparty  risk  and  free  up  capital  for  other  uses.  Transparency  would  be 
enhanced because a distributed ledger lets participants see the entire history of transactions. 
That  said,  several  important  issues  with  DLT  must  be  resolved  before  its  benefits  can  be 
realized.  First  on  the  list  are  technical  issues  related  to  scalability,  the  consensus 
mechanism,  data  privacy  and  cyber  security.  Second,  proponents  will  have  to  agree  on 
governance, which can be a challenge when stakeholders have divergent interests. Bitcoin’s 
recent struggles are a clear illustration of this.12 Finally, standards and protocols, as well as a 
solid legal foundation, must be established to allow for interoperability. 
Protocols  may  be  an  area  where  governments  can  contribute.  In  the  early  days  of  the 
Internet, governments helped develop the first networking protocols. Like the Internet, many 
of the applications of DLT will require a global view. 
Applications of DLT will also need to become widely adopted. This means getting users to 
move away from the current networks and switch to DLT networks. Usually, the more people 
who join a network, the better the network becomes, which in turn entices even more people 
to adopt it. A social network like Facebook is a good example of this network effect – people 
                                                
8  Bank research and other useful information on e-money are featured on a dedicated webpage. 
9  For  example,  Digital  Asset  Holdings  is  one  company  that  has  projects  under  way  to  explore  the  use  of 
distributed ledgers with the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) for the Australian equity market and with 
Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation for the clearing of repo transactions in the United States. 
10  See J. Schneider et al., “Blockchain: Putting Theory into Practice,” Goldman Sachs, 24 May 2016. 
11  See  Santander  InnoVentures,  Oliver  Wyman  and  Anthemis  Group,  “The  Fintech  2.0  Paper:  Rebooting 
Financial Services,” 2015. 
12  As Bitcoin usage increased, developers proposed modifying the protocol that supports the technology to make 
it easier to process larger volumes of transactions, but Bitcoin’s decentralized governance system has made it 
difficult  to  agree  on  proposed  changes.  See  R. Waters,  “Bitcoin’s Future  Threatened  by  Software  Schism,” 
Financial Times, 11 February 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  flock  to  the  service  that  their friends  use  –  and  it  is  no  small  challenge  to  compete  with  a 
system that is already established.13  
The  final  hurdle  DLT  has  to  overcome  is  to  gain  regulatory  acceptance  and  comply  with 
domestic and cross-border laws and regulations. Authorities should support innovation, but 
the bar will be high, especially for core financial services, and appropriately so. 
Financial  institutions,  including  Canadian  banks,  are  working  hard  to  test  and  adopt  new 
technologies and adjust to new trends. So while banks may look different in the future, they 
will still play a major role in the financial system. 
It is true that some changes could seem revolutionary to some incumbents. To customers, 
however, it will likely seem evolutionary, and some changes will not be visible to them at all. 
In  some  dimensions,  DLT  is  reminiscent  of  Voice  over  IP:  here  was  a  revolutionary 
advancement  in  technology  that  caused  an  evolutionary  change  in  how  we,  as  end-users, 
use the phone system. 
Now’s the time 
This brings me to my final point. Now is the time for financial institutions, new entrants and 
policy-makers to work together. The opportunity cost of sitting back and waiting for the dust 
to settle is too great. 
Financial  institutions  and  infrastructure  operators  are  making  important  strategic  decisions 
about  which  parts  of their  businesses they  want  to  defend  and grow  and  which  ones  they 
want to scale back. This urgency is not only coming from fintech contenders. Banks are also 
dealing with a more demanding regulatory environment and exceptionally low interest rates 
around  the  world  that  are  squeezing  profit  margins.  Banks  already  spend  close  to 
$200 billion a year on IT globally, so replacing legacy systems will mean difficult and critical 
investment decisions. 
For the Bank of Canada, our priority is to see upgrades made to the core payment systems 
that  the  financial  system  relies  on  and  that  the  Bank  oversees:  the  Large  Value  Transfer 
System  (LVTS)  and  the  Automated  Clearing  Settlement  System  (ACSS).  These  systems 
have served us well, but both require investments that are needed to fully meet our oversight 
requirements.  Investment  will  also  help  the  systems  better  meet  the  modern  needs  of 
participants and their customers. 
Take  the  ACSS,  for  example,  which  still  handles  most  retail  transactions  today.  It  was 
implemented over 30 years ago, when everyone wanted a Commodore 64. The ACSS may 
have been at the forefront in 1984, but we are far from the efficient frontier now.14 Cheques 
take up to four days to clear, and some information needs to be re-entered manually. 
Now  is  the  time to make  our  core  systems  more  efficient  and  competitive.  For  consumers 
and business users, we need to move closer to real-time access to funds. In both the ACSS 
and  LVTS,  we  need  to  collect  richer  data  on  transactions  and,  ideally,  make  them 
interoperable to avoid having to manually re-enter information. This effort is not change for 
change’s sake. If we can leverage some of the existing infrastructure and still achieve our 
goals, that is all the better. 
For our part, policy-makers and regulators need to address innovation in financial services in 
a few proactive ways. 
                                                
13  In a recent book, Hanna Halaburda and Miklos Sarvary illustrate network effects by showing how they come 
into play in the competition between cryptocurrencies and state-issued fiat currencies. See H. Halaburda and 
M. Sarvary, Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Digital Currencies (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2016). 
14  J.  Chapman,  J.  Chiu,  S.  Jafri,  H.  Pérez  Saiz,  “Public  Policy  Objectives  and  the  Next  Generation  of  CPA 
Systems: An Analytical Framework,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–6, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The first is to develop a solid analytical framework to understand and assess the benefits and 
challenges of something so new. This is something the Financial Stability Board is working 
on.  Authorities  will  make  their  assessments  through  many  lenses,  including  consumer 
protection, financial inclusion, market integrity, competition policy and financial stability. That 
is  why  other  international  groups  such  as  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  and  the  International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  are  also  involved.  The  Bank  of  Canada,  together 
with our domestic colleagues, is actively contributing to these efforts. Since fintech is a global 
phenomenon,  it  is  critical  that  this  regulatory  effort  be  global.  We  must  also  learn  from 
emerging-market economies that are further along in some areas. 
While  fintech  innovations  promise  to  solve  some  current  problems,  they  could  also  create 
new  ones.  Let  me  give  you  an  example:  I  worry  that  network  effects,  which  underpin  the 
success of many payment applications, could lead to an excessive concentration of payment 
service  providers.  If  this  happens,  households  and  businesses  may  not  benefit  from  cost 
savings. This is clearly an issue for competition authorities. 
It also is an issue for financial stability because “too big to fail” could emerge in a new form 
outside the current regulatory perimeter. Once again, payments are a great example. I worry 
that players not covered currently by regulation could become important to the system even if 
they never take on bank-like risks, such as maturity transformation or leverage, or become 
big  enough  to  be  considered  systemically  important. The  move  to  increased  direct  access 
means  that  even  smaller  players  could  very  well  create  critical  dependencies  within  the 
financial  system,  particularly  if  they  connect  directly  to  core  payments  infrastructure.  This 
could give rise to moral hazard. At a minimum, authorities need to put a large enough weight 
on  operational  dependencies  when  looking  at  systemic  importance,  particularly  in  light  of 
cyber  risk.  When  a  payment  system  grows  to  be  prominent  or  systemically  important,  the 
Bank of Canada’s job is to oversee it. Even before we reach that point, regulatory measures 
should  be  considered  to  address  specific  issues,  such  as  operational  resilience  and 
consumer protection.15  
I  also  wonder  how  DLT-based  infrastructures  could  affect  the  financial  ecosystem.  Ever-
increasing automation through, say, smart contracts, could increase efficiency and certainty 
but could also increase financial volatility. Would that volatility be short-term, such as flash 
crashes? Or would it entail procyclical dynamics or new channels of contagion? 
There  are  also  questions  about  whether  the  regulatory  perimeter  is  adequate,  given  new 
entrants and risks of regulatory arbitrage. In my view, the field of inquiry should include the 
inherent risk and systemic importance of an activity, regardless of what entity is performing it. 
Even as  we strive to implement a regulatory response that is proportionate to the risk, we 
need to keep in mind that maintaining a level playing field is important. Some of these issues 
are not too different from those that authorities face in their work on shadow banking, another 
area where new entrants are challenging traditional players.16 And, big or small, operational 
risk deserves much greater attention. 
The second way to address innovation in financial services is active engagement between 
authorities  and  the  private  sector.  Some  countries,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom,  Australia 
and Singapore, have created official regulatory “sandboxes.”17 These sandboxes allow start-
ups to experiment with services without jumping through all the usual regulatory hoops. 
                                                
15  The  federal  government  conducted  a  consultation  on  these  issues  in  2015.  See  “Balancing  Oversight  and 
Innovation in the Ways We Pay: A Consultation Paper,” Department of Finance Canada, 13 April 2015. 
16  For  a  discussion  of  the  issues  in  the  shadow  banking  sector,  see  T.  Lane,  “Shedding  Light  on  Shadow 
Banking” (speech to the CFA Society Toronto, Toronto, 26 June 2013). 
17  See  “Consultation  Paper  on  FinTech  Regulatory  Sandbox  Guidelines,”  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore, 
6 June 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Here in Canada, we are consulting with fintech entrepreneurs. The Bank of Canada is also 
partnering with Payments Canada, Canadian banks and R3 – which leads a consortium of 
financial  institutions  –  to  test  drive  distributed  ledgers.  Our  only  goal  at  this  stage  is  to 
understand the mechanics, limits and possibilities of this technology. The plan is to build a 
rudimentary wholesale payment system to run experiments in a lab environment. 
Our experiment includes a simulated settlement asset used as a medium of exchange within 
the  system.  It  is  very  much  like  the  settlement  balances  in  LVTS,  except  it  is  using  DLT. 
Because  it  cannot  be  used  anywhere  else,  it  is  a  different  animal  altogether from  a  digital 
currency for widespread use. 
This  is  an  experiment  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  I  cannot  think  of  a  better  way  to 
understand this technology than to work with it. Other frameworks need to be investigated, 
and  there  are many  hurdles  that  need  to  be  cleared  before  such  a  system  would  ever  be 
ready for prime time. 
The third way to address innovation proactively is to do fundamental research on the effects 
of new technology.18 The Bank of Canada’s research over the past few years has focused on 
new  payment  methods,  the  adoption  and  competitiveness  of  digital  currencies,  and  the 
essential  benefits  of  private  e-money.19  We  are  continuing  this  work  and  broadening  it  to 
include other developments, such as peer-to-peer lending and uses of DLT. 
We  also  want  to  understand  how  new  financial  technologies  will  address  the  underlying 
forces  that  created  the  need  for  financial  intermediation  in  the  first  place.  In  theory,  new 
technology could enable a different framework for addressing the same frictions, potentially 
one that does not require financial intermediaries at all. The names and faces may change, 
but I do not see technology changing the need for maturity transformation, loan monitoring, 
intermediation of borrowers and lenders, and trust. This is a good question for academics. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  wrap  up.  While  it  is  important  to  filter  out  the  hype  surrounding  fintech,  I  am 
convinced that it could have a net positive impact on the financial system, provided the risks 
are adequately managed. 
Fintech will likely entail  more of an evolution than a revolution. This is because incumbent 
financial institutions will adapt, new players will join the financial ecosystem and those with 
strong business models will survive. And the most fundamentally transformative technology 
so far – DLT – still has important hurdles to clear. 
Innovations  may  solve  some  current  problems,  but  they  could  also  create  new  ones.  The 
regulatory framework needs to adapt so that the door is not opened to unmanaged financial 
and operational risks, unchecked critical dependencies within our financial system and moral 
hazard. Promoting financial stability is a core function of the Bank of Canada, and we take a 
system-wide perspective when we monitor risks. 
There is a lot of hard work ahead, and we need to get on with it. By working together, we can 
unlock the full promise of fintech to ensure a smooth evolution to tomorrow’s financial system 
– safe, sound and serving the people who rely on it. 
                                                
18  For  a  discussion  of  some  possible  effects,  see  D.  Andolfatto,  “Monetary  Policy  Implications  of  Blockchain 
Technology,” 1 May 2016. 
19  See, for example, W.E. Weber, “A Bitcoin Standard: Lessons from the Gold Standard,” Staff Working Paper 
No.  2016–14,  Bank  of  Canada,  2016;  N.  Gandal  and H.  Halaburda  “Competition  in  the  Cryptocurrency 
Market,”  Staff  Working  Paper  No.  2014–33,  Bank  of  Canada,  2014;  J.  Chiu  and  T.-N.  Wong,  “On  the 
Essentiality of E-Money,” Staff Working Paper No. 2015–43, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
