   Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
21 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, first of all let me wish you a Happy New Year. The Vice-President and 
I are very pleased to welcome you to our press conference. We will now report on the outcome 
of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was also attended by the Commission 
Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  after  the  recalibration  of  our 
monetary  policy  measures  last  month,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
unchanged and we expect them to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of 
time.  Regarding  our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  the  asset  purchases  are 
proceeding smoothly and continue to have a favourable impact on the cost and availability of 
credit for firms and households. 
Taking stock of the evidence available at the beginning of 2016, it is clear that the monetary 
policy measures that we have adopted since mid-2014 are working. As a result, developments 
in  the  real  economy,  credit  provision  and  financing  conditions  have  improved  and  have 
strengthened the euro area’s resilience to recent global economic shocks. The decisions taken 
in early December to extend our monthly net asset purchases of €60 billion to at least the end 
of March 2017, and to reinvest the principal payments on maturing securities for as long as 
necessary, were fully appropriate. They will result in a significant addition of liquidity to the 
banking system and will strengthen our forward guidance on interest rates. 
Yet,  as  we  start  the  new  year,  downside  risks  have  increased  again  amid  heightened 
uncertainty  about  emerging  market  economies’  growth  prospects,  volatility  in  financial  and 
commodity markets, and geopolitical risks. In this environment, euro area inflation dynamics 
also continue to be weaker than expected. It will therefore be necessary to review and possibly 
reconsider our monetary policy stance at our next meeting in early March, when the new staff 
macroeconomic  projections  become  available  which  will  also  cover  the  year  2018.  In  the 
meantime, work will be carried out to ensure that all the technical conditions are in place to 
make the full range of policy options available for implementation, if needed. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP growth was confirmed at 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 
2015,  supported  mainly  by  private  consumption,  while  being  dampened  by  a  negative 
contribution from net exports. The most recent survey indicators, available up to December, 
point to ongoing real GDP growth momentum in the fourth quarter of last year. Looking ahead, 
we expect the economic recovery to proceed. Domestic demand should be further supported 
by our monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, as well 
as by the earlier progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, the 
renewed fall in oil prices should provide additional support for households’ real disposable 
income and corporate profitability and, therefore, for private consumption and investment. In 
addition,  the fiscal  stance  in  the  euro  area  is  becoming  slightly  expansionary,  reflecting  in 
particular measures in support of refugees. However, the economic recovery in the euro area 
continues  to  be  dampened  by  subdued  growth  prospects  in  emerging  markets,  volatile 
financial markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the 
sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside and relate in particular to 
the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in the global economy, as well as to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
broader geopolitical risks. These risks have the potential to weigh on global growth and foreign 
demand for euro area exports and on confidence more widely. 
Euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.2%  in  December  2015,  compared  with  0.1%  in 
November. The December outcome was lower than expected, mainly reflecting the renewed 
sharp decline in oil prices, as well as lower food price and services price inflation. On the basis 
of current oil futures prices, which are well below the level observed a few weeks ago, the 
expected path of annual HICP inflation in 2016 is now significantly lower compared with the 
outlook  in  early  December.  Inflation  rates  are  currently  expected  to  remain  at  very  low  or 
negative levels in the coming months and to pick up only later in 2016. Thereafter, supported 
by our monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation rates should 
continue to recover, but risks of second-round effects should be monitored closely. A more 
comprehensive picture of the impact of oil prices and other external and domestic factors on 
the  outlook  for  HICP  inflation  will  become  available  in  the  March  2016  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic projections, which will also cover the year 2018. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm solid growth in broad money (M3), with 
the annual rate of growth of M3 standing at 5.1% in November 2015, after 5.3% in October. 
Annual growth in M3 continues to be mainly supported by its most liquid components, with the 
narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 11.2% in November, after 11.8% 
in October. 
Loan dynamics continued the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) increased to 0.9% in November 2015, up from 0.6% in October. Developments 
in loans to enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit 
risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The 
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation) 
increased to 1.4% in November, compared with 1.2% in October. 
The  bank  lending  survey  for  the  euro  area  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015  points  to  further 
improvements in demand for bank loans, supported by the low level of interest rates, financing 
needs for investment purposes and housing market prospects. Credit standards eased further 
on loans to enterprises, notably owing to increasing competitive pressures in retail banking, 
and reverted to a net easing on loans to households for house purchase. Overall, the monetary 
policy measures in place since June 2014 have clearly improved borrowing conditions for both 
firms and households, as well as credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirmed the effectiveness of the monetary policy measures in 
place and the need to review and possibly reconsider our monetary policy stance at our next 
meeting in early March in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels below, but 
close to, 2%. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance supports economic activity. However, in order to reap the full benefits 
from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute  decisively.  Given 
continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro area, the 
ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective structural policies. In particular, 
actions to improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public 
infrastructure,  are  vital  to  increase  productive  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity. The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of 
accommodative monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in 
the euro area but will also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate 
the beneficial effects of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks. 
Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the 
fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Growth Pact is crucial to maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all 
countries should strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
