  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
21 April 2016. 
 it 
forward, 
is  essential 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB 
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for 
an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. Regarding 
non-standard monetary policy measures, as decided on 10 March 2016, we have started to 
expand our monthly purchases under the asset purchase programme to €80 billion, from the 
previous amount of €60 billion. As stated before, these purchases are intended to run until the 
end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees 
a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  Moreover,  in 
June, we will conduct the first operation of our new series of targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO II) and we will commence purchases under our corporate sector purchase 
programme (CSPP). Further information on the implementation aspects of the CSPP will be 
released after the press conference on the ECB’s website. 
Following  our  comprehensive  package  of  decisions  taken  in  early  March,  broad  financing 
conditions in the euro area have improved. The pass-through of the monetary policy stimulus 
to  firms  and  households,  notably  through  the  banking  system,  is  strengthening.  However, 
global uncertainties persist. 
Looking 
to  preserve  an  appropriate  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation as long as needed in order to underpin the momentum of the euro area’s 
economic recovery and in order to accelerate the return of inflation to levels below, but close 
to, 2%. The Governing Council will continue to monitor closely the evolution of the outlook for 
price stability and, if warranted to achieve its objective, will act by using all the instruments 
available within its mandate. In the current context, it is crucial to ensure that the very low 
inflation  environment  does  not  become  entrenched  in  second-round  effects  on  wage  and 
price setting. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.3%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015, 
supported  by  domestic  demand,  while  being  dampened  by  relatively  weak  export  trends. 
Incoming data for the first quarter of 2016 point to ongoing output growth, at a pace broadly 
similar to that in the final quarter of 2015. Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery 
to  proceed.  Domestic  demand,  in  particular,  continues  to  be  supported  by  our  monetary 
policy  measures.  Their 
together  with 
improvements 
investment.  Moreover,  our 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  continued  employment  gains  resulting  from  past 
structural reforms and the still relatively low price of oil should provide ongoing support for 
households’ real disposable income and private consumption. In addition, the fiscal stance in 
the euro area is slightly expansionary. At the same time, the economic recovery in the euro 
area is still dampened by the ongoing balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors, the 
insufficient  pace  of  implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  subdued  growth  prospects  in 
emerging markets. 
The  risks  to  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  still  remain  tilted  to  the  downside.  Our  recent 
monetary policy decisions have improved overall financing conditions, which should support 
in  corporate  profitability, 
financing  conditions, 
is  benefiting 
impact  on 
favourable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  outlook  for  consumption  and  investment.  However,  uncertainties  persist  and  relate,  in 
particular, to developments in the global economy and to geopolitical risks. 
According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP inflation in March 2016 was 0.0%, compared 
with –0.2% in February, reflecting mainly a rise in services price inflation. Looking ahead, on 
the basis of current futures prices for energy, inflation rates could turn negative again in the 
coming months before picking up in the second half of 2016. Thereafter, supported by our 
monetary  policy  measures  and  the  expected  economic  recovery,  inflation  rates  should 
recover further in 2017 and 2018. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continued to grow at a robust pace in 
February 2016, with its annual rate of growth remaining unchanged at 5.0%. As in previous 
months,  annual  growth  in  M3  is  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the 
narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 10.3% in February, after 10.5% 
in January. 
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) increased to 0.9% in February 2016, up from 0.6% in January. Developments 
in  loans  to  enterprises  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle, 
credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. 
The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) 
increased to 1.6% in February 2016, from 1.4% in January. 
The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  first  quarter  of  2016  indicates  further 
improvements in loan supply conditions for enterprises and in loan demand across all loan 
categories. Improvements in the demand for bank loans were supported by the low level of 
interest rates, financing needs for investment purposes and housing market prospects. 
Overall,  the  monetary  policy  measures  in  place  since  June  2014  have  clearly  improved 
borrowing conditions for firms and households, as well as credit flows across the euro area. 
The comprehensive package of new monetary policy measures adopted in March this year 
underpins  the  ongoing  upturn  in  loan  growth,  thereby  supporting  the  recovery  of  the  real 
economy. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  to  preserve  an  appropriate  degree  of 
monetary accommodation in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are 
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  supports  economic  activity.  As  emphasised  repeatedly  by  the 
Governing  Council,  and  as  strongly  echoed  in  both  European  and  international  policy 
discussions, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy 
areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the national and at the European levels. 
Structural  policies  are  essential,  given  continued  high  structural  unemployment  and  low 
potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  actions  to  raise  productivity  and 
improve 
the  provision  of  an  adequate  public 
infrastructure, are vital to increase investment and boost job creation. The swift and effective 
implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, 
will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but will also make 
the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  global  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the 
economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in  compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  European 
Union.  Full  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  crucial  to 
maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should strive for 
a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
the  business  environment, 
including 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
