   Jon Cunliffe: The UK economy post crisis – a series of unfortunate 
events? 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, at 
the  Centre  for  International  Business  Studies,  London  South  Bank  University,  London, 
24 February 2016. 
 There is a well-known myth – much loved in management schools – that if you put a frog in 
boiling water it will jump out; but if you put it in cold water and bring the water very slowly to 
the boil, its nervous system will not register the temperature change and it will be boiled. 
I am assured by zoologist friends that it is indeed a myth. Frogs sense gradually changing 
temperatures like the rest of us. But it is an instructive parable. Sometimes when you focus on 
incremental changes you can forget the big picture until the water has become very hot – or 
very cold. 
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meets every month. We assess a very wide range of 
changing  data  –  for  the  world  and  the  economy  is  constantly  changing.  The  past  usually 
becomes clearer but the future is always uncertain. So as a policymaker occasionally it is worth 
standing a long way back and asking “What did I expect to happen last year and the year 
before? And what can I learn from what actually happened?”. And, crucially, “Have I been lulled 
by the ever turning kaleidoscope of data and missed a change in the big picture?”. 
So tonight I want to stand back and review how I saw the big picture two years ago and how 
what has happened since has changed my view. And what evidence I am looking for to confirm 
my view of the likely future. 
Slow healing story 
Since the Great Recession of 2008/9 we have had the slowest recovery in our modern history 
– slower than the recovery from the Great Depression. For those of you familiar with children’s 
literature, one title for the story of the last eight years is “a series of unfortunate events”.1  
In  this  big  picture  story,  the  UK  economy  was  hit  by  a  very  unfortunate  event,  a  massive 
financial crisis, leading to the deepest recession for 80 years. Three years later, as it is just 
beginning to recover, the economy is hit again by the effects – via confidence and financial 
market and trade – of the euro-area crisis. Three years on the economy finally picks itself up 
with a burst of strong growth. Unemployment falls at the fastest rate for 40 years, confidence 
recovers and business investment starts to grow strongly. But pay growth and hence incomes 
respond much less, reflecting in part the fact that productivity growth does not recover. And, in 
the latest chapter, just as we see signs of income growth and productivity growth coming back 
into life, a deflationary shock from a collapse of oil prices, which should boost the economy, 
allied to a slump in emerging markets, pulls us back and the economy begins to slow. Markets 
worry that the next chapter will be another unfortunate event.  
I would call this the “slow healing” story. Recoveries from financial busts tend to be slow and 
painful. Indeed, that is why it is worth doing all that you can – in advance and in good times – 
to avoid financial crises. The academic literature suggests it takes an average of eight years 
to recover.2 If in the meantime you are hit by other bad surprises it can take longer. And in this 
                                                
1 
“A Series of Unfortunate Events” is a series of children’s novels written by Daniel Handler (using the pen name of Lemony 
Snicket).  
2  This finding refers to recovery in real per capita GDP to its pre-crisis level rather than to making up lost output relative to pre-
crisis trends. See Reinhart, C.M., and Rogoff, K.S. (2014) “Recovery from financial crises: evidence from 100 episodes”, 
NBER Working Paper No. 19823. Reinhart and Reinhart (2015) report that ten years after the fifteen worst financial crises of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
story  most  of  the  events  are  related.  As  many  commentators  have  observed,  as  well  as 
country-specific factors, many of the stresses now seen in emerging markets are knock-on 
effects, if not from the financial crisis itself, then from the responses to it in the post-crisis 
recession.  
One can tell a version of this slow healing and unfortunate events story for the world economy 
as well as for the UK. You can see that reflected in the IMF’s forecasts for world growth. In 
every one of the last five years the world economy has underperformed the forecast.3 Indeed 
it  has  pretty  much  become  an  annual  event  that  the  world  economic  growth  forecast  is 
downgraded  as  stresses  emerge  somewhere  in  the  world  economy  or  there  are  serial 
disappointments on pay and productivity. This is not to denigrate the IMF’s forecasters. You 
see the same effect in the Bank’s own forecasts and in private sector forecasting. For example, 
the  Bank’s  growth  forecasts  made  in  2010  were  derailed  by  the  euro-area  crisis.  These 
outcomes are a combination of not understanding at the outset how slow the healing process 
from the 2008 crisis would be and subsequent unforeseeable and unfortunate events.  
Secular stagnation story 
There is another rather different story however, one more reminiscent of our friend the mythical 
boiled or frozen frog. In this other world, we are not on a slow healing path, subject to a series 
of unfortunate events. Rather, there are deep secular and structural forces pushing down on 
our economies. These began to have an impact before the financial crisis. But their effect was 
masked somewhat by stimulative effects of the financial sector bubble as it inflated and was 
only exposed in the post-crisis world. In this story there is recovery from the crisis, of course, 
but  it  is  recovery  to  economies  with  both  considerably  weaker  growth  potential  and 
considerably greater vulnerability to shocks. We are in a “secular stagnation” world but have 
not fully woken up to it. 
There are different hypotheses as to why we might be in such a world. One is that we are stuck 
in an era of very low demand because there are more savers than opportunities to invest. This 
is due to fundamental factors such as demographic changes, inequality and preferences for 
low-risk assets. When the supply of savings exceeds demand for borrowing the price – i.e. the 
natural real interest rate – goes down. 
If this natural real interest rate is pushed down below zero and held there by this imbalance 
between supply of savings and demand for borrowing, central banks can’t push demand back 
up and economies remain stuck. In this world, neither central banks nor the private sector can 
easily  break  the  cycle;  the  government  has  to  step  in  to  borrow  massively  to  invest  thus 
correcting the imbalance of savers and borrowers and pushing the natural interest rate back 
up. 
Another, somewhat different take, is that we are stuck in an era not of low demand but of low 
supply growth. In this view, productivity growth slowed in the 1970s after the benefits of the 
Second  Industrial  Revolution  had  finished  working  through.  And,  despite  the  manifest 
technological  developments,  such  as  ICT,  technological  change  has  not  since  had  an 
equivalent impact on productivity. Or, as Peter Thiel said: “we wanted flying cars, instead we 
got 140 characters”. This is a world in which it is harder for policy to boost productivity and 
growth.  
 the second half of the 20th century, the median level of GDP per capita was 15% below the level predicted from the trend of 
the ten years prior to the crisis, which is roughly where the UK is currently. See Reinhart, C. M., and V. R. Reinhart (2015) 
“Financial crises, development, and growth: a long-term perspective”, The World Bank Economic Review. 
 
3   Refers to forecasts made for the first year after the April IMF WEO in question; for example the April 2010 WEO forecast for 
2011 relative to the final outturn data. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In these secular stagnation views of the world, the water around us was getting colder before 
the crisis and has become colder since. But we have not noticed it. And it is this, rather than 
the slowness of the healing process and the aftershocks of the crisis, that explains the serial 
disappointments in economic growth. 
I have set this out as two very different stories about what is happening – “slow healing” and 
“secular  stagnation”.  Of  course,  given  enough  unfortunate  events  and  enough  repeated 
disappointment on the pace of recovery, they could look and feel the same for a long time. 
There is much that is common to them. In both stories for a period of time, productivity is lower, 
interest rates stay low for long and pay and income growth is weak. But these effects are 
longer-lived in a secular stagnation world. It is quite possible that we are in some combination 
of both worlds. But I think it is important, especially when thinking about policy, to distinguish 
the different forces that drive these respective stories about the world.  
The UK picture  
Which brings me to the UK. When I joined the MPC over two years ago, the data seemed to 
point quite firmly towards the healing story. The UK was experiencing a burst of growth, driven 
by  the  return  of  credit  and  confidence  and  pent-up  demand  from  the  recession  and  slow 
recovery. Many commentators were arguing that the Bank was in danger of getting behind the 
curve; these arguments grew louder as unemployment fell at its fastest rate for 40 years. The 
Bank’s forecasts two years ago suggested that growth would fall back a touch, but only a touch, 
to around its pre-crisis average of 0.7% per quarter. Our forecast for growth in 2014,15,16 was 
3.4%, 2.7% and 2.9% respectively. 
The reality has confirmed part but only part of that story. Over the course of 2014 and 2015 
growth drifted down, slowly but consistently and by more than forecast. The economy grew at 
around 2% annualised in the last quarter of 2015 – around 0.7 percentage points lower than 
the February 2014 forecast; growth in 2015 was 0.2 percentage points lower. The Bank’s most 
recent forecast is for growth to pick up slowly over the next few years to 2.5%. That is less 
than the  average  growth  rate  of  nearly  3%  in the  decade  before  the  crisis  but  around the 
average growth rate in the last 60 years. It will, according to the OECD, be the fastest growth 
rate among G7 economies this year.  
Over the period, inflation has been pushed down to around zero by the strength of sterling and 
by the very sharp fall in the oil price. I hesitate to describe the oil price fall as an “unfortunate 
event”. Much of the fall is the result of an increase of supply, the product of the oil investment 
cycle that accompanied oil prices staying at over $100 per barrel for much of the last ten years. 
That will have boosted consumption and supported growth in oil-consuming countries like the 
UK. But the speed and size of the fall has made the shock to inflation very abrupt and exposed 
weaknesses in oil-producing economies. And more worryingly some of the fall over the last 
18 months has been due not to an increase in supply but rather to slowing demand in emerging 
markets especially China. This will have had an adverse effect on world growth. 
There are continued signs of strength in the UK economy. Consumer confidence is near record 
levels  and  business  investment  intentions  are  strong.  Housing  market  transactions  and 
investment are picking up. Credit has picked up and is growing around the rate of GDP. On 
pre-crisis metrics, there are signs of tightening in the labour market. Unemployment is now at 
5.1% – its lowest level since 2006. Job-to-job flows have picked up sharply and are nearly at 
pre-crisis  levels  and  the  vacancy  to  unemployment  ratio  –  a  measure  of  labour-market 
tightness – is at its highest level since 2005. 
But, some things have still not improved as we had hoped. Despite being stronger in the middle 
of 2015, pay growth has now fallen back to the 2% range – roughly its average since the crisis. 
And forward-looking surveys do not suggest any significant recovery in pay growth is around 
the corner.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Productivity growth similarly showed signs of picking up in the middle of 2015 but has dropped 
back to annual growth of around a quarter of a percentage point at the end of 2015. Unit labour 
costs have picked up a bit over the last year. The picture is not completely consistent across 
different measures but most measures are subdued or expected to fall in the near term.  
Meanwhile, risks from the rest of the world economy have shifted and increased. Boosted by 
monetary policy, the euro area has recovered over the past two years, albeit to low rates of 
growth. The stresses around Greece and its creditors have so far been managed. But the risk 
to the UK from a more severe hard landing in emerging markets has grown. Emerging market 
economies now account for more than half of global GDP and they accounted for more than 
95% of world economic growth between 2008Q1 and 2011Q4.4 They are now facing a set of 
inter-related challenges, including high and growing levels of debt to GDP, slowing economic 
growth, falls in commodity prices which has hit commodity exporters and a strong US dollar.  
The healing process  
How should we read this picture? Is it still slow healing, just slower and hit by more adverse 
events than we expected? Or, like our friend the frog, has the gradual nature of the drift down 
in prospects and the fact that the deflationary shock looks so clearly to have been externally 
generated lulled us into missing some more fundamental shift? Is the water around us much 
colder than we thought?  
I think there is still some mileage in the slow healing story to explain the drift down in UK growth 
and the failure of pay and productivity to recover. One cannot repair quickly the damage to the 
global economy from the worst international financial crisis for 80 years. Some, but not all, of 
the effects of the financial bust and deep recession have passed. But some have not. I want 
to look now at some of these effects and headwinds that may be holding us back.   
First, there are signs that there may still be some scarring effects in the labour market. The 
amount of average weekly leave taken – a sign of worker confidence – has recovered sharply 
over  the  last  two  years  but  remains  someway  off  its  pre-crisis  level.  And  long-term 
unemployment  and  the  proportion  of  part-time  workers  who  say  they  want  full-time  jobs 
remains  elevated. To the  extent that  workers  do  not  yet feel  confident in  asking for  a  pay 
increase, that might be one reason why wage growth has been relatively unresponsive to the 
sharp fall in unemployment.  
And we may still be seeing some cyclical effects from changes in the composition of those in 
work; low skilled, low paid workers tend both to lose their jobs early in a recession and regain 
employment late in the recovery. The increases in employment over the last year or so have 
added proportionally more younger and lower skilled workers and hence pushed average pay 
down.  
Second, on top of some of these scarring effects, the deflationary shock from lower energy 
prices does seem to be having some effect on pay. The Bank’s Agents have reported that low 
inflation is restraining pay awards. And the resulting increases in real disposable income may 
have made workers less willing to press for higher pay. Medium term inflation expectations 
appear to remain anchored and consistent with the inflation target. But the current very low 
rate of inflation may have made it less necessary for employers to increase pay now especially 
given low productivity. As the deflationary shocks pass, any dampening effect of inflation on 
pay should fade, providing inflation expectations remain well anchored. Migration may have 
                                                
4  Emerging market economies now account for 60% of global GDP in purchasing power parity terms and around 53% at market 
exchange rates.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
had some role in restraining wage growth too, though evidence suggests that it has had only 
a small negative impact on average British wages.5 
Third, the economy is facing fiscal headwinds as the Government repairs the damage to the 
public sector balance sheet from the crisis and the deep recession. This drag on growth will 
continue for a number of years. In the decade prior to the financial crisis, government spending 
on average contributed 0.6 percentage points per year to GDP growth – over 2016–2018, the 
MPC expect it to contribute 0.1 percentage points on average. 
Fourth, headwinds from weakness in the world economy are also likely to endure. Net trade 
detracts from growth in every year of the MPC’s forecast for UK growth.  
Overall,  the  healing  story  is  for  me,  the  story  behind  the  MPC’s  latest  forecast  to  which  I 
subscribe. Growth picks up slowly over the next few years, driven by domestic consumption 
and business and housing investment. As the deflationary shocks from oil prices and the past 
strength  of  sterling  wane,  the  closing  of  the  output  gap  and  consequent  domestic  cost 
pressures push inflation slowly back up to target. This forecast is premised on a market yield 
curve in which interest rates rise gradually though to levels substantially below their pre-crisis 
average. The forecast recognises the risks to this picture from another unfortunate event in the 
form of a harder landing in emerging markets.6  
Secular signals? 
But while one can still explain the current conjuncture this way, there must be less confidence 
in the healing story than when I first arrived on the MPC.  
We have already incorporated a weaker structural picture into our thinking. A few years ago 
we  were  expecting  a  period  of  above  trend  productivity  growth  to  recover  some  of  the 
productivity growth lost during the Great Recession. We no longer expect any catch-up of the 
lost productivity growth and indeed, productivity growth in our latest forecast only recovers to 
1.8%, compared to 2.7% between 1950–2007 and 2.2% in the decade before the crisis. This 
downgrading of prospects is true more broadly – according to the IMF, potential output growth 
in advanced economies fell from 2.2% over the period 2001–07 to 1.5% over 2013–14. 
And the natural rate of interest probably remains around, or a touch below, zero. This is the 
unobservable  underlying  real  interest  rate  that  is  consistent  with  inflation  at  target  and 
economic activity at its potential. One cannot observe this “natural rate” directly; it has to be 
estimated and that is difficult to do with precision. In the crisis, estimates of this rate were 
deeply into negative territory, which is why the MPC cut Bank Rate to 0.5% and launched 
quantitative  easing  (QE).  The  MPC’s  asset  purchases  can  be  thought  of  as  equivalent  to 
reducing  the  level  of  Bank  Rate,  since both  policies  provide  stimulus  to  activity  and  boost 
inflation. If you adjust real Bank Rate to factor in the effects of QE, the resulting, “adjusted”, 
rate is probably below zero at present.7 Our latest forecast is consistent with the natural rate 
and adjusted Bank Rate recovering slowly. But it is very much part of our thinking that the 
                                                
5  See Nickell, S, and Saleheen, J. (2015) “The impact of immigration on occupational wages: evidence from Britain”, Bank of 
England Staff Working Paper No.574. 
6  The GDP projections in the February 2016 forecast include a downside skew, reflecting the possibility that global activity and, 
in particular, growth in emerging economies may disappoint. 
7   The adjusted measure of Bank Rate is calculated by comparing the estimated effects of QE with those for a cut in Bank Rate, 
and using that to convert the MPC’s asset purchases into an equivalent change in Bank Rate. Expected inflation is also 
subtracted from the adjusted rate to convert it from a nominal to a real rate and so make it comparable to the estimates of the 
natural rate of interest discussed in the text. The MPC’s central estimate that QE had a total peak impact on GDP of around 
2.5% in 2013 implies that adjusted Bank Rate fell below 0.5% during the depths of the crisis. In the May 2014 Inflation Report 
the MPC judged that maintaining the stock of asset purchases at £375bn would provide continued, albeit declining support to 
activity implying that adjusted Bank Rate is still currently below 0.5%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
natural rate of interest will not rise to pre-crisis levels which is why we believe increases in 
Bank rate will be both gradual and limited. 
Moves  in  financial  markets  may  also  be  signalling  nervousness  in  the  slow  healing  story. 
Financial markets drifted down in the second half of 2015 and they fell quite sharply in the first 
months of this year. Some of these moves have recovered a bit in the last week or so. But 
nevertheless current market signals seem to be suggesting a structurally weaker economic 
picture. UK 10-year real yields are negative. And yield curves are flat as far as the eye can see 
–  the  5-year  point  on  the  UK  forward  market  interest  rate  curve  has  fallen  by  around 
0.8 percentage  points  to  1%  in  the  last  month.8  It  is  difficult  to  identify  any  really  major 
economic news in 2016 that might underlie this. Rather it may be that markets are shifting to 
a new perception of the world economy and risks, and of policy-makers’ ability to respond to 
future challenges.   
Policy implications 
What does all of this mean for policy? While the water has not become as warm as two years 
ago I thought it would, I do not yet see enough evidence that we have missed some shift to a 
permanently colder environment. My central expectation remains that as the effects of the 
crisis continue to heal and as the deflationary effects of past sterling strength and oil price falls 
wane, domestic cost pressures will gradually push inflation back to target.  
I  will  be  looking  to  see  that  consumer  confidence  remains  robust  and  business  intentions 
remain strong. I will be watching to see if pay growth picks up as disinflationary pressures fade 
and  if  productivity  growth  accelerates  as  a  result  of  the  pick-up  in  investment  and  of  the 
tightness  of  the  labour  market.  And  I  will  be  looking  very  carefully  at  the  risks  of  another 
unfortunate event for the UK economy from a hard landing elsewhere in the world. If economic 
growth falters and pay and productivity remain stuck at current levels then the healing story 
will become increasingly less convincing. 
There are of course other possible stories one can tell about the economy and other risks. I 
want  to  mention  three.  The  first  is  the  possibility,  much  in  the  news  two  years  ago,  that 
monetary policy will not react in time to the build-up of inflationary pressure. Monetary policy 
typically has its peak impact on inflation somewhere between 18 and 24 months ahead. The 
risk here is that when the current external disinflationary pressures subside, domestic cost 
growth pressures will have built up and will push inflation above target before monetary policy 
can restrain it. I would not discount this risk. The labour market has clearly become much 
tighter. And if pay is being held down by cyclical or scarring effects, these could change quickly. 
And there has been a substantial depreciation in sterling in the past three months which will 
push up on inflation, possibly more quickly than the usual prolonged lag between changes in 
the exchange rate and inflation.  
But with interest rates near the effective lower bound, with powerful disinflationary forces from 
abroad  likely  to  persist for the  next  year,  with  low  growth  in  unit  labour costs  and  with  an 
economy growing at around 2%, I think this is the lesser risk. 
Second, there is the concern that continued low interest rates lead to the build-up of financial 
stability  risks  through  an  acceleration  of  credit  growth,  increase  in  bank  leverage  and 
household  indebtedness.  The  financial  system  has  only  recently  come  back  to  life  with 
economy-wide credit now growing in the UK at around the rate of GDP. While there are some 
elements of credit that are growing more strongly, such as buy to let mortgages and unsecured 
debt, I think we are now emerging from the post-crisis phase and in a more standard stage of 
the credit cycle and we now have macroprudential tools to manage risks as they build up. Of 
                                                
8  The implied pace of tightening in the current yield curve between 75 and 125 basis points (bps) is 4 bps per quarter compared 
to 7 and 5 bps in the November and February Inflation Reports respectively. The average pace of tightening in the cycles 
since the start of inflation targeting in 1992 is around 50 bps per quarter. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
course, even after paying down debt following the crisis, UK households’ indebtedness is high 
by historical and international measures so there may not be a great deal of room for growth 
in this area if we want to avoid vulnerabilities building up in the economy generally. 
The growth in credit since the crisis, however, has been in emerging markets rather than in 
advanced economies which brings me to the last risk – an unfortunate event from some form 
of a hard landing in major emerging markets. These are now a large part of the world economy 
and debt stocks in many emerging economies have grown sharply over the last eight years. 
This could amplify the stresses many of these economies already face from the inter-related 
effects  of  slower  emerging  market  economy  growth,  much  lower  commodity  prices  and  a 
stronger dollar. A more severe slowdown and debt-related financial stress in key emerging 
markets  could  well  have  an  impact  on  advanced  economies,  including  the  UK,  through  a 
number of channels. One reassuring point is that the major UK banks and building societies 
were tested against precisely this scenario by the Bank of England in 2015 and demonstrated 
they had the resilience to weather such a shock and carry on lending to the UK economy. 
Conclusion 
Looking back over the last two years, I think that the slow healing story can still explain where 
we are and provide a guide to our future prospects. But the story has to be adapted in the face 
of more UK and world weakness than I had expected and this weakness might be signalling 
that there are deeper structural factors at work.  
Nonetheless, my central projection remains that the UK economy will continue to grow solidly 
and that inflation will return to target over the next few years. But, as always, policymakers 
need  to  be  alive  to  the  possible  meaning  of  disappointments,  to  be  very  sensitive  to  the 
possibility of changing temperatures around them, and to the risk of unfortunate events. We 
have  a  range  of  tools  at  our  disposal  and  should  be  ready  to  use  them  whichever  risk 
materialises.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
