  Ewald Nowotny: Central banking in times of change 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  OeNB-BIS  conference  “Central  banking  in  times  of  change”,  Vienna, 
13 September 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  today  to  a  very  special  event.  The 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (OeNB),  which  was  founded  in  June  1816,  celebrates  its 
200th anniversary this year. To mark this occasion, we organized a number of events. The 
high-level research conference that will take place today and tomorrow is a further milestone 
in this series of special events. 
The  OeNB  organized  this  event  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS).  Since  its  foundation  more  than  80  years  ago,  the  BIS  has  provided  a 
forum for the members of our large “family” of central banks to get together and exchange 
our views and experiences. This is why I was very happy when the occasion arose to join 
forces  with  the  BIS  and  organize  this  high-level  policy  research  conference  together. 
Hopefully,  it  will  provide  plenty  of  opportunities  today  and  tomorrow  for  policymakers  and 
academics to discuss some of the most pressing questions in present-day monetary policy. I 
would like to thank Jaime Caruana from the BIS for having made this event possible, and I 
would like to extend a warm welcome also to Peter Zöllner, former OeNB Governing Board 
member  and  thus  a  former  colleague  of  mine,  who  is  now  member  of  BIS  Management– 
something that does not happen to Austrians every day. 
Milestone  birthdays  not  only  provide  an  occasion  to  gather  family  and  friends.  They  also 
afford an opportunity to pause for a moment and reflect on one’s past as well as one’s plans 
and hopes for the future. The 200-year history of our institution has been eventful, to put it 
mildly. In its first 100 years, the Nationalbank was the central bank of a major power; in its 
second 100 years, that of a small open economy in the middle of Europe. The fate of the 
Nationalbank  has  always  been  closely  entwined  with  the fate  of  Austria,  for  better  and for 
worse. Central banks never operate in isolation. The most important lesson to be drawn from 
our 200-year history is that the greatest threat to financial and monetary stability has been, 
and still is, war. In fact, it was the twenty odd years of the Napoleonic wars which stood at 
the origin of the Nationalbank in 1816, as Austria strove to stabilize a currency which had 
undergone  strong  inflation  and  depreciation.  So  the  “privileged  Austrian  central  bank”  was 
founded as an independent institution with private shareholders. One of the first shareholders 
was  Ludwig  van  Beethoven  –  and  just for the  record:  this turned  out to  have  been  a  very 
good investment for him. 
World  War  I  ended  with  the  most  dramatic  period  in  Austrian  monetary  history,  the 
hyperinflation period of the early 1920s. If we can look back on 70 years of prosperity today, 
this is because of the long period of peace that most of Europe has enjoyed since 1945. The 
most important ingredient in this success story has been the European integration process, 
culminating  in  the  foundation  of  the  European  Union  and  the  creation  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union.  Even  if  the  European  project  faces  some  headwinds  today,  we  should 
never forget about these fundamental achievements of the past. 
But central banks cannot rest. The world is changing, and so must central banking in order to 
make sure that we can continue to fulfil our stability mandate. When turning to our hopes and 
plans for the future, I would therefore like to draw your attention to two developments which 
have  shaped  and  will  continue  to  shape  the  evolution  of  central  banking.  The  first  is 
globalization,  the  ever-increasing  interconnectedness  of  our  economies  through  the 
international  movement  of  goods,  capital,  persons  and  ideas;  a  process  which  we  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  witnessed for some time now, but which is going to continue unabated. The second, more 
recent development is the broadening of central bank mandates to include financial stability 
concerns. Both developments are very closely entangled. And they are both also very much 
in the focus of the BIS. 
Globalization  has  brought  many  opportunities,  and  many  of  the  big  challenges  facing 
mankind, like global warming, can in fact only be dealt with at a global level. At the same 
time, the constraints and influences that result from the interconnectedness of our economies 
limit the room for domestic policies. The probably biggest change in monetary policy regimes 
in  the  past  half  century  –  the  end  of  Bretton  Woods  and  the  move  from  fixed  to  floating 
exchange  rates  –  resulted  from  this  very  tension  between  the  wish  to  manage  domestic 
economies autonomously on the one hand and a world of increasing capital mobility on the 
other.  But  floating  exchange  rates  do  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  is  independent. 
Monetary policy decisions taken in other monetary areas affect our domestic economies and 
vice  versa; more and more so as the global economy is becoming increasingly integrated. 
The  unconventional  monetary  policies  undertaken  recently  by  a  number  of  central  banks 
have created policy challenges in some smaller advanced and emerging market economies. 
But spillovers concern the main currency areas as well, as exchange rates react nervously to 
expected changes in their relative monetary stance. As policymakers, we have to take care 
that the necessary stimulating effect of expansive monetary policies does not so much come 
from  increased  net  exports  but  rather  from  a  strengthening  of  domestic  demand.  In  the 
present policy environment, which in many ways is still exceptional, it is import- ant to keep 
the spirit of dialog and cooperation. The BIS has a crucial role to play here by providing a 
forum  for  the  international  community  of  central  bankers.  When  the  BIS  was  founded  in 
1930, some 20 central banks subscribed to BIS shares. Today, the BIS counts central banks 
of 60 countries among its members, representing 95% of world GDP. 
A  by-product  of  globalization,  namely  of  financial  liberalization  and  the  opening-up  of 
domestic economies and financial systems that we have witnessed over the past 50 years, 
has been the increasing frequency and severity of episodes of financial instability. Advanced 
economies had been largely spared by financial crises between 1945 and 1970, or during the 
“quiet  period”  as  Professor  Gary  Gorton  of  Yale  University  termed  it.1  With  the  end  of 
financial repression and the forces of financial markets unleashed, central banks now have 
again  to  deal  with  volatile  capital  flows,  booms  and  busts  in  credit  and  asset  prices,  and 
banking  instability.  Historically,  it  is  not  new  that  central  banks  assume  responsibility  for 
financial  stability.  The  U.S.  Fed,  notably,  was  founded  with  the  explicit  aim  to  prevent  the 
recurrence of banking crises. Also in the case of the Austrian central bank – even though it 
was  initially  founded  with  the  primary  objective  of  fostering  monetary  stability  –  financial 
stability considerations ranked high at a very early stage. Today it is clear – and has been at 
least since 2008 – that price stability alone is not sufficient to guarantee the stability of the 
financial  system  and  that  the  instability  of  the  financial  system  in  turn  can  seriously 
undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy and become a threat to price stability. 
As a result, we have seen the mandates of central banks evolve. On the one hand, there is 
the question of whether and how financial stability concerns should enter the monetary policy 
decision process. As we all know, this topic has received considerable attention at the BIS 
and  will  feature  prominently  in  our  discussions  tomorrow  morning.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
financial  crisis  of  2008  has  reinvigorated  debates  on  the  proper  role  of  central  banks  in 
banking supervision and regulation. From the late 1990s onward, there has been a general 
movement toward creating unified supervisory agencies that would not only be responsible 
for banks but also for insurance companies and other financial market actors like investment 
firms.  The  main  advantage  of  these  unified  supervisory  agencies  is  their  ability  to  take 
account of the increasing integration within the financial sector. But who should become the 
                                                
1   Gorton, Gary. 2012. Misunderstanding financial crises. Oxford. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  unified  supervisor?  Some  countries  like  the  U.K.  –  the  reform  of  the  Financial  Services 
Authority  in  2001  was  a  landmark  event  in  this  respect  –  but  also  Germany  and  Belgium 
opted  for  a  separate  authority  outside  the  central  bank.  Other  countries,  like  Ireland, 
assigned unified prudential supervision to their central banks. Overall, however, before the 
financial  crisis  there  seems  to  have  been  some  preference  for  independent  financial 
supervisory  authorities,  while  after  the  financial  crisis  more  countries  went  toward  putting 
prudential  supervision  under  the  authority  of  their  central  banks.  In  this  respect,  the  most 
radical changes took place in Hungary, and again in the U.K., where the prudential regulation 
of financial institutions was integrated back into the Bank of England in 2013. 
Both approaches have their advantages and drawbacks. The issue is far from being settled, 
and in fact there are many reasons to think that there is not one-size-fits-all solution as every 
arrangement has to work within a specific economic and political context. 
It is with these questions in mind that I would like to conclude my introductory remarks and 
hand  over  to  Jaime  Caruana.  I  wish  all  of  us  a  successful  conference  with  stimulating 
presentations and discussions. 
Jaime, the floor is yours. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
