  Barry Whiteside: Recent developments in the Fijian stock market 
Keynote address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the South 
Pacific Stock Exchange Listing Forum, Suva, 22 September 2016. 
 Salutations 
Dr Nur Bano Ali, Chair of the Board of Directors of the South Pacific Stock Exchange 
Latileta Qoro, Chief Executive Officer 
Distinguished Forum Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula  vinaka  and  good  morning  to  you  all!  It  is  certainly  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  for  the 
opening of today’s Listing Forum. 
Introductory remarks 
It  was  just  a  year  ago  that  the  Reserve  Bank  first  partnered  with  the  South  Pacific  Stock 
Exchange in establishing this Forum, which now complements other awareness programs as 
part of our overall Capital Markets Development initiatives. Thank you, Lati, and your team, 
for continuing this program. 
The need to raise awareness on the benefits of listing is still significant and all businesses in 
Fiji  that  require  finance  should  know  that  the  stock  market  is  definitely  another  avenue  of 
raising further capital towards your growth plans. 
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the participants for taking time out to attend this 
Forum.  The  theme  of  today’s  forum,  “Going  Public  –  Unlocking  the  Value  of  Your 
Company” – is an apt message that will resonate throughout today’s sessions. 
A key objective of this Forum is to encourage dialogue and familiarity between companies 
potentially looking to list, the key decision makers, and the regulators. After today, we hope 
you will be better informed on how to prepare your company to take the final step to what is 
usually referred to as “going public” or “listing”. 
Recent developments in the stock market 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Fijian capital market has made progress in its development over 
the last two decades, but I have got to say that it has not all been smooth sailing. At times we 
have  struggled  to  meet  the  proposed  targets,  especially  to  grow  the  number  of  listed 
companies. However, with the introduction of the first Capital Markets Development Authority 
Act in 1996, the market has continued to evolve. That legislation enabled both the legal and 
institutional  infrastructure  of  our  capital markets  to  be  established.  Market  players  such  as 
investment advisors, the stock exchange and stock brokers began to be formally instituted. 
The framework on oversight and protection for investors is also now well in place. 
Looking at a few key indicators, the number of listed companies has grown from 9 to 18, with 
19 securities in total, since the mid-1990s. The value of the stock, or market capitalisation, 
grew  over  this  same  period  from  $140  million  to  just  under  $1.27  billion.  In  addition,  on  a 
positive note we see interest and an influx of new investors on the stock market. 
However, whilst progress has been made in the industry, we are of the view that there is still 
much more capacity for growth. The market is well below potential and it is very pleasing to 
see  that  work  is  underway  to  address  this.  The  Capital  Markets  Development  Taskforce, 
which I chair, was set up to coordinate the development and address challenges in the Fiji 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  capital market. One of the key areas in our 2025 Masterplan is the continued development of 
the stock market. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my view that the potential impact that stock markets can have on 
economic development remains largely untapped in Fiji. Today’s Forum is about how we can 
grow and make our stock market a more active part of our financial system as well as, of 
course, discussing how it can help raise the capital finance that you need to grow your own 
companies. 
Listing is a critical component to that overall goal. This morning we will hear from some of the 
companies on our Exchange and the reasons behind their motivation to list. This will set the 
background for an engaging day of fruitful discussions. I urge you to fully participate as this is 
your  chance  to  get  first-hand  knowledge  and  experiences  from  some  of  our  key  market 
players. Please ask questions when you get the opportunity. 
You  will  also  learn  how  brokers  and  capital  market  advisors  can  play  key  roles  in  helping 
provide information and guidance to enable potential listing companies to smoothly transition 
from a private to a listed company. 
As  regulators,  we  can  also  assist  by  reviewing  our  own  processes  and  removing 
unnecessary hindrances or barriers when it comes to listing. 
Benefits of listing on SPSE 
Ladies and gentlemen, the benefits of listing on the South Pacific Stock Exchange have been 
complemented  over  the  years  with  a  number  of  Government  incentives  offered  to  listed 
companies.  We  are  indeed  grateful  for  the  Government’s  commitment  to  help  grow  and 
support the overall vision of having a reputable, sound, and vibrant capital market in Fiji. 
Some  incentives  currently  in  place  include:  a  corporate  tax  rate  of  just  10  percent;  tax 
exemption on dividends received by shareholders; no capital gains tax; and a 150 percent 
tax deduction for all listing-related costs. 
Over  the  years  we  have  known  a  number  of  companies  in  Fiji,  while  showing  some  initial 
interest  in  listing,  have,  in  the  end,  been  reluctant  to  do  so.  It  was  thought  that  possible 
reasons for this reluctance can be attributed, among other things, to: lack of awareness or 
incomplete information; too much work involved in meeting the requirements; the fear of loss 
of control of their company; and necessary disclosure requirements. 
So the key question is why should a company list? 
Listing is the building block to key potential advantages, such as elevating the market value 
of  your  company  or  business  through  increased  transparency,  strengthened  corporate 
discipline,  corporate  governance  and  compliance  to  the  rules  and  regulations.  Experience 
shows that companies become more efficient through greater public scrutiny and it actually 
benefits the business in the long term. 
An  obvious  advantage  is  access  to  Capital  and  the  ability  to  raise  long  term  finance 
which  ensures  more  capital  to  be  used  for  expansion,  as  opposed  to  a  debt  financing 
situation that a company would normally find itself in. 
Apart from the preferential tax benefits for listed companies I highlighted earlier, there is 
also an increasing pool of investors in Fiji who are not just looking to put their money into 
banks  (where,  incidentally,  deposit  rates  remain  relatively  low)  but  also  as  Fiji  grows  its 
status as a regional hub, this pool will likely include more and more foreign investors. 
One  additional  advantage  is  related  to  prestige  and  branding  for  the  listed  company. 
Clearly companies on the stock exchange gain a higher profile and they should capitalise on 
this. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Coupled with these advantages to listing, there are extensive literature and empirical studies 
that illustrate a positive correlation between financial intermediation in the stock markets and 
increased  GDP.  When  there  is  a  liquid  stock  market,  it  promotes  investments  and  allows 
investors to acquire and sell shares with ease and in a cost effective manner. In the long run, 
and  in  the  process  of  generating  more  activity,  this  leads  to  increased  savings  and 
investments, laying the foundations for economic growth and development. 
Ladies and gentlemen, at this point I would also like to highlight that there is a systematic 
process  to  listing,  and  acquainting  yourselves  with  that  process  is  critical  to  ensuring  a 
successful listing. 
Due diligence is one of the most critical steps in the journey towards listing. Getting that first 
step right would set the foundation to going public. A decision to list should be taken only 
after a careful assessment of your company’s future plans and the needs and interests of the 
shareholders. Leadership plays an integral role in listing a company and taking the company 
to a whole new level. 
While all these benefits may appear to be theoretical, let me share with you a local success 
story  that  demonstrates  how  these  benefits  pan  out  for  a  successfully  managed  listed 
company. 
In  2001,  when  RB  Patel  Ltd  listed  on  the  South  Pacific  Stock  Exchange,  it  had  a  market 
value  of  $31.5  million.  At  the  close  of  trading  at  the  end  of  2006,  this  had  grown  to 
$51 million. By the end of June 2016, the company’s market value was nearly $93 million. 
Similarly, the successful listing of the Vision Investments Limited on the 29th February this 
year  is  testimony  to  the  benefits  of  going  public.  On  the  date  of  listing,  the  founding 
shareholders of the company divested over 29.3 million shares for a total consideration of 
$46.3  million.  The  shares  were  bought  by  both  institutional  and  retail  investors.  In  just 
7 months the price of Vision’s shares has gone from $1.70 to $2.01. Overall, the value of the 
company has gone from $176.4 million on the date of listing to $208.6 million today. 
Family run local companies who wish to leave behind a legacy after years of hard work and 
sacrifice now find that the stock market can provide this. It enables continuity and succession 
planning for the company. 
These are only two examples of successful listings on the South Pacific Stock Exchange that 
have  maximised  shareholder  value.  I  am  sure  you  will  hear  other  stories  of  growth  and 
success during the course of today. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  stock  exchange  is  an  excellent  platform  for  savers  looking  for 
investments and companies who need more finance to further expand. Currently, the ability 
of the stock market to maximise shareholders’ value is neither truly appreciated nor actively 
pursued in Fiji. However, with time and more fora like this to raise awareness on the benefits 
of listing, we expect both potential investors and listed companies to converge on the stock 
market in search of growth. We will continue the collaborative effort with all stakeholders to 
reach this full potential. 
Finally, I thank Dr. Ali and Lati for their kind invitation to address you today and wish you well 
in your deliberations. 
Vinaka. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
