 Peter Praet: Interview in Expansión 
 Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Expansión,  conducted  by  Mr  Daniel  Badía  González  and  Mr  Agustín  Monzón  Peña  on 
25 April 2016 and published on 29 April 2016. 
 After  last  week’s  meeting,  Mario  Draghi  repeated  that  interest  rates  cannot  be  cut 
indefinitely. Are negative interest rates close to their limit? 
Since  negative  rates  were  introduced  in  2014,  they  have  been  very  effective.  So  far,  the 
positive effect of an improvement in financial conditions outweighs any negative effects that 
may be associated with banks’ earnings capacity or other financial stability risks. 
On the other hand, it’s clear that negative rates cannot be reduced indefinitely to ever lower 
levels. We have to monitor how the measure is being transmitted to the broader economy. In 
March we decided to focus more on the credit easing part of the long-term monetary policy 
strategy that we started in June 2014. We decided to launch a new series of targeted longer-
term refinancing operations (TLTRO II) where banks can borrow funds at rates that can be 
as low as –0.4%, on the condition that they lend that money on to the real economy. This is a 
way to ensure that the easing impact of the negative rates doesn’t stay within the interbank 
money market circuit, but reaches the broad economy. 
Having said this, interest rates remain part of a broader toolbox. But deploying negative rates 
again in the future would require a distinct worsening of the inflation outlook. As Mario Draghi 
himself said, I don’t think we’re going to see these conditions materialising in the near future. 
But the instrument is in the toolbox in case risks re-emerge. 
If  the  positives  outweigh  the  negatives,  why  are  negative  rates  coming  in  for  such 
criticism? 
I  think  the  banks  that  are  complaining  aren’t  looking  at  the  whole  picture.  They  see  the 
immediate loss associated with the tax on the cash they are holding with the ECB. They see 
the fall in unit margins if their loan book is indexed to low market rates. What they do not 
mention is that low interest rates are spurring more demand for loans, so they are able to 
expand their operations and collect more margins overall. They also don’t refer to the fact 
that,  in  a  better  economy,  the  quality  of  their  loan  book  improves.  Spanish  banks,  for 
instance, have experienced a dramatic fall in non-performing loans, which would have been 
unthinkable if we had kept rates higher. 
It is certainly easy to blame the ECB, but the truth is that the level of the interest rates is not 
the  main  problem  for  many  banks.  The  problems  are,  rather,  the  need  for  some  business 
models  to  evolve  in  directions  that  strengthen  banks’  capacity  to  successfully  face 
competition, as well as tougher regulation. 
Also in Spain, the squeeze on unit margins is not only due to low interest rates, but is also 
the result of competition. Part of this may also be due to the fact that the banking sector in 
the euro area has not undergone sufficient consolidation. 
The  new  measures  are  improving  liquidity  conditions  for  the  banking  sector,  but  can  they 
provide solutions to its capital needs? 
Our measures have had a positive impact on banks’ profitability and thus, indirectly, on their 
capital  positions.  For  example,  the  relatively  favourable  lending  conditions  enable  them  to 
reduce their funding costs. As I said, the new TLTROs will reinforce these beneficial effects 
on banks’ profits. More than in the past, when our long-term liquidity operations were positive 
mainly  for  banks  (including  of  course  Spanish  banks),  the  new  TLTROs  will  benefit  both 
banks and the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Do  you  think  the  new  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  will  be  welcomed  by  the 
banking sector? 
We believe that the new TLTROs will be even more favourable than the previous series and 
will be successful in helping to ease financing conditions. Even if the banks don’t turn to us 
because  they  don’t  want  to  be  overly  dependent  on the  ECB, knowing  that  they  have  this 
option  will  give  them  sufficient  comfort to keep credit flowing  to the  economy  on  attractive 
terms. 
The ECB’s actions have also provoked criticism from political circles, particularly in 
Germany. How far can the ECB go without political backing? 
It’s our belief that we have a lot of political support in Europe. Our policies are dictated by 
decades of monetary thinking and best central bank practices. The Deutsche Bundesbank 
has been the champion of this thinking and these practices. Central bank independence and 
low  and  steady  inflation  are  written  into  the  German  founding  law.  In  my  opinion,  the 
alternatives proposed by those criticising us are not very credible. If we raised interest rates 
now, it would no doubt abort the recovery of the economy and compromise the achievement 
of our objective. 
And what’s your assessment of Germany’s position on the banking union? 
I  believe  that  Germany  should  be  bolder  with  regard  to  completing  the  banking  union. 
Completing the banking union in the near future is essential for a better-functioning monetary 
union. There are imbalances in the project that can’t be resolved overnight, but it also can’t 
take too many years. 
Should banks limit their exposures to sovereign debt? 
There  are  various  considerations  that  need  to  be  balanced  when  thinking  about  limits  to 
banks’ exposures to sovereign debt. First, we have seen that over-exposure to sovereign risk 
can undermine banks’ financial health and business viability in times when sovereign credit 
risk  surges.  This  clearly  advocates  finding  ways  in  which  regulation  can  discourage  over-
extension by banks to sovereign risk, but I would say country risk more generally, with a view 
to moderating concentration risk on banks’ balance sheets. Second, we need to keep in mind 
that sovereign securities perform a well-defined function in banks’ business activities, as they 
provide liquidity and hedging services for banks while guaranteeing some positive carry, at 
least in Spain. There is nothing abnormal or toxic about this practice: the fact that banks are 
so eager to invest in public securities has a lot to do with their general quest for a risk-free 
asset, an asset whose value is not subject to idiosyncratic risk. The ideal situation would be 
to have a pan-European asset which could perform this function. In its absence, banks tend 
to invest in public securities. 
Are the measures announced in March sufficient to bring inflation back to the desired 
levels? 
Assessing  the  impact  on  inflation  will  take  some  time:  we  have  just  started  to  update  our 
projections  taking  into  account  the  evolution  of  the  economy  since  March  and  the  new 
measures. The climate around the global economy has improved compared to February and 
March, although there are still many uncertainties, including of a geopolitical nature, which 
could have implications for growth and inflation moving forward. We want to make sure that 
the recovery is not derailed on account of new shocks. 
If necessary, what additional measures could the ECB adopt? 
We  shouldn’t  be  talking  of  new  instruments. We  must  focus  on  the  implementation  of  our 
recent  decisions.  By  the  way,  two  important  components  of  the  March  package  have  not 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  even  been  implemented  yet:  the  TLTROs  and  the  corporate  sector  purchase  programme. 
That’s very important, and it’s what we said at last week’s meeting. 
I only wish to say that the Governing Council has demonstrated, over the years, that it has 
always had the ability, not just the will, to act. The ECB has always been able to act without 
being constrained by a supposed paucity of instruments. 
Is “helicopter money” an option for the ECB? 
Mario Draghi already pointed out that the use of this instrument would be very complex and 
fraught with legal difficulties. The option has not been on the table, not even informally. 
Will increasing the size of the debt purchase programme make it more effective? 
We haven’t actually seen it become any less effective. But it’s difficult to assess because it’s 
part of a package with the rest of the measures. What is important to note is that, when we 
saw  the  need  to  increase  the  volume  of  interventions  to  €80  billion  a  month,  we  could 
recalibrate and increase the range of eligible securities under our purchase programme. We 
don’t feel constrained by the instruments at our disposal. 
Will the purchases of corporate debt help all companies and countries, or just the big 
ones? 
It’s true that most of the bonds available at present are issued mainly in only a few countries 
and by a limited number of large firms. But there are two things to note here. First, it’s the 
realignment of portfolios that matters. If we go into the market and purchase bonds for cash, 
the sellers can use that money to purchase other assets, including those issued by smaller 
firms  and  in  other  countries.  The  ECB’s  purchases  will  be  concentrated  on  just  a  limited 
number of bonds, but all bonds will benefit from the narrowing of spreads. Second, markets 
are never static. Currently, you may see a high concentration of issuance in a few countries 
by  a  few  issuers.  But,  in  our  experience,  markets  are  very  unlikely  to  remain  static.  Our 
presence in the market will also spur supply in countries where today supply is limited. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
