  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining relative strength in a dynamic 
environment 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Euromoney  Philippines  Investment  Forum  2016, 
Manila, 6 September 2016. 
 It is my pleasure to join you today, and share the views of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
regarding  the  investment  landscape  in  the  Philippines.  I  wish  to  thank  Euromoney  for 
organizing this Philippine Investment Forum, which is an annual event started in 2012. 
It’s always about relative value 
Investing is always about weighing relative values – among asset classes, across points in a 
yield  curve,  across  industries  and  types  of  credit.  In  our  highly  interconnected  global 
environment,  investment  choices  now  also  include  weighing  relative  values  across 
geographical  markets  and  currencies.  In  other  words,  good  investing  is  never  done  in  a 
vacuum or in absolutes. 
In  making  relative  value  judgments,  prudent  investors  ask  themselves  three  questions  – 
(1)  Is there upside potential? (2) Are the returns sustainable? and (3) Are the downside risks 
manageable? 
In the case of the Philippines as an investment destination, my answer to these questions 
would  be  YES.  I  believe  the  Philippine  economy  continues  to  offer  a  convincing  case  for 
investment and sustained growth. I say this with confidence because the Philippines has a 
good solid track record! 
The Philippines’ macroeconomic environment has been marked by solid economic growth 
and  low  inflation.  Our  gross  domestic  product  has  been  robust  and  durable,  registering 
70 consecutive quarters of positive growth (even through the Global Financial Crisis!). In the 
second  quarter  of  this  year,  the  country  grew  by  7.0  percent,  its  fastest  since  the  third 
quarter of 2013. Quite notably also, there has been a resurgence in manufacturing in recent 
periods,  and  domestic  tourism  has  also  been  on  the  rise,  creating  a  broader  base  for 
economic growth. Moreover, inflation has been benign and inflation expectations continue to 
be  well-anchored.  Our  latest  assessment  shows  that  inflation  will  be  just  below  the  lower 
end  of  the  government’s  target  range  for  this  year,  but  should  move  to  within  the  target 
range of 2–4 percent in 2017–2018. 
The banking system has also been an enabler of economic growth as it continues to channel 
lending to the productive sectors of the economy. This, without sacrificing credit underwriting 
standards and the quality of their balance sheets. 
In  the  meantime,  our  external  liquidity  position  has  been  robust.  We  have  been  running 
current account surpluses for 13 years now, allowing us to beef up FX reserves to an all-time 
high of US$85.5 billion as of end-July 2016. 
All-told,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippine  economy  continues  to  enjoy  a  position  of 
relative  strength.  And  this  has  not  been  unnoticed  by  global  investors.  We  have  had  our 
share of surges in capital inflows in search of yield. And while, some of these have “come 
and gone”, a large portion of the inflows have stayed and remain invested in our domestic 
assets. 
But what I wish to emphasize this morning is that the Philippines is a destination not only for 
flighty capital. The Philippines is, more importantly, a destination for serious investment. I am 
able to say this with conviction because we do not only have a solid macroeconomic track 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  record, we also have the institutions that are critical to sustaining such a strong economic 
performance. 
Good institutions are indispensable 
For more than two decades now, we have been putting in place structural reforms that have 
liberalized key industries, including utilities, the power sector, and the banking system. We 
have adopted legislation aimed at improving governance in government corporations (GCG) 
and  public  procurement  (GPPB);  as  well  as  ensuring  fair  competition  in  industry  and  vital 
services (PCC). These reforms have helped raise the country’s total factor productivity (TFP) 
and are seen to help further reduce incremental capital output ratios (ICOR). These efforts 
complement  the  ongoing  reforms  to  further  improve  “ease  in  doing  business”  and  lessen 
“frictions” for investments in the Philippine economy. 
In  parallel,  the  BSP,  in  collaboration  with  market  participants  and  other  regulators,  is 
continuing to roll out specific market reforms under our capital market reform agenda. The 
reforms which include, among others, developing a benchmark governance framework and 
creating  a  repo  market  should  further  deepen  our  domestic  capital  market  and  align  its 
functioning  with  global  standards.  Alongside  these,  the  BSP  has  also  put  out  banking 
regulations  that  will  enhance  corporate  governance  and  credit  and  IT  risk  management 
among banks, in tandem with the adoption of the other components of Basel 3. 
Furthermore  just  last  month,  the  BSP  embarked  on  a  significant  liberalization  of  foreign 
exchange  rules.  These  measures  aim  to  encourage  the  public  to  transact  their  FX  needs 
more  with  banks  by,  among  others,  increasing  the  current  limit  of  allowable  FX  purchase 
from  banks  without  supporting  documentation,  and  allowing  payments  in  FX  for  certain 
transactions between residents. 
Also, in an effort to further improve the transmission of monetary policy, the BSP adopted in 
June this year the Interest Rate Corridor (IRC) framework for its conduct of monetary policy. 
These  monetary,  capital  market  and  banking  reforms  are  meant  to  further  strengthen  the 
financial markets so that they could more effectively “marry” the users and sources of funds. 
There  is  enough  liquidity  in  the  domestic  financial  system.  What  needs  to  happen  is  that 
more  and  more  of  this  liquidity  is  pushed  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  more 
expeditiously, not only through bank lending, but also through a robust capital market. 
The  national  government  for  its  part,  under  the  new  administration,  has  committed  to  a 
10-point  Economic  Agenda  that  aims  to  continue  the  factors  that  led  growth  in  the 
Philippines:  maintaining  an  orderly  fiscal  house,  investing  in  human  resources  and  capital 
development, among others. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we put these institutions in place because our operating environment 
is not static. We know that the macrofinancial stability we now enjoy can only be sustained if 
we have sound institutions on which to anchor any further reform efforts. 
Conditions are never static 
To complete therefore the discussion of the Philippine investment landscape, allow me now 
to  briefly  speak  on  the  risks  that  could  possibly  unsettle  us.  These  risks  impact  us  in  the 
short-term through financial market volatility and in the long-term possibly through aggregate 
demand dynamics. 
Externally, we are affected by the policy actions of advanced economies. The most pressing 
of these are 1) the timing of the next hike of the Fed and 2) the magnitude of any further 
easing from the BOJ and ECB. As the markets digest any pronouncements from AE policy 
makers,  we  will  continue  to  experience  a  toggling  between  “risk  on”  and  “risk  off”  market 
behavior, which always creates “noise” in financial markets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  BSP  has  the  tools  to  address  such  “noise”  in  our  onshore  markets,  to  calm  our 
participants  and  keep  market  behavior  in  check.  Specifically,  we  have  room  to  allow  the 
exchange rates to absorb some of these near-term shocks or provide FX liquidity under our 
flexible exchange rate policy. Moreover, we could also adopt targeted macroprudential tools 
to bring about a more fundamental change in market behavior. In addition, given the current 
benign inflation outlook, the BSP has room to keep its policy rates steady to provide a further 
anchor for stability. 
A second potential source of vulnerability are shifts in Chinese economic policies – 1) from a 
growth model that relies on exports and fixed investments to one which is driven by domestic 
demand, and 2) to a more market-oriented (and weaker) RMB. Early expectations were that 
the  shift  to  domestic  demand  would  result  in  significant  slowing  in  Chinese  growth,  which 
could dampen exports of its trading partners, such as the Philippines. More recent forecasts, 
however, show a somewhat less dire outlook on China due to fiscal and monetary support 
from  the  authorities,  easing  risks  of  knock-on  effects  on  trading  partners  and  demand  for 
international  commodity  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  the  policy  of  a  weaker  RMB  is  not 
expected to lead to stronger competition against our exports because we have a relatively 
low  degree  of  export  similarity  with  China.1  Should  the  policies  of  the  Chinese  authorities 
indeed  bring  about  more  sustainable  growth,  this  should  be  overall  positive  for  us  as  it 
reduces global tail risks. 
A third risk is Brexit. The direct impact to us of a slowdown in the UK would be minimal, given 
that  our  exports  to  the  UK  account  for  only  0.8  pct.  of  total  exports.  It  is  the  possibility  of 
second round effects on the EU, however, that is more concerning because exports to EU 
account  for  11.5  percent  of  total  exports.  We  therefore  need  to  remain  watchful  of 
developments in the UK, particularly during the transition to “exit.” 
On the  domestic front, we  have  to  contend  with  natural calamities. While  no  one  can fully 
prepare for the wrath of nature, the country has put in place policies that will help ensure we 
have adequate supply of staple foods, particularly rice. 
In  short,  ladies  and  gentlemen, the  Philippines  is  not  immune to  risks  but  our  view  is  that 
these risks right now are manageable. 
The balance – short vs. long-term dynamics 
On balance, the Philippines continues to forge an economic growth story that puts emphasis 
not  only  on  strength  but  also  on  long-term  stability  and  resilience.  The  fact  that  the 
Philippines has just entered the “demographic window”, in contrast to the aging population of 
some  neighboring  economies,  undergirds  our  long-term  resilience.  We  have  a  young  and 
vibrant population that is both a steady employment and consumer base, that opens up a lot 
of  possibilities  for  investment.  Many  industries  are  already  burgeoning  and  seizing  the 
opportunities the demographics present. 
There  is  fiscal  space  to  pursue  infrastructure  investments  geared  towards  increasing  the 
productive capacity of the economy. And the new administration has promised to ramp up 
infrastructure spending. 
On the  part  of the  BSP,  we  will  continue  to  be steadfast  in  delivering  on  our mandates of 
maintaining price and financial stability in the economy, thereby serving as the wind at the 
back of our stakeholders, including investors like you. 
                                                
1  Based on the UNCTAD’s Export Similarity Index. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Philippines presents excellent relative value 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippines  means  business.  While  the  challenges  to  the 
investment environment appear formidable, our collective vigilance and prudence will help us 
achieve  our  objectives  of  sustainable  growth,  as  well  as  stability.  I  trust  that  the  BSP  can 
further engage you in pursuing the economic agenda of the Philippines. 
At the top of my remarks, I said investing is all about relative values. I hope that in the time 
that  had  been  given  to  me,  I  have  been  able  to  show  you  that  the  Philippines  presents 
excellent  relative  value,  an  investment  choice  that  will  allow  you  to  achieve  your  target 
risk/return and more. 
Thank you very much and I wish everyone a productive Forum. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
