  DeLisle Worrell: Debating social science issues in the Caribbean 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
2016 Annual Review Seminar, Bridgetown, 26 July 2016. 
 A warm welcome to the 2016 Annual Review Seminar (ARS). This conference plays a vital 
role in the intellectual life of Barbados and the Caribbean, and it has hugely greater potential 
to contribute to the global policy debate in years to come. Over the years we have seen the 
ARS  mature  as  an  incubator  for  the  development  of  the  skills  of  Caribbean  Economists, 
especially  those  in  the  early  years  of  their  career.  This  event  began  as  an  opportunity  for 
Central Bank Economists to share their research, and invite comment, and it continues to be 
a catalyst for our ongoing work. Our seminar is timed to fall at a time when we have interns 
visiting with us, and we always fit them into our programme. In addition, we issue a global 
call for papers, and as always we delight in the presence of those of you have come from 
further afield to join us today. 
The  ARS  complements  the  Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference  (AMSC)  and  the  annual 
Salises conference, making for a trio of opportunities to debate social science issues in the 
Caribbean. 
I see an exciting future for the ARS as we go forward, based on the research underway at 
the Central Bank of Barbados (CBB), on policy options in what we are calling the Small Very 
Open Economies (SVOE). We see an opportunity here to exploit an unfulfilled niche in the 
global market for ideas. 
Forty  years  ago  the  University  of  the  West  Indies  and  Caribbean  Economists  pioneered 
research in the Economic problems of small size. The late William Demas, second President 
of  the  Caribbean  Development  Bank  (CDB),  brought  size  into  the  mainstream  Economic 
debate with his book The Economics of Development in Small Countries, and the New World 
Group of social scientists produced a wealth of deeply researched studies on the challenges 
and circumstances of small open economies. We understood then that one size cannot fit all, 
and  that  the  strategies  that  Canada  and  the  United  States  employ  to  grow  and  prosper 
cannot be borrowed, lock, stock and barrel, and applied to tiny economies like Barbados. 
But that is what we have come to nowadays. Whether you are Brazil or Belize, Canada or 
Cayman,  Mexico  or  Maldives,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  insists  that  your  best 
mix  of  Economic  adjustment  measures  is  an  independent  central  bank  with  an  inflation 
target,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  and  a  debt  to  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  ratio  that 
trends downward to sixty percent. We no longer have conceptual frameworks for Economic 
management  for  very  small  economies.  That  is  the  market  that  we  at  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados are well positioned to claim as our own. 
We are already out of the boxes. We have a framework for anchoring our exchange rate by 
the  use  of fiscal  policy  to  contain  aggregate spending  and  imports.  It  is,  as far  as  I know, 
unique  in  the  world.  Other  countries  are  doing  what  we  do,  and  like  us  have  kept  up  the 
value  of  their  currencies.  But  they  are  doing  it  instinctively,  often  because  they  have  vast 
natural resources and small populations. We are the only ones who have a theory and a way 
to know when we must adjust and by how much. 
And  this  is  just  the  beginning.  We  are  working  on  a  tool  to  measure  whether  our  fiscal 
policies are sustainable, building on the work we did with colleagues across the region, in the 
book we published last year. From this work we may derive fiscal rules that make sense for 
small open economies that are credible and can be implemented. 
Also ongoing is analysis of investment and the current account of the Balance of Payments 
(BoP), intended to demonstrate that the conventional indicators may give misleading signals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Beyond  this,  we  must  venture  out  into  the  fields  of  competition  and  competition  policy, 
financial stability analysis, finance and development, and payments, to name a random few, 
in search of policies and guidelines that are appropriate for small very open economies. 
I  say  this  is  a  golden  opportunity  for  us  at  CBB  to  take  ownership  of  policy  design  for 
economies like our own,  worldwide. Nobody else is doing this  work. This can become our 
trademark, and when it does, we will attract talent from around the world to the ARS, people 
with an interest in Economic and financial management of SVOEs. 
That is the promise of our future. We will go forward in concert with colleagues from across 
the  region.  Our  research  agenda  will  be  reflected  in  the  other  conferences  hosted  in  the 
region, and in the research that is undertaken in our universities and reflected in our journals. 
We have the potential to be a fount of ideas that can spread across the world, because we 
are coming up with policies that work. 
We have every reason to look forward to the discussion and debate of the next few days. At 
the end of our sessions I am confident we would all have gained insight, and have identified 
many lines of new research waiting for our explanation. Our time here will have been well 
spent. 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
