  Raghuram Rajan: Strengthening our debt markets 
Annual Day Address by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the 
Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India, Mumbai, 26 August 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak to FEDAI. In the last few weeks, in successive speeches, 
I  have  outlined  the  RBI’s  approach  to  inflation,  distressed  debt,  financial  inclusion,  and 
banking sector reform. I want to speak today about debt markets and associated derivatives; 
why we need them to be deep and liquid, why, in addition to central and state governments, 
we need riskier firms and projects to be able to access the bond markets for funds, why we 
need to encourage product innovation, and finally the dilemmas that regulators like the RBI 
face. In the process, I hope to touch on some of our recent successes, as well as failures, 
and our ambitions for the future. 
There are three important reasons why debt markets have become a lot more attractive in 
recent months. First, we finally have a framework that commits us to low and stable inflation. 
Yes, July’s inflation reading was a high 6.07%, but I have no doubt that inflation will fall in the 
months  ahead.  The  key  point  is  that  market  participants  know  that  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  has  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation,  certainly  over  the  next  five  years  for 
which  its  remit  has  been  set,  and  it  will  do  what  it  takes.  This  lowers  the  inflation  risk 
premium, and thus reduces the nominal fixed interest rate for everyone, from the government 
to the riskiest borrower. In this regard, I am confident that Dr. Urjit Patel, who has worked 
closely  with  me  on  monetary  policy  for  the  last  three  years,  will  ably  guide  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee going forward in achieving our inflation objectives. 
A second development has been the reluctance of public sector banks (PSBs) to lend, and 
together with private sector banks, the reluctance to fully pass through past policy rate cuts 
into bank lending rates. Short term market rates, however, have seen full pass-through. No 
wonder highly rated firms are bypassing banks to borrow from the commercial paper (CP) 
markets, with outstanding commercial paper having more than doubled in the last two years 
to  over  3  lakh  crores  (see  chart  below  on  CP  outstanding  juxtaposed  against  incremental 
bank lending). 
But what of lower rated firms? Unfortunately, the difficulty of debt recovery in India has meant 
that credit spreads are wider than elsewhere. This is  where the third notable development 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   comes in. Recent reforms of the SARFAESI Act and Debt Recovery Tribunals in the short 
term,  and  the  new  Bankruptcy  Code  in  the  medium  term,  should  help  in  enhancing  the 
prospects of repayment, thus reducing credit spreads. 
Given these developments, what should the objectives of fixed income market regulation? 
The objectives of market regulation 
As a developing country regulator, the RBI is focused on enhancing growth while maintaining 
stability. In the past, this has meant that the RBI has moved cautiously on liberalizing fixed 
income  and  derivatives  markets.  What  is  there  about  these  markets  for  central  banks  to 
worry about? 
Typically three issues. We have always worried that markets attract speculators, and that in 
thin markets, the speculative element can move market prices away from fundamentals. This 
is certainly a concern, but we should also remember that not all speculators think the same 
way.  So  long  as  there  is  no  concerted  move  to  manipulate  markets  (and  this  concerted 
manipulation can be prevented by regulation), the varied opinions of speculators can provide 
liquidity, which in turn can make the markets more immune to manipulation. In other words, 
excessive fear of speculation in markets is self-fulfilling – it renders markets illiquid and prone 
to manipulation. 
Second,  markets  can  be  a  source  of  competition  for  established  institutional  players.  For 
instance,  as  I  noted  above,  high  quality  corporate  credits  can  migrate  from  banks  to  debt 
markets. This may push banks into higher risk lending. Once again, there is merit in these 
concerns. However, too much can also be made of them. After all, banks are supposed to 
lend to riskier clients that need monitoring and hand-holding, while markets are supposed to 
lend to clients who do not need such attention. Moreover, the problem in India is too much 
risk  ends  up  on  bank  balance  sheets,  either  directly  or  indirectly.  For  example,  Non-Bank 
Finance  Companies  (NBFCs)  are  supposed  to  take  on  greater  risk,  such  as  loans  to  real 
estate developers, because their liabilities are longer term. In actuality, though, many have 
substantial borrowings from banks. It would be better from the perspective of systemic risk if 
they  replaced  bank  debt  with  market  borrowing.  More  generally,  some  of  the  very  large 
single and group exposures of banks should be brought down by forcing large borrowers to 
raise more market financing. 
Third,  we  worry  about  unbridled  innovation  that  attempts  to  get  around  prudential  and 
supervisory  norms  and  ends  up  creating  uncertain  valuations  and  systemic  risk.  For 
instance,  the  fixed  income  products  and  derivatives  structured  around  housing  mortgage 
pools in the United States became hard to value as house prices turned down. This was a 
primary  factor  in  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Once  again,  though,  financial  innovation  has 
been useful in opening credit to the hitherto underserved – the unfortunately named “junk” 
bonds  have  indeed  facilitated  the  growth  of  a  variety  of  enterprises  and  sectors,  most 
recently shale oil. While regulators have to weigh carefully the benefits versus the systemic 
risks posed by every new product, we cannot simply ban all innovation just because it makes 
us feel safer. 
The  broader  point  is  that  a  measured  and  well-signaled  liberalization  of  fixed  income  and 
derivative  markets  will  probably  allow  us  to  reap  the  benefits  of  deeper  and  more  liquid 
markets, while minimizing the risks associated with speculation, competition, and innovation. 
Over  the  last  few  years,  we  have  had  to  proceed  somewhat  cautiously  on  market 
development  because  we  worried  about  creating  vulnerabilities  when  global  financial 
markets were fragile. But as macroeconomic stability has strengthened, the movement has 
always  been  forward.  Yesterday’s  announcements  were  simply  the  next  steps  in  steady, 
measured liberalization. Let me explain. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Participation 
Greater participation adds liquidity. Over the years, we have tried to enhance participation. 
Most  recently,  even  though  retail  investors  form  a  small  part  of  the  global  fixed  income 
market, we are  working to enhance their access to the institution-dominated screen-based 
NDS-OM market so that they can trade G-Secs, and also so that they can use their de-mat 
accounts  to  do  so.  However,  in  markets  that require  sophisticated  understanding,  such  as 
complex derivatives, we continue to be careful about broadening retail access. 
We can be more relaxed about institutional participation. Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) 
will  now  have  direct  access  to  a  variety  of  markets  including  NDS-OM  ,  corporate  bond 
trading and perhaps other market segments going forward. 
One reason we limited institutional participation in the past was to prevent speculation. So, 
for example, we required participants to be long an underlying exchange asset, say dollars, 
in order for them to take a short position in financial markets, and vice-versa. But sometimes 
the volume of importers hedging prospective imports by buying dollars forward far outweighs 
the volume of exporters, who hedge future receipts by selling dollars forward. To satisfy the 
net demand for forward dollar hedging, typically banks have taken the other side. However, 
to ensure bank stability, we have limited the extent of open positions that banks can hold. 
There is a cost to these limits. Every time the market gets imbalanced, exchange rates have 
to move substantially to equalize temporary imbalances between demand and supply, even if 
unwarranted by medium term fundamentals. This puts more pressure on the central bank to 
intervene. 
We can certainly increase bank open position limits, and will do so over time, but it would not 
be prudent to place all the exchange risk on banks. A better option would be to allow more 
players to hold open positions without an underlying, with some limits so that we do not get 
excessive speculation or attempts at manipulation by single traders. This can rectify market 
imbalances, improving exchange market liquidity and depth, without imposing large demands 
on  banks  or  on  the  RBI.  The  RBI  took  a  fundamental  step  in  this  direction  yesterday  by 
allowing a moderate open position to all market participants. Based on experience, the RBI 
will decide further moves. 
Finally, not all participation adds to liquidity and depth in Indian markets. For example, some 
foreign  organizations  have  suggested  allowing  trading  of  domestically  issued  Indian 
securities  abroad,  only  reporting  the trades  domestically.  Unfortunately,  this  could  subtract 
trading  on  Indian  exchanges,  and  thereby  diminish  liquidity.  We  have  suggested  to  such 
organizations  that  they  either  conduct  their  trades  on  the  Indian  exchanges,  or  that  they 
direct their clients to Masala bonds. The former is still under discussion. 
Innovation 
Financial innovation is sometimes seen in a bleak light as a way to evade or avoid taxes and 
regulations. Properly done, however, financial innovation can slice and dice risks so that they 
are placed on the right shoulders. One example of such an instrument is interest rate futures, 
where after an overhaul in 2013–14, the last 12 months’ average daily trading volume was 
close to Rupees 23 billion (despite falling in recent months). An investor, bank, or corporation 
can use the IRF market to gain or shed interest exposures as they desire. The key to the 
success  of  this  market  has  been  to  allow  the  design  of  the  relevant  instrument  to  be 
governed  by  market  participants,  while  ensuring  regulatory  concerns  are  satisfied. We  are 
proceeding in a similar way with money market futures contracts. 
Not  all  innovative  instruments  have  been  successful. Inflation  Indexed Bonds  (IIBs)  tied to 
the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) have not been very popular because the RBI has moved 
away from a focus on the WPI to a focus on CPI. Even the market for CPI indexed IIBs has 
been  lukewarm.  The  moderate  investor  interest  perhaps  reflects  the  disinflationary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  environment,  where  inflation  protection  is  less  sought  after.  Also,  unlike  the  more  tax-
protected Gold Monetization Bonds, the CPI indexed IIBs are not fully tax protected against 
inflation. Going forward, a level playing field on taxes is warranted for all instruments, so that 
instruments do not gain favor simply because they get better tax treatment. 
The lesson from these examples is that financial innovation needs support, not to create tax 
or  regulatory  arbitrage,  but  so  that  appealing  features  are  encouraged.  Innovation  also 
requires  tinkering,  to  modify  what  does  not  work  until  something  more  appealing  can  be 
found – the first versions of Interest Rate Futures were not attractive, but later versions have 
succeeded.  This  is  why  the  RBI  has  moved  to  a  sandbox  approach,  where  we  are  liberal 
towards  early  product  innovations  so  long  as  they  are  not  clearly  problematic,  regulating 
more  carefully  only  when  interest  picks  up  and  the  product  looks  like  it  might  become  of 
systemic importance. 
Finally, an important function for the regulator in encouraging financial innovation is to create 
the necessary infrastructure. For instance, a number of financial contracts are structured off 
benchmarks.  RBI  has  encouraged  the  setting  up  of  the  Financial  Benchmarks  India  Pvt. 
Limited (FBIL) which is building a series of market benchmarks. I am hopeful that these will 
soon be used in innovative financial contracts. 
Internationalization 
As  a  current  account  deficit  country,  India  needs financing from  abroad.  Ideally,  we  would 
like to attract risk capital, which is in short supply in this country. This means encouraging 
Foreign  Direct  Investment,  as  well  as  equity  investment.  Foreign  investors  can  also  help 
deepen debt and derivative markets as they contribute to price discovery and liquidity. 
Not  all  domestic  entities  should  issue  claims  held  by  foreign  investors.  Ideally,  of  course, 
companies should be left to make decisions about what currency they borrow in, and how 
much  they  hedge,  but  given  our  weak  bankruptcy  system,  there  is  moral  hazard  built  into 
unhedged  foreign  borrowing  –  if  the  rupee  appreciates,  the  promoter  takes  all  the  upside 
associated with paying the low dollar interest rate and the now-lower principal, if the rupee 
depreciates,  the  occasional  unscrupulous  promoter  goes  to  his  Indian  bankers  and  asks 
them to bail him out. This is why the issuance of short term dollar or yen denominated debt 
by infrastructure companies, if left unhedged, could be severely problematic in case of rupee 
depreciation. 
Therefore, we have encouraged companies that do not have foreign exchange earnings to 
either issue long term dollar bonds, fully hedged shorter term bonds, or rupee denominated 
Masala bonds abroad. The first issues recently of Masala Bonds reflect a coming of age of 
Indian debt that has been insufficiently remarked upon – for the first time in recent decades, 
the rupee’s value is trusted enough in international markets that corporations can issue there 
in domestic currency. Going forward, we hope a more vibrant Masala bond market abroad 
will complement a vibrant domestic corporate bond market. 
Even  though  FDI  flows  are  enough  to  cover  our  current  account  deficit,  we  are  also 
encouraging  inflows  into  the  debt  markets  to  improve  depth  and  liquidity.  We  have 
progressively  expanded  FPI  limits  in  government  debt,  and  recently  specified  how  these 
limits  will  expand  for  the  foreseeable  future. We  have  also  opened  up  investment  in  state 
government debt, and laid out the medium term plan for those limits also. In general, our aim 
is to liberalize steadily, but in a thoughtful way, continuously asking how further liberalization 
will strengthen our domestic markets. 
We have not been persuaded by every market plea. For example, a number of investment 
banks  want  a  dollar  denominated  G-Sec  issued  internationally  –  ostensibly  to  create  a 
benchmark dollar yield curve for Indian instruments. While I agree such an instrument would 
be attractive for investors in the yield-starved world, I am not persuaded it is useful for India. 
When much of the emerging world would love to move from issuing dollar debt to issuing in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  its own currency so as to avoid currency risk, I don’t see why we should move the other way. 
Instead,  let  us  build  out  an  international  quasi-sovereign  rupee  yield  curve,  so  that  rupee 
issuances can be priced easily. It is with this in mind that we have allowed banks to issue 
Masala bonds yesterday, with bank bonds being a good quasi-sovereign proxy. 
Liquidity 
Of  course,  not  all  parts  of  the  rupee  yield  curve  are  liquid,  even  in  the  domestic  G-Sec 
market. At the very short end, we are trying to bring more liquidity and better pricing through 
the auctioning of term repos. At the longer end, we have been trying to focus on more illiquid 
securities  in  our  open  market  operations  so  that  the  term  curve  evens  out.  We  are  also 
proposing to encourage market making in specific G-Sec instruments by  involving Primary 
Dealers. 
One way to bring liquidity to corporate debt is to enable them to be used as collateral in repo 
transactions  with  the  central  bank,  with  appropriate  haircuts,  of  course.  As  banks  become 
able to borrow against their high quality corporate bonds, yields will fall, and more issuers will 
come to the market. With this in mind, we have initiated the process with the Government to 
amend  the  RBI  Act  to  allow  the  RBI  to  conduct  repos  of  corporate  bonds  with  banks  and 
other financial institutions. 
Ratings, contingent support, and supply 
The ratings put out by credit rating agencies are important in assuring arm’s length investors 
about corporate credit quality. In order for their ratings to be accurate, agencies need both 
up-to-date information, as well as good analysis. Agencies have asked the RBI to give them 
information  about  corporate  bank  borrowings.  Since  these  are  available  from  the  credit 
information  bureaus  (CIBs),  the  RBI  has  suggested  the  credit  rating  agencies  become 
members  of  CIBs.  Hopefully,  incidents  where  a  highly  rated  corporate  bond  plummets 
without  warning  into  default  will  become  increasingly  rare  as  rating  agencies  exercise  due 
diligence. 
Some have argued that the easy access to bank cash credit keeps large corporations from 
going  to  the  money  and  bond  markets  for  funds.  This  phenomenon  also  raises  bank 
exposures to single names or groups, increasing their risk concentration. While as suggested 
earlier, we are seeing some movement of corporations to the money and bond markets in 
this period of bank stress, we will nudge corporations further by imposing higher provisioning 
and  capital  requirements  for  banks  on  such  corporate  lending  when  exposures  become 
large. 
Many  of  the  measures  proposed  so  far  will  enhance  the  attractiveness  of  highly  rated 
corporate  bonds  to  investors.  But  infrastructure  projects  that  need  substantial  amounts  of 
financing may not start out highly rated. To enable such entities to issue, we have allowed 
banks to offer credit enhancement to such bonds. We have been careful to set the capital 
requirement for such credit enhancement commensurate with the risk banks are taking on so 
that there is no arbitrage. Yesterday’s announced measures should make it easier for banks 
to offer appropriate amounts of credit enhancement. 
One area that needs greater clarification is obligations of state governments as well as state-
government guaranteed obligations. In order for state government obligations to have zero 
risk  weight,  and  have  the  highest  rating,  it  is  important  that  there  be  no  explicit  or  implicit 
default  or  restructuring  of  such  obligations.  While  a  restructuring  may  seem  like  a  way  to 
postpone  obligations,  its  ramifications,  not  just  for  the  yield  the  market  will  demand  of  the 
particular state government issuer in the future but also for the yields on obligations of other 
state  governments,  are  large  enough  that  such  actions  should  continue  to  remain 
“unthinkable”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Regulations 
We are conscious of the limitations placed on  netting of derivative contracts, and thus the 
higher  associated  capital  requirements  on  banks.  The  issue  has  been  taken  up  with  the 
Government, and we hope to amend the RBI Act to make such netting possible. As with the 
tax  issues  associated  with  securitization,  which  have  recently  been  addressed  by  the 
Government, resolving this issue should hopefully lead to substantial market activity. 
Finally, while the RBI is a liberalizer, we have to be careful not to relax prudential regulations 
simply  because  an  entity  or  activity  is  deemed  of  national  importance.  Dispensation  on 
prudential regulation is the wrong instrument to favor such activities. A nationally important 
activity  such  as  infrastructure  may  be  very  risky.  To  require  lower  provisions,  or  to  allow 
higher leverage or ECBs against such activities, may increase systemic risk. In the long run, 
the activity may be damaged by the regulatory dispensation (too many infrastructure projects 
that do not have dollar earnings will be financed with dollar or yen loans and cannot repay) 
and  stability  may  also  be  compromised.  It  is  far  better  for  the  Government  to  directly 
subsidize such activities if it deems them important than for RBI to sacrifice systemic stability 
on the altar of national importance. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. While the RBI has been cautious in reforming during the recent period of 
global  market  turmoil,  it  has  not  stood  still.  Market  reforms  have  proceeded  at  a  steady 
measured  pace. Observers  may  be  impatient,  but  my  belief  is that  steady  and  irreversible 
reform and “mini Bangs” like yesterday’s rather than “Big Bang” is the need of the hour. As 
global  conditions  become  less  uncertain,  the  pace  of  reform  can  pick  up.  The  lessons  we 
have learnt during this period on what works will be invaluable then. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
