   Andrew G Haldane: Whose recovery? 
Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, in Port Talbot, Wales, 30 June 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
The views are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Bank of England. I would like to thank Mauricio 
Armellini, Christine Boykiw, Mark Carney, Ian Derrick, Chris Duffy, Jeremy Franklin, Emma Hardaker-Jones, Steve 
Hicks, Dena Jacobs, Arpad Morotz, Ben Nelson, Lizzie Peck, Alice Pugh, Lee Robinson, Mark Robson, Arthur 
Turrell and Sebastian Walsh from the Bank and Elaine Chamberlain, Alan Newman and Phil Wales from the ONS 
for contributions and comments. 
It is a great pleasure to be here in Port Talbot. I want to discuss the UK’s economic fortunes. 
The past few weeks have been dominated by the run-up to the EU referendum vote and its 
aftermath. This has generated considerable uncertainty about the economy, about policy and 
about politics – a heady cocktail. I will come to those uncertainties, and their implications for 
monetary policy, at the end. But I wanted to start by assessing the UK’s economic recovery so 
far, as this provides important context for what happens next. 
Last year I visited Nottingham on one of my regular regional visits. As with today’s, these visits 
are crucial for helping the Bank of England make sense of the economy. My first stop was a 
lunch for local business people. There, I spoke about the recovery in the UK economy over the 
past  three  years,  the  dramatic  improvement  in  the  jobs  market  and  the  high  degrees  of 
confidence  among  companies  and  consumers. This  met  with  several knowing  nods,  a few 
furrowed brows and some gently probing questions. Overall it seemed we were all on the same 
economic page, if not always on the same paragraph or line. 
My next visit was to a community centre in Nottingham with half a dozen local charities and 
community  groups.  This  was  something  of  a  new  departure  for  me.  Typically,  the  Bank’s 
regional visits have tended to focus on company contacts in the public and private sectors. I 
hoped speaking to this different group of organisations, drawn largely from the voluntary sector, 
might provide me with a different perspective on the fortunes of the economy, the jobs markets 
and degrees of confidence in the recovery. It did not disappoint. 
I began by speaking about the UK’s economic recovery. I never got as far as the improvement 
in the jobs market or surging confidence. I was stopped in my tracks by a forest of furrowed 
brows and a phalanx of probing questions, not all of them gentle. “What exactly do you mean 
by recovery?” one asked. “My charity is dealing with 50% more homeless people than three 
years ago.” Every other charity in the room had similar stories to tell. Whether it was food 
banks, mental health problems or drug addiction, all of the numbers were up. The language of 
“recovery” simply did not fit their facts. 
On subsequent regional visits, including this one in Wales, talking to companies, community 
groups  and  charities,  I  have  encountered  the  same  conundrum.  For  many,  the  economic 
recovery is visible and tangible – in sales, in jobs, in investment. But for others it is barely 
visible and for some non-existent. How to reconcile the macro data with these micro accounts? 
Were these stories outliers? Or was I neglecting an important missing ingredient in the UK’s 
economic fortunes? Put differently, whose recovery were we actually talking about?  
These  questions  have  a  particular  resonance  here  in  Port  Talbot.  Prior  to  the  crisis, 
unemployment in the local area was similar to the Welsh and UK average at around 5%. But 
the region was hit hard by the recession, with unemployment peaking at 13% in 2014. Despite 
recent falls, it remains at 9% – well above its pre-crisis peak and levels in Wales and the UK. 
Today, over one in five households have no-one in work. Recent uncertainty about the future 
of the local steelworks, and the jobs of the 4,000 workers there, has further complicated the 
picture. Here in Port Talbot, the language of “recovery” may also fail to fit the facts.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Against that background, I want today to take a look at the performance of the UK economy 
over recent years. By slicing and dicing the data in different ways, it is possible to assess how 
different segments, sectors and regions of the UK have performed during the recovery. That 
means looking at aggregate metrics of economic health, such as income, employment and 
wealth. But a different lens is provided by looking at these metrics on a disaggregated basis 
and at non-standard measures of societal well-being. 
Taken together, these disaggregated data tell a rather more nuanced story about the UK’s 
recovery: a recovery which for most has been slow and low, for many partial and patchy and 
for some invisible and incomplete. This uneven economic surface helps reconcile the macro 
data  and  the  micro  stories  from  my  regional  visits  –  the  “recovery  puzzle”.  It  also  has 
implications for what happens next to the economy in the light of the referendum, including 
monetary policy, on which I will conclude.  
Why it matters 
Before turning to the data, it is worth spending a moment on why this matters. Why look at the 
distributional pattern of activity when monitoring the economy as a whole and when setting 
monetary  policy?  This  might  seem  like  a  strange  question.  Surely  the  fortunes  of  different 
sectors  and  segments  of  society  are  important?  Yet,  at  least  viewed  from  one  angle,  the 
distribution of gains and losses across the economy and across society ought not to much 
matter, at least when it comes to setting monetary policy. Here is why.  
The tools available to monetary policymakers, like the Bank of England, are small in number. 
The Bank can set only one interest rate – the interest rate on Bank of England money. This 
interest rate affects every region, every sector, every company and every individual that uses 
Bank money. In practice, this means pretty much everyone in the UK. In other words, monetary 
policy affects the fortunes of the whole of the UK economy and it does so equally. The Bank 
cannot set a different interest rate for the steel and the shipping industries, for Port Talbot and 
Portstewart, for Wales and West Lothian.  
If monetary policy is singular, does that imply it should be set in a way which is single-minded? 
In  other  words,  should monetary  policy focus  only  on the  economy-wide  picture, taking  no 
account of developments across different sectors or regions, income and age ranges, savers 
and borrowers? My answer to that, quite different, question is a resounding no. That is for four 
distinct reasons. 
First, we know that official data on the economy are noisy and mis-measured. They also often 
fail to capture fully some areas of economic activity – for example, sectors of the economy that 
are either rising rapidly (such as the digital economy) or contributions that fall outside of the 
National Accounts framework (such as volunteering). Forming a picture of the whole economy 
from official statistics is rather like doing a jigsaw puzzle with half of the pieces missing and 
the other half slightly water-damaged.  
This is not a criticism of statistical agencies: the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS), down 
the road in Newport, do a fantastic job of tracking our economy, to say nothing of the help they 
have provided with this speech. It is simply that, in a dynamic economy, it is impossible to track 
everything with statistical precision.1 Faced with those uncertainties, it is often useful to try to 
form  pictures  using  disaggregated  subsets  of  the  jigsaw  pieces  –  much  as  we  do  when 
completing a large jigsaw puzzle. As with a jigsaw, this can help in understanding the bigger 
picture.  
Second, standard measures  of economic  activity,  such  as  GDP,  are  not  perfect metrics of 
societal well-being. This problem has long been recognised, including by the original architects 
                                                
1   For example, see the recent review of the UK’s statistical system (Bean (2016)). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   of GDP.2 It is one reason why statistical agencies in a number of countries, including the UK, 
have recently begun publishing a broader range of measures of well-being, social as well as 
economic, subjective as well as objective. These provide a different window on how economies 
and societies are performing over time and across sectors. 
Third,  even  though  monetary  policy  cannot  discriminate  between  regions,  sectors  or 
individuals, that does not mean its impact is exactly the same across each of these groupings. 
It is not. The effects of interest rates, whether higher or lower, affect savers and borrowers very 
differently. And the impact of so-called Quantitative Easing (QE) is also likely to be different 
across cohorts of society.3 Understanding the differential impact of monetary policy across 
these sectors is important in general, as well as for gauging whether policy is working through 
its intended channels.  
Fourth, and perhaps most important of all, the distribution of outcomes across different groups 
can matter greatly for the well-being even of the economy as a whole. To see that, consider a 
simple example. Imagine the economy comprises two regions, one with income of 10, the other 
with income of 90. Now imagine income falls by 5 in region one but rises by 10 in region two. 
At least as measured by GDP, the economy and society as a whole is 5% better off.  
But is it? The income of the already-rich has risen by just over 10%, while the income of the 
already-poor has fallen by 50%. Does the former really swamp the latter when it comes to the 
well-being of society? There are grounds for doubt. Empirical studies show that every extra 
pound of income or wealth yields less satisfaction than the last. A millionaire values a £1,000 
lottery  win  less  than  someone  on  the  living  wage.  For  economists,  this  goes  by  the  name 
“diminishing marginal utility”. Yes, I know we should get out more. 
If they are sufficiently unevenly distributed, income losses by the poor may more than offset 
gains by the rich in a social welfare sense, even if not in a GDP sense. In our simple example, 
imagine  people’s  satisfaction  has  a  logarithmic  relationship  with  income,  consistent  with 
diminishing marginal utility. Then, we find that social welfare is almost 10% lower after than 
before the changes, even though GDP is 5% higher. When it comes to assessing how societies 
are doing, the distribution of gains and losses really matters. 
The role of the Bank of England is to serve the good of the UK people, as it has been since its 
inception in 1694. Monetary policy is very unlikely to be the most effective tool for changing 
the distribution of gains and losses across society – other macroeconomic tools are better 
placed. And, indeed, doing so would be inconsistent with the Bank’s monetary policy mandate. 
But policymakers, including central banks, do need to dive beneath the statistical surface to 
understand  the  economy  region  by  region,  city  by  city,  town  by  town,  sector  by  sector, 
household by household. Indeed, that is the very purpose of regional visits like this one.  
The economic jigsaw 
Before turning to the distribution of outcomes, let me start by looking at measures of economic 
health for the economy as a whole. When it comes to economy-wide measures of activity, 
economists typically look at metrics such as output (often measured by GDP), employment 
(such  as  the  number  of  people  in  jobs)  and  wealth  (financial,  property  etc).  These  are, 
essentially, different pieces of the same economic jigsaw.  
Chart 1 plots these three measures over the past decade. All three suffered a severe set-back 
at the time of the global financial crisis: peak-to-trough, GDP fell by 6%, employment by 2% 
                                                
2   “The welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measurement of national income” (Kuznets (1934)). 
3   Bank of England (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   and wealth by 11%. These are significant falls. They are confirmation, if it were needed, that 
the UK entered a deep recession – indeed, a “Great Recession” – between 2008 and 2009.4 
Since 2009, however, all three measures have begun to recover: GDP has risen by around 
14%, employment by around 8.5% and wealth by around 35%. These are strong recoveries. 
Indeed, all three measures now exceed their pre-crisis peaks: GDP is 7% higher, employment 
6%  higher  and  wealth  over  30%  higher  than  in  2008. When  economists  refer  to  the  UK’s 
“recovery”, these are the metrics they typically use to keep score: incomes, jobs and wealth 
have all “recovered” their crisis-related losses.  
So why has that recovery not been felt, at least by some? One explanation may simply be that 
this time’s recovery is slower than those in the past. At a corresponding stage of recovery after 
the  UK  recessions  of  the  1970s,  1980s  and  1990s,  GDP  was  6%,  19%  and  18%  higher 
respectively than today (Chart 2). Even after the Great Depression of the 1930s, GDP was 
16% higher. For those with a long enough memory, this time’s recovery is likely to feel quite 
anaemic, relative to those in the past. 
A  second  potential  explanation  may  lie  in  the  fact  that  aggregate  activity  measures  are 
sometimes a poor proxy for the average person’s income. GDP is a measure of the size of the 
economic pie, a pie that has grown substantially larger since 2009. But so too has the number 
of people eating it. Taking the two together, GDP per head has risen significantly more slowly 
than aggregate GDP since 2009. Indeed, GDP per head today is only around 1% above its 
pre-crisis peak (Chart 3).  
GDP measures income from all UK-based activities. But not all of that income flows to UK 
citizens.  Some  flows  abroad  to  foreign  owners  of  UK  assets  and  some  income  is  earned 
domestically on UK investments abroad. The amount of net income flowing overseas currently 
stands at around 3% of GDP. This is a record high. If we take net overseas income out of GDP, 
to give a measure of net national disposable income per head, it has recovered even more 
slowly than GDP per head. It is currently at levels little different than its pre-crisis peak (Chart 
3). National income per head suggests there has scarcely been any recovery. 
Moreover, not all the income earned nationally flows directly and immediately to households. 
For  example,  some  accrues  to  companies  who  may  save  it  rather  than  distributing  it  to 
households as wages or dividends. Net savings by UK companies currently stand at around 
1% of GDP. That means, when we look at household disposable income per head, we find it 
has  essentially  flat-lined  since  2009  (Chart  4).  Even  as  GDP  has  recovered,  household 
incomes have essentially stagnated.  
Even the notion of the “average household” needs careful interpretation. Looking at a different 
“average” – the household in the centre of the distribution or median – suggests this flat-lining 
in disposable incomes may have pre-dated the crisis (Chart 4). Half of all UK households have 
seen no material recovery in their real disposable incomes since around 2005. Or, put more 
evocatively and provocatively, the majority of UK households have faced a “lost decade” of 
income. 
Next  let’s  look  at  employment.  The  aggregate  numbers  here  are  hugely  impressive,  with 
2½ million new jobs created since 2010. The UK unemployment rate has fallen like a stone, 
from 8.5% in 2011 to around 5% currently. And the news gets better. Chart 5 breaks down 
these new jobs into full-time, part-time and self-employment. It is clear that the lion’s share of 
the jobs’ increase over the past few years is accounted for by rises in full-time work. This has 
been not just a jobs-rich recovery, but a full-time, jobs-rich recovery. 
Yet the nature of work may matter every bit as much as headline jobs numbers. Work is about 
more than just the money; it adds to life satisfaction and self-esteem and lowers anxiety and 
                                                
4   Bernanke (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   depression.5 And there have been several notable shifts in the nature of employment which 
may  have  affected  people’s  satisfaction  with  their  job.  One  is  in  the  changing  nature  of 
employment. The number of people in self-employment has risen from 3.6 million in 2005 to 
around 4.7 million today and so, less dramatically, have numbers of workers on temporary 
contracts. Those on zero-hours contracts have risen from 120,000 to 800,000. 
Some of this shift in employment practices is likely to have been a voluntary choice by workers 
to increase their job flexibility – for example, those nearing retirement or returning to work after 
childcare seeking part-time employment. But this is not the full story. Around 15% of those 
working part-time would prefer to be in full-time employment. And around a third of those on 
temporary contracts would prefer to be on permanent contracts. For those individuals, the dark-
side of labour flexibility – job insecurity – may be being felt. 
Some measures of job insecurity are consistent with that. For example, job insecurity would 
tend to lower the likelihood of people moving jobs.6 As Chart 6 shows, job-to-job flows began 
rising  slowly  after  2010  but  remain  at  levels  well  below  their  pre-crisis  levels.  Meanwhile, 
surveys suggest around a quarter of workers currently are afraid of losing their jobs, the highest 
level  in  several  decades.7  Citizens  Advice  has  recently  estimated  that  around  4.5 million 
workers in England and Wales are in insecure employment.8 
Even those in a job, secure or otherwise, may not be working as much as they wish. Around 
three and a half million people, or almost 10% of the working population, say they would like 
to work longer hours (Chart 7). In 2007, that number was two and a half million. The number 
of extra hours these people would like to work – around 12 hours per week or 35% of the 
average working week – is also material. Even if these survey numbers overstate the actual 
number of extra hours people might wish to work, they leave a sizable fraction of the working 
population not unemployed, but under-employed.  
When it comes to the pay of those in work, the picture is also a subdued one. Chart 8 plots 
mean and median weekly earnings growth for full-time UK employees, in nominal and real 
terms. Nominal earnings today are around 7% higher than in 2009. But in real terms earnings 
are still around 5% below this peak. This is the longest period of flat or falling real wages since 
at least the middle of the 19th century. Although the recovery of the past few years has been 
jobs-rich, it has been notably pay-poor.  
Finally, let’s look at household wealth. As with employment, the headline gains here have been 
impressive,  with  aggregate  net  wealth  increasing  by  almost  £3  trillion  since  2009.  Chart 9 
breaks down these wealth gains by asset type – pensions, property, financial, physical. This 
suggests these gains have come principally from rises in property and pension wealth. In other 
words, the gains have been skewed towards those in society who own their own home or who 
have sizable pension pots. 
That skewed wealth picture is confirmed if we look at measures of median, as opposed to 
mean,  wealth  using  household-level  data  (Chart  10).  Since  2006,  average  net  household 
wealth has risen by around 25%, from £345,000 to £435,000. Over the same period, median 
household wealth has increased more modestly, by around 15%, from £200,000 to £225,000. 
Overall, then, although the aggregate data suggest a fairly robust recovery, a drill-down paints 
a more nuanced picture. The rising economic tide has not lifted all boats. Indeed, a sizable 
fraction  of  households  have  seen  no  recovery  in  their  disposable  incomes,  a  rise  in  job 
insecurity and at best modest rises in their wealth. For them, the “recovery puzzle” may not be 
                                                
5   Gallie D et al (2016). 
6   Gregg and Gardiner (2015)  
7   Gallie, Felstead, Green and Inanc (2016) 
8   Citizens Advice (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   so  puzzling.  These  data  also  suggest  that  distributional  factors  may  be  important  when 
understanding “whose recovery”. Let me now turn to those. 
Disaggregating the jigsaw 
There are a number of ways in which the economic jigsaw can be rearranged to provide a 
different picture of the UK’s economic fortunes. Let me briefly consider four cuts of the data: 
by region; by income; by age; and by housing tenure. Each provides a somewhat different, 
though complementary, window on whose recovery we are talking about. 
Regional distribution 
(a) 
Chart 11 shows the regional pattern of real GDP per head since 2007. For most regions, these 
show a fall in 2008/09 followed by a recovery thereafter. The regional profiles of recovery are, 
however, quite different. For example, in only two regions – London and the South-East – is 
GDP per head in 2015 estimated to be above its pre-crisis peak. In other UK regions, GDP per 
head still lies below its pre-crisis peak, in some cases strikingly so. For example, in Northern 
Ireland GDP per head remains 11% below its peak, in Yorkshire and Humberside 6% below 
and here in Wales 2% below. 
Regional patterns of real household disposable income show a broadly similar pattern: in most 
regions incomes are estimated to have broadly flat-lined since 2009 at lower than pre-crisis 
levels.  In  other  words, disposable  incomes  in most regions  have  not  experienced  any  real 
recovery. Perhaps it is not such a surprise, then, that the language of “recovery” fails to fit in 
many of them.  
Another notable pattern in regional income gains and losses is that the largest gains have 
come in regions where income was already high – London (incomes more than 30% above 
the UK average) and the South-East (14% higher). Contrarily, some of the larger losses have 
been in regions where income was already-low – Northern Ireland (18% lower than the UK 
average)  and  Yorkshire  and  Humberside  (14%  lower).  Put  differently,  since  the  crisis  the 
regional distribution of incomes has widened. 
This widening of the income distribution means that aggregate GDP figures may over-state 
somewhat the impact of the recovery on societal well-being: gains by the already-rich boost 
well-being by less than equivalent losses by the already-poor. To demonstrate that, Chart 12 
plots an illustrative measure of “social welfare”. This is constructed by aggregating up regional 
measures of well-being on the assumption they have a logarithmic relationship with GDP per 
head.9 This is plotted alongside aggregate GDP per head. 
Although conventionally-measured GDP per head has recovered to above its pre-crisis peak, 
the same is not true of aggregate well-being, so defined. It fell after the crisis and has remained 
at those lower levels over the past three years; it currently stands just below its 2007 peak. In 
other words, in a subjective well-being sense, there may have been no real recovery in the UK 
over the past few years.  
If we turn from income to wealth, the picture is much the same. Chart 13 plots median wealth 
on  a  regional  basis  since  2007. This  has  risen across  all  regions.  But  the  pattern  is  again 
uneven, with the largest gains in London (47%) and the South-East (25%), whereas in Wales 
the gains are smaller (8%) and in the North East there has been a small fall in wealth. With 
In other words, this is a standard “Benthamite” (Bentham (1789)) social welfare function of the form : 
                                                
9  
 
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆=∑ln𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖
   where 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 is gross value-added for region i 
See, for example, Sen (1970). Other forms of social welfare function – such as those proposed by Rawls (1974) 
and  Sen  (1973) –  place  greater  weight  on  those  with  lower  initial  levels  of  well-being.  They  would  suggest 
weaker profiles for social welfare than those shown here.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   wealth in the former regions already higher than in the latter, the upshot has been a widening 
in the regional distribution of wealth. 
As with income, these wealth data can be translated into a measure of social welfare. Chart 14 
plots that relative to aggregate wealth since 2007. The well-being benefits from higher wealth 
have been roughly half as large as would have been the case had these gains been evenly 
distributed regionally. This evidence goes some way towards reconciling the macro data and 
the micro stories from my regional visits. Whose recovery? To a significant extent, those living 
in London and the South-East of England.  
Income distribution 
(b) 
A different lens on recovery comes from looking at how income gains are distributed across 
households. Chart 15 plots real household disposable income per head across households 
grouped  into  five  income  categories.  Because  household  spending  differs  materially 
depending  on  someone’s  income  –  for  example,  poorer  households  spend  proportionately 
more on food and energy – we deflate the income of each group using a price index which 
reflects their different spending patterns. 
Chart  15  paints  a  fairly  reassuring  picture.  In  general,  lower  income  groups  have  fared 
somewhat better than higher income groups since the crisis: the lowest income quintile has 
seen disposable incomes rise by around 5% since 2007, while the highest quintile has seen 
income fall by around 5%. Those in the bottom half of the distribution have seen incomes rise 
since 2007, while those in the top half have seen them fall. This reflects the impact of the 
benefits and pensions system in supporting lower income households.  
As a result, the distribution of incomes across the UK has probably narrowed a little since 2007. 
Income inequality has, if anything, fallen. That means, when we look at measures of social 
welfare  aggregated  across  different  income  groups,  we  find  it  has  not  performed  very 
differently than aggregate real disposable income since the crisis (Chart 16).  
These patterns of gains and losses are, however, very different when we turn to wealth. Chart 
17  plots  the  distribution  of  wealth  gains  since  2010  across  income  quintiles.  It  suggests  a 
dramatically uneven pattern. Those in the bottom two-fifths of the income distribution have 
seen virtually no gains in their wealth since 2010. Indeed, those in the bottom 20% have seen 
their wealth fall over this period. By contrast, those in the top quintile have seen their wealth 
increase by almost 20%. 
This uneven pattern of gains and losses in wealth has widened what was already a fairly wide 
wealth divide: in 2010, those in the bottom income quintile had average net wealth of £70,000, 
compared with £587,000 for those in the top quintile. That means the gains in social well-being 
since 2008 are likely to have been considerably more modest than the rise in headline wealth 
would imply: these gains have largely been harvested by the already-asset-rich and not at all 
by the already-asset-poor. 
Looking across the income distribution, then, it is clear that recovery has been associated with 
both the incomes and, more strikingly, the wealth of the least well-off having broadly flat-lined. 
Recovery has not lifted all boats, especially some of the smaller ones. This pattern may go 
some  further  way  towards  solving  the  recovery  puzzle.  Whose  recovery?  To  a  significant 
extent, those already asset-rich.  
Age distribution 
(c) 
A third dimension of recovery is how it has affected different age groups. Chart 18 looks at the 
evolution  of  nominal  average  hourly  earnings  across  different  age  groups.  It  suggests  a 
significant  inter-generational  income  shift  has  been  underway  over  recent  years.  Nominal 
earnings of those under-30 have risen by a cumulative 6% since 2007, while those over-50 
have seen cumulative gains of 22%.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Household-level data, which looks at all sources of income, suggests an even more striking 
inter-generational  divide.  Chart  19  plots  average  real  disposable  income  across  three 
household types: pensioners and working age adults with and without children. Since 2007, 
pensioners  have  seen  their  real  disposable  incomes  rise  by  9%.  Over  the  same  period, 
incomes  for  working  age  households  with  children  have  increased  by  3%  while  those  for 
working age adult households without children have fallen by 3%.10  
These aged-related disparities in income are mirrored, and amplified, when we look at the 
distribution of wealth. Chart 20 looks at the evolution of wealth across the age distribution since 
2007, while Chart 21 shows a breakdown of the gains. All of the £2.7 trillion rise in wealth since 
2007 has been harvested by those over the age of 45, two thirds by those over the age of 65. 
By contrast, those aged 16–34 have seen their wealth decline by around 10% over the period. 
Given this evidence, it seems likely perceptions of recovery will differ radically according to 
age. Those over 50 have seen material gains in both income and, notably, wealth. For them, 
recovery  will  have  felt  tangible.  By  contrast,  those  under-40  have  seen  their  disposable 
incomes and wealth fall. For them, recovery is likely to have felt invisible. Whose recovery? To 
a significant extent, those over the age of 50. 
Housing tenure distribution 
(d) 
Finally, consider the impact of housing tenure. This has undergone seismic shifts over recent 
years. Charts 22 and 23 show the proportions of UK households renting or with a mortgage. 
Those under 50 have seen a secular rise in renting and a fall in mortgaged households. Among 
young adults, these shifts have been dramatic. In 1977, one in four 25-year-olds were renters. 
By 2014, that fraction had risen to two-thirds. The number of households aged 21 to 25 with a 
mortgage has fallen by a factor of three. 
While these trends in housing tenure are long-lived, the financial crisis has clearly amplified 
them. Since 2007, the share of renters among those aged between 25 and 34 has risen by 12 
percentage points. Among 35–49 year olds, the share of renters has increased by over two 
thirds. By contrast, those over 50 have seen a much smaller change in housing tenures. These 
shifts are likely to reflect the combined effects of a rise in UK house prices relative to income 
and, since the crisis, a reduction in mortgage availability for the young.  
Whether someone owns or rents a property need not affect their well-being, other things equal. 
But when it comes to the UK housing market, other things are rarely equal. The combination 
of rising demand for rental property, and constrained supply, has led to more rapid rises in 
rents than in household incomes. As a fraction of household income, rents have doubled since 
the early 1980s from around 10% to over 20% today. For the rising fraction of households who 
are renting, this will have eaten into their disposable incomes.  
Chart 24 shows a measure of household income which subtracts the amount spent on housing 
by  each  household.  The  conventional  measure  of  household  disposable  income,  using 
average mortgage costs across households, has increased by 1–2% since 2007. Over the 
same  period,  the  housing  cost-adjusted  measure  of  household  disposable  income  has 
increased by less than 1%. Once housing costs are taken into account, the improvement in 
household living standards is even harder to discern.  
The impact of housing costs is also likely to have fallen unevenly across different cohorts and 
regions. Chart 25 show rents as a fraction of income across different regions. What stands out 
is the much larger than average rent proportion in London and, to a lesser extent, the South-
East and South-West. These additional housing costs would good some way towards undoing 
the over-performance of these regions in disposable income terms since the crisis. 
                                                
10   The IFS and Resolution Foundation have both highlighted the divergence of income growth between pensioners 
and working-age households. See, for example, Belfield et al (2015) and Corlett et al (2016). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What is true across regions is also true across income and age cohorts. Charts 26 and 27 look 
at the change in household income and wealth across different housing tenure-types since 
2007.  Gains  in  both  income  and  wealth  have  been  far  larger  for  owner-occupiers  than  for 
renters. This helps explain the uneven pattern of wealth gains by age since the crisis, as older 
cohorts are more likely to be owner-occupiers. 
Taken together, then, the rising cost of rents, and the rising share of renters, appears to have 
caused a further erosion of some households’ income since the crisis, particularly renters, the 
poor and the young. For those cohorts, rising housing costs are likely to have contributed to 
the sense of this being an invisible recovery. Whose recovery? To a significant extent, those 
owning their own home. 
The social jigsaw 
So far, we have looked at relatively standard measures of economic health and wealth, the 
staple  diet  of  economists  like  me.  But  there  are  now  many  studies  showing  that  objective 
measures  of  economic  health  and  wealth  do  not  always  correspond  well  with  individuals’ 
subjective sense of well-being and fulfilment.11 Let me give a simple example to bring this point 
home. 
The highest per capita income region in the UK is London, where the average person earned 
£24,000 per year in 2014. At the bottom of the per capita income league table was Northern 
Ireland, where the average person earned £15,000 per year in 2014. Yet when it comes to 
measures of life satisfaction, the tables are completely turned. London ranks at the bottom of 
the regional league table of happiness, while Northern Ireland occupies (by some distance) 
pole position.  
In part for those reasons, a number of countries have over recent years developed indices of 
well-being, drawing on a much wider array of economic, social and environment factors. For 
example, in the UK the Office for National Statistics (ONS) has begun tracking 43 separate 
measures of well-being grouped into 10 categories: personal well-being, relationships, health, 
participation  in  civic  society,  where  we  live,  personal finance, the  economy,  education  and 
skills, governance and the natural environment. 
These  different  metrics  are  slightly  apples  and  oranges  –  and  some  may  be  bananas. 
Nonetheless,  a  variety  of  empirical  studies  have  found  these  categories  to  be  important 
determinants of individuals’ subjective well-being.12 A good starting point is personal well-being 
– people’s sense of whether their lives are satisfying. Chart 28 plots an index of personal well-
being since 2012. At an aggregate level, it suggests a rising tide of well-being, consistent with 
a growing economy. There are also few clear distributional differences in this pattern of well-
being, with different regions, ages and income groups all rising.  
Other measures of well-being paint a more mixed picture. Of the 43 measures of well-being 
tracked  by  the  ONS,  17  have  seen  some  improvement  since  2012.  Many  of  these 
improvements are among economic indicators – employment, income and wealth. In some 
ways more interesting, however, the majority of these well-being measures have not improved 
during the recovery, while a fifth have deteriorated. Interestingly, the areas of weakness chime 
with some of the messages I heard from charities in Nottingham last year. 
One area of perceived deterioration in levels of satisfaction concerns accommodation. Some 
of this probably reflects trends in housing tenure, with far fewer young people on the housing 
ladder than in the past and with renting offering a lower quality, higher cost, alternative. Another 
factor reducing satisfaction may be that, facing these costs, larger numbers of young adults 
                                                
11   Fitoussi, Stiglitz and Sen (2009). 
12   Fitoussi et al (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   are still living with their parents: almost a quarter of 21–34 year olds now live with their parents, 
up from 20% in 2007 (Chart 29).  
For  some  people,  these  housing  problems  are  more  acute  and  appear  to  have  worsened 
during the recovery. For example, official estimates of the number of people sleeping rough 
have been on a rapidly rising trend since at least 2010. Over the same period, the number of 
people  classified  as  “statutorily  homeless”  (in  accommodation  they  have  no  legal  right  to 
occupy) has also drifted steadily higher, largely due to a surge in London and the South-East.  
A second area of perceived deterioration is health. While objective measures of health, such 
as life expectancy, have improved, subjective measures have deteriorated during the period 
of recovery. So too have measures of anxiety and depression. Among other factors, these 
trends may be linked to changes in the nature of work, in particular greater job insecurity for 
some groups. They may also be linked to the stagnation, or in some cases falls, in disposable 
incomes in some regions, age groups and income cohorts.  
A third area of perceived deterioration concerns income. With a sizable fraction of households 
having seen their disposable incomes stall, especially once account is taken of housing costs, 
that should  perhaps  come  as  no  surprise.  One  metric  often  looked  at here  is  poverty.  For 
example, Charts 30 and 31 look at the fraction of households whose incomes are below a fixed 
threshold (“absolute poverty”) and below 60% of median incomes in the UK (“relative poverty”), 
in both cases after housing costs.13 It does so for three cohorts: under-16s, those aged 16–65 
and the over-65s.  
Whether in absolute or relative terms, the story is roughly the same. Among those over-65, 
levels of poverty have declined steadily both prior to and following the crisis, if at a less rapid 
rate over the past few years. That is not true, however, of the 16–65 cohort. Their levels of 
poverty have tended if anything to drift upwards slightly over the past few years. In other words, 
poverty levels among those of working age have increased at the same time as the economy 
as a whole has recovered fairly robustly. This, too, puts a somewhat different gloss on whose 
recovery this has been. 
Monetary policy implications 
What, then, does this mean for monetary policy? 
Around a year ago, my assessment of the UK economy was a cautious one.14 The economy 
was growing at a solid, if unspectacular, rate. There were signs growth was slowing, albeit 
gently, towards trend. Meanwhile, price pressures remained weak. Energy prices had fallen, 
and sterling had risen, in both cases sharply. This had lowered inflation significantly below 
target. Domestic wage growth was also weak, despite the significant improvement in the jobs 
market.  I  was  doubtful,  then,  there  would  be  any  significant  pick-up  in  wage  pressures, 
dampening the reflationary process necessary to return inflation to target. 
With the risks to costs and prices to the downside, my view a year ago was that maintaining 
Bank rate at its historically low levels was necessary to provide support to the recovery and 
momentum to the reflationary process. Indeed, given the asymmetry of risks to growth and 
inflation, my view was that monetary policy should stand ready to move in either direction, with 
the chances of a rate rise or cut broadly balanced.  
A year on, in the run-up to the referendum, my view on both the economy and on the stance 
of  monetary  policy  was  essentially  unchanged.  The  UK  economy  had  continued  to  grow, 
steadily if unspectacularly. At the same time, there had been accumulating evidence, from 
surveys and from GDP figures over a period of three years, of growth continuing to slow gently 
                                                
13   Belfield, Cribb, Hood and Joyce (2015)  
14   Haldane (2015). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   to the point where it was little different than trend. That meant the output gap was no longer 
shrinking at any pace, if at all.  
Meantime, price pressures had remained weak. External deflationary forces – from energy 
prices and sterling’s earlier appreciation – have started to wane. But domestic wage growth 
had not picked up discernibly. Wage inflation had remained in the “2-point-something” zone it 
had occupied for much of the preceding 5 years. Indeed, this looked increasingly like a new, 
post-crisis, “going rate”. Given job insecurity, and given slowing employment growth, that new 
going-rate seemed unlikely quickly to dislodge. 
This has been an uneven economic recovery, looking across regions, income and age cohorts. 
Large parts of the UK – many regions, those on lower incomes, the young, renters – have not 
experienced any meaningful recovery in their incomes or in their wealth. Perhaps it is not so 
surprising, then, that reflation in spending, prices and wages has been modest over the past 
few years and interest rates, contrary to financial market expectations, have hence remained 
on hold. 
Over  the  past  month,  the  outcome  of  the  EU  referendum  has  added  another  important 
ingredient to this mix. It has increased materially the degree of uncertainty – economic, policy, 
and political – around the UK’s economic recovery.15 And while some of this uncertainty may 
dissipate,  a  good  chunk  is  likely  to  linger  throughout  the  Bank’s  two  to  three-year  policy 
horizon.  This  uncertainty  is  likely  to  weigh  on  domestic  spending  by  both  companies  and 
households for the foreseeable future.  
It is still far too early to be drawing strong conclusions on the precise path of the UK economy 
from here. At present, we have only the smallest trail of data breadcrumbs on which to base 
any assessment of how companies and consumers are responding to the referendum news. 
The Monetary Policy Committee will have a chance to offer its own comprehensive macro-
economic assessment in a month’s time, with the August Inflation Report. But let me offer a 
few general reflections on the likely economic path ahead. 
First, and in some ways most importantly, this is not (underlined, italicised, capitalised and 
repeated  in  bold)  a  re-run  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2008/09.  Then,  the  fault-line  was  an 
undercapitalised and illiquid banking system which, having folded under pressure, then pulled 
the credit rug out from under the feet of companies and consumers. When the banks sneezed 
in 2008, the whole economy caught a cold – and atishoo, atishoo, we all fell down.  
The situation today could not be more different. The UK banking system is, by an order of 
magnitude, better capitalised and more liquid than then. That is in large part a reflection of the 
post-crisis  regulatory  reform  agenda  which  has  strengthened  banks’  capital  and  liquidity 
standards.  Since  the  referendum,  the  Bank  of  England  has  augmented  these  capital  and 
liquidity buffers by making available more than £250 billion of liquidity and by lowering banks’ 
Counter-Cyclical Capital Buffer to facilitate an extra £150 billion of lending. 
That underlying balance sheet strength has meant, despite some sharp gyrations in their share 
prices, the cost of UK banks funding themselves has scarcely budged since the referendum. 
That means the cost of credit to companies and consumers should not be expected to rise 
either. And nor, with balance sheets strong, is there any reason for banks to constrict credit to 
customers. This time the credit rug will not be pulled. So while the past few weeks have been 
a drama, there is no reason to expect this to turn into a crisis, or at least a financial one. 
Second, even though the economy is unlikely to crash, it is likely to slow, perhaps materially, 
in the quarters ahead. While companies and consumers might not be slamming on the brakes 
and going into reverse, as in 2008, some are likely to be going down a few gears, perhaps 
even moving into neutral. External economists expect the UK economy to tread water over the 
                                                
15   Carney (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   next few quarters. That means the amount of slack in the UK economy is likely to begin steadily 
rising in the period ahead, perhaps causing unemployment to rise.  
The main  reason for that  likely  slowdown  is  uncertainty.  And  with  uncertainty  having  risen 
sharply, caution may once more become the watchword for companies and households, as it 
has for most of the period since the crisis. This increases the incentive to delay making and 
executing plans. This delaying effect is likely to be greatest for those spending decisions which 
are largest, lumpiest and most difficult to reverse. 
There is already some evidence of this delaying effect among companies’ lumpy decisions. 
Surveys conducted since the referendum, including by the Bank of England’s regional agents, 
suggest a significant number, perhaps even a majority, may be pausing or trimming their hiring 
and  investment  plans.  A great many  others  are still  huddled  around  their  board  tables,  re-
thinking their strategic plans. There is no sense of slash and burn. But there is a strong sense 
of trim and singe. 
Meanwhile, among households there are signs of a significant slowing in both confidence and 
in the housing market, which are often inter-twined. The latest survey from the Royal Institute 
for  Chartered  Surveyors  (RICS),  covering  the  period  since  the  referendum,  showed  the 
weakest three-month-ahead house price expectations balance since 2010 and the sharpest 
fall since 2004. This feels like a market braced for disappointment. And where housing leads, 
the economy often tends to follow. 
Third,  counterbalancing  to  some  degree  this  downdraught  to  domestic  demand,  there  has 
been a sharp fall in the sterling exchange rate of around 9% in trade-weighted terms since the 
referendum. This will provide a shot in the arm to the UK’s net exports. And, through higher 
import prices, it will also help the process of lifting inflation back towards its 2% target, from its 
current level close to zero. Indeed, given the scale of the exchange rate shock, it is possible 
inflation could overshoot this target in the period ahead. 
In  principle,  this  combination  of  inflation-above-target  and  output-below-capacity  poses  a 
dilemma for monetary policy. Tighten to counter the first or loosen to cushion the second? In 
practice, in my personal view, there is no real policy dilemma here and little ambiguity about 
the appropriate monetary policy response, either in direction (easing) or scale (significant).  
One  reason  for  saying  that  is  because  I  do  not  think  the  risk  of  higher  inflation  becoming 
entrenched is especially great. Even before the events of the past month, the Phillips curve 
here in the UK (the relationship between wages/prices and unemployment/output) was as flat 
as a pancake. In a world of potentially stalling output and rising unemployment, I find it hard to 
imagine wage and price pressures will intensify greatly in the period ahead.  
Indeed, it is striking that despite the sharp fall in the exchange rate and the temporary boost 
this will provide to inflation, there are no indications so far of this having dislodged medium-
term inflation expectations. The most direct measure we have is from financial markets where 
they have shown few signs of ticking-up  
(Chart 32). Indeed, at longer maturities inflation expectations have nudged down from already 
fairly  low  levels.  With  household  and  company  measures  of  inflation  expectations  also  at 
historically low levels, in my personal view the risk of inflation expectations being dislodged to 
the downside is greater than on the upside.  
Fourth, there is an important asymmetry in the risks facing the UK economy at present, which 
needs  to  be  weighed  when  judging  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  With 
expectations and animal spirits fragile, and uncertainty high, maintaining confidence among 
companies and consumers is key. Indeed, a failure to do so could itself become self-fulfilling 
in  its  negative  impact  on  activity.  In  this  environment,  policy  leadership  and  action  has  a 
particularly important role to play in buttressing expectations and supporting confidence. That 
includes, but is not confined to, monetary policy leadership and action.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   There is also an asymmetry in the potential effectiveness of monetary policy. If there is greater 
uncertainty about the effectiveness of tools for easing than tightening, then the monetary policy 
implication is clear: more should be done to cushion the effects of negative shocks, the like of 
which  we  have  just  seen,  than  positive  ones.  This  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  the  “risk 
management”  approach  to  monetary  policy.16  And  in  the  current  environment,  with  risk 
elevated, I think it has particular force. 
Put differently, I would rather run the risk of taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut than taking 
a miniature rock hammer to tunnel my way out of prison – like another Andy, the one in the 
Shawshank  Redemption.  And  yes  I  know  Andy  did  eventually  escape.  But  it  did  take  him 
20 years. The MPC does not have that same “luxury”. 
In my personal view, this means a material easing of monetary policy is likely to be needed, 
as one part of a collective policy response aimed at helping protect the economy and jobs from 
a  downturn.  Given  the  scale  of  insurance  required,  a  package  of  mutually-complementary 
monetary policy easing measures is likely to be necessary. And this monetary response, if it is 
to buttress  expectations  and  confidence,  needs I think  to  be  delivered  promptly  as  well  as 
muscularly. By promptly I mean next month, when the precise size and extent of the necessary 
stimulatory measures can be determined as part of the August Inflation Report round. 
Yesterday, the minutes of the July meeting of the MPC were published. Broadly consistent 
with  my  personal  view,  they  noted:  “In  the  absence  of  a  further  worsening  in  the  trade-off 
between  supporting  growth  and  returning  inflation  to  target  on  a  sustainable  basis,  most 
members of the Committee expected monetary policy to be loosened in August”.  
So whose recovery? So far at least, this has been a recovery for the too few rather than the 
too many, a recovery delivering a little too little rather than far too much. Nowhere is that more 
evident than here in Port Talbot. Yet it is evident, too, in sectors from steel-making to shipping, 
in towns like Portstewart as well as Port Talbot, from Wales to West Lothian.  
Monetary policy cannot do everything to counter the impact of the referendum which is, after 
all, an economic regime shift for the UK. And monetary policy of course needs to be mindful of 
the  potential  adverse  consequences  of  administering  ever-larger  doses  of  the  monetary 
medicine. Nonetheless, my personal view is that it has an important role to play in cushioning 
the effects of any relapse in recovery in the months and quarters ahead and, beyond that, in 
helping making the future recovery everyone’s.  
Thank you. 
(2016), 
Bulletin, 
available 
‘Independent  Review  of  UK  Economic  Statistics’,  available  at 
References 
Bank  of  England  (2012),  ‘The  distributional  effects  of  asset  purchases’,  Bank  of  England 
at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Quarterly 
Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb120306.pdf. 
Bean,  C 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/independent-review-of-uk-economic-statistics-
final-report.  
Belfield, C., Cribb, J., Hood, A., & Joyce, R. (2015). Living standards, poverty and inequality in 
the  UK:  2015. 
for  Fiscal  Studies  available  at  http://www.ifs.org.uk/ 
publications/7878.  
Bernanke,  B  S (2011),  ‘The  Effects  of the  Great  Recession  on  Central Bank  Doctrine  and 
Practice’, Federal Reserve Board, , speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 56th 
Institute 
                                                
16   Evans (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   on 
UK 
‘The 
living 
(2016), 
income 
available 
available 
Resolution 
standards’, 
Foundation 
importance  of 
of  England  Court  Room, 
Economic  Conference,  Boston  USA,  available  at  https://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
newsevents/speech/bernanke20111018a.htm.  
Bentham,  J  (1789),  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation,  Clarendon 
Press. 
Carney M (2016), ‘Uncertainty, the economy and policy’, Bank of England, speech given at 
Bank 
at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech915.pdf. 
Citizens  Advice 
security’,  available  at 
https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/Global/CitizensAdvice/welfare%20publications/The%20Imp
ortance%20of%20Income%20Security%20(Final).pdf.  
Clarke, S, Corlett A and Judge, L (2016) ‘The housing headwind: The impact of rising housing 
costs 
at 
http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/the-housing-headwind-the-impact-of-rising-
housing-costs-on-uk-living-standards/.  
Corlett,  A.,  Finch,  D.,  Whittaker,  M.  (2016)  Living  Standards  2016.  Resolution  Foundation 
Report available at http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/living-standards-2016/.  
Evans C (2015), ‘Risk management in an uncertain world’, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
speech to the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum in London, England, available 
at 
https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/speeches/2015/03-25-2015-risk-manangement-
uncertain-world-charles-evans-london. 
Gallie, D, Felstead, A, Green, F and Inanc, H (2016) ‘The hidden face of job insecurity’, Work, 
Society, 
http://orca.cf.ac.uk/82553/17/ 
Employment 
Gallie%20et%20al%202015.pdf. 
Gregg, P and Gardiner, L (2015), ‘A steady job? The UK’s record on labour market security 
and 
at 
available 
http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/a-steady-job-the-uks-record-on-labour-
market-security-and-stability-since-the-millennium/.  
Haldane,  A  G  (2015),  ‘Stuck’,  Bank  of  England,  speech  to  the  Open  University,  London, 
available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/828.aspx. 
Kuznets, S (1934) Report to the Congress, 1934; Cited in: Gernot Kohler, Emilio José Chaves 
(2003) Globalization: Critical Perspectives. p.336. 
Rawls,  J  (1971),  ‘A  Theory  of  Justice’,  Harvard  University  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass.;  and 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Sen,  A  (1970),  ‘Collective  choice  and  social  welfare’,  Advanced  Textbooks  in  Economics, 
Vol 11.  
Sen,  A  (1974),  ‘Informational  Bases  of  Alternative  Welfare  Approaches’,  Journal  of  Public 
Economics. 
Stiglitz, J, A Sen and S Fitoussi (2009), ‘The Measurement of Economic Performance and 
Social  Progress  Revisited’,  INSEE,  available  at  http://www.ofce.sciences-po.fr/pdf/dtravail/ 
WP2009-33.pdf. 
 
the  millennium’,  Resolution 
Foundation 
available 
stability 
1–18, 
since 
and 
at 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix 
 
Chart 1 – GDP wealth and employment 
Index, 2007 = 100
GDP
Employment
Wealth*
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
2007
2015
2011
2009
2013
 
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.  
* Total net wealth; the property component of wealth is 
estimated for 2015 using by growing the 2014 figure by the 
rate of increase in house prices. 
 
 
Chart 3 – GDP and disposable income per 
head 
    Chart 2 – GDP in different recessions 
 1929 Crash
 1970 Recession
 1980 Recession
 1990 Recession
 2008 Recession
Real GDP (Peak = 100)
120
115
110
105
100
95
1
0
Number of years following onset of recession
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.  
90
Chart 4 – Measures of disposable income per head 
GDP per head
Indices, 2007 = 100
Real Net National Disposable
Income (RNNDI) per head
105
100
95
Indices, 2007 = 100
Real Household
Disposable Income
(RHDI) per head
Real median household
disposable income
(equivilised)*
105
100
95
90
85
2007
2005
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.  
2011
2009
2013
90
2015
   80
2012
2009
2006
2003
2000
Sources: ONS. 
* Data show income per households with these equivilised in size to 
make them comparable. Changes in the size of the average household 
could affect this series. 
  
2015
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   Chart 5 – Full time, self-employed, part time  Chart 6 – Job to job moves  
Per cent increase in number of 
employed since Q1 2010  
 Employed PT
 Self-employed
 Employed FT
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
15
10
5
0
-5
Proportion of those in employment 
moving to another  job each quarter 
Job-to-job moves as a
proportion of employment
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Sources: ONS.  
 
 
Chart 7 – People desiring more hours work   Chart 8 – Mean and median wages  
2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
 
Sources: Labour Force Survey, ONS and Bank calculations.  
Data shown on a seasonally adjusted basis. 
 
 Number of people, 
thousands
People desiring more hours
Median weekly earnings
Mean weekly earnings
Real median earnings*
Real mean earnings*
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Pounds per 
week
600
500
400
300
1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011 2014
 
Sources: Labour Force Survey, ONS and Bank calculations.  
  2006
2002
1998
 
Sources: Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, ONS, Bank 
calculations.  
* 1998 prices 
2010
2014
200
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Chart 9 – Wealth by type  
Chart 10 – Mean versus median wealth* 
£ bn
2008
2010
2012
2014
120
100
800
600
400
200
0
Wealth, £
 Median net wealth inc. pensions
 Mean net wealth inc. pensions
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
Private Pension Wealth
 
Physical Wealth*
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, Bank calculations.  
Financial Wealth (net)
* Property, physical and financial wealth excluding private pensions. 
Property Wealth (net)
 
Total Wealth (including Private Pension Wealth
2008
2010
2012
2014
 0
 
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, Bank calculations. 
*July 2006 to June 2008 estimates for physical wealth are 
based on half sample. 
  
 
Chart 11 – Regional GDP per head* 
North East
Yorkshire and The Humber
West Midlands
London
South West
Scotland
2007 = 100
North West
East Midlands
East of England
South East
Wales
Northern Ireland
 110
 105
 100
 95
 90
2009
2008
2007
Sources: ONS, Bank calculations. 
* Regional GVA (income approach) deflated using the GDP deflator. 2014 is provisional ONS estimate. 2015 figure is indicative, 
estimated using the average annual growth rate from the preceding two years. 
 
2014*
2010
2011
2012
2013
    85
2015**
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 Chart 12 – Social welfare by Regional GDP* 
2007 = 100
100.5
Real GDP per head (RHS)
Social welfare (LHS)
100
99.5
99
98.5
2011
2007
2010
2008
2009
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
* Social welfare is calculated as a sum of the natural logs of GVA by region (see for example, Sen A (1970)). 
 
 
Chart 13 – Median regional net wealth  
2014*
2012
2013
Median Household Wealth by 
region, indexed to 2006-2008 
North East
Yorkshire & the Humber
West Midlands
London
South West
Scotland
North West
East Midlands
East of England
South East
Wales
2007 = 100
103
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92
91
2015**
    160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
2006-2008
2008-2010
2010-2012
2012-2014
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, and Bank calculations.  
 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 14 – Social welfare by regional 
wealth* 
Indexed at 2006-08
102
102
101
101
100
100
99
99
98
2006-08
Indexed at 2006-08
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
2012-14
 Median wealth in GB (RHS)
Social welfare (LHS)
2008-10
2010-12
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, and Bank 
calculations. 
* Social welfare is calculated as a sum of the natural logs of 
net wealth by region.  
 
 
Chart 16 – Disposable income and social 
welfare* 
Indexed at 2007
2007 = 100
Real Household Disposable
Income per head (RHS)
Social welfare (LHS)
101.0
100.5
100.0
99.5
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
99.0
 2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
 
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
* Social welfare is calculated as a sum of the natural logs of 
household disposable income per head by decile. 
   Chart 15 – Real disposable income per head by 
income quintile 
1st (lowest)
2nd
3rd
4th
5th (highest)
2007=10
105
110
100
95
90
2007
 
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey and Bank calculations.  
2015
2009
2011
2013
85
Chart 17 – Wealth gains by income quintile since 
2010  
Percentage increase in median household net wealth 
between 2010/12 and 22-12/12
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
(highest)
1st
(lowest)
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, and Bank calculations.  
 Income quintile 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
     16-17
    18-21
    22-29
    30-39
    40-49
    50-59
    60+
Chart 18 – Median nominal hourly earnings 
by age 
Chart 19 – Real income after housing costs by 
household type 
  Index 2007=100
140
130
120
110
100
90
£pw equivalised in 2014/15 prices 
(Index, 05/06-07/08 = 100)
 Working age adults, no children
 Pensioners
 Working age adults, with children
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
08/09-10/11
05/06-07/08
Sources: Household Below Average Income and Bank calculations.  
 
11/12-13/14
 Chart 21- Total net wealth gains by age group 
2006/08 to 2012/14  
25-34
55-64
85 and over
16-24
45-54
75-84
35-44
65-74
£ million
3,500,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
500,000
0
-500,000
 Sources: Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, and Bank 
calculations.  
 
2013
2011
2009
2007
Sources: ASHE and Bank calculations.  
 
 
Chart 20 – Total net wealth by age  
80
2015
 16-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65-74
75-84
85 and over
2007=100
160
140
120
100
80
60
2010
2008
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS, and Bank 
calculations.  
2012
2014
40
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Chart 22 – Proportion of individuals by age 
that rent  
Chart 23 – Proportion of individuals by age that 
have a mortgage  
Per cent
1987
2007
1977
1997-98
2014
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
Source: ONS. 
 
 
Chart 24 – Real income before and after 
housing costs 
Indices 07/08 = 100
Median real income before housing costs
Mean real income before housing costs
Median real income after housing costs
Mean real income after housing costs
2007/08
Sources: HBAI and Bank calculations.  
2009/10
2011/12
2013/14
  Per cent
1977
1987
1997-98
2007
2014
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
Source: ONS.  
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Chart 25 – Rent as proportion of disposable income 
in 2014* 
London
South West
South East
Wales
North West
Scotland
Eastern
West Midlands
Northern Ireland
Yorkshire
East Midlands
North East
1
0
10
20
30
40
 Sources: Living Costs & Food Survey, Expenditure & Food Survey, 
National Food Survey. 
* Disposable income is measured after benefits and direct taxes are paid, 
consistent with the Effects of Taxes & Benefits publication. 
1 Yorkshire and the Humber 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
Chart 27 – Changes in total net wealth by housing 
tenure  
  Household wealth (£)
Mean change
2006/08 to 12/14
Median change
2006/08 to 12/14
Own outright Mortgagor
Rent
owner-
occupier
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS.  
 
250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
0
 Chart 29 – Young adults living with parents 
 Percentage of 21-34 year
olds living with their parents
Per cent
 Chart 26 – Changes in total income by 
housing tenure 
Household net equivilised income (£)
Mean
change
2006/08 to
12/14
Median
change
2006/08 to
12/14
Own outright
Mortgagor
owner-occupier
Rent
Sources: Wealth and Asset Survey, ONS. 
 
 
Chart 28- Personal well-being 
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
 Average score out of 10
 UK average well-being index
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
2012/13
2011/12
Sources: Annual Population Survey, ONS, and Bank 
calculations.  
2013/14
7.2
2014/15
 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011 2014
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.  
25
23
20
18
15
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Chart 30 – Share of people living in absolute 
poverty after housing costs* 
Chart 31 – Share of people living in relative poverty 
after housing costs* 
Under 16
16-65
Over 65
Per cent of  age group
Under 16
16-65
Over 65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
94/95 97/98 00/01 03/04 06/07 09/10 12/13
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
* A household is defined as living in relative poverty where their income 
is less than 60% of median income.  
 94/95 97/98 00/01 03/04 06/07 09/10 12/13
 
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.  
* A household is defined as living in absolute poverty where 
their income is less than 60% of 2010/11 median income 
held constant in real terms. 
 
 
Chart 32 – Financial market measures of 
inflation expectations 
 Per cent
3.5
23/06/2016
06/07/2016
3.0
2.5
 2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
6
Years
Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.  
* Instantaneous RPI inflation implied from swaps. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
