   Hiroshi Nakaso: Developing a global code of conduct for the foreign 
exchange market 
Opening remarks by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the BIS 
FXWG-MPG meeting, Tokyo, 26 February 2016. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great pleasure to welcome the BIS FXWG (Foreign Exchange Working Group) and MPG 
(Market Participants Group) joint meeting on developing a single global code of conduct for 
the foreign exchange market.1 
In  March  last  year,  the  eight  foreign  exchange  committees  in  the  major  financial  centers 
gathered  here  in  Tokyo  and  adopted  the  “Global  Preamble,”2 sharing  their  commitment  to 
developing  and  promoting  clear,  robust,  and  implementable  best-practice  guidance  in  the 
foreign exchange market. Building on the Global Preamble, in May last year, the BIS governors 
agreed to set up a working group to facilitate the  establishment of a single global code of 
conduct for the foreign exchange market. Since its inception, 16 central banks and more than 
30 private-sector professionals from around the world have been participating actively in this 
project.  Without  a  doubt,  this  project  is  a  cornerstone  for  the  ongoing  global  initiatives  to 
address the misconduct issues in the broad financial market. Thanks to the hard work of each 
member and the excellent leadership of the Chair, Guy Debelle, significant progress has been 
made with the first public update, which is envisaged in May 2016. As a member of the FXWG, 
the Bank of Japan is honored to host this joint meeting with the MPG today. 
In my remarks, first I would like to share my views on why we need the global code and how it 
matters to the central banks, and then express my support on key concepts of the code that 
have been shared among our colleagues here. 
Why we need the global code 
II. 
Let me begin with my thoughts on how the global code can contribute to the sound functioning 
of the foreign exchange market. 
It has been broadly agreed that the single global code of conduct for the foreign exchange 
market aims to promote a robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market. Achieving this goal 
is crucial to the sound functioning and development of the foreign exchange market. 
Why  is  a  well-functioning  foreign  exchange  market  highly  important  from  a  central  bank’s 
perspective?  We  closely  monitor  the  financial  market  developments  when  conducting  our 
policy  in  pursuit  of  price  and  financial  stability.  Financial  markets  carry  crucial  information 
regarding market participants’ views on economic and financial conditions, and also play a vital 
role for transmission of our policy. Financial markets must be functioning effectively to play 
such important roles. 
A well-functioning market needs to be supported by  sufficient market liquidity. Therefore, I 
strongly believe that the central banks should continue to be committed to enhancing market 
                                                
1   “Foreign Exchange Working Group” (FXWG), which consists of 16 central banks, was established under the 
auspices of the BIS Markets Committee to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the 
foreign exchange market and to promote greater adherence to the code. To support the FXWG, a “Market 
Participants Group” (MPG) was established, drawing on more than 30 private-sector professionals in the foreign 
exchange market. The relevant press release is available at http://www.bis.org/press/p150724.htm. 
2  Available at http://www.fxcomtky.com/announce/pdf_file/global_preamble.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
liquidity as part of our efforts to develop the code. According to the widely accepted definition 
of the BIS, “A liquid market is a market where participants can rapidly execute large-volume 
transactions with a small impact on prices.”3 I believe that a robust, fair, open, and transparent 
market,  where  diverse  types  of  participants  with  diverse  business  models  can  confidently 
transact  will  indeed  support  market  liquidity,  which  in turn  enhances  the functioning  of the 
foreign exchange market. 
Key concepts of the global code 
III. 
Next, I would like to touch upon a few key concepts of the global code that have been shared 
among our colleagues here. I would like to express my strong support for these concepts, as 
they are crucial to improve market functioning. 
Principle-based code 
A. 
The first key concept is that the global code will become most effective when it is principle-
based, taking into account the diversity of market participants. 
The foreign exchange market is a large cross-border market uniquely featured with diverse 
participants. Indeed, we cannot find any other market where such a wide variety of financial 
and nonfinancial corporations transact on a daily basis. Over-the-counter (OTC) transactions 
prevail, and the electronic trading venues are also diverse, ranging from brokers to single- and 
multiple-dealer platforms. Regulatory settings covering foreign exchange transactions are also 
diverse in a range of jurisdictions. 
A principle-based approach, rather than a prescriptive rule-based approach, is well suited to 
address such a diversity of participants and a complexity in market structures across the globe. 
Regarding the approach, Guy Debelle raised an important point in his speech last November, 
and let me repeat it here: History has shown that “the more prescriptive it becomes the easier 
it is to get around [because] rules are easier to arbitrage than principles.”4 I fully support his 
views. 
Collaboration between the public sector and the private sector 
B. 
The second key concept of the global code is that continuous collaboration between the public 
sector and the private sector is indispensable. 
The foreign exchange market has evolved through close collaboration between the public and 
private sectors. For example, the foreign exchange committees in the major financial centers 
typically comprise both central bankers and private-sector participants. 
Work on the global code has also achieved progress through a public sector-private sector 
partnership. The MPG, which consists of both sell-side and buy-side institutions, has been 
providing valuable insight based on its members’ expertise in market practices and innovation. 
It would be desirable that innovations led by the private sector continue to evolve under the 
appropriate code of conduct, thereby improving market functioning. The public sector should 
endeavor  to  align  the  private  sector’s  incentives  appropriately  to  support  further  market 
innovation and sound functioning of the foreign exchange market. 
                                                
3   Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1999),  “Market  Liquidity:  Research  Findings  and  Selected  Policy 
Implications,” CGFS Publications No 11. 
4   See Guy Debelle, “The Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign Exchange Market,” speech at the FX Week 
Europe conference in London on November 25, 2015. Available at http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2015/sp-
ag-2015–11–25.html. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   User-friendliness 
C. 
The third key concept is that the global code should be succinct, clear, and easy to use. The 
code becomes valuable only when market participants make good use of and adhere to it in 
their day-to-day business at the practical level. 
In addition, bearing in mind the existence of diverse participants and diverse business models, 
I would like to emphasize the importance of clearly addressing what market participants can 
do under the code. This is to prevent over-cautious behavior of market participants which could 
be  detrimental  to  fostering  well-functioning  markets.  As  an  initiative  to  enhance  market 
functioning through clearer dialogue among market participants, the Tokyo Foreign Exchange 
Market Committee developed the “Tokyo Blue Book” in April last year.5 The book provides 
guidance  with  succinct,  clear  statements  and  practical  examples  to  help  promote 
understanding of the code among Tokyo market participants. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
I firmly believe that the successful development of a single global code and greater adherence 
to it will reinforce the functioning of the foreign exchange market and facilitate vibrant, sound 
development of the market. The Bank of Japan has been, and will continue to fully support and 
be committed to the work of the global code. I am confident that this Tokyo meeting will provide 
us with a valuable opportunity to achieve further progress in our work. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
                                                
5   Available at http://www.fxcomtky.com/coc/code_of_conduct_e2015.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
