  Karnit Flug: Reforms to increase competition in the Israeli banking 
system 
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Herzliya  Conference 
“Reforms to Increase Competition in the Israeli Banking System”, Herzliya, 15 June 2016. 
 In recent days, there has been significant progress in the efforts to promote competition in 
the financial system, with the presentation of the Strum Committee’s main recommendations 
to  the  government,  and  the  publication  of  the  outline  for  establishing  new  banks  by  the 
Banking Supervision Department. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee 
members, Committee Chairman Dror Strum, and obviously the Minister of Finance, who put 
these issues on the agenda and acted to establish the joint committee. The agreements the 
committee reached, and the agreements concerning the establishment of the National Credit 
Register in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Justice will generate a 
change that will serve the public. 
In my remarks today, I would like to present the Bank of Israel’s philosophy regarding the 
desired  model  of  competition  in  the  Israeli  financial  sector,  particularly  as  it  relates  to  the 
banking  system.  While  doing  so,  I  will  clarify  how  our  position  relating  to  the  correct 
implementation of the reforms in this area was formulated. 
The desired competitive model must be built looking at a number of dimensions, which I will 
detail, and the various reforms intended to increase competition in Israel must be developed 
on  this  basis.  Before  I  get  into  the  details,  I  would  like  to  say  now  that  there  is  room  for 
change in the competitive model in the Israeli banking and financial system, as agreed upon, 
such that will increase competition in the household and small business sectors. 
The first dimension relates to the unique characteristics of the banking sector as opposed to 
other sectors in the economy. I note at the outset that the banking sector is unique, the risks 
inherent  in  its  operations  are  large,  and  the  realization  of  those  risks  would  have  serious 
social and economic ramifications. 
In short, the banking system around the world is characterized by very high leverage and a 
short duration of liabilities. Creditors (mainly depositors) are very dispersed and have no real 
ability to track or monitor the bank’s activity. The duration of the banks’ assets is long, and 
their financial value is uncertain, which creates and strengthens the traditional risk problem. 
As a result, banks are more exposed than other entities to default risk and to the contagion 
effect., and due to their importance to the modern economic system, the social cost of their 
failure is high. We saw this in recent years with the failure of many banks in the US and in 
European countries. 
With these characteristics, it is clear that competition in the banking sector cannot be similar 
to  competition  in  other  sectors.  History  proves  that  if  we  permit  and  even  encourage  the 
banking and financial system to engage in unlimited competition in favor of the profit line, the 
price paid by creditors, and the economy as a whole, meaning the entire public, is too heavy 
to  bear. It  is  therefore  important  to support the competitive  model  that will  be  chosen  with 
proper regulation. 
The  second  dimension  relates  to  the  question  of  what  objectives  we  want  to  achieve  by 
increasing  competition.  In  general,  competition  should  lead  to  three  main  results:  (1)  the 
development  of  the  financial  sector,  including  greater  efficiency  of  financial  services;  (2) 
increased accessibility and lower prices for financial services to companies and households; 
and (3) innovation and improvement of the banking service and product, and adapting it to 
the  customer.  In  other  words,  without  competition,  our  banking  system  will  not  develop, 
service to the consumer will be negatively impacted, consumer confidence in the system may 
be harmed, and in the end, it could also have implications for stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I mentioned the stability of the system, and I now come to the third dimension, which relates 
to the questions of whether there is a contradiction between stability and competition, what 
the proper balance is between the level of competition and protection of the stability of the 
system, and how to maintain it. I have in the past spoken about the importance of the stability 
of the financial system and the central role the Bank of Israel plays in  ensuring it. I would 
mention that maintaining stability of the system is a public interest, which first and foremost 
serves bank customers – meaning the broad public. Stability relies to a large extent on public 
confidence  in  the  banking  system,  which  increases  the  more  the  system  is  fair  and 
competitive.  When  this  is  understood,  we  can  even  see  competition  and  stability  as 
complementary factors that strengthen each other. The aim is to achieve the proper balance 
between the two, and this is a constant challenge. Even in the UK, the only country that has 
entrenched  the  regulator’s  role  of  promoting  competition  in  legislation,  the  promotion  of 
competition is an objective that is subordinate to the main function of the regulator, which is 
maintaining stability. 
Given these three dimensions, the last dimension, which completes the picture, relates to an 
analysis  of  the  existing  structure  of  the  banking  system,  while  identifying  the  competitive 
failures  inherent  in  it,  and  accordingly,  selecting  the  places  for  regulatory  or  legislative 
intervention. 
Such an analysis has been conducted in-depth by the Bank of Israel, as part of our role in 
the Strum Committee. I will now briefly present the main points of that analysis. 
The financial system in Israel has been changing in the past few years, and currently has a 
broader variety of players, with the banks remaining the most prominent among them. But 
alongside  the  banks,  institutional  investors  are  becoming  more  important,  and  nonbank 
financial entities, as well as the fintech industry, are developing. 
• 
The  banking  system’s  share  of  the  credit  to  large  corporations  market  has  been 
gradually  declining,  and  institutional  investors  have  become  a  significant  player, 
creating an alternative to the banking system. As a result, there is no dispute that 
the credit to large corporations market features a high level of competition. 
The  area  of  mortgages  also  features  very  high  competition,  as  well  as  informed 
consumerism  by  customers  themselves,  who  make  comparisons  before  signing  a 
transaction, even within the current structure of the banking system. This is also a 
result  of  the  fact  that  housing  credit  is  backed  by  collateral,  which  significantly 
reduces the risk and the problem of asymmetry of information. 
The segments where there is room to continue acting to increase competition are 
the small business sector, and to a certain extent, the household sector (other than 
housing credit). In these sectors, the banks are the dominant credit supplier and the 
spreads are still relatively high, despite the rapid growth in the supply of bank credit 
and the decline of spreads to these sectors in recent years. 
  How, then, do we promote competition in the financial system in general and in the banking 
system in particular? How do we expand the competition that has developed in the business 
sector and in the mortgage market to households and small businesses as well? 
Expanding  the  supply  and  increasing  competition  can  be  accomplished  by  bringing  new 
agents into the bank and nonbank credit markets, and by improving the competitive abilities 
of both existing and new agents. Those abilities will be supported by, among other things, 
reducing the information gaps between the customer and the (new) bank and between the 
bank and nonbank agents – measures that were recommended by the Zaken Committee and 
implemented by the Bank of Israel, and which will now be expanded with the establishment 
of the National Credit Register. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Strum Committee’s recommendation to separate the two credit card companies from the 
large  banks  is  consistent  with  this  strategy,  and  the  Bank  of  Israel  therefore  supports  it. 
These companies are financial entities, the operations of which are currently the closest to a 
bank’s operations, and the Banking Supervision Department has even developed an outline 
for turning them into banks in a shortened process if they choose to do so. 
In  parallel,  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  is  promoting  a  lenient  outline  to  establish 
new  banks  from  scratch,  with  the  intention  of  handling  barriers  that  existed  in  the 
establishment of a new bank, and even to provide incentives for going in this direction. Thus: 
 
• 
In  relation  to  the  capital  barrier  –  The  capital  requirements  of  new  banks  will  be 
significantly  lower  than  what  has  been  customary  until  now,  once  the  required 
infrastructure is established to manage the risks inherent in this; 
In  relation  to  the IT  systems  –  The  Banking  Supervision  Department  will  make  it 
possible  for  new  and  existing  banks  to  operate  without  an  independent  computer 
system, but via an outsourced joint computer and operational infrastructure. 
In relation to the barrier resulting from the need for a broad network of branches – A 
number of months ago, the Banking Supervision Department published a directive 
reflecting  a  change  in  supervisory  policy  regarding  banking  through  means  of 
communications, which makes it significantly easier to offer a full variety of banking 
services  directly,  without  branches,  through  service  centers,  via  the  Internet,  and 
through digital applications. 
There  is  also  a  barrier  resulting  from  uncertainty  of  the  process.  The  process  of 
obtaining a bank license will be simpler and subject to a predetermined timetable, 
thereby creating greater certainty for investors. 
And in relation to the information barrier – In addition to the Banking ID that every 
customer received beginning this year, we are promoting the establishment of the 
National Credit Register at the Bank of Israel. This register is expected to reduce the 
information  gaps  between  the  bank  and  the  customer  and  between  the  bank  and 
competing  entities,  and  will  serve  as  an  essential  tool  for  new  banks  to  properly 
price the credit they provide. 
    In addition, we are supporting and incentivizing the banks to become more efficient and to 
use new technologies, which can lower the costs of credit and of managing deposits in the 
banking system, and enable them to offer more convenient services adapted to the customer 
and  in  real  time.  These  are  very  significant  steps,  which  constitute  a  change  in  our 
supervisory  policy.  So  what  has  caused  the  change  in  philosophy  at  the  Bank  of  Israel?  I 
would like to mention that a little more than a decade ago, a number of small banks in Israel 
failed,  and  the  various  studies  in  this  field  showed  that  small  banks  do  not  contribute  to 
competition  (mainly  because  of  the  large  fixed  costs  that  created  large  disadvantages  to 
being  small),  but  they  definitely  had  a  negative  effect  on  stability.  Accordingly,  supervisor 
policy  actively  made  it  very  difficult  to  establish  small  banks.  In  view  of  this,  the  Bank  of 
Israel’s focus in the following years was to improve competition within the banking system, 
and  broad  reforms  were  made  by  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  to  encourage 
competition by improving the position of consumers. 
The  developments  in  the  financial  system  in  Israel  and  around  the  world,  technological 
changes that can significantly reduce the costs of automation and the need for a network of 
branches,  and  that  in  any  case  decreased  the  advantage  of  size,  alongside  attention  to 
public discourse on the matter, led the Bank of Israel – as happened with regulators in other 
places  in  the  world  –  to  reassess  the  existing  competitive  potential  in  the  activity  of  small 
banks.  These  banks  will  be  able  to  operate  and  specialize  in  niches  that  will  give  them  a 
competitive advantage, while relying for instance on technologies that reduce fixed costs. We 
believe that in addition, the removal of the barriers I outlined, which will make it significantly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  easier to establish new banks, can lead to improved competition in the banking field, whether 
directly or by creating a competitive threat. 
Similar to the significant measures taken in the Zaken Report to improve competition in the 
financial sector, which are only now beginning to have initial positive effects, we will need to 
be patient in order to examine the effects of the measures currently being implemented by 
the Banking Supervision Department and those recommended by the Committee to Promote 
Competition. We must remember that a change in the financial system requires steps that 
are informed, thorough, and long-term, as well as a little patience. I can promise that all of 
the many steps we are taking in the area of competition are being taken responsibly, after a 
serious and professional examination of the benefits and possible risks that may result from 
each  and  every  step.  This  is  critical  to  the  success  of  the  measures  while  minimizing  the 
risks existing in the process. 
A  complementary  and  necessary  step  for  implementing  the  recommendations  to  promote 
competition, which is also a condition for granting some of the leniencies in the outline for 
establishing new banks, is the promotion and improvement of tools to handle a bank in stress 
and  a  failing  bank,  including  deposit  insurance.  These  tools,  which  have  become  very 
commonplace around the world, inter alia due to the lessons from the Global Financial Crisis, 
will provide a safety net in a case where a bank encounters difficulties, so that the damage to 
depositors, the financial system, and the economy as a whole, will be moderate. 
One  more  word  of  caution,  to  conclude:  The  trend  of  growth  in  credit  to  households  is 
continuing rapidly, and we therefore must cautiously examine the many initiatives to further 
increase  the  supply  of  credit  to  this  sector.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  borrowers,  the 
increase  in  the  volume  of  credit  may  lead  to  overleverage  and  an  increased  burden  of 
repayment in the future. 
The economy is currently in a period of growth, although slower than in the past, in a near-
zero interest rate environment and full employment. Possible changes in any one of these 
parameters,  such  as  an  increase  in  the  interest  rate  or  unemployment,  may  endanger  the 
financial  state  of  households  and  small  businesses,  and  make  it  difficult  for  them  to  meet 
their obligations. The strength of the damage that a financial crisis may cause requires us to 
be extra careful when implementing reforms in the financial services industry, and to learn 
the lessons from international experience. 
 
We must remember that a collapse of a financial agent may cause contagion and a negative 
impact to confidence in other financial agents and the reputation of the financial system as a 
whole.  For  these  reasons,  it  is  important  that  increased  competition  in  the  credit  market, 
which  is  important  on  its  own,  be  accomplished  with  caution,  while  paying  attention  to  the 
developing risks and with proper supervision of the new credit suppliers. The Committee for 
Financial Reform, which is expected to be established soon, and which will be comprised of 
the  various  regulators  in  the  financial  system,  will  have  an  important  role  in  ensuring  the 
monitoring, early identification, and timely handling of risks to the financial system. 
In  summation,  the  continued  implementation  of  the  significant  processes  I  have  outlined, 
which reflect a long-term view of the good of the consumers and the economy, will lead to a 
significant  change  in  the  competitiveness  of  the  financial  system  without  endangering 
stability  or  negatively  impacting  consumers.  Therefore,  it  is  important  now  to  focus  on  the 
implementation of the reforms. These are large changes and we must enable the system to 
become accustomed to them and to reach the new equilibrium that will be created as a result 
of the changes and reforms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
