   
Mugur Isărescu: Unconventional monetary policies and financial stability 
– implications for banks and financial markets 
Address by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the joint CIGI 
(Centre  for  International  Governance  Innovation)  –  Oliver  Wyman  conference,  Rome, 
15 December 2015. 
 The  address  was  presented  by  Governor  Mugur  Isărescu  during  the  panel  session 
“Unconventional monetary policies and their impact on financial markets”, which also included 
the following members: 
• 
• 
• 
Domenico Lombardi, Director of the Global Economy Program, CIGI 
Malcolm Knight, Distinguished Fellow, CIGI (former General Manager of the BIS) 
Lorenzo  Bini-Smaghi,  Chairman,  Société  Générale  (former  Vice-President  of  the 
ECB) 
Lorenzo Codogno – Professor in Practice European Institute, LES 
Pierpaolo Benigno, Professor of Economics, LUISS University 
Carlotta de Franceschi, Co-Founder and President, Action Institute 
• 
• 
• 
Participants included, among others: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Robert Ophèle, Deputy Governor, Banque de France 
Dimitar Bogov, Governor, National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia 
Korbinian Ibel, Director General, Micro-Prudential Supervision IV, ECB 
Margarita Delgado, Deputy Director General, SSM, DG1, ECB 
Matthew Elderfield, Head of Compliance, Lloyds Bank 
Carlo Corradini, Member of the Supervisory Board, Intesa Sanpaolo 
Pierre Siklos, Senior Fellow, CIGI 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  address  the  audience  during  this  conference  on  unconventional 
monetary policies. 
In Romania, as in most other Central and Eastern European countries, monetary policy interest 
rates are still above the zero bound and, as such, there has been no need to venture into the 
uncharted waters of quantitative easing and negative nominal interest rates. Therefore, I will 
not  approach  these  two  already  classical  unconventional  instruments,  since  Romania’s 
experience  is  not  illustrative  from  this  perspective.  Besides,  I  am  sure  that  they  will  be 
extensively dealt with by other panellists. 
In this case, you are probably wondering why I am now in front of you. The answer is that, 
10 years ago, the National Bank of Romania faced an economic and financial context which 
could also be labelled as exceptional. It called for the use of unconventional instruments and 
hence the departure from the prevailing economic precepts of the time and particularly from 
the rules that defined the modus operandi of an inflation targeter. Some of these tools would 
later be referred to as “macroprudential instruments”, but back then we referred to them as 
unorthodox monetary policy measures, the NBR responsibilities including not only monetary 
policy,  but  also  financial  stability,  the  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the  issuance  of 
secondary legislation in the field of banking regulation. 
Consequently, I have come in front of you today with the hope that at least some of the lessons 
we learned at the time might prove relevant for this panel’s discussions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   My intervention today is structured along 4 lines, namely: 
1. 
What made the economic context in which the NBR was operating in the run-up to 
the European Union exceptional? 
How far has the NBR departed from the standard paradigm? 
Did markets and banks react to the departure from the paradigm? 
Was the unorthodox approach effective? 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Allow me to sketch the answers to these questions: 
1. 
What made the economic context in which the NBR was operating in the run-
up to the European Union exceptional? 
First  of  all,  the  banking  system  was  dominated  by  foreign-owned  banks.  After  a  string  of 
domestic bank failures (particularly in the late nineties), the lack of domestic private capital, 
combined with the fragile situation of the state budget, made it compulsory to privatize the 
existing banks by selling them to foreign entities. As a matter of fact, the dominant view at the 
time  was  that  opening  the  banking  system  to  foreign  capital  was  essential  for  improving 
efficiency  and  expertise,  alleviating  the  shortage  of  domestic  capital,  and  increasing 
competition.  Against  this  background,  by  facilitating  a  better  resource  allocation,  the 
penetration  of  foreign  capital  into  the  Romanian  banking  sector  was  seen  as  a  means  to 
promote restructuring of the loss-incurring SOEs and to stimulate convergence to the EU. 
Of course, such a development brought about positive effects in the economy, as it came with 
stronger corporate governance and modern banking practices. However, it also had the by-
product of rapidly growing forex credit, undermining the effectiveness of conventional monetary 
policy and giving rise to risks from the financial stability perspective. 
This  occurred  against  the  background  of  a  significant  interest  rate  differential,  given  the 
comparatively high inflation and increasingly abundant capital flows, as the removal of capital 
controls was proceeding rapidly due to the requirements of the forthcoming EU membership. 
Such  an  environment  naturally  produced  nominal  appreciation  of  the  domestic  currency, 
providing further incentive for foreign currency lending, booming domestic demand and an 
unsustainable  decrease  in  inflation,  as  revealed  by  an  ever  widening  current  account 
imbalance (to the tune of two-digit numbers as a percentage of GDP). To further complicate 
matters, the newly found prosperity lured fiscal policy into relaxing pro-cyclically. 
Trying to cool down the economy through the standard recipe of policy rate hikes would have 
been pointless, if not outright detrimental, by prompting even more capital inflows and nominal 
appreciation, thus feeding the vicious circle described before. 
How far has the NBR departed from the standard paradigm? 
2. 
Quite far, I would say, if we use as a benchmark the clearly defined IT framework. Constrained 
in the resort to the policy rate, the NBR had to depart, at times, from monetary policy orthodoxy. 
Such  departures  from  conventional  practices  involved  full  use  of  direct  FX  interventions, 
allowing  market  interest  rates  to  fall  significantly  below  the  policy  rate  through  liquidity 
management or deploying administrative measures to control credit growth. But probably the 
most striking unconventional feature of our monetary policy back then was the active recourse 
to reserve requirements, the rates of which were increased to levels exceeding by far those of 
any other central bank in the EU: 20 and 40 percent for lei- and forex-denominated liabilities 
respectively in 2006. 
However, taking into account that studies published even before 2006 considered the pure IT 
framework as not necessarily the most suitable for an emerging economy, one might think that 
the NBR’s departure from the mainstream was less significant. Specifically, the NBR opted for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
a “light” version of inflation targeting, which meant retaining the managed float feature of the 
exchange rate regime, which implied smoothing out excessive volatility, without defending a 
certain level of the exchange rate or preannouncing interventions. 
The actual form inflation targeting took in Romania thus matched the “managed-floating plus” 
concept introduced by Goldstein in 2002, considered the most suitable choice for an emerging-
market economy involved in the global capital market, as it combines the managed float part 
with an inflation targeting monetary policy strategy and an active pursuit of measures to limit 
the degree of currency mismatches in the economy. 
Subsequently, this “managed-floating plus” approach gained acceptance, especially during the 
global  crisis,  and  now  forex  interventions  are  part  of  the  arsenal  of  many  central  banks, 
including some of those using a free floating regime before the crisis. 
3. 
Yes, especially since we also used a number of administrative measures, controversial at the 
time,  but  which  now  –  after  the  crisis  has  warranted  their  use  –  are  considered  valid 
macroprudential  instruments.  I  will  name  some  of  them:  enforcing  maximum  loan-to-value 
ratio, introducing debt service ceilings relative to households’ monthly disposable income (the 
scope of which was subsequently expanded to include non-bank financial institutions engaged 
in  lending),  setting  limits  to  banks’  forex  exposure  vis-à-vis  unhedged  borrowers,  using 
differentiated  coefficients  in  stress  tests  (higher  for  exposures  to  EUR  than  lei,  with  even 
stricter coefficients for CHF- and USD-denominated credit). 
At the time, banks perceived such measure as excessive administrative interference and I 
even remember a rather uncomfortable discussion with the president of a large foreign bank 
operating in Romania, who reproved me for the fact that, only a few years after being invited 
to invest in our country, banks were facing regulatory “innovations” that narrowed their scope 
of business. 
Did markets and banks react to the departure from the paradigm? 
Was the unorthodox approach effective? 
4. 
With  the  benefit  of  the  hindsight,  I  would  say  it  was,  at  least  to  some  extent.  I  see  now 
3 limitations and 3 benefits of the approach we took 10 years ago. 
Let me start with the limitations: 
First, the measures were not entirely successful in cooling off foreign currency lending, as 
banks found ways to circumvent the restrictions in place by externalising credit portfolios. Forex 
credit continued to expand, its share in total credit approaching 60 percent by the end of 2008. 
We are still dealing with this legacy: for instance, Swiss franc loans, even though accounting 
for a much lower share of total credit than in neighbouring countries, proved troublesome in 
the wake of the recent CHF appreciation. 
Second,  implementing  the  unorthodox  measures  has  also  proven  very  difficult  from  the 
communication perspective. These measures proved difficult to explain to the public at large, 
which saw them as preventing improvements in welfare, and also to the commercial banks 
themselves, which – as I said earlier – were protesting against what they saw as an uncalled 
for injunction into their activity. On top of that, we had a tough time explaining our policies even 
to  the  ECB.  Fortunately,  President  Trichet  understood  why  we  had  to  take  the  unusual 
monetary policy approach, acknowledging that the standard policy consensus was not enough 
to deal with the challenges a small open economy had to face amid a flood of capital. 
Third,  the  exit from these measures  has  not  been  easy. While  the  post-crisis  environment 
provided an opportunity to gradually normalize the reserve requirements levels (thus supplying 
an additional counter-cyclical tool), they remain high by European standards. 
However, despite all these obstacles, I think the resort to unconventional policy instruments 
had 3 major advantages. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
I would name first the fact that they certainly managed to limit the size of the disequilibria. I 
have no doubt that the outcome would have been a lot worse had we been complacent and 
relied entirely on the self-corrective behaviour of markets. I will give here just one example: 
forex interventions limited significantly exchange rate fluctuations, with the appreciation during 
the  massive  capital  inflows  and  the  depreciation  after  the  crisis  outbreak  not  exceeding 
25 percent. In the absence of such interventions, the magnitude of fluctuations could have 
been as high as 40 to 60 percent. 
The foreign exchange purchases made before the crisis not only limited the unsustainable leu 
appreciation and the associated loss of export competitiveness, but supplied the ammunition 
for subsequent interventions to cushion the currency depreciation once the outbreak of the 
crisis  changed  the  direction  of  the  flows.  And  I  believe  this  is  the  second  benefit  of  the 
approach. 
Last, but not least, thinking outside the box allowed us to avoid incurring losses after 2006. 
While profitability should not be a concern for a central bank, this development proved very 
fortunate from the perspective of the political economy. On the one hand, it allowed the NBR 
to  preserve  its  independence  in  relation  to  the  government  by  not  generating  quasi-fiscal 
deficits in a period with an increasing fiscal imbalance. On the other hand, it helped preserve 
institutional credibility in relation to the banks subject to NBR supervision, which were closely 
monitored in terms of capital adequacy. Moreover, through our actions we wanted to avoid 
rewarding the speculative behaviour several commercial banks were engaged in (i.e. carry 
trade) and instead incentivize them to focus on their core activities. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
