   Yannis Stournaras: Bank of Greece’s Monetary Policy Report 2015-2016 
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, to the Standing Committee 
on Economic Affairs of the Hellenic Parliament, Athens, 11 July 2016. 
 1.  
The completion of the first review has a positive effect on confidence and 
enhances the growth prospects  
The completion of the first review has a positive effect on confidence and enhances the growth 
prospects, with direct and indirect benefits, including:  
• 
First, the disbursement of successive loan tranches totalling €10.3 billion. The first 
tranche of €7.5 billion has already been disbursed; of this amount, €5.7 billion will be 
used for public debt servicing and €1.8 billion will be used to settle part of general 
government arrears. The remaining amount of €2.8 billion (of which €1.7 billion will be 
used to pay general government arrears) will be released by autumn 2016, conditional 
on  a  number  of  prior  actions  in  the  following  areas:  the  pension  system;  bank 
corporate  governance;  energy;  privatisations;  the  general  secretariat  of  public 
revenue; and the labour, product and services markets. This should have a positive 
impact on liquidity and economic activity in the second half of 2016.  
Second, the recent decision of the ECB Governing Council to reinstate the waiver for 
Greek government bonds, enabling Greek banks to obtain low-cost financing from the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  This  development,  along  with  a  dissipation  of 
uncertainty, the stabilisation of private sector deposits and the progress achieved in 
restructuring Greek banks, has contributed to the lowering of the emergency liquidity 
assistance (ELA) ceiling for Greek banks by €9.5 billion since late June, bringing it 
down to €58.6 billion.  
Third, the eligibility of Greek government bonds for inclusion in the ECB’s quantitative 
easing programme towards the end of 2016. This, together with the reinstatement of 
the waiver for Greek government bonds and the resulting refinancing of Greek banks 
at  a  lower  cost,  should  have  a  sizeable  beneficial  effect,  potentially  amounting  to 
€400-500  million,  on  banks’  results.  However,  the  indirect  benefits,  through  e.g. 
upgrades of the credit ratings of the Greek sovereign and Greek banks, are expected 
to be even greater.  
  The  above  developments  are  expected  over  the  medium  term  to  encourage  a  return  of 
deposits to the Greek  banking system,  which  will  allow  an  easing and, ultimately,  lifting of 
capital controls. Coupled with a more effective management of non-performing loans, this will 
contribute to reducing borrowing costs and will gradually increase the lending capacity of Greek 
banks,  with  positive  effects  on  the  financing,  hence  the  growth  performance,  of  the  Greek 
economy.  
In general, the completion of the first review is impacting favourably on the Greek economy, 
by strengthening confidence and removing the uncertainty that has weighed heavily on the 
economic climate and led to a postponement of investment decisions.  
The gradual restoration of confidence as a result of the completion of the first review is reflected 
in several leading indicators of economic activity. For example:  
• 
The industrial PMI index, which had fluctuated below the growth/contraction threshold 
from February to May 2016, rose above that threshold in June 2016 (to 50.4, from 
48.4 in May), indicating a marginal increase in manufacturing output and posting its 
highest value since May 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    The economic sentiment indicator stabilised in June (at 89.7), as the decline in service 
and  retail  confidence  was  offset  by  an  improvement  in  industrial  and  consumer 
confidence, with the latter reflecting households’ more optimistic expectations about 
the overall economic situation and their financial condition over the next 12 months.  
At the same time, the completion of the first review contributed to a decline in the yields of 
Greek government  bonds  and  corporate  bonds  issued  by Greek  non-financial firms  on the 
international  market.  However,  the  global  capital  market  turbulence  in  the  wake  of  the  UK 
referendum, in which a majority of British citizens opted to leave the EU, has contributed to a 
reversal of this downward trend and an increase in yields.  
Building  on  the  elimination  of  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  imbalances  and  the  significant 
improvement of unit labour cost competitiveness over the 2010-2015 period, economic policy 
focus  must  now  shift  to  the  reforms  and  privatisations  agreed  upon  between  the  Greek 
government and the institutions, as well as to the utilisation of idle state property, which can 
serve  as  a  catalyst  for  attracting  investment.  These  actions  would  support  growth,  while 
facilitating the achievement of future budgetary targets of the programme.  
The Eurogroup’s commitment to take action on debt relief  
2.  
The  successful  completion  of  the  first  review  is  accompanied  by  a  commitment  from  our 
partners to take action to reduce the Greek debt burden. The Eurogroup statement of 25 May 
describes  the  timeframe  and  outlines  a  number  of  actions  to  be  implemented,  if  deemed 
necessary, in order to bring the gross financing needs of the general government down to more 
manageable levels, i.e. below 15% of GDP in the medium term and below 20% in the long 
term.  
The Bank of Greece takes the view that, in the first place, the expressed will of our partners to 
provide debt relief strengthens confidence in the future of the Greek economy. However, the 
measures included in the Eurogroup statement have not been specified or quantified, whereas 
the final decisions on debt will be re-examined after the completion of the programme and are 
conditional on (i) a positive final assessment of the programme implementation; and (ii) the 
outcome of an updated debt sustainability analysis to be produced in 2018.  
The Bank of Greece considers that there are important reasons to act now.  
• 
First, global interest rates are at historical lows and the term structure is relatively flat, 
implying that, at the same cost, debt relief could be much more beneficial to Greece 
now than a few years down the road, when global interest rates might be higher.  
Second,  debt  relief  now  will  contribute  to  improved  confidence  of  international 
investors in the country, hence, to lower risk premia, lower cost of financing, stronger 
investment and improved growth prospects for the Greek economy.  
 extending maturities;  
smoothing interest payments over time;  
restoring the transfers of ANFA and SMP profits;  
swapping IMF for ESM loans.  
Sensible debt relief measures could include:  
(a) 
(b)  
(c) 
(d) 
In the view of the Bank of Greece, debt relief measures should be accompanied by a lower 
medium-term  fiscal  target.  Specifically,  the  final  target  for  a  general  government  primary 
surplus of 3.5% of GDP could be reduced to 2% of GDP after 2018, enabling a faster return of 
the  Greek  economy  to  robust  and  sustainable  growth  rates.  Besides,  past  experience  has 
shown that very few countries have been able to maintain high primary surpluses of 3.5% of 
GDP over relatively long periods, as required in the case of Greece from 2018 onwards.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   An  important  argument  supporting  this  view  is  that,  given  the  current  debt  dynamics,  one 
percentage point higher growth is 80% more effective in reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio than 
a one percentage point of GDP higher primary surplus.  
Public  debt  sustainability  scenarios  explored  by  Bank  of  Greece  staff  show  that  primary 
surpluses  of  2%  of GDP  from  2018  onwards  are  consistent  with  public  debt  sustainability, 
assuming:  
(a) 
(b)  
Moreover, the easing of fiscal targets will allow a lowering of taxation. This would alleviate the 
consequences for the real economy, thereby strengthening growth in the medium-to-longer 
term, which could speed up the reduction of public debt.  
an extension of loan maturities by 20 years; and  
the smoothing of capitalised deferred interest payments over a 20-year period.  
3.  
Developments in the banking system: liquidity, non-performing exposures 
and capital controls  
Liquidity  
(a)  
The completion of the review will largely dispel the remaining uncertainties. Combined with the 
anticipated exit of the Greek economy from the recession onto a path of sustained growth as 
adjustment and reforms bear fruit, reduced uncertainty should lead to a return of deposits to 
Greek banks and the improved access of domestic credit institutions, as well as of healthy 
extrovert Greek businesses, to international financial markets.  
From  the  beginning  of the  crisis,  the  Greek  banking  system suffered  the  consequences  of 
successive sovereign downgrades, followed by bank downgrades that forced Greek banks out 
of the global financial markets. Meanwhile, uncertainty led to large deposit outflows, amounting 
to some €90 billion, i.e. one third of the initial deposit base, in less than three years. Banks had 
to resort to a large extent to central bank funding, at first through Eurosystem monetary policy 
operations, but gradually, due to the lack of eligible collateral, to emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA) from the Bank of Greece. It should be noted that ELA funding peaked at €120 billion in 
2012, before gradually declining and coming to zero in the first half of 2014.  
Thanks  to  the  broad  liquidity  support  from  the  central  bank,  the  decline  in  bank  credit  to 
businesses and households was much weaker than the contraction of the banks’ deposit base.  
The deteriorating economic climate and heightened uncertainty in the first half of 2015 led to 
widespread  deposit  outflows,  totalling  some  €45  billion.  Of  this  amount,  about  one  third 
involved  the  withdrawal  of  banknotes  (for  hoarding  “under  the  mattress”);  one  third  was 
transferred to banks abroad; and one third was invested in foreign money market instruments. 
The  bank  holiday  and  the  imposition  of  capital  controls  (including  restrictions  on  cash 
withdrawals from bank accounts, cross-border payments and cross-border capital movements) 
managed  to  contain  the  deposit  outflows  and  the  capital  flight.  At  the  same  time,  capital 
controls encouraged the use of electronic payments. In fact, there is strong evidence that the 
widespread use of electronic payments have boosted tax revenue by reducing the informal 
economy.  
The recapitalisation of Greek banks was successfully completed in December 2015, with a 
substantial  participation  of  private  investors.  The  four  significant  Greek  banks  managed  to 
cover the capital needs identified by the ECB’s stress tests. The necessary funds came from 
(a) foreign investors, who placed around €5.3 billion; (b) capital mitigating actions amounting 
to  €0.6  billion;  and  (c)  liability  management  exercises  (voluntary  bond  swap  offers to  bank 
bondholders) that yielded about €2.7 billion. For the two banks that did not fully cover their 
capital  needs,  based  on  the  adverse  scenario,  from  private  sources  (totalling  about 
€5.4 billion), the necessary additional funds were drawn from the Hellenic Financial Stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Fund  (HFSF).  Thus,  the  public  resources  used  proved  to  be  far  lower  than  the  amount  of 
€25 billion foreseen by the Eurogroup in August 2015.  
Moreover, banks’ reliance on ELA has decreased and, since end-July 2015, the ceiling has 
been lowered by more than €31.5 billion to €58.6 billion. This lower ceiling reflects the improved 
liquidity situation of Greek banks amid easing uncertainty and a stabilisation of private sector 
deposit flows; the gradual and improving access regained by banks to interbank market funding 
(in  fact  using  collateral  not  eligible  for  Eurosystem  operations);  and  progress  with  the 
recapitalisation of Greek banks. It also reflects progress with the restructuring of Greek banks 
(with  the  sale  of Finansbank  by the  National  Bank  of Greece),  and the  impact  of the  ECB 
Governing Council’s decision, on 29 June, to reinstate the waiver. With particular regard to 
deposits, more than €2 billion returned to the banking system between 20 July 2015 (when the 
bank holiday was abolished although capital controls remained in force) and the end of 2015. 
During the first half of 2016, deposits showed signs of stabilising. Meanwhile, there has been 
a gradual but steady return of banknotes, with a deposit inflow of about €4 billion since 20 July 
2015.  
The  acceptance  of  Greek  government  securities  as  eligible  collateral  for  open  market 
operations, through which the Eurosystem refinances euro area banks on highly favourable 
terms, will reduce funding costs for banks, which are expected to increasingly participate in the 
Eurosystem’s  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  and  in  other  non-
standard monetary policy instruments. 
More generally, the Greek banks have benefited from a number of monetary policy measures 
taken by the ECB, such as interest rate cuts and targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs). They have also benefited from the public sector purchase programme (PSPP), by 
selling to the Eurosystem notes (of up to an amount of €19 billion) that had been issued and 
contributed by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to strengthen the capital base 
of Greek banks. The sale of EFSF notes could bring capital gains of some €200 million to 
Greek banks.  
Now that the waiver has been reinstated, the ECB Governing Council will at a later stage also 
examine possible purchases of Greek government bonds under the public sector purchase 
programme (PSPP) (a nominal amount of about €3.7 billion after the end of July 2016), taking 
into account, as stated in a relevant ECB announcement, the progress made in the analysis 
and  reinforcement  of  Greece’s  debt  sustainability,  as  well  as  other  risk  management 
considerations.  
More generally, as mentioned above, access to lower-cost refinancing from the Eurosystem, 
coupled with the participation of Greek government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative easing 
programme,  should  have  a  sizeable  beneficial  effect,  potentially  amounting 
to 
€400-500 million,  on  banks’  results.  Even  greater,  however,  would  be  the  indirect  benefits, 
through e.g. upgrades of the credit ratings of the Greek sovereign and Greek banks.  
Non-performing exposures  
(b)  
The major problem facing the Greek banking system today is the high stock of non-performing 
exposures (NPEs) in bank portfolios.  
Greece  has  the  second  highest  NPE  ratio  in  Europe  (after  Cyprus),  with  non-performing 
exposures at the end of the first quarter of 2016 reaching 45% of total exposures or, in absolute 
terms, €108.6 billion. In particular, the NPE ratio came to 67% in the SMEs sector, 42% for 
housing exposures and 55% for consumer exposures.  
The above NPE ratios have yet to top out, moving inversely to GDP. In the first quarter of 2016, 
NPEs increased further by €600 million. Yet, a trend towards deceleration seems to have set 
in, considering that the increase in 2015 as a whole surpassed €4 billion.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Despite the size of the problem, the capital base of the banking system remains strong, with 
the provision coverage ratio standing at 50%. If one adds to this the value of collateral pledged, 
total risk coverage comes to 101%, one of the highest in the EU. 
Recognising the seriousness of the problem, the Bank of Greece, as early as in 2013, took a 
number  of  initiatives,  either  by  conducting  studies  or  by  issuing  legal  acts  and  regulatory 
provisions to address NPEs.  
Following a thorough analysis of the situation (Troubled Assets Review), Executive Committee 
Act No. 42/2014 was adopted, establishing a supervisory framework for the management of 
loans in arrears and non-performing loans, whereby banks are required to report, on a quarterly 
basis, in the most detailed manner at European level, data on their NPEs and the actions they 
have taken for their management, as well as their internal reorganisation for this purpose.  
A few months later, in the autumn of 2014, the Bank of Greece introduced a Code of Conduct 
for  Banks  for  the  transparent,  effective  and,  where  appropriate,  flexible  treatment  of 
cooperating borrowers facing difficulties in servicing their debt obligations. The Code ensures 
that  borrowers  are  provided  with  timely  and  comprehensive  information  and  are  protected 
against  unfair  treatment  by  creditors,  and  is  geared  towards  promoting  permanent  and 
sustainable arrangements, whether forbearance or resolution and closure solutions.  
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  worked  closely  with  the  relevant  ministries  on  the  preparation  of 
legislation  enabling  the  effective  tackling  of  NPEs,  such  as  Law  4307/2014  (“corporate 
insolvency for SMEs”), amendments to Law 3869/2010 (“household insolvency”) and, more 
recently, amendments to Law 4354/2015 to permit the assignment of the management and the 
transfer of loan portfolios to specialised non-bank entities. By authority of that law, the Bank of 
Greece adopted Executive Committee Acts Nos 82/2016 and 95/2016 detailing the licencing 
framework for credit servicing firms, striking a balance between speed, transparency, efficiency 
and borrower protection.  
Last but not least, the Bank of Greece, jointly with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
of the European Central Bank, decided to set binding operational targets for all Greek banks 
with a view to ensuring a reduction of NPEs over a horizon of three years. On 24 June, as 
instructed,  banks  submitted  their  detailed  targets  by  NPE  category  for  the  remaining  two 
quarters of 2016 and their annual targets for 2017, 2018 and 2019. They also provided specific 
documentation on their NPE management strategies and the instruments that they plan to use 
to achieve the targets set.  
More specifically, according to the targets of the four systemic banks, NPEs should be reduced 
by 40% or €41 billion by 2019. This reduction is expected to result from: first, the economic 
recovery envisaged in the Programme and the ensuing return to profitability for a large swath 
of  businesses;  and,  second,  successful  debt  forbearance/restructuring  whereby  non-
performing loans will become performing again. A small percentage of non-performing loans 
(about 5%) are likely to be sold, while no more than 7% of total NPEs are likely to be subject 
to collateral realisation.  
The Bank of Greece evaluates and approves banks’ NPE management strategies on the basis 
of the following key priorities:  
• 
avoidance of short-term solutions and provision of sustainable long-term forbearance 
solutions or resolution and closure solutions;  
promotion of multiple creditor workouts;  
the restructuring of indebted viable businesses through new business planning and, 
if necessary, new management along with loan restructuring;  
active use of the existing stock of provisions and collateral for the permanent removal 
of troubled assets from bank balance sheets;  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  development  within  banks  of  new  organisational  methods  and  processes  for  the 
objective and transparent selection of workout solutions.  
  To  sum  up,  the  size  of NPEs  is  the  most  critical  long-term  challenge for  both  the  banking 
system  and  the  real  economy.  However,  under  certain  conditions,  it  can  also  serve  as  a 
catalytic opportunity to attract investment and remedy the unhealthy situations that have long 
hindered  the  restructuring  of  production  and  hampered  the  competitiveness  of  the  Greek 
economy.  
Capital controls  
(c) 
Following the bank holiday and the imposition of capital controls on 28 June 2015, it became 
an utmost priority to ensure the smoothest possible functioning of the Greek economy. Since 
then, the restrictions have eased considerably, also on the back of progress in various areas, 
notably the recapitalisation of Greek banks towards the end of 2015 and the recent successful 
completion of the first review. This latter fact will allow us to proceed to a further, albeit always 
cautious, relaxation of restrictions.  
Throughout  this  period,  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  been  working  closely  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance on developing a roadmap towards gradually lifting restrictions in line with progress in 
achieving important milestones for the Greek economy.  
In this context, a proposal was submitted today to the institutions, with a new set of relaxation 
measures, accompanied by relevant documentation, aimed both to facilitate the operation of 
Greek enterprises and to further enhance banks’ liquidity situation, thereby serving to improve 
sentiment among depositors, investors and businesses.  
The new relaxation measures include:  
• 
lifting  the  restriction  on  cash  withdrawals  in  cases  of  new  deposits  in  cash  (“new 
funds”);  
full lifting of the ban on early loan repayments;  
increasing the percentage of cash withdrawals from deposit accounts to which funds 
are transferred from abroad, from 10% to 30% of the total funds transferred;  
allowing cash withdrawals of up to €840 every two weeks. 
• 
At the same time, our goal is to shorten the execution times for fund transfers abroad and to 
reduce the costs arising from the imposition of capital controls. The Committee for the Approval 
of  Bank  Transactions,  which  has  played  a  substantial  role  towards  achieving  this  goal,  is 
currently in the process of amending its decisions in order to:  
• 
increase  the  limit  up  to  which  bank  subcommittees  may  approve  transactions 
(currently €250,000 per customer per day) and the amounts directly executable by 
banks in transactions without the requirement of prior history (currently €20,000 per 
customer per day). Our target is for businesses to be granted approval up to the next 
business day, in order to protect their reputation with their foreign partners;  
increase the limits on the use of cards abroad, and re-open almost all international 
websites for online purchases, thereby facilitating the transactions of both legal and 
natural persons with foreign counterparties;  
increase the monthly limit (currently €1,000) on fund transfers abroad from banks and 
payment institutions.  
   Meanwhile,  following  an  intervention  from  the  Bank  of  Greece,  banks  have  stepped  up 
procedures for the supply of POS terminals not only to retailers but also to independent service 
providers, restaurants and cafés, etc. Apart from offering convenience to consumers, this also 
helps to curb tax evasion.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In this regard, it should be mentioned that the fees charged by Greek banks on POS usage 
correspond, on a weighted average basis, to about 1.1% of the payment amount, compared 
with 1.8% in the US and 1.3% in the EU, and that the bulk of these fees goes to international 
card clearing houses and not the banks themselves.  
Finally, it is important to note that Bank of Greece inspections of compliance with the capital 
controls legislation have shown that the banks’ management and staff have effectively ensured 
the  compatibility  of  their  operations  with  the  regulatory  framework,  despite  the  various 
implementation difficulties.  
In conclusion, the Bank of Greece is preparing the next steps and making every effort for the 
fastest possible return to normality. The next changes, like the ones made so far, will need to 
be  well-designed,  so  as  to  effectively  improve  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  without 
hampering liquidity in the system, and, once macroeconomic and financial stability has been 
consolidated, to ultimately remove the restrictions.  
4.   Prospects of economic recovery and potential risks  
In the first months of 2016, economic activity was adversely affected by the imposition of capital 
controls and by the delays in the completion of the first review of the new programme, initially 
expected  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015.  These  developments,  coupled  with  the  negative 
carryover effect from 2015, caused GDP to contract for a third quarter in a row. Specifically, 
after the decline of GDP on an annual basis by 1.7% and 0.9% respectively, in the third and 
the fourth quarter of 2015, economic activity fell in the first quarter of 2016, both year-on-year 
(-1.4%) and quarter-on-quarter (-0.5%).  
The forecasts of the Bank of Greece point to a recovery starting from the second half of 2016 
and continuing through 2017 and 2018. Specifically, GDP is projected to post a small decline 
of 0.3% in 2016, but then to grow by 2.5% and 3% in 2017 and 2018 respectively. These 
projections assume that the completion of the review in the first half of 2016 will, from the 
second  half of  2016  onwards,  bring  about  significant  positive  effects for  the  liquidity  of the 
financial  system,  reduce  uncertainty  and  improve  the  economic  climate,  with  important 
implications for the evolution of key components of domestic demand. They also assume that 
the accommodative monetary policy of the ECB will continue.  
Regarding the inflation outlook, the downward trend of prices is projected to come to a halt in 
2016, followed by a gradual increase in 2017 and 2018. For 2016, continued weak demand 
and low oil prices are expected to offset the recently enacted increases in indirect taxes. For 
2017 and 2018, prices are projected to rise slightly as a result of expected higher oil prices, a 
gradual recovery of demand and the effect of indirect taxes.  
The downward trend in unemployment is expected to continue at a slower pace during 2016. 
The rise in employment, in conjunction with the expected dynamic return to growth during the 
period 2017-2018, should contribute to a faster reduction in the unemployment rate.  
Nevertheless, risks to the outlook of the Greek economy remain. Furthermore, any delay in the 
implementation  of  reforms  and  privatisations  envisaged  in  the  programme  would  dampen 
economic growth, thereby refuelling uncertainty, undermining confidence and weakening the 
prospects of a definitive exit from the crisis.  
In  addition,  an  exacerbation  of  the  refugee  crisis  could  hurt  tourism  and  trade,  slowing 
economic recovery.  
Meanwhile, there remain risks and uncertainties regarding the course of the global economy, 
stemming,  among  other  things,  from  the  prospect  of  a  Brexit  in  the  wake  of  the  recent 
referendum. These risks could slow down the recovery of the Greek economy, both through 
negative effects on tourism and trade and through the slower-than-expected decline in yields 
on Greek government bonds due to the risk aversion of global investors.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   In any event, the impact from the outcome of the UK referendum cannot be fully assessed and 
will depend on the next moves of the British government and the subsequent negotiations with 
the European Union. In the medium term, any impact from the UK referendum will depend on 
the decisions of the EU Member States and the relevant EU institutions and bodies with a view 
to further strengthening and deepening the Economic and Monetary Union.  
Key requirements for a return to sustainable growth  
5.  
Based on the developments in the real economy and the expected positive impact of the first 
review, it is reasonable to predict that the end of the recession is close and that clear signs of 
recovery  will  become  visible  in  the  latter  part  of  2016.  Moving  on  from  this  recovery  to 
sustainable and strong growth will require a number of tangible and concerted actions, aimed 
to restore a “growth environment”. These actions comprise:  
1st.  Consolidating  confidence  and  strengthening  the  view  that  the  Greek  economy  has 
returned  to  normality  and  there  will  be  no  backtracking.  To  achieve  this,  reforms  and 
privatisations need to be implemented with consistency and continuity.  
2nd. Utilisation of public property. As suggested by the Bank of Greece long ago, together 
with the implementation of necessary reforms, putting idle public property to good use and 
speeding up privatisation processes are the strongest tools for boosting investment activity 
and achieving sustainable growth, but also for supporting fiscal adjustment, insofar as they 
serve to reduce public debt.  
3rd.  Tackling  the  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans,  which  is  the  greatest  challenge 
facing  the  banking  system.  Addressing  this  problem  will  not  only  alleviate  the  burden  on 
cooperating borrowers, but will also enable banks to free up funds for channelling into more 
dynamic and extrovert businesses. This would contribute to a comprehensive restructuring of 
the economy in favour of tradable goods and services, leading to a rise in productivity and 
potential output, even in the short run. 
The actions described above, together with an exit from recession and a gradual recovery of 
the economy, will bring about stabilisation and, subsequently, a decline in the NPL ratio, with 
beneficial effects on the economy as a whole.  
4th.  Gradual  lifting  of  the  capital  controls.  The  relaxation  of  the  capital  controls 
described earlier, along with improvements in confidence and liquidity, are expected to 
contribute to the normalisation of economic conditions by facilitating both enterprises 
and individuals in their transactions.  
5th. Reforms to support extroversion. The implementation of reforms in the markets for 
products and services and in the functioning of the public sector will lead to an increase in 
investment  and  employment,  while  it  is  also  expected  to  encourage  innovation  and  the 
introduction of new technologies by increasing competition. In turn, these developments will 
improve the quality of Greek exports and expand the export base and overall competitiveness 
of  the  Greek  economy.  This  will  ensure  that  the  decrease  in  the  current  account  deficit  is 
sustainable, while also increasing potential output in the medium-to-long term.  
These actions will attract foreign direct investment and set in motion a virtuous circle signalling 
the definitive exit from the crisis and a sustainable increase in total productivity of the Greek 
economy over the medium-to-long term.  
Conclusions  
6.  
The completion of the first review creates positive prospects for the recovery of the Greek 
economy  in  the  second  half  of  2016.  At  the  same  time,  the  commitment  of  our  European 
partners  to  take  action  in  order to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public  debt  in  the  short  and 
medium-to-long term is a positive step forward.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Bank of Greece is of the view that the envisaged public debt management measures need 
to be specified, quantified and frontloaded. This would enhance the credibility and acceptance 
of the policies pursued, thereby helping to further consolidate the climate of confidence and 
strengthen economic recovery.  
Moreover, the Bank of Greece considers that a return of the Greek economy to realistic and 
sustainable  rates  of  growth  would  be  further  supported:  First,  by  the  unwavering 
implementation of the necessary reforms and privatisations described in the recent agreement 
between the government and the institutions, and the utilisation of idle public property through 
appropriate measures to improve land use. Secondly, by a lowering of the medium-term fiscal 
target from a primary surplus of 3.5% of GDP from 2018 onwards, to 2% of GDP, without 
affecting public debt sustainability prospects, through mild debt relief measures including an 
extension of loan maturities and a smoothing of capitalised deferred interest payments. This 
would  allow  taxation  to  be  lowered  and  would  free  up  resources  for  supporting  economic 
activity, while making fiscal targets economically and socially feasible.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
