  Jon Nicolaisen: Digital challenges for the payment system 
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the Financial Industry’s Digital Services Conference, Oslo, 9 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
Technology advances rapidly, giving rise to opportunities and challenges. Norges Bank will 
actively promote efficient solutions for payments and financial transactions. I presume that 
the participants at this conference have the same goal, so we have common interests in this 
area. 
The  Norwegian  banking  industry  was  among  the  first  to  adopt  digital  solutions.  The  giro 
systems  were  integrated  and  a  common  debit  card  system  was  put  into  place.  The  first 
internet bank giro was available already 20 years ago. Internet giro payments and BankAxept 
card  payments  in  shops  are  cheap,  efficient  and  widely  used.  Payment  system  costs  in 
Norway have been considerably lower than in most other countries for a long time. 
Common  solutions  do  not  impede  competition.  Banks  and  other  operators  have  their  own 
customer  interfaces,  services  and  prices.  But  underlying  that  are  a  common  infrastructure 
and  common  standards.  This  provides  economies  of  scale  and  accessible  solutions  for 
customers,  regardless  of  where  they  hold  an  account.  Cooperation  has  rendered  the 
payment system efficient and robust. 
New  operators  and  new  technology  are  now  entering  the  payment  market.  This  can,  in 
principle,  strengthen  competition  and  improve  efficiency.  But  it  is  important  that  the 
competition is rooted in a robust and cost-efficient common infrastructure. Norges Bank will 
actively pursue profitable solutions in the best interest of all the parties concerned. 
Payments should become faster 
Norway’s efficient payment system is a competitive advantage for the Norwegian business 
sector. This is positive, but there is no room for complacency. Other countries are catching 
up and may be ahead of us in some areas, in particular in terms of real time payments and 
the infrastructure for mobile payments. We have a job to do here. 
The Norwegian banking industry has collectively developed a payment solution where money 
is immediately received by the payee, so-called instant payments. A common system offers 
several  advantages:  The  solution  is  cost-efficient  and  ensures  fast  payment  services  for 
customers.  All  banks  and  their  customers  can  use  the  solution  and  it  is  not  owned  by  an 
individual private market participant. 
Yet, to date, few banks offer instant payment services. This may be due to technical factors, 
or because mobile apps need to be more user-friendly. It may also be that the competition 
among  participants  to  promote  their  own  solutions  is  ultimately  an  obstacle  to  an  overall 
efficient infrastructure. Competition is best pursued in the area of customer interface. 
In  our  neighbouring  countries  Sweden,  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom,  the  situation  is 
different.  There  has  been  broad  cooperation  in  the  area  of  instant  payments  in  those 
countries.  Banks  have  been  engaged  in  developing  common  solutions  –  not  only  in  the 
development  phase,  but  also  in  the  application  phase.  In  all  these  countries,  instant 
payments  are  widely  used.  In  Sweden  and  Denmark,  they  are  the  underlying  solution  for 
most mobile payments. The result is faster and cheaper payments. 
A common solution for instant payments is a step forward for both users and banks. At the 
same time, banks should think in terms of further development. One ambition should be to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
eliminate the risk that arises between banks when the payee receives the funds before bank 
settlement occurs. International experience shows that this can be done in several ways. 
A  long-term  goal  should  be  that  payments  occur  in  real  time  both  between  users  and 
between banks. This will require adjustments to settlement systems. In the near term, it is 
also  possible  to  use today’s  infrastructure to make  payments faster. I  have  noted  that the 
banking industry is working towards increasing the number of daily net settlements from four 
to five, and more payments will be settled individually and immediately. 
Considerable work is underway under the aegis of Finance Norway and the new joint venture 
company  Bits,  which  may  lead  to  faster  payments.  Norges  Bank,  for  its  part,  will  explore 
whether  possible  adjustments  to  the  bank  settlement  system  could  enhance  payment 
efficiency. Norges Bank will do its utmost. We will seek a dialogue with the financial industry 
in order to find good solutions. 
Several aspects of mobile payments should be improved 
Mobile  payments  are  becoming  increasingly  common.  New  features  are  the  customer 
interface  and  additional  services  tailored  to  customers’  individual  needs.  The  underlying 
payment chain is largely the same as earlier. 
So far mobile payments have primarily been used for transfers between private individuals or 
to  charities,  clubs  and  associations.  In  some  cases,  the  payee  receives  the  funds 
immediately, while in other cases it may take several days. For purchases in shops, cash 
and cards are fast and user-friendly payment instruments. This has probably held back the 
rise  of  mobile  payments  in  shops,  although  they  are  rising  there  as  well.  A  third  area  is 
mobile payments linked to online purchases. Services are being developed in all three areas. 
A look at the conference programme indicates that we will be hearing more about that today. 
There are still some challenges facing mobile payments. Most mobile payments are made 
using an international payment card. As their use becomes more widespread, this solution 
will not be viable in the long term. It will be too expensive. 
Another challenge is that users have to download a large number of apps to make sure that 
they  can  send  and  receive  mobile  payments.  This  is  not  very  practical  for  users. 
Communication  between  apps,  so-called  interoperability,  is  key.  Moreover,  a  solution  with 
many different terminals at the cashier counter is not practical for customers or shops. Also 
for mobile payments, it is clear that standardisation and common solutions is the only viable 
path. 
Our aim is for mobile payments to be cheap and fast, and that apps can communicate and 
use the same shop payment terminal. 
The  question  is  how  to achieve  that. It  is  important for mobile  payments  to  use the  same 
underlying  solutions,  such  as  the  industry’s  own  instant  payment  solution  or  an  enhanced 
BankAxept  system.  This  will  provide  cheap  and  accessible  solutions  for  customers, 
regardless where they hold an account, and entails economies of scale. In some cases, this 
will  also  result  in  faster  payments.  Norges  Bank  will  seek  to  initiate  a  dialogue  with  the 
industry on this matter. 
I have also noted that there are many operators that are now working to develop common 
terminal solutions for mobile payments. Time will show what the concrete solution will be. 
For  the  system  to  work  efficiently,  users  must  have  good  information  about  the  services. 
Optimally, the prices charged to users should reflect costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A more decentralised financial infrastructure? 
Today’s  financial  infrastructure  is  largely  centralised.  Transactions  pass  through  one  or 
several  intermediaries  before  final  approval  and  settlement  in  a  central  bank  or  a  central 
securities depository. 
At the core of a centralised payment system is the account system in the central bank. Each 
bank holds an account with the central bank and settlement between banks is effected by 
moving  funds  between  these  accounts.  At  the  level  below  the  central  bank,  the  payment 
system consists of several layers of accounts. Banks that hold an account with the central 
bank  have  their  own  account  system  for  customers.  A  payment  between  customers  in 
different banks therefore passes through many stages, and they are verified at each stage. 
Similar centralised solutions also exist for the settlement of foreign exchange and securities 
transactions. 
Society  could  possibly  benefit  greatly  from  replacing  the  existing  infrastructure  with  more 
decentralised  solutions,  for  instance  based  on  so-called  Blockchain  technology.  Such 
solutions  were  first  used  when  the  digital  currency  Bitcoin  came  onto  the  market  in  2009. 
Such  freestanding  digital  currencies  face  a  series  of  challenges,  such  as  significant  price 
volatility, safety issues and pressures on IT resources. Experience shows that the public can 
easily lose confidence in such currencies and their payment systems, which are not backed 
by a central bank or a government deposit insurance scheme. 
Recently, the international debate has shifted focus away from freestanding digital currencies 
to other uses and the underlying technology. 
Decentralised  systems  are  peer-to-peer  networks  where  transactions  are  made  directly 
between  participants.  They  each  have  an  identical  copy  of  the  account  system  or  ledger, 
which  is  updated  continuously.  As  the  ledger  is  distributed  among  incumbents,  central 
operators or intermediaries are not needed to undertake the operations. This also provides 
potential for faster and cheaper settlement. 
Public confidence and safety rely on encryption. It should not be possible to manipulate the 
ledger and transactions, and funds cannot be used more than once. It goes without saying 
that the quality of the security solutions is absolutely essential. 
The decentralised technology can potentially be used in many areas. Besides the financial 
sector, proposed uses include registration of property and objects of value and in elections. 
However,  the  most  common  proposed  uses  are  different  forms  of  financial  transactions, 
accounting and auditing. 
A number of payment solutions have been raised in the international debate. One alternative 
is that the central bank operates a decentralised system that is open to all private individuals 
and  businesses  in  a  country.  The  currency  unit  could  be  a  variant  of  the  central  bank 
currency, either a form of “electronic cash” or for use in bank settlement. This raises a series 
of fundamental questions to which we do not have the answers today – how this would affect 
banks’  funding  and  credit  provision,  the  division  of  roles  between  the  private  and  public 
sector, and how monetary policy would function. 
Another  alternative  is  a  network  consisting  of  banks  that  settle  customer  payments 
immediately using the new technology. Each bank obtains funds to be used in the network by 
drawing down on the bank’s account holdings with the central bank. An alternative is also to 
allow the banks’ customers to participate directly in the network. 
Securities settlement has been cited as another relevant area for decentralised technology. 
Funds and securities can be stored in a network, and so-called “smart contracts” ensure that 
delivery  is  made  against  payment.  An  idea  that  has  been  mentioned  is  that  securities 
depositories  and  central  banks  would  administer  participation  and  regulate  access  to 
securities and funds. Securities companies and banks would settle trades in the network on 
behalf of investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Norges  Bank’s  task  is  to  promote  an  efficient  and  robust  financial  infrastructure.  New 
decentralised technology offers the potential to increase the efficiency of our infrastructure. It 
is still early days, and we do not know what the outcome will be. But it is still worthwhile to 
take a closer look at the possibilities. Norges Bank will start work on assessing safety and 
efficiency,  and  other  consequences  of  such  solutions.  We  want  dialogue  with  relevant 
operators in Norway and abroad. 
Both the authorities and market participants should assess the need for standardisation and 
regulation.  The  timing for  introducing  such  measures  must  not  impede  development  in  an 
early phase. 
I look forward to an active debate. Many of the stakeholders participating in that debate are 
probably here today. 
for 
implications 
the  security  and  contingency 
Safety and contingency arrangements 
Technological  advances  also  have 
arrangements for our systems, which we as a nation must take seriously. 
Developments  occur  rapidly.  Operators  want  to  market  new  solutions  to  strengthen  their 
competitive position, which is natural. But payment solutions do not function efficiently if they 
are not secure and if there is little customer confidence in the solutions. 
The payment chain includes many stages and they must all function. A chain is not stronger 
than its weakest link. Safety and operational stability must be adequately tested. Sound risk 
analyses are crucial. They provide a guide to risk-mitigation. 
Internet solutions have led to new criminal activities. Resource use to combat cybercrime is 
steadily increasing. This is a price we have to pay to be able to exploit the benefits of the 
new technology. 
Existing  payment  solutions  cannot  be  phased  out  until  we  are  certain  that  they  will  be 
replaced by other solutions that satisfy customer needs and enjoy customer confidence. This 
is important in normal times, and not least in terms of crisis preparedness. That has a cost, 
but  a  situation  where  payments  cannot  be  executed  would  entail  a  much  greater  cost  to 
society. As such, there can be no compromise with regard to contingency requirements. 
Conclusion 
Norway has an efficient payment system. This is positive, but there is room for improvement. 
In some respects, other countries are now ahead of us, for example Denmark and Sweden, 
particularly in terms of instant payments. 
Payments should be faster than is the case today – both for end users and between banks. 
We must develop new infrastructure linked to instant payments and render payments faster 
through today’s infrastructure. 
Mobile  payments  can  best  be  organised  based  on  common  underlying  solutions.  They 
should  be  cheaper  and  faster,  and  various  apps  must  be  able  to  communicate  between 
banks and use the same shop payment terminal. Banks and the wider business sector do not 
have a choice in the long run. If the new solutions are to be viable over time, standards and 
common  solutions  for  mobile  payments  must  be  developed.  We  may  have  started  in  this 
direction, but time is pressing. 
Common  solutions  and  standards  are  not  an  obstacle  to  effective  competition.  To  the 
contrary  –  the  competition  in  the  market  should  develop  on  the  foundation  of  a  common, 
efficient infrastructure. In the long run, this is of common interest to all the parties concerned, 
whether  they  are  public  institutions,  private  companies,  banks  or  our  nation.  This  should 
provide a good basis for finding sound and future-oriented solutions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
