  Mario Draghi: Working together for growth in Europe 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Deutscher Bundestag, Berlin, 28 September 2016. 
 Introduction 
Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Bundestag, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for your invitation. It is a pleasure to speak here in in the halls of the Committee 
on the Affairs of the European Union, where you bring the debate about European integration 
to the Bundestag, the heart of German democracy. 
As President of the ECB, I am here today to explain our policies and discuss with you how 
the  ECB  is  acting  to  fulfil  the  mandate  that  was  democratically  conferred  upon  us  by  the 
Treaty. As members of the Bundestag, you know what the concerns of the German people 
are. I look forward to hearing about these concerns and addressing them today. 
When I came to the Bundestag four years ago, we were at the height of the crisis. Today, the 
euro  area  is  in  better  shape.  To  protect  price  stability,  the  ECB  used  its  instruments  in  a 
manner  it  had  not  done  before  and  developed  new  tools  –  all  within  our  mandate.  We 
reduced our interest rates to very low levels, provided targeted financing to support banks’ 
lending to firms and households, and started a large-scale asset purchase programme. 
In my introductory remarks I want to make three points. 
First, I want to explain why we are pursuing our policies. I want to show how our monetary 
policy has maintained price stability and countered the threat of a new “Great Depression”. 
Our  measures  are  working:  they  are  contributing  to  keeping  the  recovery  on  track,  thus 
creating jobs and ensuring a recovery that ultimately also benefit savers and pensioners in 
Germany and the euro area as a whole. But I do understand that people have concerns. We 
take these concerns seriously. 
I  will  therefore  discuss  in  more  detail  –  and  this  is  my  second  point  –  how  our  measures 
affect  people’s  finances  and  welfare.  As  with  any  monetary  policy  decision,  our  measures 
have  distributional  effects  on  citizens.  But,  on  balance,  savers,  employees,  entrepreneurs, 
pensioners and taxpayers across the euro area, including in Germany, are better off because 
of our actions – today and tomorrow. 
Finally, I will talk about what else is needed. The ECB does not operate in a vacuum: other 
economic policies are essential to complement our monetary policy. Without them there will 
be no strong and sustainable recovery. These other policies are a precondition for interest 
rates to rise again. 
The ECB’s actions have safeguarded price stability 
Let me start with the reasons for our actions. The ECB acted because inflation drifted away 
from our aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The EU Treaties gave the ECB the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro 
area as a whole. This objective binds me and my colleagues in the ECB Governing Council, 
where  our  decisions  are  the  result  of  collegial  debate. We  are  held  accountable  for  these 
decisions  in  the  European  Parliament,  where  I  attend  four  regular  hearings  per  year. 
Furthermore,  our  decisions  are  subject to judicial  review.  This  is  what  I mean  when  I  say: 
with our measures, we follow the law. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Sometimes people wonder whether price stability doesn’t mean inflation of 0%. It does not, 
because both inflation that is too high and inflation that is too low for too long can damage 
the  economy.  A  steady,  measured  rate  of  inflation  below,  but  close  to,  2%  in  the  medium 
term acts like a cushion that protects our economies from drifting into the dangerous territory 
of negative inflation even when there is just a minor economic shock.1 Once expectations of 
falling prices become ingrained, consumers postpone purchases in anticipation of even lower 
prices, while firms hold off making investments because they do not know whether they will 
pay off. This downward spiral continues until the economy collapses. 
There are therefore very good reasons why central banks are so careful to avoid inflation that 
is  either  too  high  or  too  low.  You  would  rightly  expect  us  to  act  if  inflation  is  significantly 
above our objective of price stability. We also need to act when inflation is close to 0%. 
How  do  we  achieve  our  price  stability  objective? When  inflation  is  too  high,  central  banks 
raise interest rates to break the upward trend; when inflation is too low, they lower interest 
rates to achieve the opposite. Lower interest rates ease overall financing conditions in the 
economy. This in turn stimulates investment and consumption, which then induces inflation 
to pick up. 
But when lowering interest rates alone may not be sufficient to return to inflation rates that 
are  in  line  with  price  stability,  central  banks  may  need  to  use  other  instruments  to  ease 
monetary  and  financial  conditions.  This  is  why  we  launched  other  measures,  such  as  our 
asset  purchase  programmes.  And  we  are  by  no  means  unique  in  this.  Around  the  globe, 
central  banks  of  the  major  advanced  economies  like  the  US,  the  UK  and  Japan  have  all 
embarked on large-scale sovereign bond purchase programmes to fulfil their mandate. 
Our measures have delivered. We estimate that they will raise the inflation rate by more than 
half  a  percentage  point,  on  average,  over  2016  and  2017.  They  will  also  contribute  to 
increasing  real  euro  area  GDP  growth  by  more  than  one  and  a  half  percentage  points 
cumulatively between 2015 and 2018, which will support job creation. 
The effects of our policies 
Low rates are a symptom of the underlying economic situation. They reflect weak long-term 
growth  trends  and  the  protracted  macroeconomic  slump  that  has  resulted  from  the  crisis. 
And the ECB’s monetary policy has provided significant accommodation to limit the negative 
effects of the global and euro area-specific shocks on the economy, thereby mitigating their 
disinflationary  impact.  But  very  low  rates  are  not  innocuous. They  affect  people’s  finances 
and  welfare.  Let  me  start  with  the  effects  of  our  policies  on  savers.  Yes,  the  current  low 
interest rate environment reduces the nominal return on saving accounts. But what counts for 
savers is not the nominal interest rate but the real interest rate, which is the nominal interest 
rate minus inflation. Real rates are also low, but there have been many episodes of low, or 
even negative real interest rates in Germany well before the introduction of the euro, as a 
recent Bundesbank study has shown.2 
Moreover, savers can on average still earn satisfactory rates of return from diversifying their 
assets,  even  when  interest  rates  on  deposit  and  savings  accounts  are  very  low.  This  has 
also been the case in Germany according to another recent Bundesbank study.3 But most 
                                                
1  See  Praet,  P.,  “The  ECB’s  fight  against  low  inflation:  reason  and  consequences”,  speech  by  Peter  Praet, 
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at Luiss School of European Political Economy, Rome, 4 April 
2016. 
2  See  Deutsche  Bundesbank  ,  “Nothing  new  about  negative  real  interest  rates  on  deposits”,  30  June  2014, 
https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Topics/2014/2014_06_30_nothing_new_negative_interest_rates.ht
ml. 
3  See Deutsche Bundesbank , “German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of the low interest 
rate environment”, Monthly Report October 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  importantly,  whatever  financial  assets  savers  hold,  they  will  benefit from  a  recovery  of  the 
economy.  So  the  interest  of  all  of  us,  including  German  savers,  is  the  highest  possible 
sustainable growth in Germany and the euro area. 
Through our efforts to bring inflation back towards 2%, we have contributed to higher growth 
and the creation of more jobs. In Germany, exports are benefitting from the recovery in the 
euro area, unemployment is at its lowest level since reunification, people’s take-home pay is 
increasing noticeably, and venture capital is pouring into Berlin’s silicon alley. 
We should also not forget that people in your constituencies are affected in different ways by 
our measures. They are affected as savers, borrowers or taxpayers, and in many cases as 
all three. What a household may lose in terms of little interest on their bank account, it might 
save in lower mortgage payments for their home. And it might benefit from rising bond and 
stock prices in their retirement fund. In fact, evidence shows that between 2008 and 2015 
interest payments by households in Germany, as a percentage of gross disposable income, 
fell more sharply than interest earnings.4 And the low financing costs for government bonds 
help to balance the budget and reduce debt at a considerable speed. This is good news for 
the  Finance  Ministry  –  and  thus for taxpayers  –  which  saved  in  2015  alone  approximately 
EUR 28 billion on lower than expected interest payments. 
We should also consider the full effect of low interest rates on banks. Those who blame ECB 
policy for the mixed performance of certain German financial firms have been very vocal. But 
what has been forgotten is that many banks have been able to more than offset declining 
interest revenues with higher lending volumes, improved loan performance and lower interest 
expenses, all of which are beneficial to both the banks and their customers.5 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  not  the  main  factor  for  the  low  profitability  of  banks.  While 
some  banks’  business  models  may  indeed  need  to  adapt  to  the  current  low  interest  rate 
environment, they also need to address their own structural issues, such as overcapacity, the 
stock  of  non-performing  loans  and  the  potential  impact  of  technological  innovation.  Low 
profitability is closely linked to low operational efficiency. In Germany cost to income ratios 
are  on  average  relatively  high  compared  to  other  jurisdictions.  Let  us  be  clear,  however, 
there  is  no  one  size  fits  all  banking  model  and  we  have  different  types  of  banks  that  are 
successfully operating in Germany and in the euro area. 
Of course, low interest rates for a long period might carry the risk of overvaluation in asset 
markets as a result of the search for yield. This is why we closely monitor potential risks to 
financial stability that might emanate for instance from local real estate markets. But at the 
moment we are not seeing any overheating in the euro area or the German economy as a 
whole. While we do observe a somewhat stronger increase in residential real estate prices, 
notably  in  large  cities  in  Germany,  such  increases  are  not  the  reflection  of  a  bubble,  as 
lending is growing only moderately. Moreover, overall household debt-to-income levels are 
comparatively low and stable. Where signs of excessive risk-taking emerge, macroprudential 
measures  at  the  national  level  should  be  the  instrument  of  choice.  They  allow  exuberant 
financial  developments  to  be  addressed  in  a  more  targeted  way,  while  monetary  policy 
contributes to the stability of the euro area as a whole. 
So far I have discussed the reasons for our measures and their effects. To summarise, our 
policies allow the recovery to take hold so that we will be able to raise interest rates again. 
After  all, the  interest  earnings  that the  savers  understandably  crave  need  to  be generated 
first in the real economy. In a stagnant economy there is little to be shared out. It should also 
                                                
4  See ECB, “Low interest rates and households’ net interest income”, Box 3, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4/2016. 
And this is without taking into account the positive impact on households’ income and wealth of rising stock 
and bond prices as a result of lower interest rates. 
5  See  Cœuré,  B.,  “Assessing  the  implications of  negative  interest  rates”,  speech  at  the  Yale  Financial  Crisis 
Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  be noted that the level to which real interest rates can eventually return when the economy 
strengthens  is  not  determined  by  monetary  policy.  Instead,  it  depends  on  the  economy’s 
long-term growth prospects. Productivity and demographics play a decisive role in this, and 
the development of these factors has not been favourable in Europe in recent years. This is a 
phenomenon we also see in Germany. 
For  long-term  interest  rates  to  rise  in  the  future  we  therefore  need  more  investment  and 
structural reforms to lift growth and productivity. As Wolfgang Schäuble said in this house a 
couple  of  weeks  ago  when  he  presented  the  budget  for  2017:  we  will  only  get  out  of  this 
phase of low interest rates if we have more sustainable growth in Europe. 
The need for decisive action at the national and European level 
This  leads  me  to  my  final  point:  policy-makers  across  the  euro  area,  need  to  seize  the 
opportunity to deliver reforms. 
At the height of the crisis, all Member States and citizens showed an enormous commitment 
to  keeping  the  euro  area  together  when  the  critics  were  already  talking  about  the  euro’s 
demise. But we cannot stop here: we need to make sure not only that the euro survives, but 
that our Economic and Monetary Union thrives. 
If we want to succeed, we will need to find common solutions for the problems that we all 
face.  If  we  want  to  preserve  the  European  social  model,  we  will  need  to  bring  labour  and 
product  markets  in  line  with  the  realities  of  the  digital  and  globalised  world  of  the  21st 
century. If we want savers to benefit from higher interest rates in the future, we will need to 
create  investment  opportunities  to  put  these  savings  to  a  productive  use.  This  is  about 
raising productivity and employment.6 This is about structural reforms that are a necessary 
complement  to  our  monetary  policy.  And  Member  States  have  to  do  their  part.  I  have 
highlighted this many times in the past.7 In fact, I emphasise it every six weeks at the ECB’s 
press conference. 
And where we face common supranational challenges, and currently there are several such 
challenges, there is no alternative to acting jointly as Europeans. Consider the transformative 
power of the deepening of the Single Market at the end of the 1980s. This opened up new 
opportunities and it continues to benefit European companies and individuals alike. Consider 
what can still be achieved with the Digital Single Market, the energy union and the capital 
markets  union. Without  a  well-functioning  Single  Market,  our firms  would  lose  access  to  a 
market of 500 million consumers. Without a Single Market, we Europeans would have little 
global  leverage  to  uphold  our  values,  such  as  our  respect  for  the  right  to  privacy  on  the 
internet. Together we are immeasurably stronger.8 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The ECB is vigorously counteracting risks to price stability using all necessary tools within its 
mandate.  Our  monetary  policy  has  supported  growth  and  employment  and  will  eventually 
bring  inflation  back  to  our  aim  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  Low  interest  rates  today  are 
                                                
6  See Cœuré, B., “Structural reforms on the way to a complete Economic and Monetary Union”, speech at the 
International Conference on Structural Reforms in Advanced Economies, Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, 
17 June 2016. 
7  See Draghi, M., “On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our economic potential”, 5th Annual Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
8  See  Draghi,  M.,  “Reviving  the  spirit  of  De  Gasperi:  working  together  for  an  effective  and  inclusive  Union”, 
speech at the presentation ceremony of the De Gasperi award, Trento, 13 September 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  necessary for a return to higher interest rates in the future. What we need now is to allow our 
measures to develop their full impact. And in order to reap the full benefits of our monetary 
policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute  much  more  decisively,  both  at  the 
national and at the European level. 
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
