   Benoît Cœuré: Cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  workshop  on  the  CPMI-IOSCO  Guidance  on  Cyber  Resilience  for  Financial  Market 
Infrastructures, Frankfurt am Main, 13 January 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me start by expressing my appreciation to the European System of Central Banks’ Payment 
and Settlement Systems Committee for taking the initiative to organise this workshop on cyber 
resilience  and  to  the  representatives  of  other  authorities  and  the  financial  market 
infrastructures (FMI) community for coming here today to discuss with us this very important 
topic in the international agenda. 
Financial stability usually conjures up questions about capital and liquidity and the network 
of financial exposures and interdependencies that make up the financial sector. But the sector 
is  an  operational  network  too. On  a  daily  basis  it  delivers financial  intermediation  between 
market participants and end users, whether the transmission of salaries and other payments 
from one bank account to another or the settlement of market transactions through a web of 
settlement banks, clearing houses, settlement systems and custodians. As overseers of FMIs, 
we need to ensure that each of the nodes in this network is operationally resilient and in a 
position to provide the services that are important to the system as a whole. 
We also need to ensure that where disruptions do occur, firms can continue to operate or 
recover quickly, minimising any adverse impact on the functioning of the system as a whole. 
FMIs play a critical role in promoting the stability of the financial system, and the world in which 
they  operate  is  evolving  and  changing  rapidly.  Computing  and  digitalisation  are  becoming 
increasingly pervasive and enhancing nearly all aspects of personal life and business, creating 
more  opportunity  for  innovation,  but  also  more  and  more  threats.  Industry  leaders  and 
authorities alike consider cyber risks as a top priority. 
And so, what about cyber risk? Well cyber presents new challenges. It is not a game against 
nature. Unlike other causes of operational disruption like fires and floods, we know there are 
agents out there – criminals, terrorist organisations – that have the will, if not necessarily the 
means,  to  attack  and  exploit  the  system.  Motivations  vary.  More  often  than  not  they  are 
economic – to defraud banks or their customers or to extract information. But we have seen 
cases where the motivation is to damage the system, either to destroy data or cause non-
availability of systems or both. The capabilities of these actors, and thus the nature of the 
threat, are rapidly evolving – barriers to entry are low in cyber space and attacks are readily 
scalable. Low level attacks are now not isolated events but continuous. Unlike physical attacks 
that are localised, these attacks are international and know no boundaries. 
Add to this, the cyberattack surface is rapidly growing: 
• 
• 
in 2015, there were 3 billion digital users, and by 2019, this will increase to 4 billion; 
in  2015,  there  were  3.3  billion  smartphone  connections,  which  will  increase  to 
5.9 billion in 2020; 
in  2015,  there  were  16.3  billion  IP-connected  devices,  which  will  increase  to 
24.4 billion by 2019; 
and it is estimated that network traffic will more than double from 2015 to 2019. 
• 
The routes for exploitation and potential disruption are therefore clearly increasing. 
Furthermore, the threat to FMIs is increasing. FMIs represent critical infrastructure to the 
financial  system.  In  a  recent  survey  on  critical  infrastructures,  more  than  70%  thought 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   cybersecurity  threats  to  their  organization  are  increasing;  and  48%  found  it  likely  that  a 
cyberattack will take down their critical infrastructure. 
Cyber defence as a result has become not a matter of designing a hard perimeter that can 
repel attacks but detecting where networks have been penetrated and responding effectively 
where this occurs. As it changes and multiplies, cyber is elusive, hard to define and to measure. 
It is clear that the risk is on the rise and a growing cause of concern to industry and authorities 
alike.  It  is  within  this  context  that  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures 
(CPMI) and the Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) 
joined  their  efforts  in  developing  the  Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial  market 
infrastructures which you will discuss today.1 
From the outset, this guidance is aimed towards financial market infrastructures, overseers, 
supervisors and authorities, making it clear that our response to cyber risk must be a collective 
and united effort, based on a partnership model. This is why on the side of CPMI and IOSCO 
we seek the views of the industry through a public consultation, and hence this workshop is an 
important  opportunity  to  bring  us  all  together  for  some  shared  reflections  during  the 
consultation period. 
The CPMI-IOSCO Guidance is the first set of internationally agreed principles in the field of 
financial markets and institutions to support consistent and effective oversight and supervision 
in the area of cyber resilience. It is a real achievement and it is setting the standard for other 
committees. It will be important that going forward, other authorities, committees and market 
sectors approach cyber standards and guidance in a harmonised manner, to ensure that there 
is no duplication and inconsistency, and to ensure that there is cross-fertilisation and evolved 
collective learning. 
Within this context, events like the one today is vital, and we must ensure that all the relevant 
stakeholders remain involved and work together, as cyber threat recognises no border and 
stakeholder. It is a risk to us all, and only through such events will we increase the common 
understanding and approach, and begin to address the risks. 
In this regard I would like to emphasise to the FMI community that it is important that you 
support  the  CPMI-IOSCO  work  and  respond  to  the  public  consultation  with  your 
comments, observations and ideas regarding the Guidance within the February deadline. We 
want  your  views,  as  from  the  outset,  I  have  stated  that  this  is  a  collective  journey,  one  of 
partnership. 
Thank you for your time, and let us work together in 2016 to enhance cyber resilience at EU 
level and beyond. 
                                                
1   See:  CPMI-IOSCO  consultative  paper  “Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial  market  infrastructures”, 
November 2015, https://www.bis.org/press/p151124.htm. See also CPMI, “Cyber resilience in financial market 
infrastructures”,  November  2014;  and  IOSCO,  “Cyber-crime,  securities  markets  and  systemic  risk”,  Staff 
Working Paper, July 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
