  Yukitoshi Funo: Economic activity and prices in Japan, and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Yukitoshi  Funo,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Hyogo, 23 March 2016. 
 I. 
Recent economic and price developments 
Overseas developments 
A. 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  first  speech  delivered  as  a  Policy  Board  member  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan by talking about developments in global financial markets and overseas economies. In 
global  financial  markets,  risk  aversion  has  increased  from  the  end  of  2015,  against  the 
backdrop  of  the  declines  in  crude  oil  prices  and  Chinese  stock  prices.  In  this  situation, 
overseas  economies  have  been  decelerating  somewhat,  mainly  in  emerging  economies, 
although they have continued to grow at a moderate pace. 
As  for  the  outlook,  however,  the  pace  of  growth  in  overseas  economies  is  expected  to 
accelerate  moderately  as  the  positive  effects  of  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies 
gradually spread to emerging economies. According to the World Economic Outlook (WEO) 
Update released in January 2016 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the projection of 
global  economic  growth  has  been  revised  somewhat  downward  from  the  October  2015 
WEO, but the longer-term projection that the growth rate will accelerate moderately from the 
current estimate of 3.1 percent in 2015 to 3.4 percent in 2016, and 3.6 percent in 2017, is 
unchanged. 
Looking  at movements by  major  region, the  U.S.  economy  has  been  on  a  recovery  trend, 
assisted  by  household  spending.  Amid  the  steady  increase  in  employment  on  the  whole, 
private  consumption  has  been  increasing  steadily,  although  the  pace  has  been  slowing 
somewhat.  Housing  investment  has  followed  a  moderate  uptrend.  As  for  the  outlook,  the 
manufacturing  sector  is  likely  to  remain  lackluster  for  the  time  being,  due  mainly  to  the 
slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  but  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  recovery 
centered  on  the  private  sector,  supported  by  the  firmness  in  household  spending,  under 
accommodative financial conditions. 
The euro area economy has continued to recover moderately. Although exports have shown 
some weakness, mainly due to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies, private 
consumption has been on an increasing trend, supported mainly by the improvement in the 
labor market. As for the outlook, the economy will likely continue to see a moderate recovery, 
mainly on the back of the improved employment and income situation under accommodative 
financial conditions. 
The Chinese economy has maintained its stable growth on the whole. However, the pace of 
growth has decelerated somewhat, mainly in exports and production, reflecting (1) persisting 
excess production capacity and inventory adjustment pressure in the manufacturing sector; 
and (2) some weakness in external demand, due mainly to a pause in growth in demand for 
IT-related goods. In this situation, authorities have proactively carried out policy measures to 
support economic activity, mainly in fiscal spending. As for the outlook, the economy is likely 
to  broadly  follow  a  stable  growth  path,  due  in  part  to  authorities’  measures  to  support 
economic activity. 
Emerging  economies  have  been  slowing,  mainly  in  terms  of  exports  and  production. 
Although  effects  of  the  economic  stimulus  measures  have  been  observed,  exports  and 
production  in  Asia  have  shown  some  weakness  due  to  excess  production  capacity  and 
inventory  adjustments  as  well  as  a  pause  in  growth  in  demand  for  IT-related  goods  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  emerging economies, including China. In addition, low commodity prices have been exerting 
downward  pressure  on commodity-exporting  economies  such  as  Brazil  and  Russia.  As for 
the outlook, emerging economies are likely to gradually move out of their deceleration phase, 
mainly on the back of the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and the fiscal and 
monetary policy measures to stimulate the economy, although differences across countries 
and  regions  are  likely  to  remain  for  the  time  being.  However,  the  pace  of  the  pick-up  will 
likely remain moderate on the whole. 
One of the risks to the outlook for overseas economies is that it is difficult to deduce the pace 
of  growth  in  the  global  economy,  given  that  the  uncertainties  surrounding  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  –  particularly  China  –  remain  high  and  that  there  are 
negative effects of the declines in commodity prices. In addition, risk factors to the overseas 
economic outlook are wide ranging, as exemplified by (1) developments in the U.S. economy 
and the influences of its monetary policy response to them on the global financial markets, 
(2) prospects regarding the European debt problem and developments in economic activity 
and prices in Europe, and (3) geopolitical risks such as those in the Middle East. 
Therefore,  I  consider  it  necessary  to  closely  monitor  various  risk  factors  from  a  broad 
perspective. 
B. 
Japan’s economy and prices 
Economic activity 
1. 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan given the overseas developments I have 
just  outlined.  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend,  although 
exports and production have shown sluggishness, due mainly to the slowdown in emerging 
economies. The real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter of 2015 increased by 
an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  growth  rate  of  1.4  percent,  which  exceeds  the  potential 
growth,  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  domestic  private  demand.  That  for  the  October-
December quarter registered minus 1.1 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, 
due partly to the effects of irregularly warm weather. 
As for the outlook, although the sluggishness in exports and production will probably remain 
for  some  time,  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from 
income  to  spending  being  maintained  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors,  and 
exports are expected to increase moderately on the back of emerging economies moving out 
of their deceleration phase. Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding 
trend. Specifically, the economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential 
through  fiscal  2016.  Thereafter,  through  fiscal  2017,  it  is  projected  to  maintain  its  positive 
growth, although with a slowing in its pace to around a level somewhat below the potential 
growth rate, due mainly to the effects of a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in 
demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017. According to the 
Bank’s  January  2016  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook 
Report), the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the economic growth rate – 
1.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.3 percent for fiscal 2017 – were 
more or less unchanged from the forecasts presented in October 2015. 
Prices 
2. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food has generally been about 0 percent, with the 
decline in energy prices and the increase in non-energy prices broadly offsetting each other. 
The  rate  of  change  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy  –  one  of  the  indicators  that 
capture the underlying trend in the CPI – has remained positive for 28 months and has been 
at a level above 1 percent recently. In addition, looking at annual price changes in all CPI 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  items less fresh food, the share of price-increasing items minus the share of price-decreasing 
items has shown a marked increase since spring 2015, albeit with some fluctuations. 
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh 
food  is  likely  to  be  about  0  percent for  the  time being,  due  to  the  effects  of the  decline  in 
energy  prices,  and,  as  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  steadily  rises,  accelerate  toward 
2 percent.  Meanwhile,  assuming  that  crude  oil  prices  will  rise  moderately  from  the  recent 
level,  it  is  likely  that  the  negative  contribution  of  energy  prices  to  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI will decrease gradually. Based on this assumption, the timing of the year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching around 2 percent – the price stability target – is 
projected  to  be  around  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2017.  Specifically,  the  medians  of  the  Policy 
Board members’ forecasts of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less 
fresh food presented in the January 2016 Outlook Report were 0.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 
0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2016,  and,  on  a  basis  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  scheduled 
consumption  tax  hike,  1.8  percent  for  fiscal  2017.  Comparing  these  with  the  forecasts 
presented in October 2015, that for fiscal 2016 is lower and that for fiscal 2017 is more or 
less unchanged. The downward revision of the forecast for the CPI is due to the assumption 
of lower crude oil prices.1 
Keys to assessing the outlook for economic activity and prices 
II. 
In  what  follows,  I  will  discuss  the  keys  to  assessing  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices in Japan, including several points that I think deserve particular attention in terms of 
realizing the outlook that I mentioned earlier. 
Employment and income situation 
A. 
First, I will talk about developments in the employment and income situation. Supply-demand 
conditions in the labor market have continued to improve steadily, and employee income has 
increased moderately. According to the Labour Force Survey, the number of employees has 
been increasing, and the labor force participation of women and the elderly has been rising. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  has  risen  steadily  and  a 
perception of labor shortage suggested by the diffusion index for employment conditions (the 
proportion  of  firms  responding  that  employment  was  “excessive”  minus  the  proportion  of 
those responding that employment was “insufficient”) in the December 2015 Tankan (Short-
Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  has  heightened.  The  unemployment  rate 
has declined moderately, albeit with some fluctuations, and recently has been in the range of 
3.0–3.5 percent. The supply-demand conditions in the labor market are expected to continue 
improving steadily. On the wage side, hourly cash earnings of part-time employees,  which 
are responsive to labor market conditions, have shown an especially clear improvement of 
late, supported in part by a recent increase in minimum wages. With regard to the outlook, as 
the  tightening  of  labor  market  conditions  and  the  heightening  of  inflation  expectations  will 
become more evident, these will tend to exert upward pressure on wages. 
In  light  of  these  prospects  for  employment  and  wages,  the  rate  of  increase  in  employee 
income  is  expected  to  moderately  accelerate.  Nevertheless,  given  that  the  unemployment 
rate has declined to the range of 3.0–3.5 percent in a situation where corporate profits have 
                                                
1 
Individual  Policy  Board  members  made  their  forecasts  assuming  that  Dubai  crude  oil  prices  would  rise 
moderately from the recent 35 U.S. dollars per barrel to the range of 45–50 dollars per barrel toward the end 
of the projection period. Under this assumption, the contribution of energy prices to the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was estimated to be around minus 0.9 percentage point for fiscal 
2015,  and  approximately  in  the  range  of  minus  0.7  to  minus  0.8  percentage  point  for  fiscal  2016.  More 
specifically, the contribution was expected to start to lessen in the second half of fiscal 2016 and reach around 
0 percentage point during the first half of fiscal 2017. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  been at high levels, it should be noted that the pace of improvement in wages to date has 
been somewhat slow and the labor share has remained on a downtrend. 
Exports 
B. 
I  will  now  discuss  developments  in  exports.  The  pick-up  in  exports  has  paused  recently. 
Specifically, exports of capital goods have continued to be relatively weak, due mainly to the 
slowdown in emerging economies, including China; with regard to IT-related exports, those 
of smartphone-related goods have been slowing. However, automobile-related exports have 
been  increasing  as  a  trend,  mainly  those  to  the  United  States  and  Europe,  due  partly  to 
shifting of overseas production sites back to Japan. 
With regard to the outlook, Japan’s exports are expected to tend to mark a fall for the time 
being,  given  the  decline  in  expected  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies, protracted low commodity prices, and the resulting excess in production capacity 
related  to  material  and  energy.  I  therefore  consider  that  this  warrants  careful  attention. 
Automobile-related exports, particularly those for advanced economies, are likely to continue 
to firmly increase. On the other hand, the pick-up in exports of capital goods and IT-related 
goods  are  projected  to  be  sluggish,  due  to  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies,  and  remain  at  a  pause.  I  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  developments  in  the 
global economy. 
Business fixed investment 
C. 
Let  me  now  explain  developments  in  business  fixed  investment,  which  has  been  on  a 
moderate  increasing  trend  as  corporate  profits  have  been  at  high  levels.  According  to  the 
December 2015 Tankan, firms have generally continued to plan to increase fixed investment 
firmly  for  fiscal  2015  despite  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  As  for  the  outlook, 
business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  continue  to  increase  moderately  on  the  back  of 
(1) the high level of corporate profits, (2) stimulative financial conditions such as low interest 
rates  and  accommodative  lending  attitudes,  and  (3)  manufacturers’  positive  stance  on 
domestic investment. Machinery orders – a leading indicator of machinery investment –have 
been  increasing  moderately.  In  light  of  high  corporate  profits,  firms  are  judged  so  far  as 
having  maintained  their  restrained  fixed  investment  stance  due  to  sluggish  growth 
expectations.  However,  their  stance  is  projected  to  gradually  become  more  positive  in 
response  to  a  moderate  rise  in  growth  expectations  and  a  sustained  improvement  in 
profitability. Nevertheless, I think that it is necessary to pay close attention to the effects of 
the recent risk aversion in global financial markets on firms’ sentiment, and in turn on their 
fixed investment stance. 
Prices 
D. 
Next, I will discuss the output gap and inflation expectations, which are the main factors that 
determine  inflation  rates.  First,  the  output  gap  is  expected  to  head  toward  improvement, 
reflecting a rise in the manufacturing sector’s capacity utilization supported by a pick-up in 
exports and production, and a further improvement in labor market conditions. In fiscal 2016, 
the output gap is projected to expand within positive territory, reflecting a higher utilization of 
production inputs accompanying the economic expansion and higher growth due to a front-
loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017. 
Second,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  still  appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole 
from a somewhat longer-term perspective, judging from firms’ price-setting and households’ 
spending  behavior,  although  market  indicators  and  various  surveys  have  been  somewhat 
weak recently. Firms’ price- and wage-setting stance clearly has changed, and consumers 
seem to be accepting firms’ movements to increase prices, mainly reflecting an improvement 
in 
labor-management  wage 
negotiations,  movements  toward  wage  increases  have  been  broadening  since  2014, 
reflecting corporate performance and supply-demand conditions in the labor market. Looking 
the  employment  and 
income  situation. 
the  annual 
In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ahead, as the observed inflation rate rises, medium- to long-term inflation expectations are 
also  likely  to  follow  an  increasing  trend  and  gradually  converge  to  2  percent  –  the  price 
stability target. Nevertheless, I believe that it is still necessary to pay close attention to how 
factors  such  as the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  will  affect firms’  and  consumers’  outlook for 
prices. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Let me now turn to the Bank’s monetary policy. 
The Bank decided to introduce Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a 
Negative Interest Rate at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held in January 2016. Let me 
look back on how the Bank came to introduce it. About three years ago, at the MPM held in 
April 2013, the Bank made a commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the  earliest  possible  time,  and  decided  to  introduce  QQE  as  a  necessary  measure  to 
underpin  this commitment. The main  transmission  mechanism  of QQE  is  stimulating firms’ 
investment and households’ consumption through lowering nominal interest rates across the 
entire yield curve by making large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
and  showing  the  Bank’s  clear  commitment  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent  by  continuing  with  massive  asset  purchases.  Thereafter,  the  Bank  decided  to 
expand QQE at the MPM held at the end of October 2014. In January 2016, it introduced 
QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, which is designed to enable the Bank to make full use of 
possible monetary easing measures in terms of the three dimensions of quantity, quality, and 
the interest rate, in which a negative interest rate is added to the existing options of QQE 
conducted to date. 
After the turn of 2016, there had been uncertainty over future developments in emerging and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  and  financial  markets  had  been  volatile.  Reflecting  such 
developments, there was an increasing risk that an improvement in the business confidence 
of Japanese firms and conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed, and that the 
underlying trend in inflation – which had been rising steadily – might be negatively affected. 
Based on such recognition, the Bank decided to introduce QQE with a Negative Interest Rate 
to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  this  risk  and  to  maintain  momentum  toward  achieving  the 
price stability target of 2 percent. 
For the good of Japan’s economy, it is necessary to dispel people’s deflationary mindset that 
has  taken  hold  amid  deflation  that  has  lasted  for  a  long  period.  Therefore,  at  present,  I 
consider  that  it  is  most  important  to  steadily  pursue  monetary  easing  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  while  paying  attention  to  various  effects  that  monetary  easing 
may bring. 
We are only halfway to achieving the 2 percent price stability target. Given this, I think that it 
is  vital  that  the  Bank  continue  to  steadily  pursue  QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate  to 
achieve  the  price  stability  target.  The  Bank  aims  to  achieve  the  target  of  2  percent  at  the 
earliest possible time. In order to do so in a sustainable and stable manner, I think that it is 
necessary that the target be achieved while the economy as a whole maintains the virtuous 
cycle in a balanced manner, such as with prices rising along with wage increases. The Bank 
will continue to steadily pursue monetary easing, making full use of all possible measures in 
terms of the three dimensions of quantity, quality, and the interest rate to achieve the price 
stability target of 2 percent. 
Challenges for Japan’s economy 
IV. 
I would now like to express my thoughts regarding the current situation of Japan’s economy 
from a longer-term perspective. In my view, the economy, which has experienced deflation 
for a long period of time, faces the challenge of strengthening its growth potential. Japan’s 
potential growth rate as estimated by the Bank has declined to around 0.5 percent or lower, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  and  this  reflects  factors  including  decreases  in  (1)  the  growth  rate  of  capital  stock  due  to 
postponement of business fixed investment, (2) labor input due to the aging of the population 
and the decrease in the number of hours worked, and (3) productivity growth due to sluggish 
innovation. In order to enhance the potential growth rate of the economy, I believe that it is 
important to steadily proceed with measures that will cause increases in these factors. 
Let me elaborate on each of them. First, firms’ fixed investment is made based on their future 
prospects and strict selection of such investment based on the quality criteria and on value 
added.  They  recently  have  been  exhibiting  moves  such  as  the  shifting  of  production  sites 
back to Japan and expanding investment in research and development. In order to manage 
risks and maintain sustainable growth, many Japanese firms that face global risks seem to 
be in the process of adopting a strategy that allocates fixed investment in several areas in a 
balanced manner and establishing their own competitive supply chains. I believe that, in this 
process,  firms  are  reaffirming  the  advantage  of  having  bases  in  Japan.  That  is,  it  has 
become a widely acknowledged view that there are things that Japanese firms can achieve 
only  in  Japan.  I  expect  that  investment  behavior  that  takes  such  a  view  into  account  will 
become more active. 
Second,  as  for  labor  input,  labor  market  conditions  remain  tight.  Both  manufacturers  and 
nonmanufacturers  have  been  voicing  concern  recently  that  they  cannot  provide  sufficient 
goods  or  services  due  to  labor  shortages.  This  situation  reflects  the  structural  issues 
surrounding Japan’s labor market – for example, labor shortages, the rigid labor market, and 
the  insufficient  job  training  framework.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  make  efforts  to  resolve 
these issues. That being said, the labor force participation rate both of women raising small 
children and of the elderly is rising, and this is an encouraging development as a first step to 
resolving these issues. 
Third, in order to increase productivity, I consider it important that not only manufacturers but 
nonmanufacturers  –  the  services  sector,  for  example  –  make  innovations  to  increase 
productivity. Indeed, let me note that there is severe price competition among commoditized 
goods  and  services  that  firms  provide,  and  thus  firms  need  to  take  initiatives  to  develop 
capital goods, materials, or parts with high technology, or unique high value-added goods or 
services with high brand value. In addition, considering that foreign firms are often pointed 
out  as  having  higher  productivity  than  Japanese  firms,  it  seems  that  there  is  room  for 
enhancing  Japanese  firms’  productivity,  and  that  making  efforts  to  attract  foreign  firms’ 
inward investment in Japan will contribute to enhancing productivity. 
Firms’  initiatives  are  essential  to  addressing  these  issues  facing  Japan’s  economy.  They 
should not be overly pessimistic about the structural changes to the economy, such as the 
decrease in population. Rather, they should take these structural changes into account and 
take active steps toward enhancing the growth potential of the economy. The Bank, for its 
part, has established the Loan Support Program, through which it provides long-term funds 
at low interest rates so that firms and households can fully utilize accommodative financial 
conditions. Moreover, the Bank decided on measures to support firms’ investment in physical 
and  human  capital  at  the  MPM  held  in  December  2015.  There  has  been  progress  in 
converting  firms’  and  households’  deflationary  mindset  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  and 
many  firms  have  become  proactive  in  making  investment  in  physical  and  human  capital. I 
consider it desirable that these developments spread further. 
In closing, let me underline that enhancing the growth potential of the economy is essential 
for the virtuous cycle in the economy to continue operating. I strongly hope that, in addition to 
the  promotion  of  a growth  strategy  by  the  government,  various  measures  and  frameworks 
introduced  by  the  Bank  will  be  utilized  effectively,  and  that  this  will  contribute  to  further 
progress in the efforts to strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
