  Vítor Constâncio: The outlook for the global economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  City 
Week, London, 9 May 2016. 
 This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form at City Week on 9 May. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to participate in this event. 
In my remarks today, I intend to outline my assessment for the euro area outlook against the 
backdrop of developments in the rest of the global economy. In doing so, I will discuss the 
prospects  of  the  euro  area’s  recovery  as  well  as  some  of  the  policy  initiatives  which  are 
required to make it more lasting and vigorous. 
The main point that I want to make is that the shock absorption capacity of the euro area has 
increased.  This  notwithstanding,  the  continuation  of  our  accommodative  monetary  policy 
needs  to  be  supported  by  a  determined  implementation  of  structural  reforms  as  well  as 
growth friendly fiscal policies in order to strengthen and secure the recovery and with this, 
accelerate the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%. 
Prospects for the global economy: cyclical developments 
In  the  euro  area,  the  overall  data  points towards  a  continued moderate  recovery,  which  is 
nonetheless  still  subject  to  fragilities.  According  to  the  latest  EU  Commission  projections, 
euro  area  real  GDP  is  expected  to  expand  by  1.6% this  year  and  1.8% next  year  (figures 
stood  at  1.4%  for  2016  and  1.7%  for  2017,  according  to  the  March  2016  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic projections). That said, the euro area’s emergence from the financial crisis 
has been protracted, particularly when seen from an historical perspective. It was only in the 
first quarter of this year that it surpassed its pre-crisis peak level of output. In this quarter, the 
euro  area  had  a  higher  growth  rate  than  the  U.S.  or  the  U.K.,  which  creates  a  positive 
dynamics for this year’s overall growth, exceeding recent forecasts. 
This  recovery  needs  to  be  seen  in  a  context  where  legacies  from  the  crisis  continue  to 
dampen growth, and the contribution of external demand to the recovery is less assured. The 
latter reflects a 5-year string of weakening growth in Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) as 
well as less favourable than expected out-turns at the turn of this year, at a global level. 
While domestic demand in the euro area is rising, it still shows a weakness that relates in 
part  to  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  is  coming  out  of  a  balance  sheet  recession,  where 
economic  activity  is  constrained  by  the  need  for  governments,  firms  and  households  to 
deleverage.  For  instance,  the  ratio  of  euro  area  investment  to  GDP  is  still  more  than 
3 percentage  points  below  its  pre-crisis  peak  level.  This  phenomenon  of  economic  growth 
remaining weak in the aftermath of banking crises has been well documented. 
Moreover,  the  repercussions  of  the  crisis  have  also  weakened  the  recovery  in  all  major 
economies – albeit in different ways and in varying degrees – and with this, the demand for 
euro  area  exports.  Indeed,  the  only  positive  contribution  to  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  in 
2015  came  from  domestic  demand,  which  in  itself  highlights  how  important  our  monetary 
policy  measures  have  been  in  supporting  the  recovery  of  key  euro  area  spending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  components.1 Monetary policy has been practically the only expansionary macro policy in the 
euro area, the recovery would have been much weaker without it. 
Concerns  over  the  weakness  in  the  global  economy  generated  apprehension  in  financial 
markets earlier in the year, but have receded somewhat since then. This is evidenced by the 
subsidence  of  financial  markets  turbulence,  as  stock  markets  recouped  their  losses  and 
commodity  prices  rebounded.  This  has  also  helped  to  ease  financial  conditions  in  many 
emerging market economies, where capital flows have returned amid an improved global risk 
appetite.  Also,  oil  prices  have  recovered  to  a  degree,  which  reflects  a  moderation  in  the 
global  oil  supply  overhang  as  well  as  better  than  expected  global  oil  demand  largely 
stemming from India and other non-OECD Asian countries. Uncertainties, however, remain 
and further bouts of volatility cannot be precluded. 
In terms of economic activity in major economies, following rather weak readings at the start 
of the year, both the services and manufacturing sectors are showing signs of a modest pick-
up, which is expected to continue. This improvement is broad based with the main exception 
being Japan. Global trade has also showed resilience early this year, although remaining still 
relatively weak when seen from an historical perspective. 
More specifically, in the U.S., following a moderate expansion of real GDP by an annualised 
rate  of  1.4%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015,  economic  activity  showed  signs  of  further 
deceleration in the first quarter of this year, in particular business equipment spending and 
real consumption growth have remained moderate. However, the strengthening of the labour 
market in combination with household balance sheets being largely repaired, are expected to 
support real income and consumption looking ahead. In my view, the degree to which the 
U.S.  economy  continues  on  this  path  of  solid  employment  creation  as  well  as  the 
normalisation  of  its  monetary  policy,  will  be  key  in  determining  how  global  economic 
developments unfold in the period ahead. 
Equally important for the shaping of the global economic outlook are developments in China. 
The Chinese economy has been experiencing a gradual transition to a new growth model. In 
this context, growth is undergoing a gradual slowdown which is in line with the new growth 
target range, yet it continues to be underpinned by policy support as well as by a rapid credit 
expansion. The greater stability in financial markets and the Renminbi exchange rate have 
helped in alleviating some of the uncertainty, which was particularly high at the start of the 
year.  Across  other  emerging  markets,  growth  momentum  remains  relatively  weak  and 
heterogeneous. Activity has by and large remained resilient in commodity-importing countries 
and very weak in commodity exporting countries, particularly Russia and Brazil. 
In  sum,  while  I  expect  the  recovery  in  the  global  economy  to  gather  momentum  as  the 
headwinds eventually dissipate, there are many factors which could potentially derail it. And 
from the euro area’s perspective, I expect support from external demand to be considerably 
lower in the future when compared to the pre-crisis years, even if none of the downside risks 
materialise. 
Longer-term growth trends 
These  cyclical  developments  have  been  accompanied  by  unfavourable  long-term  global 
trends  affecting  economies’  growth  potential.  Indeed,  there  is  a  growing  chorus  among 
                                                
1  ECB staff estimates suggest that, had there been no asset purchase programme (including the recalibration of 
December 2015 but not including the March 2016 package as it is currently assessed by staff in the context of 
the projection exercise that will become available in June), inflation would have been negative in 2015. ECB 
assessments also suggest that the asset purchase programme (including the recalibration of December 2015, 
but not including the March 2016 package as it is currently assessed by staff in the context of the projection 
exercise that will become available in June) will contribute to raising the GDP of the euro area by around 1.6% 
in the period 2015–18. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  commentators and academics postulating that even when all the impediments from the crisis 
are  surmounted,  there  may  be  unrelated  secular  forces  at  play  which  have  shifted  down 
long-term growth rates.2 Two of these contributing factors relate to declining productivity and 
weak  demographics.  In  relation  to  the  former,  Robert  Gordon  (2016)  argues  that  the 
slowdown in the pace of innovation of the so-called general-purpose technologies, which are 
those with a broad-based impact on living standards and business practices, is the cause of 
the reduction of total productivity growth in the U.S. and most advanced economies. While 
for the latter, Charles Goodhart and co-authors (2015) emphasise the fact that the positive 
global labour supply shocks recorded in past decades are fading out, implying that another 
crucial source of growth is drying-up. 
In  the  event  that  a  permanently  lower  potential  growth  rate  materialises,  this  would  have 
considerable ramifications.3 First, if firms and households believe that future growth will be 
lower,  they  may  refrain  from  undertaking  consumption  and  investment  in  the  present  and 
thereby, reduce economic potential further. Additionally, it makes surmounting the large debt 
overhang which prevails in the global economy more arduous. There would also very likely 
be societal implications, as lower economic growth would not be able to create enough jobs 
for citizens and may exacerbate income inequality. 
But  it  would  also  have  significant  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For 
example,  a  lower  potential  growth  rate  reduces  the  equilibrium  interest  rate,  that  is,  the 
interest  rate  where  resources  are  fully  employed  in  the  economy  and  inflation  is  stable. 
Monetary policy strives to engineer its policy rate as close as possible to the equilibrium rate 
in order to steer output back towards its potential and thereby, close the output gap and keep 
inflation at the central bank’s desired level. However, as the equilibrium rate falls, the central 
bank faces challenges coming from the lower bound on nominal interest rates as it attempts 
to reduce its policy rates to a low enough level. In addition, it may be forced to keep rates at 
low levels for long in order to provide the required stimulus to the economy. 
Addressing this  situation  requires  a  combination  of  both  supply  and  demand  side  policies. 
Supply  side  measures  are  required  to  increase  potential  growth,  and  consequently  the 
equilibrium real interest rate. Monetary and fiscal policies can stimulate demand, which helps 
speed up the closing of the output gap while at the same time, boosting potential growth by 
facilitating  investment.  In  addition,  by  mitigating  a  prolongation  of  the  recession,  monetary 
policy can help prevent hysteresis from gaining a foothold in the labour market, which in itself 
weighs on an economy’s economic potential. 
Policy measures adopted by the ECB 
The  ECB’s  monetary  measures  since  the  summer  of  2014  have  been  geared  at  easing 
overall  financial  conditions  while  at  the  same  time  restoring  specific  market  segments  and 
the  bank  lending  channel.  The  latter  is  a  particularly  important  channel  for  transmitting 
monetary impulses to euro area firms and households. In doing so, this has greatly reduced 
the  cost  of  capital  for  firms,  which  is  a  key  determinant  underpinning  the  investment 
decisions of firms. By reducing the real cost of capital, the hurdle for generating a positive net 
return  on  investments  declines  and  consequently,  this  spurs  economic  growth  and 
subsequent investment with a virtuous circle emerging. Indeed, increasing investment in the 
euro area will be crucial in terms of absorbing the considerable amount of economic slack 
and reducing unemployment. 
                                                
2  See speech by V. Constâncio (2016) “International headwinds and the effectiveness of Monetary Policy”, at 
the  5th  Annual  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  U.S.  and  World  Economies  at  the  Levy 
Economics Institute of Bard College, Blithewood, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, 13 April 2016. 
3  See  speech  by  P.  Praet  (2015)  “Lifting potential  growth  in the  euro  area”,  at the Welt-Währungskonferenz, 
Berlin, 23 April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Eliminating  the  negative  output gap  is  an  important  way  to  normalize  inflation  towards  our 
medium-term  objective.  This  year,  we  will  continue  to  have  the  effect  of  low  commodity 
prices and so our staff projections point to an average inflation of 0.1%, with several months 
still in negative territory. However, since the last quarter of this year, statistical base effects 
related with the new level of oil prices are expected to start to increase inflation, as reflected 
in the forecast of 1.4% growth, just published by the EU Commission. On the other hand, the 
ECB will continue to do what is necessary to achieve its goal of reaching a level of inflation 
close  to  2%  and  enough  policy  tools  can  still  be  used.  Our  monetary  policy  has  been 
effective.  We  have  to  allow  some  time  for  the  package  of  measures  adopted  in  March  to 
produce its effects, while closely monitoring external developments. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. Besides the ECB’s determination to pursue its expansionary policies, other 
actors  need  to  do  their  part  in  order  to  deliver  a  sustainable  recovery  and  boost  the 
productive capacity of countries. And, as I see it, there are, in particular, three policies which 
are  ripe  for  action.  First,  the  introduction  of  measures  to  increase  productivity,  such  as 
improving  the  business  environment  and  providing  adequate  public  infrastructure.  Second, 
the implementation of growth friendly fiscal policies, while adhering to the fiscal rules of the 
European Union. And finally, the completion of the banking and capital markets union, which 
would greatly strengthen the euro area’s capacity to withstand future shocks. Combined, this 
would make the euro area fit to deliver a more prosperous future for its citizens. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Goodhart C., P. Pardeshi and M. Pradhan (2015), “Workers vs pensioners: the battle of our 
time”, Prospect Magazine, December. 
Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living 
since the Civil War”, Princeton U.P. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
