Lael Brainard: The "New Normal" and what it means for monetary
policy
Speech by Ms Lael Brainard, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, 12 September 2016.
 In  the  months  ahead,  my  colleagues  and  I  will  continue  to  assess  what  policy  path  will  best
promote  the  sustained  attainment  of  our  goals.  With  that  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  start  by
describing  the  contours  of  today’s  economy  that  will  be  particularly  important  in  shaping  the
appropriate  path  of  policy  before  reviewing  recent  developments.  These  contours  represent
noteworthy departures from the “old normal” that prevailed in the decades prior to the financial
crisis. I would argue that policy today must rely less on the old normal as a guidepost and instead
1
be sensitive to the contours that shape today’s “new normal."
Key Features of the “New Normal"
Because monetary policy is forward looking, policymakers must assess how key features of the
economic environment are most likely to influence the future path of the economy and shape
policy accordingly. At a time when our assessment of the economy is evolving, several features
of  the  “new  normal"—some  of  which  are  interrelated—appear  particularly  noteworthy  for  our
policy deliberations:
1. Inflation Has Been Undershooting, and the Phillips Curve Has Flattened
First,  for  the  past  several  decades,  policymakers  relied  on  the  empirical  relationship  between
unemployment  and  inflation  embodied  in  the  Phillips  curve  as  a  key  guidepost  for  monetary
policy.  The  Phillips  curve  implied  that  as  labor  market  slack  diminished  and  the  economy
approached full employment, upward pressure on inflation would result. However, since 2012,
inflation has tended to change relatively little—both absolutely and relative to earlier decades—as
the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  considerably.  At  a  time  when  the  unemployment  rate  has
fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.9 percent, inflation has undershot our 2 percent target now for 51
straight  months.   In  other  words,  the  Phillips  curve  appears  to  be  flatter  today  than  it  was
previously.
2
3
With the Phillips curve appearing to be a less reliable guidepost than it has been in the past, the
anchoring  role  of  inflation  expectations  remains  critically  important.  On  expected,  similar  to
realized,  inflation,  recent  developments  suggest  some  reasons  to  be  concerned  more  about
undershooting  than  overshooting.  Although  some  survey  measures  have  remained  well
anchored at 2 percent, consumer surveys have moved to the lower end of their historical ranges
and have not risen sustainably.  Meanwhile, market based measures of inflation compensation
have declined noticeably over the past two years at longer-term horizons, and have shown little
improvement despite the recent stabilization in the price of oil and the exchange rate. Thus, we
cannot rule out that the sustained period of undershooting the inflation target along with global
disinflationary pressures are weighing on inflation expectations.
4
Recognition of these developments is reflected in the evolution of the forecasts of Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) participants in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from
June 2012 to June 2016. The SEP forecasts have shown repeated mark downs of the central
tendency of the projection for core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation, and the
attainment of 2 percent at the upper end of the range has been pushed out repeatedly from 2012
initially to 2017 most recently.
The apparent flatness of the Phillips curve together with evidence that inflation expectations may
 1 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
have softened on the downside and the persistent undershooting of inflation relative to our target
should be important considerations in our policy deliberations. In particular, to the extent that the
effect on inflation of further gradual tightening in labor market conditions is likely to be moderate
and gradual, the case to tighten policy preemptively is less compelling.
2. Labor Market Slack Has Been Greater than Anticipated
Second,  and  related,  although  we  have  seen  important  progress  on  employment,  this
improvement has been accompanied by evidence of greater slack than previously anticipated.
This  uncertainty  about  the  true  state  of  the  economy  suggests  we  should  be  open  to  the
possibility  of  material  further  progress  in  the  labor  market.  Indeed,  with  payroll  employment
growth  averaging  180,000  per  month  this  year,  many  observers  would  have  expected  the
unemployment rate to drop noticeably rather than moving sideways, as it has done. It is true that
today’s  unemployment  rate  of  4.9  percent  is  only  0.1  percentage  point  from  the  median  SEP
participant’s  estimate  of  the  longer-run  level  of  unemployment.  However,  the  natural  rate  of
unemployment is uncertain and can vary over time. Indeed, in the SEP, the central tendency of
the projection for the longer-run natural rate of unemployment has come down significantly, from
a range of 5.2 to 6.0 percent in June 2012 to 4.7 to 5.0 percent in June 2016—a reduction of 1/2
to 1 percentage point.  We cannot rule out that estimates of the natural unemployment rate may
move even lower.
5
In  addition,  the  unemployment  rate  is  not  the  only  gauge  of  labor  market  slack,  and  other
measures have been suggesting there is some room to go. The share of employees working
part time for economic reasons, for example, has remained noticeably above its pre-crisis level.
Of particular significance, the prime-age labor force participation rate, despite improvement this
year,  remains  about  1 1/2  percentage  points  below  its  pre-crisis  level,  suggesting  room  for
further  gains.  While  it  is  possible  that  the  current  low  level  of  prime-age  participation  reflects
ongoing  pre-crisis  trends,  we  cannot  rule  out  that  it  reflects  a  lagged  and  still  incomplete
6
response to a very slow recovery in ​job opportunities and wages.
This possibility is reinforced by the continued muted recovery in wage growth. Although wage
growth has picked up to about a 2-1/2 percent pace in recent quarters, this pace is only modestly
above that which prevailed over much of the recovery and well below growth rates seen prior to
7
the financial crisis.
My  main  point  here  is  that  in  the  presence  of  uncertainty  and  the  absence  of  accelerating
inflationary  pressures,  it  would  be  unwise  for  policy  to  foreclose  on  the  possibility  of  making
further gains in the labor market.
3. Foreign Markets Matter, Especially because Financial Transmission is Strong
Third, disinflation pressure and weak demand from abroad will likely weigh on the U.S. outlook for
some  time,  and  fragility  in  global  markets  could  again  pose  risks  here  at  home.   In  Europe,
recovery continues, but growth is slow and inflation is very low. Low growth and a flat yield curve
are contributing to reduced profitability and a higher cost of equity financing for banks, which in
turn could impair bank lending, one of the main transmission channels of monetary policy in the
euro area’s bank-centric financial system. A low growth, low inflation environment also makes
progress on fiscal sustainability difficult and leaves countries with high debt-to-gross domestic
product (GDP) ratios vulnerable to adverse demand shocks. Against this backdrop, uncertainty
about Britain’s future relationship with the European Union could damp business sentiment and
investment in Europe.
8
Japan  remains  greatly  challenged  by  weak  growth  and  low  inflation.  Indeed,  it  is  striking  that
despite active and creative monetary policies in both the euro area and Japan, inflation remains
below target levels. The experiences of these economies highlight the risk of becoming trapped
 2 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
in  a  low-growth,  low-inflation,  low-inflation-expectations  environment  and  suggest  that  policy
should be oriented toward minimizing the risk of the U.S. economy slipping into such a situation.
9
Downside  risks  are  also  present  in  emerging  market  economies,  where  growth  has  slowed
rapidly in recent years.  Most importantly, China is undergoing a challenging transition from a
growth  model  based  on  investment,  exports,  and  debt-fueled  state-owned  enterprises  to  one
driven by consumption, services, and dynamic private businesses. Because of the adjustment
costs along this transition path and demographic trends, Chinese growth will likely continue to
slow. Given that China has experienced very high growth in corporate debt, this downshift could
pose risks. Importantly, Chinese authorities have made some progress on clarifying their policy
stance,  and  capital  outflows  have  slowed  in  recent  months.  Nonetheless,  considerable
uncertainty remains, and further volatility cannot be ruled out. The importance of Chinese growth
and stability to many emerging market economies and to global markets more broadly implies
that these risks have global implications.
Headwinds  from  abroad  should  matter  to  U.S.  policymakers  because  recent  experience
suggests global financial markets are tightly integrated, such that disturbances emanating from
Chinese or euro-area financial markets quickly spill over to U.S. financial markets. The fallout
from  adverse  foreign  shocks  appears  to  be  more  powerfully  transmitted  to  the  U.S.  than
previously. Indeed, recent research suggests that changes in expectations regarding the path of
policy in the United States relative to other major economies lead to exchange rate movements
that appear to be several times bigger than they were several years ago.
 The fact that many
advanced economies are suffering from deficient demand and have policy rates at or near the
zero bound and that the U.S. dollar is a favored safe-haven asset may imply that adverse foreign
demand shocks have a particularly strong effect on the value of the dollar, effectively transmitting
the weakness to the U.S. economy.
10
11
In  turn,  U.S.  activity  and  inflation  appear  to  be  importantly  influenced  by  these  exchange  rate
movements. In particular, estimates from the FRB/US model suggest that the nearly 20 percent
appreciation of the dollar from June 2014 to January of this year could be having an effect on U.S.
economic  activity  roughly  equivalent  to  a  200  basis  point  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate.
Interestingly, it appears that this effect showed through in decreased business investment activity
and stagnant manufacturing output, while the anticipated effect on net exports may have been
somewhat dampened by depressed demand for imports of capital goods, among other factors.
4. The Neutral Rate Is Likely to Remain Very Low for Some Time
Fourth, perhaps most salient for monetary policy, it appears increasingly clear that the neutral
rate of interest remains considerably and persistently lower than it was before the crisis. Over
the  current  expansion,  with  a  federal  funds  rate  at,  or  near,  zero  and  the  additional  support
provided by asset purchases and reinvestment, GDP growth has averaged a very modest rate
upward of 2 percent, and inflation has averaged only 1 1/2 percent. Ten years ago, based on the
underlying economic relationships that prevailed at the time, it would have seemed inconceivable
that  real  activity  and  inflation  would  be  so  subdued  given  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  To
reconcile these developments, it is difficult not to conclude that the current level of the federal
funds rate is less accommodative today than it would have been 10 years ago. Put differently, the
amount of aggregate demand associated with a given level of the interest rate is now much lower
than before the crisis.
In  the  early  stages  of  the  recovery,  most  observers  thought  that  the  cyclical  headwinds
restraining demand and lowering the neutral rate would dissipate, and that the neutral rate would
move gradually back to the pre-crisis norm of 2 percent. But seven years into the expansion and
with little sign of a significant acceleration in activity, the low neutral rate looks likely to persist.
Indeed, developments over the past year confirm that the underlying causes will be with us for
some time.
 Foreign consumption and investment are weak, while foreign demand for savings
12
 3 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
is high, along with an elevated demand for safe assets. Productivity growth, which increased at
an average annual rate of nearly 2-1/2 percent from 1950 to 2000, has increased only 1/2 percent
on average over the past five years, and demographics also suggest a persistent slowing of the
labor force.
Recognition  of  the  reduction  in  the  long-run  neutral  federal  funds  rate  is  perhaps  the  most
consequential change in the SEP forecasts. In the four years between June 2012 and June 2016,
the estimate of the long-run federal funds rate has declined from 4.25 percent to 3.0 percent—
nearly one-third. Over one-third of that adjustment has occurred between December 2015 and
June  2016.  It  is  notable  that  this  recent  step-down  in  the  SEP  estimate  has  coincided  with  a
period  of  easing  in  financial  conditions  and  a  stabilization  in  the  exchange  rate  as  market
participants have taken into account changes in the perceived FOMC policy reaction function.
Several econometric models and estimates from market participants suggest the current real
neutral rate is at or close to zero, and any increase is likely to be shallow and slow.
 These
estimates  imply  that  it  may  require  a  relatively  more  modest  adjustment  in  the  policy  rate  to
return to neutral over time than previously anticipated.
13
5. Policy Options Are Asymmetric
The four features just discussed that define the new normal make it likely that we will continue to
grapple with a fifth new reality for some time: the ability of monetary policy to respond to shocks
is  asymmetric.  With  policy  rates  near  the  zero  lower  bound  and  likely  to  return  there  more
frequently  even  if  the  economy  only  experiences  shocks  similar  in  magnitude  to  those
experienced pre-crisis, due to the low level of the neutral rate, there is an asymmetry in the policy
tools available to respond to adverse developments. Conventional changes in the federal funds
rate,  our  most  tested  and  best  understood  tool,  cannot  be  used  as  readily  to  respond  to
downside shocks to aggregate demand as it can to upside shocks. While there are, of course,
other policy options, these alternatives have constraints and uncertainties that are not present
with conventional policy.
  From  a  risk-management  perspective,  therefore,  the  asymmetry  in
the conventional policy toolkit would lead me to expect policy to be tilted somewhat in favor of
guarding  against  downside  risks  relative  to  preemptively  raising  rates  to  guard  against  upside
risks.
14
Because a persistently low neutral rate implies less room for conventional monetary policy to
adjust to adverse developments, it will be important to assess whether our current policy tools
are  adequate  to  respond  to  negative  shocks  and,  if  not,  what  adjustments  would  be  most
appropriate. There is a growing literature on such policy alternatives, such as raising the inflation
target, moving to a nominal income target, or deploying negative interest rates.
 These options
merit  further  assessment.  However,  they  are  largely  untested  and  would  take  some  time  to
assess and prepare. For the time being, the most effective way to address these concerns is to
ensure that our policy actions align with our commitment to achieving the existing inflation target,
which the Committee has recently clarified is symmetric around 2 percent—and not a ceiling—
along with maximum employment.
Recent Developments Suggest Gradual Progress
15
Against  the  backdrop  of  these  five  features  of  the  new  normal  that  are  most  salient  for
conditioning policy, I will briefly summarize my take on recent economic developments and their
implications  for  policy.  The  economy  has  seen  welcome  progress  on  some  fronts  in  recent
months,  supported  by  the  cautious  approach  taken  by  the  Committee  and  a  corresponding
easing in financial conditions: The labor market has continued to improve, consumer confidence
has remained high, and we have navigated past near-term risks from abroad.
Overall,  the  recent  data  on  the  labor  market  and  aggregate  spending  suggest  that  we  are
 4 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
continuing  to  move  toward  full  employment,  but  that  progress  has  been,  and  likely  will  be,
somewhat gradual. This year, monthly job gains have averaged 180,000, below last year’s pace
but  still  sufficient  to  reduce  labor  market  slack.  The  slowing  pace  of  job  gains  has  been
associated  with  a  flattening  out  in  the  unemployment  rate  over  the  past  year,  along  with  a
heartening 1/2 percentage point increase in the prime-age labor force participation rate. These
developments suggest that an improving job market has made joining, or remaining in, the labor
force  increasingly  attractive,  and  may  imply  that  the  labor  market  has  room  for  further
improvement.
Recent  spending  data  suggest  a  pickup  in  third-quarter  growth.  In  particular,  real  consumer
spending  increased  at  nearly  a  4  percent  annual  pace  over  the  three  months  ending  in  July,
driven  by  continued  job  growth,  buoyant  consumer  sentiment,  and  rising  household  wealth.
Nonetheless, spending in other sectors has been disappointing. Weak foreign growth and the net
appreciation of the dollar over the past two years have weighed heavily on net exports, corporate
profitability,  business  investment,  and  manufacturing  production.  Business  investment  has
declined in each of the past three quarters, and the latest data on housing permits suggest that
residential investment slowed noticeably in the middle of this year. As a result, economic activity
over the past three quarters has been disappointing, with growth in GDP and gross domestic
income  each  averaging  less  than  1  percent,  a  significant  step-down  from  the  same  period  in
2015.
Looking  ahead,  the  stabilization  of  the  dollar  and  oil  prices  suggests  that  growth  in  these
components should move higher over the second half of the year. Indeed, exports, which have
declined since the end of 2014, moved slightly higher last quarter, and the number of oil drilling
rigs in operation has begun to edge up after sharp declines over the past two years, a positive
sign for business investment. In addition, inventory investment, which edged lower last quarter,
should step up over the second half of the year to a level more in line with continued moderate
increases in final sales.
We have also seen signs of progress on our inflation mandate. In July, the 12 month change in
core PCE prices was 1.6 percent, higher than a year ago, but still noticeably below our 2 percent
target. The stabilization of the dollar and oil prices should lead inflation to move back toward our
target in coming quarters. Non-oil import prices, which fell steadily from the end of 2014 through
the first quarter of this year, edged up in the second quarter and, if the dollar remains steady,
should continue to rise going forward. Continued progress in inflation will also depend on inflation
expectations remaining well anchored and not drifting lower. The evidence here is mixed, as I
noted earlier.
Policy Implications
The five features of the current economic landscape that I have highlighted lean roughly in the
same  direction:  In  today’s  new  normal,  the  costs  to  the  economy  of  greater-than-expected
strength in demand are likely to be lower than the costs of significant unexpected weakness. In
the case of unexpected strength, we have well-tried and tested tools and ample policy space in
which to react. Moreover, because of Phillips curve flattening, the possibility of remaining labor
market slack, the likely substantial response of the exchange rate and its depressing effect on
inflation,  the  low  neutral  rate,  and  the  fact  that  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored  to  the
upside,  the  response  of  inflation  to  unexpected  strength  in  demand  will  likely  be  modest  and
gradual, requiring a correspondingly moderate policy response and implying relatively slight costs
to the economy. In the face of an adverse shock, however, our conventional policy toolkit is more
limited,  and  thus  the  risk  of  being  unable  to  adequately  respond  to  unexpected  weakness  is
greater.  The  experience  of  the  Japanese  and  euro-area  economies  suggest  that  prolonged
weakness  in  demand  is  very  difficult  to  correct,  leading  to  economic  costs  that  can  be
considerable.
 5 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
This asymmetry in risk management in today’s new normal counsels prudence in the removal of
policy accommodation. I believe this approach has served us well in recent months, helping to
support continued gains in employment and progress on inflation. I look forward to assessing the
evolution of the data in the months ahead for signs of further progress toward our goals, bearing
in mind these considerations.
References
Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and
William  Wascher  (2014).  “Labor  Force  Participation:  Recent  Developments  and  Future
Prospects (PDF),"  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–275.
Ball, Laurence (2014). “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent (PDF)," IMF
Working Paper WP/14/92. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2015). “Monetary Policy in the Future,"  speech delivered at the “Rethinking
Macro Policy III” conference sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, April 15.
Blanchard, Olivier (2016). “The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)"  Policy Brief 16 1.
Washington: Peterson Institute of International Economics, January.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010). “Rethinking  Macroeconomic
Policy (PDF),"  IMF Staff Position Note 10/03. Washington: International Monetary Fund, February
12.
Brainard,  Lael  (2015a).  “Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy,”  speech  delivered  at  “North
America’s  Place  in  a  Changing  World  Economy,”  57th  National  Association  for  Business
Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12.
————- (2015b). “Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low,” speech
delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Emmanuel  Farhi,  and  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas  (2015).  “Global
Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB,"  NBER Working Paper Series 21670. Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October.
Council of Economic Advisers (2016). The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force
Participation (PDF). Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June.
Curcuru,  Stephanie  (forthcoming).  “The  Sensitivity  of  the  USD  Exchange  Rate  to  Changes  in
Monetary  Policy  Expectations,”  IFDP  Notes.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve System.
Cúrdia, Vasco (2015). “Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates," 
  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  FRBSF  Economic  Letter  2015–32.  San  Francisco:
FRBSF, October 12.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Micah Smith (2016). “The Macro Effects of the Recent
Swing 
in  Financial  Conditions,"  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York, Liberty  Street
Economics (blog), May 25.
Erceg,  Christopher  J.,  and Andrew  T.  Levin  (2014).  “Labor  Force  Participation  and  Monetary
Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 46 (S2,
October), pp. 3-49.
Goodfriend, Marvin (2016). “The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the Zero Bound
 6 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
(PDF)," speech delivered at “Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future,” a
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug.
26–27.
Haldane, Andrew (2015). “How Low Can You Go?" speech delivered at the Portadown Chamber
of Commerce, Northern Ireland, September 18.
Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the
Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.
Kiley, Michael T. (2015a). “ What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?”
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–077. Washington: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, August.
————- (2015b). “Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research,” FEDS
Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux
(PDF),"  Working  Paper  Series  2015–16.  San  Francisco:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San
Francisco, October.
Lubik,  Thomas A.,  and  Christian  Matthes  (2015).  “Calculating  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest: A
Comparison  of  Two  Alternative  Approaches  (PDF) ,"  Economic  Brief  15–10.  Richmond,  Va.:
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October.
Reifschneider, David (2016). “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions
(PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016–068. Washington: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.
Romer,  Christina  D.  (2011).  “Dear  Ben:  It’s  Time  for  Your  Volcker  Moment,"  New  York
Times,  October  29, www.nytimes.com/2011/10/30/business/economy/ben-bernanke-needs-a-
volcker-moment.html?_r=0.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
See Blanchard (2016), Kiley (2015b), and Brainard (2015a).
The inflation information refers to core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation measured on a 12-
month average basis.
For example, over the past 12 months, median 5-to-10 year-ahead inflation expectations from the University of
Michigan Surveys of Consumers were 1/4 percentage point below the average over the prior 10 years.
For 
see www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
information 
current 
from 
and 
previous 
SEPs,
For analyses of the determinants of labor force participation, see Aaronson and others (2014), Erceg and Levin
(2014), and Council of Economic Advisers (2016).
Over the 12 months ending in August 2016, average hourly earnings increased 2.4 percent. Over the 12 months
ending in June, the employment cost index for private-sector workers also increased 2.4 percent. The more
volatile compensation per hour measure for the business sector has increased at an annual rate of 2.6 percent
over the past eight quarters. From the fourth quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2014, these measures all
increased at an average annual rate of around 2 percent. From the fourth quarter of 2003 to the fourth quarter of
2007, the compensation per hour and employment cost index measures increased at an average annual rate of
around 3-1/2 percent. Average hourly earnings for all workers were not available for this period.
 7 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has repeatedly marked down its forecast of world economic growth in
recent years. From April 2014 to July of this year, for example, the IMF revised down 2015 growth from 3.9
percent to 3.1 percent. And from April 2015 to July of this year, the IMF revised down 2016 growth from 3.8
percent to 3.1 percent. See the IMF’s World Economic Outlook at www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=29.
Emerging market growth, as weighted by a country’s share of U.S. exports, has decreased from an average
pace of 5-1/4 percent from the fourth quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2012 to a little over 2 percent last
year.
See Curcuru (forthcoming). The confidence intervals around the estimated effects are quite large.
See Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2015).
For a fuller description of the likely contributors to a persistent low neutral rate, see Brainard (2015b) and
Goodfriend (2016).
See, for example, Laubach and Williams (2015); Del Negro, Giannoni, and Smith (2016); Cúrdia (2015); Lubik
and Matthes (2015); Kiley (2015a); and Johannsen and Mertens (2016) for econometric estimates of the neutral
rate, or the closely related concept of the natural rate of interest. See the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s
most  recent Survey of Market Participants    and Survey of Primary Dealers  for forecasters’ estimates of the
current neutral rate.
See Reifschneider (2016). 
See Romer (2011), Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2010), Ball (2014), Haldane (2015), Bernanke (2015),
and Goodfriend (2016). 
 8 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
