  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Fostering safe, efficient and reliable payment 
systems 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the SWIFT Business Forum Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 
1 March 2016. 
 As we transition into a high income and high value added economy, a resilient and efficient 
financial  market  infrastructure  is  an  important  enabler  for  economic  growth  and  financial 
stability. Payment and Settlement Systems play a critical role in the smooth functioning of the 
economy. A fact sometimes underestimated. In a larger perspective, it can also be leveraged 
upon  as  a  strategic  tool  to  facilitate  regional  market  integration,  strengthen  the  country’s 
competitiveness,  and  enhance  the  country’s  position  as  an  international  Islamic  financial 
centre.  Today’s  Business  Forum  organized  by  SWIFT  offers  a  valuable  platform  for  the 
financial community to exchange ideas and identify opportunities for collaboration to enhance 
the financial market infrastructure as an indispensable part of a vibrant financial ecosystem in 
Malaysia. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  importance  of  open  and  competitive 
Payment and Settlement Systems as a backbone for economic growth. I will also highlight 
the opportunities arising from greater standardization and interoperability and how banks can 
lead  the  way  in  facilitating  greater  straight  through  processing  (STP)  for  greater  efficiency 
and  competitiveness.  Lastly,  I  will  outline  the  importance  of  keeping  pace  with  innovation, 
with a focus on real-time payments. 
Importance of open and competitive payment and settlement systems 
To sustain improvements in the efficiency of payment services and lower barriers of entry, 
competition is vital in the payment landscape. Strategies adopted by Bank Negara Malaysia 
for  payment  system  development  in  Malaysia  are  therefore  aimed  to  foster  effective 
competition among the market players as a key driver to lower costs, enhance quality and 
innovation, and provide greater choice to the public. An example of this is reflected in Bank 
Negara Malaysia’s recent reform measures for the payment card market. These measures 
were  introduced  in  response  to  inordinate  market  power  to  hike  prices  and  the  lack  of 
transparency and information in how prices of products and services were being set. 
The payment card market in  Malaysia is sizeable with 453.9 million transactions valued at 
RM141.5 billion in 2015. The payment card market is dominated by two major international 
payment  card  networks  which  cumulatively  controlled  about  90%  of  market  share  in 
Malaysia.  Prior  to  the  implementation  of  the  reform  measures  in  mid-2015,  the  growth  of 
payment  card  terminals  from  2013  to  2014  had  remained  stagnant  at  8  terminals  per 
thousand inhabitants. Based on a report published by the World Bank and the IMF in 2013, 
the higher Merchant Discount Rate or MDR paid by merchants, averaging between 1.5% to 
2.5%  when  accepting  payment  card  transactions,  had  the  impact  of  pricing  out  smaller 
merchants. 
Lack  of  effective  competition  in  the  payment  card  industry  had  led  to  higher  costs  for 
payment card transactions, which would in turn raise costs for businesses and consumers. 
Over  a  period  of  14  months  from  May  2013  to  June  2014,  interchange  fee,  that  is  the 
wholesale fee paid between banks in a payment card transaction, were hiked several times. 
As interchange fee is priced into the MDR, the hikes in interchange fee contributed towards 
an  increase  in  the  MDR  for  merchants.  A  lack  of  price  transparency  and  the  overall 
competition further weakened market pressure to lower interchange fee and MDR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  highly  concentrated  market  also  discouraged  merchants  from  switching  to  another 
payment card network given concerns over losing significant competitive advantage if they 
did. Clearly, left unchecked, such indiscriminate interchange fee hikes risked bringing about 
a  broad-based  increase  in  MDR  which  would  in  turn  be  passed  on  to  consumers  through 
higher retail prices of goods and services. 
To curb indiscriminate increases in payment card acceptance cost and foster a competitive 
payment  card  market,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  implemented  the  Payment  Card  Reform 
Framework  in  July  2015.  Under  the  Framework,  the  interchange  fees  are  subject  to 
objectively-set  ceilings,  while  a  market  incentive  structure  was  instituted  to  strengthen  the 
incentives  for  investments  in  payment  card  infrastructure.  In  addition,  measures  were  also 
introduced to enhance transparency and competition by prohibiting restrictive trade practices. 
The results of such measures are very encouraging. These reforms have had an immediate 
and positive impact on the payment card landscape. The cost of payment card acceptance 
had started to moderate whilst the annual growth of payment card terminals had tripled from 
5.4% in 2014 to 18.1% in 2015. 
In addition to promoting effective competition within the payment industry, it is also important 
to  preserve  the  neutrality  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems.  This  includes  neutrality 
among instruments and geo-political interests. This is especially true for global and critical 
market infrastructure providers such as SWIFT where the offer of services to all parts of the 
world should be guaranteed and reliable. The emergence of other service providers to fill any 
void  should  it  happen,  would  be  most  unfortunate  as  it  could  diminish  efficiencies  gained 
from  access  to  global  market  infrastructures.  As  a  participant-owned  institution,  adequate 
safeguards to maintain SWIFT’s neutrality and finality are essential to ensure it continues to 
serve its mandate as a trusted provider of secure financial messaging services to facilitate 
global connectivity. 
Opportunities from greater standardization and interoperability 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  the  need  for  standardization  and  interoperability  in  Payment  and 
Settlement  Systems.  Proprietary  and  legacy  systems  are  costly  and  a  source  of  much 
inefficiency  as  time  and  resources  are  needed  to  maintain  different  systems  and  facilitate 
interconnectivity.  Hence,  there  is  much  value  for  the  financial  community  to  collaborate 
through greater standardization to facilitate interoperability and innovation to achieve greater 
economies  of  scale  and  network  multiplier  effects.  For  instance,  in  the  area  of  retail 
payments,  the  collective  industry  efforts  to  adopt  chip  technology  based  on  international 
standards  in  2003  had  succeeded  in  eradicating  counterfeit  fraud.  The  investment  cost  of 
about RM200 million was recovered through potential fraud cost avoidance in just less than 
two years. The migration to adopt the international chip standard on an industry scale has 
boosted  public  confidence  collectively  in  the  use  of  payment  cards.  Foreign  cardholders 
including  tourists  had  increased  spending  by  about  77%  in  the  past  10  years,  from 
RM5.6 billion in 2005 to RM9.9 billion in 2015. 
In  the  area  of  large  value  inter-bank  payments,  continuous  efforts  are also  being  made  to 
modernize  and  enhance  the  RENTAS  or  the  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  System  to 
strengthen its resilience and elevate its efficiency and interoperability. In 2006, the RENTAS-
USD  CHATS  link,  an  inter-bank  Payment  versus  Payment  (PvP)  settlement  link,  was 
implemented to eliminate foreign exchange settlement risk. This was followed  in 2007 with 
the  implementation  of  a  Delivery  versus  Payment  (DvP)  settlement  service  for  USD 
securities issued, deposited and traded in Malaysia to eliminate settlement risk arising from 
trading  of  such  securities. In  2012,  Malaysia  was  among  the first  countries  in  the  world  to 
have its large value inter-bank payment system assessed by the IMF and the World Bank 
under  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  to  be  in  compliance  with  all  applicable 
Principles of Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  2015,  the  RENTAS  daily  average  transactions  totalled  about  17,900  with  a  value  of 
RM217.8  billion.  This  amounted  to  4.4  million  transactions  valued  at  RM53.6  trillion 
throughout  2015.  As  part  of  the  ongoing  transformation  of  RENTAS,  there  is  currently  an 
exercise  to  transform  RENTAS  into  a  multi-currency  system  that  adopts  the  SWIFT 
messaging standard. The adoption of SWIFT as an alternative access channel, which caters 
for  multiple  messaging  standards  including  the  ISO  20022,  will  facilitate  the  integration  of 
RENTAS with other regional large value payment systems to facilitate seamless, safe and 
efficient  cross-border  financial  transactions.  The  interconnectivity  with  other  economies 
within the region will further enhance the integration of our trade and financial transactions. 
Development and modernization of the payment system in any country will not be possible 
without  the  banking  system.  Therefore,  banks  should  lead  the  way  in  facilitating  straight 
through  processing  (STP)  to  enhance  operational  efficiency  by  promoting  standardisation 
and interoperability. This can be achieved through the adoption of common standards such 
as  the  ISO  20022,  for  corporate  and  cross-border  payments.  In  this  regard,  banks  should 
leverage on the momentum created by the ongoing transformation of RENTAS to reach out 
to  their  customers  by  offering  holistic,  end-to-end,  STP  solutions.  This  would  contribute 
towards  enhanced  safety  and  efficiency  and  facilitate  economic  growth  through  greater 
connection with global supply chains, as well as, enhance greater integration with regional 
markets. 
Importance of keeping pace with innovation 
Let me now turn to the importance of keeping pace with innovation. Over the past five years, 
significant  efforts  have  been  undertaken 
to  modernise  Malaysia’s  retail  payment 
infrastructure and migrate away from inefficient paper based payment instruments such as 
cash and cheques. Good progress has since been made, especially in the displacement of 
cheques. The annual decline rate had accelerated from an average of –1.6% in 2011 to 2013 
to –10.1% in 2014 and –16.5% in 2015. 
Concurrently, there is also an increase in the uptake of electronic fund transfer services. The 
annual growth rate for the Interbank GIRO (IBG) had increased from an average of 18.8% 
prior  to  2013  to  34.1%  in  2014  and  2015.  The  Instant  Interbank  Funds  Transfer  (IBFT) 
service  had  also  recorded  encouraging  growth  where  its  annual  growth  rate  of  over  60% 
since 2011 had further increased from 67.8% in 2014 to 76.7% in 2015, signifying greater 
confidence in the use of e-payments. 
However, we must not be complacent. As we move forward, there are two technology trends 
that hold immense promise to revolutionize the payments market. The first is the proliferation 
of mobile  technology  and  ubiquitous  communications. Increasingly, mobile  devices  are  the 
preferred channel for consumers to make payments conveniently from anywhere and at any 
time. The second is the ability to process payments and move funds instantaneously around 
the clock. 
Towards this end, Bank Negara Malaysia’s wholly-owned subsidiary MyClear has initiated a 
multi-year  program  to  modernise  Malaysia’s  payment  infrastructure.  The  key  thrust  of  this 
plan is to develop a new real-time Retail Payments Platform that will serve as both a catalyst 
and enabler for innovative payments in Malaysia. This should meet the needs of consumers 
and businesses who increasingly expect payments on-demand where funds are available to 
the  recipient  immediately.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  call  upon  the  financial  industry  to 
jointly  work  with  MyClear  in  the  development  of  such  new  real-time  Retail  Payments 
Platform. 
Conclusion 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  are  the  foundation  that  underpin  the  financial  market 
infrastructure  and  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  economic  growth.  Hence,  efforts  to  promote  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  resilience, interoperability and competition of such systems are of utmost importance. This 
has been and will continue to form the key thrust in Bank Negara Malaysia’s policy work in 
delivering our mandate of fostering safe, efficient and reliable payment systems. There are 
immense opportunities and new sources of growth including expanding financial accessibility 
to the underserved that is made possible from greater standardization and interoperability of 
the payment systems, as well as, innovation. Hence, in today’s rapidly evolving and highly 
competitive  environment,  the  financial  community  should  capitalise  on  such  enabling 
environment,  and  collaborate  through  standardisation  and  interoperability,  to  lower  costs, 
foster innovation and deliver better value proposition and choices to their customers. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
