  Andreas Dombret: A success story? Reflecting on one year of European 
banking supervision 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  SUERF-Deutsche  Bundesbank-IMFS  Conference  on  “SSM  at  1”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 February 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak at the joint conference of the SUERF Colloquium, the 
Deutsche Bundesbank and the Foundation Geld und Währung. It is a pleasure to be here 
this evening, and I hope that your discussions today have been fruitful and informative. 
Henry  Ford  once  said:  “Coming  together  is  a  beginning,  keeping  together  is  progress, 
working  together  is  success.”  And  that’s  exactly  what  I  would  like  to  talk  about  tonight: 
Working together in European banking supervision, and the question of whether, and under 
what  circumstances,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  or  SSM  for  short,  can  write  a 
success story of its own. 
Coming together: the first year of European banking supervision 
2. 
European supervisors came together over a year ago to put the first pillar of the European 
banking  union  in  place. The  SSM  became  operational  on  4 November 2014. That  was  the 
date on which the ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the most significant banks in 
the euro area. These banks, which number roughly 120 in all, account for more than 85% of 
the aggregate balance sheet of the euro area’s banking sector, making the European Central 
Bank one of the biggest banking supervisors in the world. 
But  besides  being  one  of  the  largest  banking  supervisory  authorities  worldwide,  there’s 
something else that makes the ECB one of a kind – it is the only supranational supervisor in 
the world. Never before have sovereign nation-states come together and surrendered their 
powers in the field of banking supervision to an independent authority. 
Keeping together: where do we stand? 
3. 
The SSM has been up and running for nearly a year and a half – and now is a good time to 
reflect on how it has fared so far. And I must say that our experience has been quite positive. 
But at the same time, it would be dishonest of me to say there weren’t any challenges still 
facing European supranational supervision. 
There are two particular challenges currently facing the SSM that I would like to discuss this 
evening:  first,  that  of  striking  a  balance  between  harmonisation  and  proportionality,  and 
second, institutional challenges. 
Since November 2014, banks in the euro area have been supervised according to a set of 
harmonised  standards.  This  is  an  important  step  for  creating  a  level  playing  field  and 
improving supervisory effectiveness. Yet at the same time, we need to meet the challenge of 
implementing  supervisory  practices  that  are  proportionate  to  the  specific  characteristics  of 
individual institutions. 
In practical terms, this means, for example, that supervisory expectations and requirements 
should be proportionate to the size, significance and riskiness of the supervised institution. 
We have to emphasise the role of proportionality in guiding the way we supervise differently 
sized banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Things are somewhat different for the less significant institutions, or LSIs for short. There are 
around 3,500 institutions in the euro area, of which 1,600 are German LSIs. Although the LSI 
sector  as  a  whole  is  overseen  by  the  ECB  in  matters  of  risk  concentration,  the  individual 
institutions continue to be directly supervised by the national competent authorities. The ECB 
and the national supervisors are currently in the process of developing joint standards for the 
supervision of these smaller banks. Here, too, harmonising standards up to a certain degree 
is a necessary and welcome measure. 
That  said,  it  is  particularly  important  –  as  far  as  LSIs  are  concerned  –  to  give  national 
supervisors  sufficient  leeway  to  allow  for  the  particular  characteristics  of  individual 
institutions.  Supervising  LSIs  is,  and  should  be,  a  matter  for  national  supervisors.  That 
conforms  to  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  and  represents  the  most  effective  and  efficient 
solution. 
Another topic in this regard is debate on options and national discretions. Today, European 
supervisory legislation offers around 150 options to choose from. Because these options may 
be exercised in many different ways at the national level, they are sometimes regarded as 
obstacles for creating a regulatory level-playing field. To be sure, sometimes it is reasonable 
to interpret rules against the backdrop of specific national circumstances, but sometimes it is 
not. So we need to analyse all the options and discretionary scope provided at the national 
level  very  carefully.  The  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors  have  just  kick-started  this 
evaluation process and until now, a number of national options have been harmonised. 
The second challenge I would like to discuss is somewhat different because it is rooted in the 
existing legal framework, so it’s not exactly a matter that’s still taking shape. 
Since  the  ECB  is  responsible  for  European  banking  supervision,  so  it  follows  that  the 
Governing  Council,  as  its  supreme  decision-making  body,  is  accountable  not  just  for 
monetary  policy  issues  but  also  for  matters  of  banking  supervision.  These  two  areas  of 
responsibility  overlap  at  the  bank  level.  This,  of  course,  gives  rise  to  conflicts  of  interest, 
because after all, banks are not just a crucial element in the monetary policy transmission 
process; they are also subject to banking supervision. Thus, the ECB has to deal with the 
conflict of interest of being a banking supervisor with access to central bank liquidity and the 
other way round a central bank that decides about banks that are important in the monetary 
policy transmission process. 
In  an  effort  to  minimise  such  conflicts  of  interest,  a  governance  structure  has  been  put  in 
place  to  limit  the  Governing  Council’s  involvement  in  supervisory  decisions.  Speaking 
personally, I have my doubts whether this set-up will truly help to prevent a clash between 
the ECB’s monetary policy mandate and its role as a banking supervisor. You will most likely 
have explored this issue in much greater depth early on today. 
As I mentioned earlier, the SSM is only the first pillar of the European banking union. The 
second  is  the  European  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  which  will  deal  with  future  bank 
failures. This  mechanism  has  been  operational  since  1 January 2016. Its  task  is  to realign 
incentives  and  make the  entire  banking  system  more  stable. In  cases where  a  bank  is  no 
longer viable, its shareholders and creditors will be first in line to bear the resulting losses – 
the taxpayer will only be asked to contribute as a very last resort. This is an urgently needed 
step in the right direction. 
But in its final form, the European banking union will be made up of three pillars, the final one 
being a common deposit guarantee scheme. Let’s make one thing clear – a single deposit 
guarantee arrangement is certainly the logical next step in terms of financial integration, but it 
is  altogether  premature  at  the  present  time  because  it  would  disequilibriate  liability  and 
control.  Why  do  I  say  that?  Well,  we  first  need  to  achieve  deeper  integration  before  an 
integrated  deposit  guarantee  scheme  can  work  effectively.  A  single  European  banking 
supervision set-up has been put in place – that much is true – but national economic policy 
decisions still have a huge bearing on the economic wellbeing of domestic banks. The same 
holds true for the legal framework – just take insolvency law, which is still very much rooted 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in  the  national  domain.  The  existence  of  different  rules  has  a  direct  impact  on  banks’  risk 
situations. That’s why Europe would have to be given stronger rights to intervene in national 
economic  policies,  and  a  harmonised  set  of  rules  would  be  needed,  before  a  European 
deposit guarantee scheme can be set up. That path means ceding certain rights to control 
national budgets to the European level, and it is one that ultimately leads to what is known as 
a fiscal union. For sure, such a step would require euro-area countries to surrender a degree 
of national sovereignty to Europe. 
A move of that kind would necessitate wide-ranging changes to both national and European 
legislation. And to be honest, I don’t see much willingness to go down that path right now. 
Bearing that in mind, I strongly advise against taking the second step before the first. To be 
honest, I do not really see a reason for being in hurry in this issue. In 2014, we introduced 
largely harmonised rules for deposit insurances, ensuring that deposits up to 100.000 Euro 
are secured in case of a bank’s insolvency. The risk of this insurance, today, lies with the 
respective Member State the defaulting bank is located in. I am convinced that as long as 
banks’ well-being is still so much affected by national legislation, this is an appropriate setting 
and there is no justification for pan-European risk sharing without fundamental adjustments 
to the current framework. 
Working together: the road to success 
4. 
The  creation  of  the  banking  union  has  significantly  bolstered  the  financial  supervisory 
architecture  in  Europe.  If  we  define  “success”  as  “maintaining  financial  stability”,  then 
focusing our efforts solely on banking supervision would be like making the road to success a 
narrow,  single-lane  highway.  Supervisors  can  only  be  as  effective  as  the  rules  and 
regulations  they  apply.  What  we  need  to  do,  then,  is  add  a  second  lane  to  that  road  –  a 
sound  regulatory  framework  for  the  banking  system  –  for  that  was  an  area  in  which  the 
financial crisis laid bare a number of shortcomings. 
Significant progress has been made in the regulatory space in the more than seven years 
that have elapsed since Lehman Brothers went under. The most important measure was the 
Basel III framework in 2010, which introduced stricter capital requirements and new liquidity 
rules.  When  Basel III  is  fully  implemented  in  2019,  regulatory  capital  requirements  will  be 
significantly  higher  and  tougher  than  under  Basel II,  and  I  firmly  believe  that  the  financial 
system today is already more stable than before. 
The Basel Committee has forged ahead along this path over the past few months – one of 
the items on its “to do” list for 2016 is to finalise the Basel III reform package before the end 
of the year. And things are moving along swiftly – the fundamental review of the trading book 
(FRTB) was endorsed by the central bank governors in January, which means that the new 
market risk framework will take effect in 2019. Work is also ongoing to address the problem 
of excessive variability in risk-weighted assets by the end of 2016. The Basel Committee has 
set its sights on two outcomes: removing internal model approaches for certain risk types, 
and placing constraints on the use of internal model approaches for credit risk, in particular 
through the use of floors. In parallel, the standardised approaches for credit and operational 
risk are reviewed. Another issue the committee is currently working on is the final design and 
calibration  of  the  leverage  ratio,  so  that  it  can  be  implemented  as  a  Pillar 1  measure  by 
1 January 2018. 
To make one thing clear: The regulatory projects mentioned do not target on imposing further 
burdens on the banks – which would mean first and foremost higher capital requirements. In 
that regard, I highly appreciate the overall impact study the Basel Committee will conduct this 
spring,  which  will  give  us  precious  hints  on  how  all  the  regulatory  measures  interact  and 
should  be  calibrated.  I  think  the  Basel  Committee  is  on  the  right  track,  and  finalising  the 
Basel III reform package in 2016 is my regulatory priority in 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  While  we  may  rightly  expect  much  of  the  Basel III  framework,  it  is  no  secret  that  higher 
capital  standards  and  new  liquidity  requirements  are  not  the  only  toolkit  available  when 
financial stability is at stake. 
That’s why the Basel III regime has been flanked by a host of other regulatory projects that 
have been launched in response to the financial crisis: the “too big to fail” issue, sovereign 
exposures and the shadow banking system are just three regulatory projects I could name. 
This is neither the time nor the place to explore these regulatory projects in any great detail, 
of  course.  But  there  is  one  point  I  really  would  like  to  stress.  All  the  regulatory  projects  I 
mentioned just now call for international cooperation – and not just on the Basel Committee 
for Banking Supervision or the Financial Stability Board, where it works very well. If we as 
national  regulators  do  not  coordinate  our  approaches  to  regulation,  we  will  create  a 
fragmented  financial  system  that  opens  up  vast  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  So 
working  together  –  as  regulators  and  supervisors;  at  the  national,  the  European  and  the 
global level – would be a huge step towards successfully safeguarding financial stability. 
Conclusion 
5. 
The first one-and-a-half years of the SSM have been hailed as a success – and rightly so, in 
my  eyes.  Coming  back  to  Henry  Ford,  whom  I  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech, 
European supervisors have come together successfully in the shape of the SSM. Time will 
tell  whether  this  project will  prove  to  be  a  lasting success.  Don’t get  me  wrong:  I  certainly 
believe it will be, and I have good reason for saying that: the SSM has got off to a flying start 
– which is all the more impressive, given the short space of time in which it was created – 
and its day-to-day supervisory activities are gradually taking shape. 
A  number  of  challenges  do  remain,  however,  though that  it  is  hardly  surprising for such  a 
new set-up. I discussed two of them today. But I am quite optimistic that these challenges will 
be met. Once the Basel III rules have been finalised during the course of this year, day-to-
day supervisory activities will be based upon a sound, and hopefully coherent, framework. 
At the end of the day, the work of the SSM will be measured in terms of its long-term success 
in maintaining a stable financial system. Successful European supervision needs more than 
just  institutional  structures  and  a  sound  regulatory  framework  –  it  also  depends  on 
employees who work together in a manner described by Winston Churchill when he said: “It 
is  no  use  saying  ‘We  are  doing  our  best’.  You  have  got  to  succeed  in  doing  what  is 
necessary.” 
I wish you a pleasant evening here at the premises of the Bundesbank. Thank you for your 
attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
