  Loi M Bakani: Recent review of Papua New Guinea’s economy 
Speech by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the International 
Education  Agency  (IEA)  College  of  TAFE  Port  Moresby  Graduation,  Port  Moresby, 
19 February 2016. 
 invited  guests,  parents  and  guardians  and  students,  and  graduands  of 
Acknowledgement  –  Executives  of the  International  Education  Agency,  Board  of  Directors, 
staff, 
the 
15th Graduation ceremony. 
Let  me  first  of  all  thank  the  IEA  for  the  invitation  to  be  the  key  note  speaker  at  today’s 
important occasion marking another stage in the graduands’ educational life. 
You  graduands  will  be  entering  the  workforce  or  pursuing  further  education  at  an  exciting 
time in our young country’s history that is experiencing rapid changes. You only have to look 
around  Port  Moresby  and  the  rest  of  the  country  to  see  the  transformation  change  that  is 
taking place. 
Papua  New  Guinea  as  a  nation  has  grown  and  transformed  into  a  modern,  sophisticated 
economy.  This  year,  2016,  marks  the  fourteenth  year  of  continuous  economic  growth  as 
measured  by  growth  in  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  the  longest  streak  of  growth 
since  independence  in  1975.  The  construction  of  the  US$19  billion  PNG  LNG  project  has 
transformed the PNG economy, with spin-off benefits into other sectors and place PNG on 
the  world  map  as  a  suitable  investment  destination  that  can  host  world-class  multi-billion 
dollar projects. 
As  a  small,  open  and  developing  economy,  our  economic  fortunes  are  intertwined  with 
developments  happening  elsewhere  around  the  globe.  With  the  subdued  global  economic 
growth, volatility in international financial markets and geo-political uncertainties, international 
prices  for  our  major  export  commodities  remain  low.  The  slowdown  in  China  has  also 
affected global growth. 
Let me briefly outline the current state of the economy, as reflected in the main economic 
indicators. 
Economic activity – growth in real GDP is expected to slow down in 2016 reflecting lower 
international commodity prices, including oil, and the adverse effects of the El Niño weather 
phenomenon. This resulted in lower export receipts and government revenues. 
Employment – According to the Bank’s Private Sector Employment Index, over the year to 
September 2015, the total level of employment declined by 2.6 percent, while excluding the 
mineral sector, it declined by 2.8 percent. The decline reflected the slowdown in economic 
activity. 
Balance of Payments (BOP) – Preliminary balance of payments data for the eleven months 
to November 2015 show a deficit of K380 million, compared to a deficit of K7587 million in 
the  same  period  last  year.  This  outcome  was  due  to  a  deficit  in  the  capital  and  financial 
accounts, which more than offset a surplus in the current account. 
International  reserves  –  The  level  of  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  at  the  end  of 
November  2015  was  US$1,910  (K5,600)  million,  sufficient  for  10.8  months  of  total  and 
18.7 months  of  non-mineral  import  covers.  As  at  17th  February  2015,  the  level  of  gross 
foreign exchange reserves was US$1,816 (K5,439) million. 
Exchange Rate – As a small open economy, the exchange rate of our currency, the kina, is 
determined by our international trade transactions and international economic and financial 
developments.  We  are  a  price  taker  for  our  export  products  and  the  kina  continued  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the 
ten  months 
depreciate  against  the  US  dollar  (USD)  reflecting  the  shortage  of  foreign  currency  in  the 
market. 
Fiscal  Operations  –  Preliminary  estimates  of  the  fiscal  operations  of  the  National 
Government  over 
to  October  2015  showed  an  overall  deficit  of 
K2,142.5 million,  compared  to  a  deficit  of  K1,834.2  million  in  the  corresponding  period  of 
2014. This reflected higher expenditure which more than offset an increase in revenue. The 
budget deficit of K2,142.5 million was financed from net external borrowing of K215.6 million 
from concessional sources and from domestic sources totalling K1,926.9 million. 
Inflation remained within manageable levels. Annual headline inflation for September 2015 
was 5.8 percent. 
Monetary aggregates – The level of broad money supply increased by 7.7 percent over the 
year to December 2015, compared an increase of 3.4 percent in the corresponding period of 
2014  due  to  increases  in  credit  to  the  public  non-financial  corporations  and  private  sector 
combined with higher net claims on the Government, which exceeded decline in net foreign 
assets. Monetary base declined by 2.2 percent in December 2015, compared to an increase 
of 37.1 percent in the corresponding period of 2015. This was due to decreases in deposits 
of  commercial  banks  at the  Central  Bank, more than  offsetting  the  increase  in  currency  in 
circulation. 
The  Government’s  large  budgets  (expansionary  fiscal  policy)  in  recent  years  are  aimed  at 
supporting economic activity after the end of the construction phase of the PNG LNG project. 
Whilst  lower  revenue  has  impacted  on  the  Government’s  expenditure  plans,  it  has 
maintained  expenditure  on  key  priority  areas  of  education,  health,  law  and  order,  and 
infrastructure. 
The Government’s focus on free education and primary health care are commendable as it 
strive  to  address  the  poor  social  indicators  in  the  country.  Redirecting  the  focus  of 
Government resources to agriculture, tourism and small to medium enterprises (SMEs) will 
broaden  the  economic  base  of  the  country,  reduce  reliance  on  imported  food  and  create 
employment  opportunities  for  the  majority  of  the  population.  Serious  investment  in  these 
sectors  will  assist  in  reducing  the  economy’s  dependence  on  the  mineral  sector  and 
increasing  its  resilience  to  adverse  shocks,  such  as  falling  mineral  prices  or  unexpected 
adverse weather conditions. 
Let me turn to the area of financial system development. The Central Bank undertook two 
major  financial  sector  reforms.  The  first  was  in  2000  as  part  of  the  structural  reforms 
undertaken  by  the  PNG  Government  to  address  serious  shortcomings  in  the  financial 
system.  This  was  followed  by  reforms  towards  the  end  of  2000  to  broaden  the  financial 
sector, increase competition and improve accessibility to financial services, and to create a 
sound and stable financial system. 
The reforms in 2000 involved the following: 
Banking  sector  –  strengthening governance  of  banks  with  prudent management  standards 
and  guidelines  Superannuation  funds  –  introduce  voluntary  superannuation  and  increase 
wider participation by the workforce (reduce employees to 10 from 15)  
Life  Insurance  –  introduced  good  governance  and  management  practice  standards  and 
guidelines Savings and loan societies – enhance market-oriented institutions and improved 
management (reduced from 100 to 21) 
Major legislations enacted were: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Central Banking Act 2000 making the Central Bank Independent; 
Banks and Financial Act 2000, Superannuation Act, Life and Insurance Act 
Life Insurance Act 2000 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000 
d. 
There were other financial sector reforms: 
• 
Exchange Control Liberalisation for ease of doing business with exchange contracts 
broaden  to  allow  residents  to  remit  more  abroad  (1992),  restrictions  on  (kina) 
lending to non-resident companies from domestic banks liberalised in 2004, current 
account  transactions  liberalised  in  2005  and  capital  account  transactions  in  2007. 
There are now only a few controls in place. 
Financial  Inclusion  towards  the  end  of  2000s,  there  were  further  reforms  striving 
towards financial inclusion and interconnectivity. These included: 
o 
Establishment  of  Centre  of  Excellence  for  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI)  to 
promote growth of microfinance 
Reach out to the large non-bank population 
Introduced financial literacy programmes to develop inclusive financial system 
o 
o 
Improve National Payments System to enhance efficiency of payment system 
o 
Introduction  of  New  Payments  System,  Kina  Automated  Transfer  Systems 
(KATS)  –  improve  efficiency  and  safety  of  transactions  (real  time  settlement 
for high value payments, cheque truncation, direct credits) 
Reduce incidence of fraudulent transactions 
o 
Anti-Money Laundering & Countering Financing of Terrorism to reduce criminal use 
of financial system 
o 
Establishment of a unit (FASU) at the central bank to monitor, investigate and 
report proceeds of crime to Police 
Passage through Parliament to enact relevant Acts 
Criminal code amendment (money laundering and terrorism financing) 
UN Financial sanctions 
AML/counter terrorist financing 
Proceeds of Crime Act 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
   These reforms have ensured we have a sound and prudently managed financial system with 
a  world-class  payment  system.  I  encourage  you  all  to  utilise  the  financial  products  and 
services  offered  by  our  financial  system  with  institutions  authorised  by  the  Central  Bank 
when you enter the workforce. 
In line with the Government’s Vision 2050 objective of wealth creation, the Bank is driving the 
Financial Inclusion program under the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion & Financial 
Literacy  2014–2015.  A  key  priority  of  the  Strategy  is  to  reach  one  million  unbanked  low-
income  Papua  New  Guineans  and  micro  and  small  enterprises,  with  a  diverse  range  of 
financial services. 50 percent of whom are to be women. The program has been rolled out 
with the support of the licensed financial institutions to promote the savings culture among 
the  population.  These  have  been  facilitated  through  establishment  of  the  micro  finance 
companies and micro banks. 
To  enhance  financial  literacy  of  the  population,  the  Central  Bank  carried  out  the  financial 
education through the financial literacy program. These include visits to selected provinces to 
conduct  the  programs,  schools  programmes  for  financial  products  tailored  to  students, 
hosting of conferences and workshops through the CEFI. There are plans for collaborative 
work with the Department of Education by including it in the core curricular for primary and 
secondary schools. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  You  graduands  will  be  entering  the  workforce  as  the  country  experiences  a  lot  of 
development.  Your  training  at  IEA  Port  Moresby  equips  you  for  a  working  life.  Equally 
important  though  is  the  need  for  you  to  be  financially  literate  in  managing  the  earnings  of 
your  labour.  You  must  know  how  to  budget  your  earnings,  how  to  save  and  also  how  to 
invest.  For  what  is  the  point  of  going  to  work  everyday,  earn  an  allowance  or  salary  but 
struggle to get by in life with all the pressures that come with it. 
You have acquired a technical skill here that has prepared you well for a working career in a 
competitive  job  market.  PNG  is  posed  to  experience  continuous  economic  growth  and  no 
doubt  you  will  all  play  your  part  in  our  country’s  development.  But  also  make  the  effort  to 
invest in your financial education to enjoy the fruits of your labour. You deserve that – for you 
as well as for your family. 
In concluding, I wish you all every success in your career opportunities and best wishes for a 
rewarding career and a safe financial future. 
Thank you for the invitation to speak and God bless you all. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
