  Stefan Ingves: Time to rethink – inside the head of a central bank 
governor 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Swedish  Economic  Association,  Stockholm 
School of Economics, Stockholm, 6 April 2016. 
 I would like to thank several of my colleagues who have contributed to this speech: Mikael Apel, Maria Bergsten, 
Charlotta Edler, Pernilla Meyersson, Johan Molin, Christina Nordh-Berntsson, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson, Marianne 
Sterner, Gabriel Söderberg, Anders Vredin and Anna-Lena Wretman. 
New challenges – new choices 
The  Riksbank  is  –  like other central  banks  –  in  a  position  where  strategies  and  regulatory 
frameworks are being scrutinised and questioned more intensively than at any time over the 
past  twenty  years.  The  experiences  of  the  latest  financial  crisis  suggest  politicians  and 
central bank economists must be prepared to try new approaches. Today, I intend to discuss 
the challenges and questions facing central banks the world over. 
How should monetary policy be conducted? What consideration should be given to real and 
financial variables, in addition to the inflation target? What role should central banks have as 
regards  financial  stability  and  supervision?  How  is  this  role  changing  as  a  result  of  new 
innovations in payments and in the financial system more generally? What factors affect how 
independent  central  banks  should  be  and  how  political  oversight  and  influence  should  be 
exercised? 
Many central banks the world over are facing a similar set of problems. This is partly due to 
globalisation, not least financial globalisation. It affects the scope of countries and thereby of 
central banks to conduct their own economic policy based on national prerequisites. Sweden 
is a small, open economy with a large financial sector. The room for manoeuvre in economic 
policy regarding both monetary policy and financial stability is, in my opinion, much less than 
it was for, say, 15–20 years ago. According to the textbooks, with a floating exchange rate, 
we  should  be  able  to  conduct  an  independent  monetary  policy.  And  we  can,  but  to  what 
extent? Today’s low inflation is, for example, very much a global phenomenon. 
Stability in the financial system is also affected by financial globalisation. As a consequence 
of  the  ever-stronger  links  between  different  countries’  financial  systems,  regulatory 
frameworks  are  also 
formulated  outside  national  borders.  The 
strengthening  of  global  financial  regulatory  frameworks  is,  of  course,  also  a  result  of  the 
financial crisis which broke out in 2008 – and the after-effects of which the global economy is 
still struggling with. 
I  would,  however,  like  to  stress  that  in  Sweden  we  coped  relatively  well  with  the  financial 
crisis and its aftermath. We had robust frameworks and the power to act, as regards both 
fiscal policy and monetary policy. We also had enough flexibility to be able to cope with the 
Swedish banking system’s need for liquidity and assist other countries in our vicinity in order 
to help stabilise the financial system. Economic development in Sweden has been favourable 
in many ways. The economy grew by over 4 per cent last year. The situation on the labour 
market continues to improve and unemployment is falling. Inflation has also begun to rise, 
albeit from low levels. The very expansionary monetary policy in recent years has contributed 
to this healthy development. However, risks have built up in the Swedish economy –financial 
imbalances – such as the growth of household debt. 
As regards monetary policy, my conclusions are that our policy of flexible inflation targeting 
has largely worked well. New experiences and research suggest that there are a few things 
increasingly  often 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that we should perhaps modify in order for it all to work even better. I will go into more detail 
about the things I am referring to. 
As regards financial stability, a much more major rethink is required. In Sweden, there are 
major flaws with vague mandates, unclear processes and inefficiency in the work to create a 
more robust financial system, all of which threaten financial stability in the long run. Issues 
concerning  both  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  have  been  and  remain  the 
cornerstones of central bank operations. 
To  explain  this,  and  at  the  same  time  describe  the  extent  of  the  challenges facing  central 
banks today, I would like to begin my presentation with what historically has been the basic 
function  of  central  banks,  namely  to  provide  a  country  with  a  standardised  product for the 
exchange of goods and services – money. Indeed, financial globalisation and digitalisation 
are  also  challenging  the  perception  that  central  banks  have  a  monopoly  on  the  issuing  of 
means of payment. 
The Riksbank’s responsibility for cash management has changed 
By  law,  the  Riksbank  shall  supply  the  country  with  banknotes  and  coins  and  has  the 
exclusive right to issue them. The law also states that these banknotes and coins are legal 
tender. Giving central banks a monopoly on the issuing of banknotes and coins, along with a 
certain degree of autonomy, has been seen as an effective and credible way of managing 
the supply of means of payment. 
Payment trends have a long history. From bartering and the first silver coins in Sweden in 
995, to the first standardised and collective means of payment in the form of transport bills, 
which  were  introduced  during  the  17th  century.  Besides  cash  being  much  more  modern 
today than when the Riksbank was founded almost 350 years ago, we also have access to 
several different electronic payment options. 
The  Riksbank’  responsibility  for  means  of  payment  has  been  adapted  over  time  as  needs 
have changed. At one point, the Riksbank had over 20 offices around the country, basically 
one  in  every  county,  where  banks  often  deposited  and  withdrew  cash.  For  a  period,  the 
Riksbank  also  accepted  daily  takings  directly  from  companies.  The  Riksbank  counted, 
performed  quality  checks,  invalidated  and  stored  cash.  Over  time,  the  Riksbank  has 
rationalised and adapted its cash provision. Today, it is banks and other private entities who 
are responsible for the distribution of cash. The Riksbank’s banknote and coin operations are 
centralised to an ultra-modern office north of Stockholm. 
And  the  Riksbank’s  role  continues  to  change.  An  inquiry  has  proposed  that  the  Riksbank 
should  be  given  an  overarching  responsibility 
for  monitoring  and  analysing  cash 
management.1  The  Riksbank  is  prepared  to  take  on  this  responsibility  as  it  falls  quite 
naturally  within  our  remit  as  a  central  bank.  The  inquiry  has  also  proposed  that  cash 
processing companies, such as Loomis and Nokas, should come under the supervision of 
the Riksbank. It is important for someone to exercise supervision over these operations and 
companies.  I  am  doubtful  whether  the  Riksbank  is  the  authority  best  suited  for  this  task, 
although that is of course a matter for the Riksdag to decide. 
Should the Riksbank issue electronic money? 
But developments have not just been a matter of reorganising the more operational side of 
cash  management. Technical  developments, globalisation  and  innovations  on  the  financial 
markets  also  challenge  the  perception  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  central  bank  to  have  a 
monopoly  on  issuing  cash  to  ensure  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system.  Banknotes  and 
                                                
1  See SOU 2014:61. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  coins have long since faced competition from other means of payment, especially different 
types of accounts with their related payment services offered by banks and other financial 
institutions. Today, payments are made electronically to a large extent; both households and 
companies, for example, pay invoices and transfer money online or by mobile phone. And in 
recent  years,  virtual  currencies  such  as  Bitcoin  have  been  introduced.  What  responsibility 
central  banks  should  have  for  the  security  and  efficiency  of  electronic  means  of  payment 
needs to be more closely examined. 
The  overarching  question  is  whether  it  is  important  for  there  to  be  a  “state  means  of 
payment” in order to maintain confidence in the payment system. If the answer is  yes, we 
need to ask ourselves whether the issuing of private means of payment should be restricted 
or regulated more than it is today. Or should there perhaps be access to electronic Riksbank 
cash in the future? This is an example of very interesting questions that require new ways of 
thinking as well as considerable research.2 
Risk of over-confidence in market mechanisms 
Payment innovations are intrinsically positive and good for society. They give us faster and 
more  easily  accessible  payment  methods  that  simplify  our  daily  lives  and  contribute  to 
continued growth.  But  there  are  also risks  associated  with  them.  It  is  in  society’s  interests 
that  everyone  can  make  payments  in  a  simple  and  standardised  way  A  report  into  the 
subject, on whether the right to payment accounts should be incorporated into Swedish law, 
was recently circulated for consultation.3 The directive says that all those who live within the 
EU’s borders shall have access to a bank account with basic payment features. It talks in 
particular about the possibility of withdrawing and depositing cash and of course of making 
payments, both in person and online. At the Riksbank, we consider there to be a risk of over-
confidence in the market taking its responsibility for cash supply, both now and in the future. 
In our consultation response, we therefore propose that the market’s responsibility for giving 
customers  access  to  a  payment  account  and  related  cash  services  be  regulated  more 
clearly;  or  that  the  law  include  an  option  for  the  state  to  intervene  if  the  market  fails, 
regarding both cash and electronic payments. Despite everything, there is still a long time to 
go before Sweden becomes a cashless society. There is still SEK 73 billion in circulation in 
the form of 317 million banknotes and 1.9 billion coins – a significant sum of money. 
The Swedish payment system RIX will change 
But the Riksbank’s role as regards payments is not just limited to ensuring the availability of 
cash. The Riksbank’s system for payments between banks and a number of other financial 
institutions  –  the  RIX  system  –  is  the  hub  of  the  Swedish  payment  system.  All  payment 
transactions  between  banks,  clearing  organisations  and  the  National  Debt  Office  pass 
through RIX.4 This makes it an important part of the Swedish financial infrastructure with a 
daily  turnover  of  about  SEK  450  billion  divided  among  over  15,000  payments.  The 
development  of  payment  services  makes  adjustments  of  the  RIX  system  necessary.  An 
example is the development of payments in real time using, for example, the Swish mobile 
phone app. Here at Riksbanken, we have made it possible for the payment service to work 
even when the RIX system is closed by allowing a small amount of central bank money, in 
the form of a loan, to be outstanding during the night. 
                                                
2  Other central banks are also considering these questions. See Broadbent (2016). 
3  Fi  2015:02.  Access  to  payment  accounts  with  basic  functions,”  Interim  report  2  from  the  2015  Payment 
Services Inquiry. 
4  For  a  description  of  the  RIX  system,  see  http://www.riksbank.se/sv/Finansiell-stabilitet/Betalningssystemet-
RIX. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Which  financial  institutions  are  participants  in  RIX  is  affected  by  developments  on  the 
financial markets. In a Nordic comparison, Sweden has so far had relatively few participants 
as members in the system and a situation where four participants are responsible for 80 per 
cent of the turnover. This is now changing and the Riksbank will have to consider smaller 
and perhaps entirely new participants who also wish to manage their payments to and from 
the  banks,  and  between  themselves,  via  RIX.  For  example,  Forex  Bank  and  JAK 
Medlemsbank will soon participate in RIX. To maintain healthy competition and efficiency in 
the financial system, it is important that the Riksbank treats everyone equally, although it is 
also important to have a safe and secure payment system. 
As  a  result  of  the  Riksbank’s  responsibility  for  RIX,  a  government  enquiry  from  2011 
proposed  that  the  Riksbank  should  be  given  the  responsibility  for  coordinating  crisis 
preparedness in the payment system via a new law.  5 This proposal has yet to be realised. 
Parts  of  the  inquiry's  proposal  were  nevertheless  implemented  voluntarily  but  we  consider 
that this coordination responsibility should be made statutory and provide the possibility to 
place binding requirements on the payment system’s participants. No authority currently has 
such  a  responsibility  and  neither  is  there  an  authority  responsible for  producing  an  overall 
risk and vulnerability analysis. 
Ability to create unlimited liquidity in SEK 
Among the Riksbank’s many tasks is the important role of providing liquidity in the event of a 
crisis.  There  are  certainly  good  reasons  to  believe  that  the  function  of  banks  in  society  – 
facilitate payments, mediate credit, enable risk diversification – is more efficient as a result of 
competition among private players rather than being run by the state. But banking operations 
also have an inherent vulnerability. The banks’ funding is based to a considerable degree on 
short-term loans, for example deposits from the general public and short-term borrowing on 
the capital market. Their assets, on the other hand, often comprises lending of a more long-
term nature. This mismatch in maturity and liquidity between debts and assets is typical for 
traditional banking operations and does not constitute a major problem as long as confidence 
is maintained in the banks’ debt-servicing ability. But if doubts arise, depositors may quickly 
try  to  withdraw  their  money  –  money  that  the  bank  cannot  obtain  in  the  short  run.  This 
causes a liquidity problem. This type of inherent risk is the reason why there are special rules 
for banks, supervision and, for example, a deposit guarantee protecting depositors against 
losses. 
Furthermore, a central bank can mitigate the effects of such a crisis by ensuring that there is 
money  available  when  no  one  else  wants  to  lend.  This  function  as  lender  of  last  resort  is 
based on the central bank’s unique ability to create unlimited amounts of liquid funds in its 
own  currency.6  According  to  the  classic  doctrine,  the  central  bank  can  give  generous 
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) at a high rate of interest and against good collateral.7 
The ability of central banks to act as lender of last resort has had major significance in many 
financial crises, and was particularly important during the financial crisis of 2007–2009. This 
crisis led to a number of financial institutions encountering difficulties which ultimately caused 
the  global  financial  markets  to  stop  functioning.  The  shortage  of  liquid  funds  and  credit 
threatened the entire global economy. Central banks around the world were forced to take 
extensive  measures  to  handle  the  situation.  These  measures  included  loans  in  various 
currencies  and  the  purchase  of  large  volumes  of  government  securities,  as  well  as  other 
assets. Several of them were also used during the subsequent sovereign debt crisis in the 
                                                
5  See SOU 2011:78. 
6  See Goodhart (1988) and Capie et al. (1994). 
7  See Irwin (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  euro  area.  Sweden  was  also  affected  and  the  Riksbank  decided  to  provide  liquidity  to 
Swedish  institutions.  The  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  exploded,  from  SEK  212  billion  at  the 
end  of  2007  to,  at  its  peak,  SEK  763  billion  in  the  summer  of  2009.  In  my  opinion,  the 
measures have overall been necessary due to the extraordinary circumstances. They have, 
however, created major challenges which central banks must now come to grips with. 
Central bank support can increase risk-taking 
Society’s safety net, in the form of measures such as giving banks ELA, means that we can 
counteract  the  risk  of  problems  in  one  bank  developing  into  a  widespread  systemic  crisis. 
The Lender of last resort function could therefore be seen as a form of insurance. But just 
like  all  other  types  of  insurance,  this  one  can  also  have  a  negative  impact  on  the 
beneficiaries’ risk behaviour if there isn’t a sufficient level of excess in the system. There has 
been an obvious risk of the expansion of the safety net that occurred during the crisis leading 
to greater risk-taking and thereby increasing the probability of the safety net needing to be 
used in the future. 
To counteract this, it has been necessary to increase both the excess and resilience in the 
financial system. As a result, a new crisis management framework has been introduced, the 
aim of which is to force the banks’ shareowners and creditors – excluding, I would clearly like 
to  point  out,  those  depositors  protected  by  the  deposit  guarantee  –  to  take  a  greater 
responsibility  for  losses in  the  event  of  a  default.  Furthermore, the requirements regarding 
the  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  have  been  tightened.  In  my  opinion,  these 
requirements  can  be  even  clearer  and  adapted  to  the  conditions  prevailing  in  the  specific 
banking  system.  Bearing  in  mind  the  dependence  of  Swedish  banks  on  funding  on 
international  capital  markets  and  extensive  foreign  operations,  the  requirements  regarding 
banks’  liquidity  buffers  –  sometimes  referred to as  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratios  –  or  LCRs  – 
should be expressed in relevant currencies, including Swedish kronor.8 It is also important to 
have high capital requirements. 
Lender of last resort for an increasing number of players 
Traditionally,  systemic  risks  have  been  primarily  associated  with  large  banks.  But 
developments in the financial sector have made it more difficult to assess where the systemic 
risks are. This is due to structural changes as a result of both new regulations and financial 
innovations.  In  both  the  Swedish  1990s  crisis  and  the  global  financial  crisis,  a  grey  credit 
market and a shadow banking sector emerged that evaded the supervision of the authorities 
and to an extent took over the activities of traditional banks. The risks that were built up in 
the unregulated sector formed the basis of the system-wide crises that subsequently broke 
out.9 It is therefore important that supervision and regulation keep up with and are adapted to 
developments and structural changes that occur in the financial sector. Central banks may 
also from time  to time  review  their  guidelines  and  arrangements for  liquidity  assistance  so 
that they are sufficiently flexible in order to meet new requirements. There may, for example, 
be reason to consider the forms in which types of companies other than banks might also be 
eligible for liquidity support. 
One  such  type  of  player  is  so-called  central  counterparties.  A  central  counterparty  (CCP) 
acts as a counterparty to the buyer and seller in a security transaction, thereby assuming all 
counterparty  risk.  In  order  to  reduce  systemic  risks  globally,  authorities  around  the  world 
have  encouraged  the  use  of  central  counterparties  in  transactions  with  standardised  OTC 
derivatives – such as interest rate swaps. The idea is that this will increase resilience in the 
                                                
8  An LCR amounting to 100 per cent means that the banks have assets that can be quickly and safely used for 
payments – in order to cover their cash outflows during a 30-day-long stress scenario. 
9  For an early study of the emergence of the unregulated credit market, see Ingves (1982).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  financial  system  in  the  event  of  a  bank  failing.  Now  that  central  counterparties  are 
increasingly  used,  it  also  means  that  some  of  the  risk  individual  banks  previously  had  in 
relation to each other is instead concentrated to central counterparties, which makes these 
players extremely systemically important. We are therefore now faced with the question of 
whether they should also be given the opportunity to borrow money from the central bank to 
a greater extent than currently is the case. 
ELA from central banks may therefore come into question for a more complex set of players 
in the future. Where we draw the line regarding the type of institution that can obtain ELA and 
what conditions should hence apply are obviously questions that central banks now face. If, 
for  example,  central  banks  are  in  practice  willing  to  give  loans  to  institutions  that  are  not 
covered by the previously mentioned regulations, do we not then encourage the emergence 
of new types of shadow banks and new risks? 
Increased need for foreign currency in the event of a crisis 
Widespread globalisation also means that many banks have substantial exposures in foreign 
currencies,  currencies  which  the  national  central  bank  cannot  create  itself.10  This  is 
particularly  relevant  for  Sweden,  which  has  a  very  internationally  active  banking  sector. 
When liquidity on the dollar markets slowed towards the end of 2007, swap agreements were 
established between the Federal Reserve and other central banks, including the Riksbank.11 
As a result of this arrangement and by pledging its foreign currency reserve, the Riksbank 
could  lend  a  total  of  approximately  SEK  200  billion  in  US  dollars.  Conversely,  swap 
agreements  were  also  established  between  the  Riksbank  and  two  of  the  Baltic  central 
banks.12 
These experiences indicate that, in the future, even tougher requirements will be placed on 
international  cooperation  between  central  banks.  How  should  we  organise  this  in  the  best 
way? Can we expect other countries’ central banks to always be able to assist with currency 
in a crisis situation or must special agreements be drawn up? The development also raises 
the issue of whether an international ‘lender of last resort’ is needed.13 These questions are 
particularly important for Sweden, which has its own small currency. And they will become 
even more relevant if the major Swedish bank Nordea carries out its plan to change from a 
subsidiary to a branch structure. With the current subsidiary structure, the central banks in 
the countries where Nordea has subsidiaries are responsible for providing ELA to them. After 
the transformation into a branch structure, the Riksbank will take on the main responsibility 
for  providing  ELA,  should  it  be  needed.  This  means  that  the  Riksbank  will  have  a  greater 
need of being able to obtain foreign currency in a crisis situation. Even if swap agreements 
can be concluded proactively, which is not at all certain, there are no guarantees that they 
can automatically be used in the event of a crisis or when we consider it necessary to do so. 
It is the creditor who decides whether it wishes to lend in each specific situation. 
The Riksbank has a responsibility for financial stability... 
The measures and phenomena I have now spoken of have led to banks always turning to the 
central bank in difficult times. Regardless of where the supervision is formally located, central 
banks  therefore  exercise  some  de  facto  supervision  of  banks.  Everyone  knows  that  “the 
central bank is where the money is” and that it is not willing to lend it to just anyone. For us at 
                                                
10  See Buiter (2008). 
11  See Fleming and Klagge (2010). 
12  See Molin (2009). 
13  See Capie (1998), Cechetti (2014). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the Riksbank to be able to fulfil our role as liquidity provider, we must have good access to 
information on financial institutions and markets. 
The fact that the banks have been subject to regular analysis by the Riksbank – both before 
and after the deregulation of the financial markets in the 1980s – is a natural consequence of 
their  central  role  in  the  payment  system  and  the  special  systemic  risks  with  which  their 
operations  are  associated.  The  need  for  analysis  changes  over  time,  however,  and 
developments  on  the  financial  markets  mean  that  the  central  banks’  analyses  must  now 
cover more than just banks. 
It  is  a  question  of  analysing  central  counterparties,  insurance  companies,  shadow  banks, 
asset prices, risk premiums, different markets or different phenomena (market liquidity risk, 
high-frequency trading, block chain technology, etc.) in the financial system. It is important 
that  central  banks  continuously  “scan”  the  financial  market  and  keep  track  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  in  different  places,  all  the  time  focusing  on  the  system  risk  perspective.  To 
ensure  this,  it  is  vital  that  we  can  independently  request  all  the  information  we  consider 
necessary  to  be  able  to  perform  our  analyses.  Not  least  the  ability  to  provide  ELA  in  an 
effective manner – and simultaneously limit the risks to the state, by only giving assistance to 
institutions that have liquidity problems but otherwise are healthy – requires good access to 
information. It is the Riksbank’s and ultimately the state’s funds that are at stake here and it 
can be a question of very large amounts. 
…and it needs to be clarified 
The Riksbank’s task of promoting financial stability, not least via its responsibility for the RIX 
payment  system  and  our  role  as  lender  of  last  resort,  requires  analysis  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  in  the financial  system. This  also provides  us  with  the  right  conditions to  be 
able  to  identify  feasible  measures  in  order  to  manage  the  risks.  The  Riksbank  shares  the 
responsibility  for  preventing  financial  crises  with  the  Government  and  other  authorities,  in 
particular Finansinspektionen and the Swedish National Debt Office. 
The  Riksbank’s  responsibility  in  this  area  is  expressed  in  the  legislation  as  the  task  of 
“promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payments  system”.  More  specific  details  are  not  given. 
Goodfriend  and  King  discussed  this  issue  in  their  evaluation  of  the  Riksbank  that  was 
presented  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.14  In  their  opinion,  the  Riksbank’s  mandate  should 
include financial stability and this should be clarified in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. I agree 
and  welcome  a  discussion  on  how  the  responsibility  should  be  formulated.  An  important 
question is what formal role the Riksbank should have as regards preventive work aimed at 
reducing risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system, including within the policy area of 
macroprudential policy, which focuses on preventing and mitigating systemic risks. 
Identifying systemic risks is nothing new in the world of central banking. What is new is the 
emergence  of  macroprudential  policy  as  a  policy  area.  This  means  that,  in  addition  to  the 
task of identifying systemic risks, clear mandates must also be defined for those who are to 
be responsible for macroprudential policy. In addition, a tool-box of different measures that 
can be taken to reduce systemic risks must also be developed. Neither are many of the tools 
and  measures  currently  being  discussed  entirely  new,  but  were  already  in  central  bank 
arsenals prior to the major wave of deregulations during the 1980s. 
Flaws in the Swedish macroprudential policy framework 
In Sweden, Finansinspektionen has been given the main responsibility for macroprudential 
policy. In addition, there is a financial stability council – consisting of representatives of the 
Government,  Finansinspektionen,  the  National  Debt  Office  and  the  Riksbank  –  which  is  a 
                                                
14  See Goodfriend and King (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  is 
that 
the  problem 
important  cause  of 
forum for the discussion of financial stability issues. I believe that there are significant flaws 
in several aspects of the Swedish framework for macroprudential policy. 
Firstly, experiences so far of the Swedish framework indicate clear inadequacies in decision-
making  power.  An  obvious  example  is  the  protracted  discussions  on  the  introduction  of  a 
binding  amortisation  requirement.  An 
the 
macroprudential policy objective is unclear and too narrow. For example, it should be made 
clear  that  macroprudential  policy  instruments  may  be  used  not  just  to  manage  risks  to 
financial stability, but also to reduce risks created by the financial sector in the real economy. 
It must also be clear that macroprudential policy includes the entire financial system and not 
just the credit market. A clarified and broadened objective is also appropriate in order to bring 
Sweden’s  framework  in  line  with  European  standards.15  There  is  also  a  lack  of  clear  and 
expeditious  procedures  when  new  macroprudential  policy  tools  are  to  be  introduced. 
Improvements are urgently needed here so that we can tackle risks in good time and such 
procedures  have  also  been  recommended  by  the  EU’s  macroprudential  policy  body,  the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).16 
Secondly,  the  Swedish  structure  falls  short  also  when  it  comes  to  clarity  in  the  division  of 
responsibilities.  Via  its  instruction,  Finansinspektionen  was  given  the responsibility  to  “take 
measures to counteract financial imbalances with the aim of stabilising the credit market”. No 
definition  of  what  Finansinspektionen’s  overall  macroprudential  policy  task  comprises  has 
been  formulated,  however.  This  problem  is  highlighted  by  the  decision  process  for  the 
upcoming amortisation requirement. The Government has indeed tasked Finansinspektionen 
to produce regulations that more closely define the amortisation requirement but at the same 
time 
the  Government  before 
Finansinspektionen adopts them. This is not in line with the ESRB’s recommendation that the 
macroprudential authority should as a minimum be operationally independent from political 
bodies.17 The importance of independence when adopting macroprudential policy measures 
is also underscored by Goodfriend and King. This is, if anything, a return to the arrangement 
that often prevailed prior to the deregulations of the 1980s. 
A third problem with the Swedish macroprudential policy framework is that it has not been 
established by law. Finansinspektionen’s mandate in the macroprudential policy area is only 
a  government  ordinance  and  the  Stability  Council  is  formally  only  a  committee.  This  is 
unfortunate as macroprudential policy is an important policy area and it is vital that a long-
term,  sustainable  structure  is  created  for  it,  so  that  macroprudential  analysis  is  not  given 
lower  priority  when  other  tasks  require  resources,  and  experiences  from  the  crisis  are 
forgotten. The Stability Council has so far played an insignificant role in practice. 
to  be  approved  by 
regulations 
requires 
these 
Sweden deviates from international and European standards 
Sweden thus deviates – in several respects – from European standards as regards how its 
macroprudential policy framework is designed. We have also organised the responsibility for 
macroprudential policy differently to most of the other countries in Europe. In 13 EU Member 
States, the responsibility has been given to the central bank, a similar number have given it 
to  a  separate  council  and  two  countries  (Sweden  and  Finland)  have  given  it  to  the 
supervisory authority.18 In addition, it is  worth mentioning that the European Central Bank, 
the  ECB,  has  received  a  mandate  that  basically  means  that  it  shares  the  macroprudential 
policy  responsibility  with  the  national  macroprudential  authorities  in  those  countries  that 
                                                
15  See ESRB (2011). 
16  See ESRB (2011). 
17  See ESRB (2011). 
18  See ESRB (2014). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  participate  in  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism. The  ECB  has  the  responsibility  for  a  so-
called “top-up” of some of the macroprudential policy measures decided at national level – 
i.e. to tighten the measures further if the bank feels it is necessary. 
More generally speaking, it is a problem if Sweden chooses to deviate from international or 
European standards, as it implies a risk of us losing international influence and of us having 
problems to implement new regulations in an efficient and consistent way. And the problem 
is particularly major given that we have a large banking sector by international comparison. 
In light of this, there is also reason for us to reconsider whether we should apply to take part 
in the EU’s Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Through this, the ECB has been given the 
overall  responsibility  for supervision  in  the  euro  countries  and  in  other  EU  Member  States 
that apply to and are permitted to take part in the SSM. For the past couple of years, the 
ECB has been responsible for supervision in 19 of the 28 EU Member States. The ECB’s 
influence will strengthen over time as regards the design of both microprudential supervision 
and macroprudential policy in Europe. Even if Sweden were to have only limited influence as 
an SSM participant, since we are not in the euro area, we would nevertheless gain a better 
insight  into  SSM  discussions  and  could  make  our  voice  heard.  As  an  outside  country, 
however,  we  would  in  practice  have  to  accept,  to  a  large  extent,  the  implementation  of 
changes already agreed on by the ECB/SSM. The fact that Sweden has large, cross-border 
banks  is  reason  enough  to  believe  that  we  will  have  to  adapt  to  the  SSM  rather  than  the 
other way around. 
I  can  see 
their  concrete  recommendations, 
Need for “a rethink” – a reanalysis 
It is clear therefore that our Swedish framework for macroprudential policy has major flaws in 
the  way  its  objective  has  been formulated, the processes for  allocating  tools,  clarity  in  the 
division  of  responsibility  and  in  legal  status.  This  is  problematic  as  it  has  contributed  to 
delaying measures that can counteract the high and growing household indebtedness. 
In  their  evaluation,  Goodfriend  and  King  point  out  that  both  the  mandate  and  division  of 
responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy  are  in  need  of  review.  I  agree.  Without  going  into 
more  detail  about 
that,  based  on  a 
socioeconomic  efficiency  perspective,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  utilise  the  expertise, 
experience and resources in the macroprudential policy area, possessed by the Riksbank in 
its capacity as the central bank, in a better way than is currently the case. 
There are many different ways of doing this, of which, from both an international and national 
perspective, the most efficient in the long run would probably be to merge the Riksbank and 
Finansinspektionen.  This  would  gather  our  skills  and  expertise  together  and  strengthen 
Sweden’s voice internationally. This is certainly a far-reaching change, the collective effects 
of which would most definitely need to be analysed very thoroughly. It is not in line with the 
current  structure,  but  when  the  world  around  us  is  changing,  our  central  agency  structure 
sometimes also needs to do the same. At the beginning of the 1990s, the Bank Inspection 
Board was merged with the Private Insurance Supervisory Service into Finansinspektionen. 
In  the  majority  of  EU  Member  States,  the  central  bank  and  banking  supervision  are 
nowadays under the same roof. 
There are of course other less far-reaching solutions that would be possible if we wanted to 
improve  our  Swedish  macroprudential  policy  structure.  Regardless  of  the  solution  chosen, 
each  has  its  specific  challenges  as  regards  governance  and  accountability.  But  having  a 
well-functioning and effective arrangement for macroprudential policy is extremely important 
for Sweden. What the best arrangement might be is something I hope the Riksdag will reflect 
on  in  conjunction  with  the  planned  review  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act. The  time  this  will 
take is certainly beyond my active time. My focus is on what is good for Sweden. 
The  whole  of  Sweden’s  welfare  is  built  on  the  endeavour  to  increase  productivity.  This  is 
clearly true within the private sector and it would be strange if this endeavour did not also 
lead  to  some  form  of  structural  transformation  as  regards  public  sector  regulation  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  oversight  of  the  financial  system,  especially  in  light  of  our  large,  cross-border  banks, 
technological developments and a world of free capital flows unavoidably posing new risks. 
New but at the same time old issues for monetary policy 
As I described, a central bank is “the banks’ bank”, not just in financial crisis situations but 
also on a day-to-day basis. The banks make payments between themselves via the central 
bank and they can borrow or deposit money there for the short run. The terms determined by 
the  central  banks  for  these  transactions  affect  interest  rate-setting  and  credit  flows  in  the 
economy. This is what is normally referred to as “monetary policy” and receives considerable 
media coverage and space in the economic policy debate. 
Since  the  monetary  policy  regime  of  maintaining  a  fixed  foreign  exchange  rate  was 
abandoned at the beginning of the 1990s, the Riksbank – similar to many other central banks 
– has followed a strategy known as “flexible inflation-targeting”. This means that monetary 
policy is aimed at achieving a quantified inflation target, but this is done in a flexible manner. 
Deviations from the target are consciously accepted, normally in order to avoid unnecessarily 
negative effects on output and employment, but it could also be a matter of trying to avoid 
the build-up of financial imbalances.19 
Flexible inflation targeting can help to maintain financial stability. At the same time, financial 
stability is a prerequisite for being able to pursue a meaningful monetary policy, as monetary 
policy affects the real economy and inflation via the financial system. Financial instability very 
much inhibits effective monetary policy. 
Many  would  certainly  agree  that our flexible  inflation  targeting  policy  has  led  to favourable 
economic growth in Sweden. It has also in general received a good rating in the evaluations 
of the Riksbank performed by external experts on behalf of the Riksdag.20 My impression is 
that the experience is about the same in other countries that have followed a similar strategy. 
I  am  therefore  quite  convinced  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  in  some  form  or  other  will 
continue  to  be  the  best-suited  monetary  policy  framework  in  the  future.  Experience  since 
2008  has,  however,  led  to  some  parts  of  the  strategy  being  brought  into  question.  The 
questions raised are, however, seldom completely new, but in most cases are questions we 
have  been  struggling  with  since  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target  in  1993,  even  if  the 
most recent financial crisis has put them in a different light to a certain extent. 
Should the level of the inflation target be changed? 
One  issue  discussed  is  the  appropriate  level  of  the  inflation  target  and  whether  the  target 
currently  adopted  by  most  inflation-targeting  countries,  around  2  per  cent,  should  be 
changed.  Some  commentators  have  argued  that  the  Swedish  inflation  target  should  be 
reduced.21 Their main argument seems to be that digitalisation and globalisation have made 
achievement  of  the  2-percent  inflation  target  difficult  and  that  the  Riksbank’s  attempt  to 
achieve the target is exacerbating the problems of growing debt levels and housing prices. 
Another proposal put forward is that the Riksbank, instead of explicitly reducing the inflation 
target, should allow inflation to continue to undershoot the target for a long period to come. In 
both  cases,  inflation  would  be  lower  for  an  even  longer  period  of  time  and  inflation 
expectations would probably fall even further. As a consequence, interest rates in Sweden 
                                                
19  For a theoretical discussion about the consequences of financial imbalances on flexible inflation targeting, see 
Woodford (2012). 
20  See Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006), Goodhart and Rochet (2011) and Goodfriend and King (2016). See also 
Bryant, Henderson and Becker (2012). 
21  See Mitelman (2013), Schück (2015), Sydsvenskan (2015) and Dagens Industri (2015).  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  would remain at today’s extremely low levels for even longer to come.22 For reasons I will 
shortly outline, it would, however, be more difficult to counteract economic recessions in the 
future, if inflation, inflation expectations and the average nominal interest rate were to remain 
permanently at very low levels. 
The  international  debate  has  not  concerned  itself  too  much  with  globalisation  and 
digitalisation  having  lastingly  held  back  inflation.  Instead,  it  has  been  argued  that  central 
bank  inflation  targets  should  be  increased.23  One  reason  for  this  is  that  real,  long-term 
interest rates have fallen by about 4.5 percentage points around the world over the past 30 
years.24 One consequence of interest rates being much lower than twenty years ago is that it 
has  severely  restricted  the  scope  for  central  banks  to  cut  their  policy  rates  when  the 
economy has been weak or inflation has undershot the target. One way of dealing with this is 
to raise the inflation target. With a higher inflation target, say 3 per cent, the nominal interest 
rate would be higher, which in turn would create greater scope for stimulating the economy in 
the event of future recessions and prevent the policy rate’s effective lower bound becoming 
binding. 
This is very much an ongoing discussion and it remains to be seen how it will end. The target 
level is not set in stone but a change should not be made lightly. There may be reason to 
wait until a reasonable degree of consensus has been reached among central banks and in 
the research community. This would probably increase confidence in a change to the target 
level.  This  is  an  example  of  how  the  scope  for  an  individual  central  bank  to  take  action 
entirely on its own is restricted. I will return to this issue anon. But there are parameters in 
our framework other than the target level that are perhaps more in need of adjustment. 
Which target variable is best? 
Ever  since  the  Riksbank  introduced  inflation  targeting,  the  inflation  target  has  been 
expressed in terms of the CPI. The reason for choosing the CPI as the target index is not 
only because it is a broad price index that represents normal purchases, but also because 
CPI statistics are of good quality, not normally revised and published shortly after the end of 
the month. The use of the CPI as the target variable has, however, led to some difficulties 
and we have therefore analysed other inflation indices as well in our interest rate decisions, 
more recently the CPIF (the CPI with a fixed rate of interest). It may, however, be difficult to 
evaluate  monetary  policy  if  there  are  major  differences  between  the  development  of  the 
variable that guides the Riksbank, more recently the CPIF, and the formal target variable, the 
CPI. 
Another problem is that both domestic and overseas forecasters relatively seldom take into 
account  the  fact  that  the  Swedish  CPI  is  calculated  the  way  it  is  when  they  describe  the 
situation in Sweden. This can lead to misleading international comparisons. In recent years, 
for example, eye-catching headlines have appeared at regular intervals in the media saying 
that Sweden is in deflation, despite this being largely due to the fact that housing costs in the 
CPI have gone down when the Riksbank has cut the repo rate. This can give the impression 
that the situation in Sweden is worse and the inflation is much lower than in other countries, 
despite the difference being because the Swedish CPI is particularly sensitive to changes in 
the policy rate. 
It may therefore be time to open up a discussion on the target variable. In their evaluation, 
Goodfriend  and  King  suggest  that  the  target  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  CPIF.  An 
                                                
22  See Flodén (2015). 
23  See  for  example  Williams  (2009),  Blanchard,  et  al.  (2010),  Ball  (2014),  Krugman  (2014)  and  Rosengren 
(2015). 
24  See Rachel and Smith (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  alternative  index,  which  is  not  affected  directly  by  changes  in  the  policy  rate  either,  is  the 
HICP (harmonised index of consumer prices), which is used by, among others, the ECB as 
the  target  variable.  In  terms  of  the  latter  index,  one  advantage  is  that  it  is  often  used  in 
international comparisons of inflation, but the differences compared with the CPIF in terms of 
actual figures are not particularly major. 
Interval around the target? 
Another question is whether the target should be surrounded by some form of interval. This 
is quite common internationally and previously there was also a so-called tolerance interval 
of  1  percentage  point  either  side  of  the  Swedish  inflation  target.  It  was  introduced  at  the 
same  time  as  the  inflation  target  in  1993  and  its  main  purpose  was  to  explain  that  the 
Riksbank  is  not  able  to  control  inflation  precisely  in  the  short  run,  but  that  it  aims  to  limit 
deviations from the target. 
However, the interval proved to be far too narrow in relation to how  CPI inflation varied in 
practice. When the interval was abolished in 2010, CPI inflation had more often been outside 
the tolerance interval than inside it. In the background memorandum published in conjunction 
with  the  decision  to  abolish,  the  Riksbank  argued  that  the  interval  had  become  obsolete 
since target deviations greater than 1 percentage point had become a natural part of flexible 
inflation targeting and that the credibility of the inflation target was not questioned even when 
inflation was outside the tolerance interval.25 
In  retrospect,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  whether  the  problem  was  not  just  the  fact  that  the 
interval chosen was poorly adapted. Despite this, the idea as such of an interval around the 
target does not necessarily have to be a bad one. A better adapted interval may bring with it 
the  advantages  envisaged  in  the  first  place.  It  would  signal  that  monetary  policy  is  being 
conducted amidst considerable uncertainty and that the Riksbank is unable to fine-tune the 
economy and inflation. This is something that is good to remind people of on a more or less 
continual  basis.  In  the  same  way  as  there  may  be  reason  to  discuss  a  change  of  target 
variable, there may, in light of this, be cause to consider whether a tolerance interval should 
be reintroduced. 
I  find  it  difficult,  however,  to  see  how  an  interval  could  normally  change  the  practical 
prerequisites for monetary policy very much. The Riksbank has not had any rigid fixation with 
pinning  the  inflation  target  at  exactly  2  per  cent  at  all  times,  but  an  explicit  target  is 
nevertheless necessary as a guide to monetary policy and inflation expectations. Even with 
an  interval,  monetary  policy  would  more  often  than  not  aim  to  reach  the  mid-point  of  the 
interval. But it could make things easier if it takes quite a long time to achieve the target. And 
an  interval  may,  as  I  said  before,  be  a  good  way  of  communicating  uncertainty  about  the 
future and about the effects of monetary policy. 
Other targets in addition to the inflation target? 
A question that has emerged now and again in the Swedish debate is whether it should be 
written into the law that the Riksbank, in addition to the price stability objective, should also 
have an objective for growth in the real economy. Normally, it is an objective for employment 
that debaters then have in mind. One usually talks of the central bank having a so-called dual 
mandate,  including  both  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  In  practice,  central  banks  that 
conduct flexible inflation targeting act and reason in a very similar way, regardless of whether 
                                                
25  See  Memorandum,  Basis  for  Decision.  Sveriges  Riksbank.  http://www.riksbank.se/Upload/Dokument_ 
riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Pressmeddelanden/2010/nr27_beslutsunderlag.pdf. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  they have a statutory dual mandate or not when the real target is not explicitly expressed in 
numerical terms.26 
There  is  a  risk  that  many  of  those  who  advocate  a  statutory  dual  mandate  imagining  that 
monetary  policy  would  then  be  conducted  in  a  completely  different  way  to  previously,  and 
that  it  thereby  would  be  able  to  contribute  in  some  way  or  other  to  a  lasting  increase  in 
employment. In other words, the Riksbank would not just keep inflation low and stable, but 
also help to solve the unemployment problem. Today, it is generally accepted that a central 
bank  cannot  lastingly  increase  growth  and  employment  by  conducting  a  systematically 
expansionary monetary  policy. A risk with a statutory, numerical dual mandate is also that 
politically uncomfortable reforms, that actually could lastingly increase employment, are not 
implemented  on  the  grounds  that  employment  is  the  Riksbank’s  responsibility.  The  dual 
mandate would in this case do more harm than good. 
The evaluations made of the Riksbank on behalf of the Riksdag have so far argued against 
the introduction of an explicit, numerical employment target for monetary policy. At the same 
time, it has been taken for granted that the policy should be flexible insofar as it, in addition 
to the inflation target, should also try to stabilise fluctuations in employment.27 The current 
arrangement with an inflation target and other reasoning in the preparatory works feel about 
right for me. 
Greater consensus on consideration for financial stability 
Another issue is whether flexible inflation targeting should also include taking the degree of 
financial  stability  into  consideration.28  This  issue  has  sometimes  been  perceived  as  very 
controversial,  but  I  think  I  see  greater  consensus  among  experts.  I  think  it  is  obvious  that 
there are close links between monetary policy and financial stability. The degree of financial 
stability affects how monetary policy measures spread to inflation and employment (the so-
called transmission mechanism). At the same time, price stability contributes to a “safe and 
efficient payment mechanism” and facilitates stability in the financial system in general. The 
question  discussed  is  whether  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  for  financial  stability  also 
means that financial stability should be an objective for monetary policy. 
I interpret the literature as there being a great deal to indicate that financial stability should in 
principle  be  an  objective  not  only  for  macroprudential  policy  but  also  for  monetary  policy, 
although it will be a practical and quantitative question to determine in each given situation 
how much financial stability should be considered in monetary policy decisions.29 In principle, 
it  would  be  best  if  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  could  be  coordinated,  but 
there  are  also  relevant  arguments  against  such  coordination.30 
is  claimed  that 
macroprudential policy and microprudential policy should be the “first line of defence” against 
financial  stability  risks  and  that  monetary  policy  should  focus  on  stabilising  inflation  and 
growth  in  the  real  economy.  But  given  the  strong  links  between  financial  stability,  price 
stability and real economic stability, it cannot be ruled out that monetary policy sometimes 
needs  to  be  used  to  mitigate  financial  stability  risks.  How  much  depends,  among  other 
It 
                                                
26  In the preparatory works for the Sveriges Riksbank Act, it was stated that the Riksbank, without prejudice to 
the  price  stability  target,  should  support  the  goals  of  general  economic  policy  with  a  view  to  maintaining  a 
sustainable level of growth and high rate of employment. 
27  For example, Goodfriend and King (2016), p. 98, write as follows: “We do not think it sensible to extend the 
objective  of  the  central  bank  to  include  numerical  targets  for  employment  and  output.  The  experience  of 
forward guidance in both United States and United Kingdom suggest that attempts to use numerical values for 
these variables can crumble in the hands of policymakers within a short period of time.” 
28  See Woodford (2012). 
29  See Stein (2014), Billi and Vredin (2014) and IMF (2015). 
30  See Bryant, Henderson and Becker (2012) and Acharya (2015) for different arguments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  factors, on how well the price stability objective has been met and on how effective macro- 
and microprudential policy are when it comes to promoting financial stability. 
Flexible  inflation  targeting  involves,  as  I  stated  earlier,  the  central  bank  allowing  certain 
deviations  from  the  target  in  order  to  take,  for  example,  output,  employment  or  financial 
imbalances more into account. But this flexibility is not just something that is there, one has 
to accumulate it. A prerequisite for using the policy rate for something other than stabilising 
inflation is that confidence in the inflation target is firmly rooted and that it works as a nominal 
anchor  in  the  economy.  The  higher  the  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  the  more 
consideration the central bank can show for aspects other than inflation – the more flexible 
monetary policy can be. 
Such thoughts lay behind monetary policy in the early 1990s, when we were emerging from 
twenty or so years of high, fluctuating inflation and confidence in the new low inflation regime 
needed  to  be  established.  In  both  its  communication  and  policy,  the  Riksbank  prioritised 
inflation quite clearly before other considerations – it was quite simply necessary to be what 
Mervyn King referred to as an “inflation nutter” during a period of adaptation. If, at that time, 
the Riksbank had acted less resolutely – and there was definitely external pressure to have a 
more  relaxed  attitude  towards  inflation  –  it  would  have  taken  much  longer  and  been 
considerably more difficult to establish the inflation target as the benchmark for price-setting 
and wage formation that it has been In recent decades. 
The independence of central banks – worth preserving 
As I have previously touched upon, a common view both historically and internationally has 
been to see central banks as relatively independent public institutions. This has partly to do 
with it being otherwise tempting for governments to finance budget deficits by printing more 
money. But it has also had to do with it being considered risky to use monetary policy far too 
actively in cyclical policy. Experience has suggested that this can lead to lastingly high and 
volatile inflation without any positive effects on the real economy. For these reasons, many 
countries have chosen to delegate monetary policy decisions to a highly independent central 
bank. 
The fact that the central bank has a high degree of autonomy does not however mean that it 
is  “independent”  of  political  decisions.  It  is  politicians  who  make  decisions  on  how 
independent  the  central  bank  is  to  be.  The  degree  of  autonomy  is  reflected  in  several 
different  conditions:  how  central  bank  executive  boards  are  appointed,  which  people  are 
appointed,  what  mandate  they  have,  how  the  central  bank’s  operations  are  funded.  The 
degree of autonomy can be different in different dimensions. There may also be a difference 
between how the autonomy manifests itself formally according to the law, and how it looks in 
practice. A central bank can, for example, have considerable formal autonomy when taking 
monetary policy decisions, whereas it may be strong dependent on political decisions for its 
funding. 
There  is  also  a  connection  between  the  central  bank’s  mandate  and  its  autonomy.  The 
narrower  the  central  bank’s  mandate,  the  easier  it  will  be  for  politicians  to  give  it  a  higher 
degree  of  autonomy  –  and  the  easier  it  will  be  to  evaluate  the  central  bank.  If  the  central 
bank has very broad, mandate, it may feel more natural for there to be a greater amount of 
political influence. To take two examples, among several: The Bank of England and Norges 
Bank both have significantly broader remits than the Riksbank, but they are less independent 
than the Riksbank, at least according to the legal frameworks. 
Central bank laws are not fixed for time eternal. They are modified now and again, often in 
the  wake  of  different  types  of  crisis  or  when  new  economic  policy  experience  has  been 
gained  in  other  ways.  The  most  recent  financial  crisis  and  the  discussions  now  underway 
around  the  world  on  central  bank  mandates  may  lead  to  reforms  that  change  the  political 
influence  over  central  banks.  In  Sweden’s  case,  our  scope  for  amending  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank  Act  is  limited  by  Sweden’s  membership  of  the  EU,  which  obliges  the  country  to 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  follow  the  regulations  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  But  I  do  not  think  this  should 
hamper an intellectually and analytically based discussion on the benefits and drawbacks of 
the way we have designed monetary policy and financial stability in Sweden. 
In all likelihood, there is plenty to learn both from economic research and from what works 
well and not so well in other countries. It is a matter here of not throwing the baby out with 
the bathwater. Experience of increased autonomy have generally speaking been good, so I 
do not believe major changes to the regulatory frameworks to be justified in this respect. But 
I would nevertheless like to highlight some issues that are under discussion and that affect 
the autonomy of central banks. 
Fiscal policy and monetary policy – mutually dependent 
Sweden  and  other  countries  that  came  through  the  acute  financial  crisis  of  2008  –  2009 
relatively well are characterised not only by an efficient regulatory framework for central bank 
operations but also by the fact that they have been implementing reforms for a long time that 
have  improved  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  not  least  as  regards  how  fiscal  policy  is 
conducted. The fact that Sweden has, over the last twenty years, managed to reconcile low 
and stable inflation with good economic growth and sound public finances depends to a large 
degree on fiscal policy reforms implemented in the wake of the crisis in the 1990s. 
But  experience  gained  from  the  latest  financial  crisis  shows  that  both  these  sides  of  the 
economic policy coin are intimately intertwined and cannot be entirely decoupled from one 
another.  My  interpretation  of  the  research  situation  is  that  increasing  importance  is  being 
attached to how dependent monetary and fiscal policy are on each other.31 It is difficult to 
believe that it might be possible for a central bank to independently guarantee low and stable 
inflation,  and  financial  stability,  irrespective  of  how  fiscal  policy  is  designed.  By  the  same 
token, it will be easier to maintain sound and sustainable fiscal policy if there is price stability 
and financial stability. 
The  difficulties  of  many  countries  in  countering  the  economic  downturn  after  the  financial 
crisis  via  an  active  fiscal  policy  has  increased  the  pressure  on  central  banks  to  stimulate 
economic activity. The ambitions to limit the build-up of debt in the public sector has led to 
rapidly increasingly indebtedness in the private sector instead. This can create new risks in 
the  longer  run.  The  debt  problem  is  something  governments,  central  banks  and  other 
authorities must tackle jointly. 
The  financial  crisis  has  also  led  to  major  changes  in  central  bank  balance  sheets.  For 
example,  the  Federal  Reserve  bought  90  per  cent  of  all  newly  issued  mortgage-based 
securities for a period.32 Similar actions in several countries have significantly increased the 
risk exposure of central banks.33 From 2009 and onwards, the ECB purchased large volumes 
of  government  securities  issued  by  European  governments.  The  Riksbank  has  made 
monetary policy more expansionary by buying Swedish government bonds once the policy 
rate had already been cut substantially and the scope for further rate cuts was not sufficient. 
Today, the Riksbank owns about one third of the outstanding stock of nominal government 
securities. 
The increased balance sheet totals of central banks poses risks for future economic losses, 
which  may  have  consequences for monetary  policy,  or for the  autonomy  of  central  banks. 
Theoretically, a central bank’s losses can be so large that it is either forced to create more 
money, with the potential risks to price stability this entails, or request funding from the public 
treasury, something which could affect the degree of autonomy. In addition, the reduction in 
 31  See Leeper (2011). 
32  See Mehrling (2014). 
33  See Archer and Moser-Boehm (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  the use of cash means that central bank revenue from the issuing of banknotes and coins – 
known as “seigniorage” – decreases, which further inflates the risks of central bank finances 
becoming more strained than previously in the period ahead. 
Less room for manoeuvre in the wake of financial globalisation 
Central  banks’  room  for  manoeuvre  is  affected  not  only  by  how  independent  they  are  in 
accordance  with  national  regulatory  frameworks.  I  have  today  spoken  about  how  central 
bank operations, in basically all areas, are influenced by financial globalisation. Over the past 
30 years, international capital flows have increased dramatically.34 This reflects the gradual 
liberalisation of capital flows that has occurred over a long period. In the right circumstances, 
especially  when  countries  have  achieved  a  certain  level  of  institutional  and  financial 
development,  and  when  there  are  regulations  and  oversight,  free  capital  flows  lead  to 
considerable  efficiency  gains.  But  it  does  not  mean  that  the  completely  free  movement  of 
capital is good for all countries at all times. 
The fact that many countries have been affected by the US credit cycle is nothing new, but 
the  fact  that  this  synchronisation  now  includes  developing  countries  as  well  as  a  large 
number  of  other  countries  is  a  more  modern  phenomenon.  This  increased  global  financial 
covariation  does  not  just  apply  to  credit  in  relation  to  GDP  but  also  within  basically  all 
financial asset types.35 
The financial conditions in the large and dominant currency areas, such as the dollar and the 
euro,  are  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  world  via  the  free  movement  of  capital  irrespective  of 
floating exchange rates. Floating exchange rates cannot therefore isolate an economy from 
the global financial  cycle. This  can,  of course,  lead  to  problems for some  countries  during 
certain periods. It can, for example, lead to inflated or rapidly falling financial asset prices, 
posing considerable risks to the financial system and macroeconomic growth. 
Interest rates are currently determined to a large extent directly or indirectly by the conditions 
on  the  global  financial  markets.  This  makes  it  more  difficult  for  central  banks  in  individual 
countries  to  affect  the  domestic  economy.  Moreover,  the  large  capital  flows  can  have 
undesirable effects on the exchange rate. This reduces the room for manoeuvre for domestic 
economic  policy  in  countries  like  Sweden  –  small,  open  economies  with  a  large  financial 
sector.36  A  current  example  of  monetary  policy  abroad  placing  certain  restrictions  on 
domestic policy is that in the situation we have – where inflation has undershot the target for 
several  years  –  a  dramatic  and  sudden  appreciation  of  the  Swedish  krona  could  be 
problematic. 
to  policy 
developments  abroad,  particularly  in  the  euro  area.  A  significantly  higher  interest  rate  in 
Sweden would not only risk holding back inflation under the target and entrenching it on a 
low level but also risk leading to much lower growth in Sweden. 
I do not mean that here in Sweden we cannot pursue an independent monetary policy. But 
monetary  policy  abroad  obviously  restricts  our  room  for  manoeuvre.  It  also  means  that 
macroprudential  policy  measures  take  on  even  more  importance  in  situations  where  the 
global financial cycle is not adapted to Swedish circumstances. These are questions we have 
to drill down into and understand better. 
the  Riksbank’s  policy  relates 
important 
therefore 
that 
is 
It 
                                                
34  In 1970, the sum of all capital flows between countries amounted to less than 2 per cent of global GDP. Just 
before  the  financial  crisis  in  2007,  it  amounted  to  20  per  cent  of  global  GDP.  Global  external  debts  have 
increased from 30 per cent of global GDP in 1980 to about 200 per cent of global GDP today, see IMF 2016.  
35  See Rey (2015). 
36  The covariance between Swedish and international GDP growth is very high; if growth abroad increases by 
1 percentage point, growth in Sweden increases by about 1.3 percentage points (quarterly data).  For inflation, 
the covariance is about 0.5 and if German 10-year bond yields rise by one percentage point, Swedish long-
term bond yields increase by the same amount. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We have to live with financial crises – but we can increase our resilience 
Today I have talked about the many different tasks of a central bank: A central bank is the 
banks’  bank  not  just  in  financial  crisis  situations,  but  on  a  day-to-day  basis,  “24/7”.  We 
determine the price – the interest rate – of banks’ payments among themselves, we supply 
the  central  payment  system.  And  if  something  goes  wrong  with  RIX,  Sweden’s  financial 
lifeblood,  it  is  the  Riksbank’s  task  to  manage  the  situation  Monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability  are  two  sides  of the  same  coin  – financial  stability  affects  how  monetary  policy  is 
spread to the rest of the economy and price stability contributes to a stable financial system. 
Both  monetary  policy  and  various  tasks  to  promote  financial  stability  are  part  of  a  central 
bank’s core operations and I believe that it is in reality not possible to differentiate between 
these tasks. All this is interconnected since, as I said earlier, the central bank is where the 
money  is.  It  is  also  at  the  central  bank  where  the  amount  of  money  can  be  increased  or 
reduced. 
Allow  me  in  conclusion  to  illustrate  the  importance  of  preventing financial  crises.  Over  the 
past  150  years,  economic  activity,  measured  in  terms  of  GDP,  has  not fallen  so  often  but 
when it has, it has often been in conjunction with a financial crisis. Six out of nine cases of 
substantial downturns in GDP have occurred in connection with a financial crisis. Of the rest, 
two coincided with the two world wars. The fact that we were spared financial crises between 
1945  and  1990  depends  to  a  high  degree  on  the  strict  regulation  that  prevailed  on  the 
financial  markets,  although  this  regulation  led  to  other  types  of  problem.  The  experiences 
indicate that financial crises are something we will have to live with. But to reduce the risks of 
financial  crises,  with  major  socioeconomic  costs,  central  banks  and  other  players  need  to 
have  the  mandates  and  tools  to  prevent  financial  crises,  along  with  flexibility  and  liquidity 
when a crisis actually occurs. 
The  challenges  facing  the  Riksbank  and  other  central  banks,  and  which  I  have  tried  to 
describe  in  this  speech,  are  partly  the  result  of  the  experiences  gained  during  the  latest 
crisis.  But  they  also  have  to  do  with  more  long-term  structural  changes  in  the  financial 
system, such as globalisation and innovations in the mediation of payments and credit. The 
challenges also relate to monetary policy, and this is something that often receives a great 
deal  of  attention  in  the debate.  But,  as  I  hopefully  have  shown,  there  are  many  other  and 
perhaps  even  more  important  areas  where  the  need  for  new  thinking  is  even  greater.  If 
you’ve been in the business since 1668, it’s important to think in new ways now and again. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  References 
 Acharya, V. (2015), “Financial Stability in the Broader Mandate for Central Banks: A Political 
Economy Perspective”, Hutchins Center Working Paper #11. 
Archer, D. and P. Moser-Boehm (2013), “Central bank finances,” BIS Papers, No. 71, Bank 
for International Settlements. 
Ball,  Laurence  M.  (2014),  “The  case  for  a  long-run  inflation  target  of  four  percent,”  IMF 
Working Paper, WP/14/92, International Monetary Fund. 
Billi,  R.  M.  and  A.  Vredin  (2014)  “Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  –  a  simple  story,” 
Economic Review 2014:2, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Blanchard,  O.,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking  macro  policy,”  IMF  Staff 
Position Note, SPN/10/03, International Monetary Fund. 
Broadbent, B. (2016), “Central banks and digital currencies”, speech at the London School of 
Economics, 2 March 2016, Bank of England. 
Bryant,  R.  C.,  D.W.  Henderson  and  T  Becker  (2012),  Maintaining  Financial  Stability  in  an 
Open Economy: Sweden in the Global Crisis and Beyond,” SNS Förlag, Stockholm. 
Buiter, W. (2008), “Can central banks go broke?,” Policy Insight, No. 24, Centre for Economic 
Policy Research. 
Capie,  F.,  C.  Goodhart  and  N.  Schnadt  (1994),  The  Future  of  Central  Banking:  The 
Tercentary Symposiunm of the Bank of England, Cambridge University Press. 
Capie F. (1998), “Can there be an international lender-of-last resort?,” International Finance, 
1:2, pp. 311–325. 
Cechetti,  S.G.  (2014),  “Towards  an  international  lender  of  last resort,”  BIS  Papers,  No  79, 
Bank for International Settlements. 
Dagens  Industri  (2015),  Inflationsmålets  fader  sågar  Riksbankens  agerande  [The  father  of 
the inflation target blasts the Riksbank’s actions], 30 September. 
ESRB  (2011),  “Recommendation  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  of 
22 December 2011 on the macroprudential mandate of national authorities” ESRB/2011/3. 
ESRB  (2014),  “ESRB  Recommendation  on  the  macro-prudential  mandate  of  national 
authorities – Follow-up Report – Overall assessment,” ESRB/2011/3, 25 June. 
Fi  2015:02  “Tillgång  till  betalkonto  med  grundläggande  funktioner  [Access  to  payment 
accounts with basic functions],” Interim report 2 from the 2015 Payment Services Inquiry (Fi 
2015:02) 
Fleming M.J. and N.J. Klagge (2010), “The Federal Reserve’s foreign exchange swap lines,” 
Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 16: 4, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Flodén,  M.  (2015),  ”Sweden  needs  its  inflation  target,”  speech  at  Fores,  Stockholm, 
13 October. 
Giavazzi, F. and F. Mishkin (2006), ”An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy 1995–2005”, 
Reports from the Riksdag 2006/2007:RFR 1. 
Goodfriend, M. and M. King (2016) ”An assessment of Swedish monetary policy 2010–15”, 
Reports from the Riksdag 2015/16:RFR6. 
Goodhart,  C.  and  J-C.  Rochet  (2011),  “Evaluation  of  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  and 
work with financial stability 2005–2010,” Reports from the Riksdag, 2010/11:RFR5. 
Goodhart, C. (1988), The evolution of central banks, Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press. 
IMF (2015), Monetary Policy and Financial Stability, Staff Report, 28 August 2015. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  IMF  (2016),  Strengthening  the  International  Monetary  System  –  A  stocktaking,  IMF  Policy 
Papers, March 2016. 
Ingves (1982), Den oreglerade kreditmarknaden, Expertrapport till Kreditpolitiska utredningen 
[The unregulated credit market, Expert report to the Credit Policy Inquiry] (SOU 1982:52). 
Irwin,  N.  (2013),  “The  Alchemists:  Three  Central  Bankers  and  a  World  on  Fire,”  Penguin 
Books, London. 
Krugman,  P.  (2014),  “Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered,”  essay  presented  at  the  ECB  Sintra 
conference, May 2014. 
Leeper, E. (2011), "Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy", in Macroeconomic Challenges: The 
Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Conference Proceedings, 
2010 Jackson Hole Symposium, pp. 361–434. 
Mehrling, P. (2014), “Why central banking should be re-imagined,” BIS Papers, No 79, Bank 
for International Settlements. 
Mitelman,  H.  (2013),  ”Dags  sänka  inflationsmålet,  [Time  to  reduce  the  inflation  target]” 
Dagens Industri, 4 December. 
Molin,  J.  (2009),  ”Hur  har  Riksbanken  hanterat  den  finansiella  krisen?  [How  has  the 
Riksbank  managed  the  financial  crisis?],”  essay  at  the  conference  Riksbanken  10  år  som 
självständig  centralbank  [The  Riksbank  –  10  years  as  an  independent  central  bank], 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
Rachel,  L.  and  T.  D.  Smith  (2015)  “Secular  drivers  of  the  global  real  interest  rate”,  Staff 
Working Paper, No. 571, Bank of England. 
Rey,  H.  (2015).  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  the  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy 
Independence,” NBER Working Paper 21162 
Rosengren,  E.  S.  (2015),  “Changing  Economic  Relationships:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy and Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 
16 April 2015. 
Schück,  J.  (2015),  ”2  procents  inflation  är  ett  orealistiskt  mål”  [2-percent  inflation  is  an 
unrealistic target], Dagens Nyheter, 8 May. 
Stein,  J.C.  (2014),  “Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary  Policy 
Framework”, speech at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington 
D.C., March 21, 2014. 
Sveriges Riksbank, http://www.riksbank.se/sv/Finansiell-stabilitet/Betalningssystemet-RIX/. 
Sveriges  Riksbank 
Dokument_riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Pressmeddelanden/2010/nr27_beslutsunderlag.pdf. 
SOU  2014:61,  Svensk  kontanthantering  [Swedish  cash  management]  Report  by  the  Cash 
Management Inquiry. 
SOU 2011:78, Stärkt krisberedskap i det centrala betalningssystemet [Higher level of crisis 
preparedness in the central payment system], Report by the Government Inquiry into Higher 
Level of Preparedness in the Central Payment System. 
Sydsvenskan (2015), ”Sikta lägre Ingves,” [Aim lower Ingves] 4 September. 
Williams,  J.  C.  (2009),  “Heeding  Daedalus:  Optimal  Inflation  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No 2, pp. 1–37. 
Woodford, M. (2012) “Inflations Targeting and Financial Stability,” Economic Review 2012:1, 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
(2010),  Background  memorandum  http://www.riksbank.se/Upload/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
