 Peter Praet: Interview in Público 
  Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Público, conducted by Mr Sérgio Anibal, published on 23 May 2016. 
 The ECB has warned about the risks of a long period of low inflation. Aren’t these two-
and-a-half years of very low inflation already too much? Isn’t there a risk of the economy 
being already in a situation of deflation? 
Our  monetary  policy  has  been  very  much  on  the  alert  in  order  to  avoid  a  de-anchoring  of 
inflation expectations towards a lower level. We have always said this is key. And sometimes 
it is difficult for the public to understand why we act so strongly, trying to avoid a de-anchoring 
of inflation expectations to below 1% or close to zero. The reason is that when you go from an 
inflation rate of 2% to 0%, in a context where you have a lot of output gap, firms with excess 
capacity will try to underprice their competitors, and they can do so by reducing their prices, 
which means that inflation will fall below zero on aggregate. You go quickly into a deflationary 
risk scenario. So very low inflation in the presence of economic slack is a dangerous cocktail. 
Is it possible that we are there already? 
What we say is that the risks of de-anchoring have increased, obviously. And that is why we 
acted  forcefully.  We  have  seen  in  some  countries  some  signs  of  de-anchoring  in  wage 
formation.  But,  this  being  said,  we  haven’t  concluded  that  inflation  expectations  are  de-
anchored. 
Isn’t that an argument for those who say that the ECB is acting too late? 
The  financial  crisis  started  eight  years  ago.  We  had  eight  years  of  very  bad  economic 
performance with two recessions during a short period of time. The first phase of our monetary 
policy action was basically the period between 2008 and 2009, when the ECB provided liquidity 
to the banks. Then we had this big fragmentation problem brought about by a very severe debt 
crisis. This was the second phase of the crisis, which called for a change in our policy action 
and the peak of that new course of action was of course the “whatever it takes” remark by 
Mario  Draghi.  Because  of  this  change,  the  situation  started  to  improve.  But  in  2014,  the 
recovery  was  showing  renewed  signs  of  weakening,  with  an  acceleration  in  the  pace  of 
disinflation which was threatening the stability of inflation expectations. That’s when we really 
started to address the problem of aggregate demand in the whole union. Our policy rates had 
been  reduced  repeatedly  before,  of  course,  and  in  the  summer  of  2013  we  had  already 
reinforced accommodation by starting to offer forward guidance on the path of future policy 
rates. But in June 2014 we brought the rate on our deposit facility to a negative level for the 
first time, with three further reductions in September 2014, in December last year and in March 
this year. Also, we started our asset purchase programme in March 2015. And in March 2016, 
mainly because of the emerging markets’ shock which had weakened our outlook for price 
stability further, we took additional measures. With hindsight you can always say that we could 
have done it differently, but I think that what the ECB has demonstrated with its action is that 
we are absolutely determined to avoid deflation. All the actions we took to avoid a banking 
crisis and in the end the break-up of the euro, were instrumental in avoiding deflation. 
But you didn’t avoid this increased risk of de-anchoring? 
We didn’t really see high inflationary pressures in the boom years, so when the bust of the 
financial cycle came, after a short spike due to higher oil prices, inflation started to fall very 
sharply. After a renewed surge in commodity prices in 2010 and 2011, the reversal of those 
shocks set in motion a prolonged period of disinflation. When we realised that this process was 
starting to contaminate the domestic components of inflation, including inflation expectations, 
we acted very forcefully. We haven’t succeeded yet in getting close to 2%, but on the other 
hand we really have avoided deflationary conditions. So I would say, given the nature and size 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   of the shocks, it wasn’t easy to achieve that result. Obviously, we are not satisfied with it and 
that is why we are persevering. And we have got the means to do it. 
Does the ECB have the tools to face another shock? 
The lesson we have drawn from our experience of the last few years is that we had the capacity 
to decide. We have a Governing Council with 19 Governors and six Board Members and we 
could make a decision. We could act when it was needed. We never had a paralysis problem 
or a chaotic decision-making process. We always had quite strong agreement on decisions 
actually. Not always unanimity, but very strong support. 
And do you still have the instruments that are needed? 
We have shown in the past that we can be very creative within our mandate. When people 
ask: “Are you ready for a new shock?”, I always answer: trust us, we always find the means 
within the scope of our mandate. Some of the measures we took in March, such as TLTRO II 
and the purchase of corporate bonds, have not even started being implemented. So we still 
have accommodation in the pipeline.  
On interest rates, can the ECB go even further? 
In our guidance on interest rates we have said that rates will remain at present or lower levels. 
So this means that interest rates are still in the tool box. The question is of course the conditions 
under which we would decide to use that instrument, because it is clear that the negative rates 
at  some  point  have  also  side  effects  that  start  to  become  more  important,  namely  on  the 
profitability  of  banks.  But,  on  balance,  the  positive  impact  is  dominating,  that  was  our 
judgement. 
And as for the asset purchases? Have you reached your limit? 
There are different tools, including purchase of assets, but you don’t open the door when you 
haven’t even implemented one part of the programme. The important message is that we have 
not felt hindered in our action by a lack of instruments. 
Aren’t you constrained by what governments don’t do? 
Monetary policy can’t do it alone. We have always said that we need a comprehensive policy 
response. We need structural, fiscal and monetary policies. But at the same time, we cannot 
make  monetary  policy  decisions  conditional  on  the  actions  of  others,  because  you  have  a 
mandate  which  is  unconditional,  namely  it  does  not  depend  on  the  actions  of  others.  Our 
institution was created with a mandate – price stability – but also with the tools to achieve that, 
so we don’t shy away from our responsibility. We do it. We are not hindered by the inaction of 
others. At the same time you also warn other policymakers that monetary policy will not solve 
the problems of low structural growth and unemployment.  
In some countries, it is often said that monetary policy can reduce the incentive for 
reforms… 
I don’t think this is proven. Some people defend the opposite, that with monetary policy you 
make reforms  potentially  easier. I think that for  reforms  what matters  is not  so much  what 
happens in monetary policy, it’s really the political cycle.  
How is the ECB dealing with the fact that its policy affects in different ways the countries 
that save more and the countries that are more indebted, such as Portugal? 
Within  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  you  have  indeed  countries  that  had  a  very 
pronounced financial cycle, for instance Spain or Portugal, and then a big correction. And then 
you had other countries such as Germany, with no financial cycle and with excess savings. 
This is a situation where some countries of the monetary union are creditors and some are 
debtors. It is important to say that in all the adjustments that we had, looking at the union as a 
whole, you had a compression of demand, because this was very strong in the crisis countries, 
but you didn’t have compensation from the surplus countries in terms of expansion of domestic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   demand.  In  Germany,  for  example,  GDP  did  very  well  throughout  the  crisis,  but  domestic 
demand was relatively weak. At the end of the day, the current account surplus that we will 
have in EMU is 4% of GDP, which is huge, with Germany having almost 9%. There’s an excess 
of savings. Before the crisis we had a current account range of -1% to 1% of GDP. It’s an 
imbalance that is difficult to resolve. 
The surplus countries are complaining that they are the ones that will be hit by negative 
rates. Does this affect the ECB’s decisions? 
I  don’t  think  the  Governing  Council  changes  in  any  way  its  capacity  to  decide  because  of 
political debates. We do what we have to do as good central bankers. We are unanimous in 
defending  that  view,  even  if  we  aren’t  totally  unanimous  in  the  measures  we  take.  The 
dominant fact is that we are unanimous in our intention to reach our inflation objective and 
support the economy.  
The  ECB  has  often  made  recommendations  to  and  expressed  criticism  of  deficit 
countries, such as Portugal and others. Is it fair to say that the ECB has not been so 
vocal in criticising or recommending policies to countries that have surpluses? 
It’s a very good point. We had to go through a balance of payments crisis in the deficit countries 
because money was flowing out and we don’t have a good adjustment mechanism in the EMU 
for asymmetric shocks. And the question in those countries was a big loss in competitiveness. 
There were structural reforms in those countries. At the same time, when those countries were 
hit by asymmetric shocks, there was no compensation by other countries. It is a problem that 
is quite difficult to solve, but it is a fact that EMU hasn’t functioned very well in this respect. 
One  worry  is  that  the  fundamental  reflection  about  how  to  make  EMU  work  better  is  not 
advancing  sufficiently.  Not  all  is  negative,  of  course.  We  have  managed  to  set  up  better 
mechanisms to deal with sovereign debt crises, but you are still in an unclear position when 
dealing with issues of sovereign debt. And we have banking union, we are especially advanced 
in terms of supervision, but we have not finished it. 
The fact that banking union is not finished, doesn’t that lead to small banks in small 
countries being bought by big banks from big countries? 
I know this is a big discussion here in Portugal. I always have problems in understanding why 
that  would  be  a  problem.  I  experienced  the  crisis  in  Belgium  with  Fortis,  and  that  bank 
represented a huge risk for that country. Now, it is part of BNP and this has been absolutely 
instrumental in avoiding a catastrophe. For Europe, this is an important question. You see the 
banking systems are in general more national than they were. Not in Portugal, but in many 
countries. The banks, even when they have subsidiaries, are tending to manage by way of 
separate entities more and more. Banks today are exposed to country risk because most of 
the assets are related to the country. This means that, if you have a shock in the country, the 
banking system is not diversified enough. Of course, the fact that we are in a monetary union 
limits the room for manoeuvre: you don’t have the exchange rate instrument, you have a single 
monetary policy. So it is absolutely vital to evolve towards pan-European banks, banks that 
are geographically diversified and also that would be backstopped by EMU as a whole.  
So what you are saying is that, in a monetary union, if small countries want to have safe 
banks, they have to forget the ownership question? 
I think what matters in banks is good governance, not national ownership. You can always 
have local banks, that’s not the problem, but having the whole banking system exposed to the 
local  economy  in  a  monetary  union  like  ours  is  a  dangerous  combination.  We  have  two 
problems in the euro area: a fragmented banking market and the lack of common backstop. It 
cannot be done in one day, but you have to spell out how you make the transition to it.  
Monetary policy in Europe is done essentially through banks. Isn’t that a problem? Is 
there no other way to get the money more directly to households and companies? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   As  for  helicopter  money,  we  are  not  discussing  that.  It’s  true  that  the  main  transmission 
mechanism of our monetary policy is via banks. But when you cut rates, people also have an 
incentive to consume more. Consumption has increased more in relation to real disposable 
income in some countries. Also, think about portfolio rebalancing: when we buy bonds, the 
sellers, which are not necessarily banks, get liquidity. What do they do with the cash? Some 
people spend it, others reinvest.  
Aren’t you benefiting more the rich than the poor? 
I’m not convinced. If we avoid a recession or we facilitate the recovery of the economy and 
unemployment goes down, the distribution effect of that is very important. You should not look 
only at asset prices, such as share prices, but also at the impact on the economy. 
In Portugal, should we believe that the ECB’s measures will make banks lend more when 
the demand for credit is so low? 
In a weak environment, you have growth but credit is still negative year on year. In general, in 
Europe, there is weak demand for loans. As the banking sector has not really consolidated 
enough, the biggest issue for banks now is too much competition. Our Bank Lending Survey 
shows that there is increasing competition in the banking sector. The good news is that rates 
are  passed  on  to  customers,  but  at  the  same  time  banks  don’t  have  enough  profits  to 
recapitalise. There are big challenges in the banking sector in many countries in Europe, and 
Portugal certainly is one of those countries. 
What do you think of the Portuguese plans to create an entity to deal with bad loans? 
Developing a market for bad loans is key. But there are many conditions for it to work. In Spain 
they  did  it  very  early,  but  most  of  their  non-performing  loans  were  related  to  real  estate 
exposures, which are easier to deal with than with loans to SMEs, as in Italy or in Portugal. 
These loans are much more difficult to price. If you, as a banker, try to sell them, the buyers 
will not know exactly what they are buying, so the price is going to be very low. These are 
technically very difficult things to do.  
How  decisive  do  you  think  the  ECB  has  been  in  the  last  three  years  in  keeping 
Portuguese bonds interest rates relatively low? 
One of the main factors why Portuguese rates went down was that the country completed the 
programme.  
So you don’t feel that the country is dependent on the ECB’s low interest rates and its 
promise of support in case of need? 
We have seen that interest rates in Portugal have recently gone higher. This shows that market 
discipline  is  present,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  ECB  is  buying  sovereign  bonds.  Portugal 
should not forget this message: market discipline is still there. And then there are the ratings. 
In the asset purchases, we look at the assessment of rating agencies. There is one with the 
minimum, and it is BBB-… 
If Portugal loses that rating, what would the ECB do? 
It’s very clear, we only buy investment-grade assets. We can have a rating waiver, but this is 
subject to a programme. So there is no ambiguity there. 
Don’t you think it’s strange that the ECB’s action regarding Portugal is dependent on a 
single rating agency? 
The ECB relies on four recognised rating agencies and has an economics department looking 
at the vulnerability of countries. 
Probably better than the ones at DBRS, I assume? 
The rating agencies have to fulfil a set of criteria. You can say: why don’t you do your own 
ratings?  We  certainly  can  and  do  make  an  analysis  to  cross-check  the  conclusions  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   assessments of the rating agencies. But it is good practice to have this cross-checking going 
in both directions: our assessment also needs some double-checking by outsiders. 
The IMF calculates that, at the present rate, the ECB will reach the limit of Portuguese 
bonds that it can buy at the end of the year. Will Portugal have a problem here? 
I don’t want to comment on this.  
You talked about market reactions to the latest developments in Portugal. And you, are 
you worried? 
The markets are somewhat worried, but not excessively. So there’s still the benefit of the doubt. 
The fiscal direction has been confirmed but a number of things are not clear for the budget of 
2016. And the number for nominal GDP growth looks on the high side. There is a political 
declaration of continuity and of following the rules in Europe, that’s positive, but there are some 
doubts about the details and the macro assumptions. So it is something we are following and 
I think the government is quite aware of the fragility of the situation. The other thing we are 
following  is  structural  reform. The  Portuguese  plan  has  six  priorities,  one  of  them  is  social 
cohesion, which I think is quite important. But there are some of the reforms that are to be 
reversed and we need to ask a number of questions. What are the budget implications, for 
example, if you go back to 35 hours a week? It is still in a period where there are question 
marks.  
The government thinks that the priority in the reforms has to shift towards education 
and social cohesion, instead of flexibility in the labour market for instance. Don’t you 
agree with that? 
I think the reforms have to be continued. But it’s up to policymakers to decide about distribution 
and where you put the accent, but in the end what we want is a country that is more stable, 
has more productivity and financial stress is reduced.  
And on the banking sector, what do you think of government policy in that area? 
It’s still unclear. The indicators show that the banking sector is still fragile, the adjustment is far 
from finished, and it is still difficult to see what the strategy is here. For example, an asset 
management company is a good idea, but it is technically difficult to do and can take time to 
become operational.  
And how do you see the possibility of nationalisations? 
If nationalisation means deciding on the allocation of credit on the basis of unsound economic 
criteria, it is not a good idea. If the problem is about a private bank allocating savings badly, 
then  you  have to  see  why  the  bank  is making  bad  decisions. That  usually  means  that  the 
owners or managers of the bank are not good. What a bank needs, whether it is state-owned 
or  not,  is  good  governance  and  control  over  the  soundness  of  credit  decisions.  We  have 
equally seen examples of bad public and private banks. 
We  have  had  the  troika  since  2012  and  now we  still  have  problems with  the  banks. 
Shouldn’t that have been addressed during the programme? 
Banks were a priority. In Portugal, there was a lot of credit compared to deposits, so in the 
programme there were a lot of constraints on that, which means a crunch. It’s difficult to judge, 
ex post, because you have to see the conditions at the time. What we know is that the lack of 
a banking union when the shock came very much amplified the crisis. And we have not yet 
finished  the  banking  union.  Fundamentally,  Portugal  has  longer-term  growth  issues.  It  has 
made a huge effort in the past few years but needs to persevere.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
