  François Villeroy de Galhau: Present challenges for France’s central 
bank 
Hearing of Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, by the Senate 
Finance Committee, Paris, 30 March 2016. 
 Madam President, General Rapporteur, Senators, 
Thank you for receiving me this morning, just a few months after your vote of confidence. I 
attach  great  importance  to  these  regular  exchanges  in  order  to  inform  you  of  matters 
essential to the Banque de France. 
In  2016,  the  world  in  general,  and  Europe  in  particular,  are  experiencing  a  period  of 
uncertainty: uncertainties relating to our security, with the threat of terrorist attacks still real; 
political  uncertainties,  with  the  risk  of  “Brexit”  and  the  refugee  crisis;  as  well  as  economic 
uncertainties,  with  lower  economic  growth  in  emerging  economies,  including  China,  and 
excess market volatility in January and February. 
Faced  with  this  turmoil,  the  Eurosystem,  of  which  the  Banque  de  France  is  a  member,  is 
acting decisively. Its monetary policy is supporting the economy and creating a favourable 
environment for taking all the other actions necessary to return to strong, sustainable and 
job-creating growth: France, and Europe, must seize this opportunity to regain confidence. 
Monetary policy, first of all, is doing its fair share of the work. 
1. 
The  Eurosystem  is  determined  to fight the  low  inflation  that  we  are facing  today  and  thus 
underpin economic activity. This is our mandate and we are striving vigorously to achieve it. 
The new comprehensive package of measures that we adopted on 10 March 2016 reflects 
two main objectives: first, to return to inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term.  This  is  not  the  case  at  present  since  inflation  stood  at  –0.2%  in  the  euro  area  in 
February,  taking  account  of  the  sharp  decline  in  oil  prices,  but  it  should  return  to  positive 
territory in the second half of 2016. 
The other objective is to bolster the financing of the real economy and to protect it from the 
pressures  related  to  market  volatility.  The  new  series  of  targeted  refinancing  operations 
extension of the asset purchase programme, for its part, will be of particular benefit to large 
French corporations. 
We  are  convinced  that  these  additional  measures  will  deliver  concrete  results,  as  did  the 
successive  measures  we  have  implemented  since  June  2014.  The  latter  have  indeed 
boosted  lending  to  businesses,  while  lowering  the  cost  of  credit,  and  made  a  0.3% 
contribution to  French growth in 2015, or even  0.4% according to INSEE. This represents 
about 80,000 additional jobs for the economy. 
We are therefore consistent in our objective, and ready to act using the right instruments. But 
we  also  remain  vigilant  as  to  the  possible  risks  that  our  monetary  policy  could  generate. 
Today,  there  are  no  signs  of  a financial  bubble,  but  we  are  ready  to  act,  if  necessary,  by 
implementing  macroprudential  measures,  in  the  framework  notably  of  the  Haut  conseil  de 
stabilité  financière  (High  Council  for  Financial  Stability  –  HCSF)  that  you  created  via  the 
Banking Act of 2013. For instance, at our eighth meeting held on 15 March 2016, we issued 
a warning about the office sector in the Paris area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 2. 
Monetary policy thus contributes greatly to our economy, but it can’t do 
everything. 
 It  cannot  be  the  only  game  in  town.  It  is  vital  that  Europe  and  France  seize  this 
opportunity now. In France, growth is expected to be both robust and inadequate: Robust, 
as  it  should  remain  in  2016  at  least  at  the  1.2  percent  level  observed  last  year.  But 
inadequate, as it will probably linger a little below the euro area average of 1.4–1.5 percent. 
For  growth  and  employment,  three  essential  actions  are  necessary:  reforms  in  France; 
private and public investment; the coordination of economic policies in Europe. 
First, in France, orderly and sustained reforms are needed to rebuild confidence. Keeping 
our  public  deficit  and  our  debt  under  control  is  a  contributing  factor:  the  good  figures 
published on Friday (deficit reduced to 3.5% in 2015) are another reason to strictly respect 
our European commitments by bringing it below the 3% limit in 2017. We must stick to the 
reforms that work, in particular the tax credit for competitiveness and investment (CICE) and 
the Responsibility and Solidarity Pact (RSP), and we need to go further still. The unemployed 
and youth cannot afford to wait. There are at least four reforms that are a priority, because 
our  neighbours  successfully  implemented  them  and  they  are  fully  compatible  with  the 
European  social  model  that  we  share:  the  large-scale  development  of  apprenticeships; 
simplifications,  starting  with  labour  law;  the  decentralisation  of  social  dialogue  to  the 
company level, i.e. as close as possible to the economic and human reality; and lastly, the 
development of entrepreneurship. 
Second, we need to mobilise both public and private investment in order to take advantage 
of the exceptional financing conditions created by our monetary policy. To do so, we need to 
put the Juncker Plan back on the table. The Juncker Plan has yielded results, but they are 
insufficient.  To  support  the  revival  of  this  Plan,  I  have  proposed  the  creation  of  a  true 
European “Financing and Investment Union”. To achieve this, we must combine the Juncker 
Plan, the European Commission’s plan for a Capital Markets Union, and the Banking Union. 
The aim is to create synergies in order to achieve three ambitious goals: better channel euro 
area  household  savings  to  productive  investment  and  equity;  better  pool  risks  across 
countries; and thus better finance innovation and the networks our economy needs. This is 
the direction we should take now. 
Lastly, we need to make progress towards an economic governance of the euro area; in 
France,  we  spoke  of  “economic  government”.  This  progress  is  essential,  regardless  of 
whether or not the United Kingdom remains in the European Union; naturally, I would like it 
to stay in. This is not a purely institutional question; it is not about “more Brussels” but very 
concretely about more growth and employment. Indeed, economists estimate that the current 
lack of coordination of national economic policies has cost Europeans between two and five 
percentage points of GDP since 2011. Naturally, contrary to the case of monetary policy, the 
aim is not to fully integrate all of our economic policies at the European level, but to achieve 
a  “full  coordination”  of  fiscal  and  structural  policies.  For  this,  we  need  to  have  shared 
economic goals, and a true “collective strategy” for the euro area, in which each country has 
a  role  to  play  to  improve  everyone’s  situation.  This  requires  trust,  in  particular  between 
France  and  Germany,  based  on  a  clear  pact:  national  reforms  and  (not  or)  European 
coordination.  This  full  coordination  also  rests  on  the  setting  up  of  a  strong  and  legitimate 
European institution: a euro area Finance Minister backed by a European Treasury system 
and  subject  to  greater  democratic  accountability.  This  Finance  Minister  would  be  charged 
with defining the collective strategy, supervising its decentralised implementation by Member 
States  and  managing  crisis  management  tools.  Going  forward,  he/she  could  also  be  in 
charge of a common budget. For the euro area and for the confidence of its citizens, 2016–
2017 is the crucial time to act: I had the opportunity to discuss these proposals in greater 
depth a few days ago, and I hope that our exchange will further this debate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I  will  finish  with  a  few  words  about  the  Banque  de  France  itself. When  you  heard  me  in 
September, I presented my view of the three main tasks of the Banque de France: monetary 
strategy,  financial  stability,  economic  service,  via  its  branch  network.  With  the  staff  of  the 
Banque de France, we firmly believe in these tasks and in their future, and that is why our 
ambition  is  to  be  an  exemplary  public  service,  even  more  efficient,  more  innovative,  and 
more visible in France and Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
