   Luis M Linde: Islamic finance – growing importance and regulatory 
challenge 
Welcoming  remarks  by Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  European 
Forum  on  Islamic  Finance,  organized  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (Madrid), 
Madrid, 24 May 2016. 
 Mr. Jaseem Ahmed, Secretary-General  of the Islamic Financial  Services  Board (IFSB); Mr. 
Guillermo  de  la  Dehesa,  Chairman  of  the  International  Advisory  Board  of  IE  Business 
School; colleagues, ladies and gentlemen: 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you all to the European Forum on Islamic Finance. This is 
the fifth European Forum since 2005, after the previous fora in Luxembourg, Germany, France 
and Italy. 
Following the tradition established by other European central banks, we are glad to support 
this event, organised by the IFSB. I would also like to thank the IE Business School for their 
hospitality in hosting the Forum in Madrid today. 
The purpose of this European Forum is to gain a better grasp of the specifics of Islamic Finance 
and its development, which has been particularly noticeable in the last decade. In this respect, 
I would like to stress two relevant aspects of Islamic Finance in my opening remarks: FIRST, 
its growing importance in international finance; and SECOND, the ongoing regulatory efforts 
to facilitate its insertion in international markets. 
The growing importance of Islamic finance 
Indeed, Islamic Finance has grown most significantly in the last decade, posting double- digit 
rates since 2007, at close to 20%, compared with growth of 4% in the “conventional” financial 
sector. It has now reached a volume of US$ 2 trillion, which is a very significant figure that 
represents around 1% of total global bank assets. 
The  surge  of  Islamic  Finance  is  apparent  both  in  Islamic  countries  and  also,  in  European 
markets, with the establishment of Islamic banks and the development of the Sukuk  market 
for private and official issuers under some European jurisdictions. 
The  prospects  for  Islamic  finance  are  also  positive,  given  the  extensive  scope  for  the 
financial  inclusion  of  a  population  in  a  number  of  countries,  with  very  low  rates  of  bank 
access and usage. 
The regulatory challenge of Islamic finance 
The  further  development  of  Islamic  finance  will  nonetheless  depend  on  implementing  the 
necessary financial reforms to ensure its integration into the wider financial system. Here, I 
think that the challenges are twofold: 
FIRST,  in  Islamic  jurisdictions  the  challenge  is  to  continue  developing  the  architecture  of 
Islamic finance in areas such as payment systems and supervisory and resolution regimes. In 
particular,  it  would  seem  vital  to  advance  towards  the  standardisation  of  Islamic  finance 
regulation, breaking the existing jurisdictional heterogeneity, in order to take advantage of a 
wider international market. 
The  SECOND challenge  refers to  the  integration  of Islamic finance  into the  wider financial 
system.  In  this  area,  Islamic  finance  instruments  will  have  to  comply  with  conventional  or 
general  financial  regulation,  while  maintaining  their  specificities.  In  particular,  the  contract- 
based nature of Islamic finance normally linked to an underlying asset poses challenges in 
areas such as risk weight analysis and the fiscal treatment of Islamic-type instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Financial instruments have to be carefully calibrated to take due account of the risks linked to 
the  underlying  asset  and  its  liquidity.  In  taxation,  there  are  problems  of  double  or  multiple 
taxation  and  equality  of  treatment  with  interest-based  instruments  that  also  need  to  be 
addressed. Several European countries are adapting their legislation in this respect. 
In  addressing  these  regulatory  challenges,  the  IFSB  is  playing  a  very  important  role  by 
providing a forum for coordination and dissemination of better international practices. It is also 
contributing to the integration of Islamic finance into the general framework of conventional 
finance regulation, as established by international bodies, such as the FSB itself and the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
In parallel, other institutions such as the G20, the IMF and the World Bank are stepping up 
their efforts to further the analysis of Islamic finance and to identify the necessary reforms to 
its insertion in the international financial system. 
Many of these issues will be dealt with in the different sessions of today´s Forum. The agenda 
includes four technical sessions on regulatory aspects and the specific challenges regarding 
Sukuk markets, equity-based financing and financial inclusion. We have a diverse audience 
with well-known experts on Islamic finance and market participants who, I am sure, will provide 
us with a fruitful encounter. 
Let me thank the IE again for hosting the event and the IFSB and Mr. Jaseem Ahmed for 
bringing this initiative to Madrid. 
I wish you all a very successful Forum. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
