  
 
Nina Stoyanova: Bank of Bulgaria’s latest projects in the area of financial 
services and payments 
Speech  by  Ms  Nina  Stoyanova,  Deputy  Governor  (Banking  Department)  of  the  Bulgarian 
National Bank, at the opening of the “Innovations” Financial Forum, Sofia, 14 June 2016. 
 Dear colleagues and guests, 
I would like to welcome you at the Financial Forum ‘Innovations’ organised for the third year 
in a row by the ‘Bank of the Year’ Association in partnership with the University of Finance, 
Business and Entrepreneurship (VUZF). 
The topic of this forum gives us the opportunity to present and discuss the innovations in the 
financial sector in the area of technologies, banking products and regulations. 
In this regard, I would like to briefly present the latest projects in the area of financial services 
and payments, on which the BNB is working. Later today our colleagues are going to give 
you more details on these projects, which will have an impact on the financial sector over the 
next couple of years. 
As  you  are  well  aware,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of  financial  services  and 
payments  in  Bulgaria  is  consistent  with  all  European  trends  and  requirements  aiming  to 
achieve an integrated European market, to harmonise the rules and conditions for providing 
payment services, to promote innovative payment methods, to ensure a high level of security 
for payments and better consumer protection. 
• Firstly, in the payment services area this year’s focus is the transposition into the Bulgarian 
law  of  Directive  2014/92/EU  on  the  comparability  of  fees  related  to  payment  accounts, 
payment  account  switching  and  access  to  payment  accounts  with  basic  features. 
Amendments  to  the  LPSPS  have  been  prepared  and  will  be  given  second  reading  by  the 
National Assembly, together with changes in the regulations. At the same time, the BNB is 
building  a  website  for  comparing  fees  charged  by  payment  service  providers  on  the  most 
representative services linked to a payment account, and that website will be accessible to 
all  users  free  of  charge.  The  legal  changes  will  come  into  effect,  in  compliance  with  the 
Directive, as of 18 September 2016. 
• Secondly, Regulation 260/2012 establishing technical and business requirements for credit 
transfers and direct debits in euro is going to become applicable to us. The deadline for this 
Regulation to become binding in its entirety and directly applicable to euro-payments in the 
non-euro area Member States is 31 October 2016. As from that date at the latest all credit 
transfers and direct debits in euro must be made in SEPA format, using the XML standard. 
Payment service users will be relieved of the requirement to specify BIC for these payments. 
Small-value  payment  systems  in  euro  must  ensure  that  they  are  operationally  compatible 
with other similar systems in the EU. At the end of 2015, in Bulgaria the share of SEPA credit 
transfers in the total number of customers’ credit transfer orders in euro was 59%, and the 
migration to the EMV standard for bank payment cards and POS terminals is over 90% and 
is nearly complete. 
• With effect from 1 February 2016, Member States must remove settlement-based national 
reporting obligations on payment service providers for balance of payments statistics relating 
to  payment  transactions  of  their  customers.  Soon  the  National  Assembly  is  going  to  pass 
amendments to the Currency Law, introduced with the Law on consumers’ real estate loans, 
and  the  related  changes  are  going  to  be  made  to  Ordinance  No.27  on  the  balance  of 
payment statistics. Therefore, payment service providers will no longer be required, for the 
needs  of  the  balance  of  payments  statistics,  to  keep  registers  and  provide  the  BNB  with 
information  on  transactions  and  payments  between  residents  and  non-residents  and  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  cross-border  transfers  of  over  BGN  100  000.  We  expect  that  these  changes  would  be 
passed by the end of July this year. 
• In relation to the agreement reached between the MoF, BNB and market participants, the 
BNB  as  the  fiscal  agent  of  the  government  works  on  a  project  for  the  technical 
implementation  of  direct  connection  of  the  Government  Securities  Depository  with  the  E-
BOND  system  to  the  BLOOMBERG  PROFESSIONAL  platform  and  the  system  of  the 
Bulgarian Stock Exchange. Thus, additional development and modernization of the Bulgarian 
government securities market is expected to be achieved and its further integration into the 
European Union’s single market to be encouraged. This will allow by the end of next year 
financial  institutions  to  freely  select  the  place  where  they  trade  in  government  securities 
issued  in  Bulgaria,  in  compliance  with  the  requirements  under  Regulation  2015/61 
concerning the assessment of liquid assets in the form of government securities. This would 
possibly provide the prerequisites for additional diversification of the investors in Bulgarian 
government  debt  instruments.  These  changes  are  conceived  in  line  with  the  debt 
management  and  financial  markets  security  policy  in  the  context  of  our  future  euro  area 
membership and are necessitated by regulatory reforms at EU level. 
Finally, I would like to mention a project successfully completed recently. On 31 May 2016 
Bulgaria  subscribed  to  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  Plus  of  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  Bulgaria  is  the  11th  country  worldwide  to  adhere  to  this  highest  tier 
international data dissemination standard. Adhering to this standard is the result of the joint 
efforts  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank  as  coordinator  for  Bulgaria,  the  National  Statistical 
Institute,  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  The  BNB  oversaw  the  adherence  efforts  and  was 
responsible  for  developing  the  so-called  National  Summary  Data  Page,  which  is  already 
available on the BNB website. The greater part of the new statistical indicators included in 
the standard are compiled by the BNB. Adhering to the Special Data Dissemination Standard 
–  Plus  indicates  to  the  local  and  foreign  investors,  the  rating  agencies,  the  international 
financial institutions and all other users that the quality and reliability of the statistical data 
that  are  used  to  make  important  macroeconomic  and  business  decisions  are  up  to  the 
highest international statistical requirements. 
In conclusion it could be stated that the country has achieved considerable progress in the 
implementation of financial and payment services innovations. Of course there are still a lot 
of challenges in relation to the requirements of information and communications technologies 
development,  and  the  enhanced  requirements  to  the  payment  infrastructure  and  payment 
instruments  related  to  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area.  In  our  work  we  will  keep  striving 
towards these standards and best practices. 
I wish successful, interesting and constructive work to the forum participants! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
