  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview  with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  Il  Sole  24  Ore,  conducted  by  Mr  Alessandro  Merli  on  25  April  and  published  on 
27 April 2016. 
 Last  Friday  in  Amsterdam  the  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  Council  (Ecofin) 
discussed  a  Dutch  presidency  proposal  to  change  the  rules  on  sovereign  debt 
holdings  in  banks’  portfolios.  That  was  opposed  by  a  majority  of  countries.  What 
happens now? 
There were clearly different views among ministers and they agreed that the issue needs to 
be investigated further. It’s a long technical process. Several participants, including the ECB, 
made the point that we should seek to achieve global consistency. We should have as level 
a playing field as possible in banking regulation. To be honest, I was never totally convinced 
by  the  argument  that  there  cannot  be  a  European  discussion  on  sovereign  risk:  the 
bank/sovereign nexus exists everywhere, but in the euro area it’s unique in its intensity and 
there is an acceptance that it has been a major contributor to the euro area crisis. But any 
European answer has to be set against a global background. We need to wait and see how 
the  discussion  develops  in  the  Basel  Committee.  That  was  very  much  the  tone  in 
Amsterdam. 
The  Germans,  and  a  few  others,  make  the  point  that  there  cannot  be  a  European 
deposit  insurance  scheme  (EDIS),  which  the  ECB  says  is  an  essential  part  of  the 
banking union, without a solution to banks’ sovereign exposure. So, if EDIS is put on 
hold, does that mean there will be a long delay before a common deposit insurance is 
introduced? 
The  exclusive  link  between  the  two  is  a  political  construction.  There  are  at  least  three 
dimensions to the issue of sovereign risk. One has to do with the risk in banks: that is clearly 
tied to EDIS. Progress in risk sharing has to be combined with progress in risk reduction. It 
makes  sense  in  economic  terms  and  it  makes  sense  in  political  terms.  But  if  we  want  to 
examine all the consequences of putting risk weights on sovereign bonds or setting a limit on 
exposure,  they  are  not  just  about  risk  in  banks.  They  also  have  an  impact  on  how 
governments  fund  themselves.  In  Europe,  unlike  the  US,  most  government  bonds  are 
purchased  by  banks.  So  any  change  in  sovereign  exposure  for  banks  would  also  have 
consequences for government funding. This second dimension ties in with the discussion on 
fiscal union. There is also a third question: the need for financial markets to function with risk-
free assets. So, if we start considering government bonds as risky, that is good in terms of 
discipline  for  banks,  but  it  can  also  create  systemic  fragility  and  have  an  impact  on  the 
functioning of capital markets. That is no excuse not to discuss the issue. But we need to 
understand  all  the  consequences  and  in  all  likelihood  it  will  lead  to  a  process  that  will  be 
phased  in  over  a  very  long  period  so  that  the  consequences  can  be  managed  and 
anticipated more closely by governments, banks, and market participants. 
The  ECB  published  a  legal  opinion  last  week  saying  that  the  deposit  insurance 
scheme  should  not  be  conditional  on  issues  whose  solution  in  uncertain,  as  would 
seem to be the case with this discussion on sovereign risk. What happens if Germany 
asks for EDIS to be put on hold until the sovereign risk issue is solved? 
The two discussions will continue in parallel. What the ECB has argued in its legal opinion1 is 
that in the event of a conditional phasing-in of EDIS, any milestone on risk-reduction would 
                                                
1   https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2016_26_f__sign.pdf  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
have  to  be  precisely  defined  ex-ante.  Banks  and  depositors  need  to  know  what  the 
timeframe  and  conditions  will  be.  I  expect  the  two  discussions  to  take  time,  as  there  are 
many  unresolved  questions.  The  Dutch  Presidency  has  already  made  clear  that  it  will  be 
passing this dossier to Slovakia next semester. 
In  Amsterdam,  there  was  also  a  discussion  on  Greece,  with  an  agreement  that  the 
government should adopt contingency measures to be triggered if it fails to reach the 
targets set out by the programme, but no immediate progress on debt relief. Are we in 
for another long, hot summer of Greek drama? 
On Greece, I am cautiously optimistic. There has been good progress in recent weeks, and 
in the few days before Amsterdam’s Eurogroup meeting. The Greek government has been 
committed in moving towards a solution that delivers on the programme agreed last August. 
The  review  is  about  implementation.  The  Greek  government  has  moved  closer  to  the 
institutions: there is near agreement on the measures to be taken, including in the difficult 
areas such as pension reform and personal income tax. That is promising. We are not 100% 
there yet, but we are close. It’s time to discuss the next step: the fiscal path until and beyond 
2018, debt sustainability and whether debt measures will be needed. The mission chiefs are 
back in Athens. The priority this week is to agree on contingency measures, which I see as 
an insurance in the event that the IMF fiscal scenario, which is more conservative than the 
European one, materialises. It’s not surprising that there are different views, as there is so 
much uncertainty. At this point it’s a discussion about risk management and how to hedge 
against risk. These are measures, if the scenario of the Commission, the ECB and the ESM 
is the right one, that Greece will never have to implement. On debt, the uncertainty is even 
greater, as we are talking about what happens after 2018 and in the longer term. The debt 
sustainability analysis will hinge on assumptions about long-term growth, primary surpluses, 
and interest rates. On this basis, I expect debt measures to be needed to address risks to 
debt sustainability. 
When will this go back to the Eurogroup? 
As soon as possible, as there is a value in not waiting too long. The Greek economy has the 
potential to rebound when depositors bring their money back to the banks and banks can 
again lend to the economy, and when foreign investors come back. But of course all of this 
assumes that the Greek government delivers the agreed reforms. 
The  Greek  banks  are  still  receiving  massive  support  from  emergency  liquidity 
assistance (ELA)… 
They  are  now  in  a  solid  capital  position,  having  been  recapitalised.  The  main  issues  are 
access to liquidity, which depends on overall confidence in the Greek economy, and a high 
level of non-performing loans (NPLs), which should be addressed in a decisive manner. 
On  monetary  policy,  you  claim  that  your  measures  have  been  a  success.  But 
eventually that will be measured on your results on inflation. Inflation is at zero and 
inflation expectations are at a low. The markets don’t seem to trust the ECB 
This is not a question of trust in the ECB. We are in a unique situation in terms of inflation. 
We  have  a  combination  of  strong  disinflationary  forces,  which  are  the  legacy  of  the  crisis 
(namely:  high  public  and  private  debt,  non-performing  exposures  of  banks,  high 
unemployment  and,  in  general,  vast  unutilised  capacity  in  the  economy),  and  a  series  of 
negative  external  shocks,  especially  lower  commodity  prices,  all  of  which  explain  why 
inflation  is  very  low  and  increasing  only  gradually.  But  all  other  indicators  show  that  our 
monetary policy is working: credit is improving significantly, both in the volume and cost of 
loans, and economic activity is recovering. Not strongly enough, but it is steadily increasing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
You said you are ready to act with all available instruments, if needed. Should you be 
doing  more?  And  which  instruments,  as  you  have  ruled  out  helicopter  money  and 
interest rates seem near their lowest levels? 
Let  me  first  reiterate  that  helicopter  money  is  not  something  we  are  discussing  or  even 
considering. We announced a very strong package in March and have not implemented all 
the measures yet. All conventional and non-conventional instruments are available, but we 
are not having that discussion now. 
You  have  relied  on  negative  interest  rates,  which  by  your  own  admission  are 
“complex” and have a long-term impact on the financial sector. They are also harshly 
criticised in Germany… 
We need to look beyond banks. Our action is not about supporting any particular industry. 
And even for banks there is evidence that the net interest margin has been rising, not falling. 
The effect of a low and flat yield curve is offset by expanded volumes and lower risk, which 
reduces loan loss provisions. This will continue with the recovery. In the long term, if interest 
rates continued to be this low, that would not be good news for the euro area. But that has 
nothing to do with monetary policy. It would mean that growth and potential growth had not 
picked  up,  which  would  affect  the  real  return  in  the  economy,  the  return  of  investment 
projects. We don’t want to be in that situation. That is why the Eurozone needs to support 
investment as much as possible. Monetary policy can only contribute to this. We have seen 
some public initiatives, like the Juncker plan, that go in the right direction. 
The  IMF  is  more  outspoken  than  the  ECB  in  asking  countries  with  fiscal  space,  i.e. 
Germany, to invest more. 
We agree on that. And we have said that fiscal policy and structural reforms should support 
growth,  to  alleviate  the  burden  on  monetary  policy  and  enhance  its  effectiveness.  Fiscal 
space can be used for investing in socially valuable projects or, for example, cutting taxes on 
labour. But we are not in the business of giving detailed advice to governments. That is the 
job of the European Commission. On Germany, we note that they are spending money to 
address  the flow  of  refugees.  Countries  that  do  not  have  fiscal  space, on  the  other  hand, 
should not try to invent one. And it’s not a good idea to stretch the flexibility, which is there, of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  too  much,  otherwise  it  will  lose  credibility.  On  structural 
reforms, all countries can act, and all countries can improve the composition of the budget by 
cutting taxes and unproductive expenditure. 
The  legacy  of  the  crisis  includes  the  heavy  burden  of  NPLs  on  banks,  including  in 
Italy, where some measures have been taken recently. 
I do not work on the supervisory side of the ECB, but NPLs matter for monetary policy if they 
hamper its transmission and are one of the factors that weigh on euro area growth, and not 
just  in  Italy.  In  the  Italian  case,  the  launch  of  the  Atlante  fund  is  an  initiative  to  recreate 
confidence and goes in the right direction. It shows the willingness of all the parties involved 
to  address  the  issue  in  a  swift  and  timely  manner.  But  beyond  that,  NPLs  need  to  be 
addressed at the root, not only in the balance sheets of banks, but by improving the health of 
the borrowers. We need, for instance, to tackle the fact that SMEs don’t have enough equity, 
or that collateral is too difficult to repossess. Insolvency laws need to be improved, and that 
is not specific to Italy. The sooner governments act on insolvency procedures and collateral 
frameworks, the better. In general, the crisis has taught us that recovery in the euro area has 
been delayed, in comparison with the US, because we were slow in addressing the problems 
of  the  banks  and  there  was  too  much  supervisory  forbearance.  That  is  why  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was created and that is why I think supervisors should err on 
the side of caution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Central bankers do not like to talk about currency wars and the ECB always says that 
the  exchange  rate  is  not  a  target.  However,  with  the  dollar  and  emerging  markets’ 
currencies  weakening,  is  the  euro  “losing  the  war”  and  therefore  making  it  more 
difficult for the ECB to reach its target? 
The euro has stabilised over the last month after a clear depreciation. It is not an obstacle to 
our  monetary  policy.  Only  if  there  was  a  sharp  appreciation  of  the  euro  would  that  be  a 
concern. 
Did  tensions  over  the  exchange  rate  resurface  at  the  G20  in  Washington?  And  was 
there a Plaza-style accord in Shanghai? 
All  stakeholders,  not  only  the  G-7  but  also  the  emerging  markets  in  the  G-20,  agree  that 
exchange rates should not be used for competitive purposes. That was agreed and stated in 
Shanghai and again in Washington. This is not a secret pact, but a strong joint commitment. 
The G-20 framework is there to help resist the temptation to use the exchange rate, when 
aggregate demand is globally weak, at the expense of others. My take-away from Shanghai 
and  Washington  is  that  all  participants  understood  that  it’s  in  nobody’s  interest  to  start  a 
disruptive process that would trigger uncertainty and volatility in the markets 
The ECB is increasingly under fire in Germany, from large parts of the political and 
financial establishment and from the media. How damaging to your credibility is the 
constant opposition from the largest economy in the euro area? 
It is wrong to discuss our policies along national, or even nationalistic, lines. And there are 
respected voices in Germany that support the ECB. Some of our critics only see the impact 
of our policies on themselves and miss the bigger picture. Low interest rates, for instance, 
are  a  cost  for  savers,  but  they  benefit  the  budget,  and  savers  are  also  taxpayers.  They 
support  growth  and  exports,  and  savers  are  also  workers.  That  is  why  the  ECB  is 
independent, to take distance from short-term politics and vested interests. In Germany there 
is a strong recognition that central bank independence is an asset, and I don’t see that view 
changing. Anyway, these critiques do not hamper our ability to function. Monetary policy is 
discussed and voted in the Governing Council, not elsewhere. But we realise that we do not 
operate  in  a  political  vacuum.  Indeed,  the  stronger  our  political  counterparts,  the  better.  It 
was Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa who spoke very early on of the “institutional loneliness” of 
the ECB, and his was indeed a lonely voice at the time. But he was right. There has to be a 
political discussion on how economic policy can help create growth. That’s the positive way 
ahead. Your finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, has made some good suggestions on EMU 
governance  and  what  should  be  a  stronger  political  centre for the  euro  area,  with  which  I 
agree. That’s the way forward. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
