   Philip R Lane: Selective overview of the Central Bank of Ireland’s current 
work programme 
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
Oireachtas (National Parliament) Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure & Reform, Dublin, 
26 January 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to the Committee to present a selective overview of the Central Bank 
of Ireland’s current work programme. I will especially focus on our domestic activities; as part 
of the eurosystem and the EU system of financial regulation, the Central Bank is also heavily 
engaged in a wide range of European policy committees.  
In recent years, there have been considerable changes to the mandate and structure of the 
Central Bank, in response to the many lessons from the domestic and international financial 
crises. With the passing of the most intensive phase of crisis management, it is important to 
establish new priorities for the Central Bank. Our recently-published Strategic Plan 2016-2018 
provides  a  detailed  guide  to  our  plans  for  the  next  three  years.  Our  mission  statement 
“safeguarding stability, protecting consumers” encapsulates the dual priorities for the Central 
Bank in the period ahead: the preservation of financial stability, while also working to ensure 
that the financial sector operates in the best interests of its customers.  
Much of the Central Bank’s policy work takes the form of contributions to a wide range of EU 
regulatory  committees  and  the  eurosystem’s  committees  that  support  the  formulation  and 
execution of the European Central Bank’s monetary policy. In common with similar initiatives 
by the other major central banks, the ECB has recently adopted a number of unconventional 
measures  in  pursuit  of  its  inflation  target.  These  measures  include  the  expanded  asset 
purchase programme (EAPP) that will run until at least March 2017. In implementing the EAPP, 
the Central Bank of Ireland has been actively engaged in asset purchases. To illustrate the 
scale of the eurosystem’s intervention in asset markets, total cumulative purchases of euro 
area public debt securities amounted to close to €500 billion by the end of 2015. This aggregate 
includes purchases of €7.6 billion of Irish sovereign debt.  
The  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  Ireland’s  excellent  recent 
economic performance. For instance, the low interest rate environment has been a boon to 
many indebted households, while the government has been able to issue debt at low yields. 
More generally, as indicated in the introductory statement to the press conference after last 
week’s monetary policy meeting, the assessment of the Governing Council is that the monetary 
policy measures that have been adopted since mid-2014 are working; noting the increase in 
downside risks in recent weeks, the Governing Council will review and possibly reconsider the 
monetary policy stance in early March.  
In relation to the longer-term agenda for the euro area, the financial crisis also made clear that 
the original institutional design of the euro area suffered from a lack of risk-sharing and crisis 
management  mechanisms.  While  there  has  been  significant  progress  in  reforming  the 
institutional setup of the euro area, the recent Five Presidents’ Report highlighted that further 
reforms  could  help  in  improving  the  resilience  of  the  monetary  union.  This  reform  agenda 
should be a high priority for European policymakers. 
Our latest Quarterly Bulletin was published this morning. It projects that that the economy will 
continue to grow strongly this year, with GDP growth expected to moderate only slightly to 4.8 
per cent. This reflects the confluence of several positive factors, including the employment-rich 
nature of the recovery, a less constrained policy environment, the boost to purchasing power 
from lower energy prices, the on-going easing of the balance sheet legacies of the crisis and 
broadly favourable conditions in Ireland’s main export markets. It is the positive alignment of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   all these factors that has helped growth to strengthen and supports a continued favourable 
outlook. 
However, while much has improved, vulnerabilities remain. The strong growth outlook provides 
an opportunity to address the legacies stemming from still-high levels of public and private 
sector indebtedness. Externally, the main current global risk factor relates to economic and 
financial conditions in some emerging economies. Closer to home, the Central Bank is also 
keeping a watchful eye on Brexit-related risks to the economy and the financial system.  
More generally, small, highly-globalised countries such as Ireland are inherently more volatile 
than  larger  economies:  we  can  grow  strongly  for  extended  periods  but  are  also  especially 
vulnerable to negative shocks. For this reason, it is essential that the Central Bank is pro-active 
in  the  deployment  of macroprudential  policies  that  can  improve  resilience  and  mitigate the 
procyclical dynamics associated with excessive leverage.  
The new rules that impose loan-to-value and loan-to-income limits on most mortgages were 
introduced to protect borrowers and contribute to a safer financial system, which in turn also 
contributes to a more stable economy over the longer term. As I have already stated, The 
Central Bank is firmly committed to deploying such tools on an ongoing basis, with periodic 
reviews to ensure that the measures are appropriately calibrated. I expect the first review of 
the mortgage rules to be published by November this year. This review will be based on an 
analysis of the evidence provided by data on the first year of the operation of the rules, while 
taking into account other factors that may have influenced the mortgage market during this 
period. The rules-based framework is intended to promote the resilience of both banks and 
households and, as such, should be viewed as a permanent feature of the system. The Central 
Bank  is  open  to  tightening  or  loosening  the  calibration  of  these  rules  in  response  to  the 
evidence;  still,  the  value  of  stability  in  a  rules-based  framework  means  that  the  evidence 
threshold to justify adjustments to these rules is significant. Tools such as mortgage rules and 
the  recently-introduced  system  of  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  would  have  mitigated  the 
costs of the boom-bust credit cycle in Ireland in the mid-2000s. The Irish economy remains 
vulnerable  to  adverse  shocks,  with  limits  to  household  leverage  offering  protection  to 
households and banks.  
In relation to financial regulation and supervision, the banking sector is in the middle of a multi-
year transition to higher capital requirements, reduced leverage and increased balance sheet 
liquidity. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has been in place in the euro area for just 
over a year: the SSM represents the first pillar of Banking Union by implementing a common 
area-wide approach to banking supervision, with centralised responsibility for the supervision 
of the circa 130 largest banking groups (including the main Irish retail banks). The second pillar 
consists of the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which came into effect on January 1st. 
By ensuring that financial institutions can be resolved in an orderly manner, the SRM should 
significantly reduce the adverse impact of an institution’s failure on the wider financial system 
and the taxpayer. The third pillar is the European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS): this is 
still under negotiation at a European level. 
In relation to mortgage arrears, the number of accounts in arrears over 90 days was just below 
66 thousand at the end of September 2015. There is some progress to report however. Overall 
arrears levels started to decrease over two years ago and the number of households in long-
term  arrears  (over  720  days)  started  to  decrease  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015.  While  the 
economic  recovery  has  gained  pace,  the  number  of  legal  proceedings  against  mortgage 
holders have also been increasing. The Central Bank’s continued role in this area is to ensure 
that  the  banks  adhere  to  the  Code  of  Conduct  of  Mortgage  Arrears,  meet  the  criteria  for 
sustainable solutions and continue to engage with their customers to find non- repossession 
solutions whenever possible. The Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) 
Act  2015  seeks  to  ensure that  borrowers  whose  loans  are  sold  to  unregulated transferees 
maintain the regulatory protections they had prior to the sale.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   It is imperative that lenders continue to work with over-indebted consumers to try to resolve 
any arrears situation and to achieve sustainable solutions with co-operating borrowers. Clearly 
for many, there is no quick remedy or solution to long term arrears and careful, empathetic but 
realistic  approaches  need  to  be  taken.  I  welcome  the  new  coordinated  programme  of 
assistance for those in long-term arrears, with MABS acting as a “one stop shop” for borrowers 
in need of advice and support.  
For credit unions, the Central Bank’s new regulations came into effect on 1 January this year. 
These will enhance soundness and provide for enhanced confidence in the sector, supporting 
its role in providing important financial services to the community. We will continue to work with 
credit  unions  to  support  appropriate  restructuring  measures,  the  embedding  of  the 
strengthened regulatory framework, and to facilitate prudent and appropriate development.  
This is also a landmark year for the insurance sector, with the Solvency II framework going 
live.  The  “whole  balance  sheet”  approach  to  capital  calculation  combined  with  the  strong 
emphasis  on  a  firm’s  risk  management  and  supervisory  review  will  result  in  a  much-
transformed regulatory and supervisory framework. This year, Central Bank supervisors and 
the supervised firms will be putting this framework into operation for the first time. 
In December, we released new regulations on SME lending. The regulations aim to strengthen 
protections for SMEs, while also facilitating access to credit. The regulations provide for greater 
transparency around the application process and the reasons for refusing credit applications, 
greater protections for guarantors and an expansion of the grounds for an internal appeal.  
There is growing international recognition that financial regulators should be more pro-active 
in protecting consumers, in view of the complexity, risks and costs of financial products. It is 
not  our  role  to  run  the  firms  we  regulate  nor  is  it  to  determine  their  business  models  or 
strategies (including in relation to the setting of prices and rates charged). Rather, our work on 
consumer protection is primarily focused on increasing transparency to enable people make 
informed  decisions  with  full  clarity  about  the  risks,  costs  and  long-term  impact  of  financial 
products. This year, we will further enhance our engagement with boards of the larger retail 
firms  to  push  for  a  more  consumer-focused  culture  within  firms,  and  will  carry  out  on-site 
consumer risk assessments across a number of retail firms.  
Firms must be able to demonstrate that their products are fit for purpose – this means that 
firms must ensure that products are fully understood by customers and are suitable for their 
individual  needs. We therefore  expect firms to conduct  consumer-testing  on their  products 
(including their product literature) and to simplify them where necessary; to use plain language; 
and to go beyond disclosure and caveat emptor to ensuring consumers’ general understanding 
of products before launch and individual consumer’s understanding of the product during the 
sales process. They must also continuously satisfy themselves that products remain suitable 
for the target market and provide the best solution for existing as well as new customers. 
We also plan to continue our product-focused supervisory work, including the tracker mortgage 
examination, and reviews of structured products and health insurance. We will also increase 
our  firm-specific  engagement  with  low-impact  firms,  including  intermediaries  and  debt 
management  firms.  Further  work  will  be  done  to  strengthen  consumer  protection  code 
requirements,  including  for  variable  rate  mortgage  holders,  as  well  as  carrying  out  an 
examination  of  the  impact  on  consumer  outcomes  of  commission  payments  to  insurance 
intermediaries.  
You will have seen a good deal of enforcement activity reported in the press in recent months. 
This  reflects  our  approach  whereby  high-quality  supervision  must  be  underpinned  by  a 
rigorous approach to enforcement. 
Our  role  in  the  collection  of  financial  data  will  also  be  further  expanded  through  the 
establishment of the Central Credit Register (CCR). The credit reporting obligations will apply 
to over 500 lenders, including banks, credit unions, asset finance houses, local authorities and 
money lenders and will be fully operational from 2017. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The expansion in the scope of monetary policy, the adoption of a more intrusive approach to 
financial regulation, the introduction of new EU regulatory mandates, the ongoing growth of 
the investment funds sector in Ireland and the professionalisation of corporate services in the 
Central  Bank  have  resulted  in  a  significant  expansion  in  staff  numbers.  As  our  mandate 
expands, we expect continued growth in our staff numbers; we anticipate recruitment of an 
additional 150 staff this year, bringing our staff numbers to about 1650.  
As we expand, we will begin the move to our new headquarters on North Wall Quay at the end 
of 2016. The layout of the new building has been designed to promote a collaborative working 
environment, which will facilitate the teamwork that is so critical to the delivery of the Bank’s 
multi-faceted mandate. In parallel, we expect to complete the design of new organisational and 
reward models in the next few months.  
A greater level of openness about how the Bank conducts its activities can help improve the 
level of public trust in our organisation: we believe that people will be more confident that we 
act independently and in the public interest if they have greater insights and understanding 
about what is going on inside the Bank. To this end, we have recently announced plans to 
publish the minutes of the meetings of the Central Bank Commission. While information on the 
supervision of regulated firms and market-sensitive financial operations activities cannot be 
disclosed, the publication of these minutes should contribute to greater understanding of our 
corporate governance, internal debates and the initiatives we take to deliver on our mission. 
Second, we have also released data on our salary structures and pay scales, which will be 
updated on an annual basis. Furthermore, by providing greater details on our human resources 
policies, we aim to enhance understanding about the Central Bank as a public organisation 
and prospective employer.  
In summary, during my tenure as Governor, my aim is to build on the progress that has been 
achieved in recent years in recasting the Central Bank as an efficient and effective central bank 
and financial regulator. The staff of the Central Bank can be proud of these achievements, 
which were recently recognised by our international peers through the Central Bank of the 
Year award from centralbanking.com and the Central Banking journal. Peer reviews provide 
another important benchmark for our performance: an independent assessment of five recent 
external peer reviews of the Central Bank’s regulatory functions is available on our website 
and recognises the Central Bank’s consistent adherence to the highest international standards 
over the last several years. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
