  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Accelerating the migration to electronic 
payments in Malaysia 
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the inaugural Malaysian E-Payments Excellence Awards (MEEA, 
Kuala Lumpur, 4 April 2016. 
 It is my pleasure to be at this inaugural Malaysian E-Payments Excellence Awards (MEEA) 
organised by MyClear. 
This  event  is  important  as  it  recognises  the  contribution  made  by  the  financial  services 
industry  and  the  business  community  in  accelerating  the  country’s  migration  to  electronic 
payments (e-payments). 
Safe  and  efficient  payment  systems  are  one  of  the  key  building  blocks  of  a  productive, 
competitive  and  successful  nation.  They  provide  the  foundation for monetary  and  financial 
stability as well as facilitate the overall economic development of the country. In this regard, 
the continuous development to enhance the payment systems throughout the years for this 
purpose  has  provided  Malaysia’s  businesses  and  individuals  with  reliable,  secure  and 
efficient payment infrastructure to serve as a productive and efficient means for businesses 
to conduct their day to day economic activities. 
Premised on these efforts is the close collaboration among all stakeholders in the payment 
system  value  chain, 
institutions,  businesses  and 
consumers. A conducive payment ecosystem would not only enhance the nation’s efficiency 
and productivity, but also create new opportunities and new sources of growth to position the 
economy as an attractive destination for global investors. 
My remarks this evening will focus on four broad areas: 
i. 
the  regulators,  financial 
including 
First,  I  will  outline  BNM’s  role  in  fostering  an  enabling  environment  for  network 
expansion  as  well  as  in  promoting  competition,  innovation  and  choice  in  the 
payment landscape; 
Second, I will highlight the key priority areas for stakeholders that could accelerate 
the displacement of cheques and cash with cost-effective e-payments; 
Third,  I  will  outline  the  importance  of  a  synergistic  collaboration  between  MyClear 
and the financial institutions to deliver innovative payment solutions and meet user 
needs; and 
Fourth, I will highlight the need for the financial institutions to provide end-to-end and 
value-adding financial solutions to their customers. 
Fostering an enabling environment for network expansion whilst promoting 
competition, innovation and choice 
An efficient and well-functioning payment system must not only have the economies of scale 
to  enable  lowering  of  costs,  but  also  the  quality  of  services  to  serve  the  needs  of  an 
increasingly demanding and sophisticated users. We designed our developmental efforts into 
two-fold: 
i. 
Foster an enabling environment for infrastructure building and network expansion to 
achieve the economies of scale; and 
Promote effective competition among the industry players to spur the development 
of innovative solutions, provide greater choices and value proposition to the public 
and in the process, lower costs. 
ii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
1. 
  Over  the  past  few  years,  BNM  has  played  the  role  of  a  catalyst  by  instituting  reform 
measures and introducing market incentive mechanisms to enhance the accessibility and the 
quality, affordability and security of the e-payment services to the general public. 
In  this  regard,  we  had  introduced  the  Pricing  Reform  Framework  as  well  as  the  Payment 
Card Reform Framework. 
Correcting price distortions 
In  May  2013,  BNM  had  introduced  the  Pricing  Reform  Framework  to  correct  the  price 
distortions between paper-based payments and e-payments. By differentiating the prices of 
payment services according to their relative costs, the public are thus incentivised to use the 
more efficient and cost-effective e-payment services. 
In  this  respect,  we  need  to  explore  new  incentives  that  can  accelerate  the  migration  to  e-
payments. 
Strengthening competition and lowering cost 
To  curb  the  rising  cost  of  payment  card  acceptance  that  had  impeded  the  expansion  of 
payment  card  terminals  among  merchants,  BNM  had  implemented  the  Payment  Card 
Reform  Framework  in  July  2015.  The  Reform  Framework  had  removed  market  distortions 
and imbued competition and transparency in the payment card market. This has resulted in 
the offer of higher quality and lower cost solutions, especially to the lower tier merchants. 
Driving infrastructure building and network expansion 
To facilitate  infrastructure  building  and  enhancements to  payment  services,  BNM  had  also 
established  market  incentive  structures  such  as  the  e-Payment  Incentive  Fund  (ePIF) 
Framework.  Under  the  ePIF  Framework,  banks  are  incentivised  through  a  set  of  pre-
requisites  to  invest  in  e-payment  services,  and  to  channel  the  cheque  fee  collected  as 
incentives to encourage their customers to migrate to e-payments. The industry players had 
also  established  a  Market  Development  Fund  (MDF),  which  would  channel  approximately 
RM455  million  to  expand  the  network  of  payment  card  terminals  from  240,000  in  2014  to 
800,000 by 2020. 
Building awareness and confidence 
To enhance awareness and confidence in the use of e-payments, BNM will continue to work 
with  the  financial  services  industry  to  strengthen  security  measures,  thus  ensuring  that  e-
payment transactions remain safe and secure. Significant resources are devoted to educate 
and  guide  the  public  in  adopting  e-payments  through  nationwide  roadshows,  media 
engagements, township campaigns and outreach programmes. 
The initiatives that I just outlined provide the foundation for e-payments to be less costly and 
to  offer  to  the  public  a  cheaper  alternative  to  paper-based  payment  methods.  The  market 
incentive  structures  on  the  other  hand,  will  foster  effective  competition  and  sustain  the 
industry efforts in providing value-added and efficient payment offerings to their customers. It 
is in the interest of all for the financial services industry, especially the payment infrastructure 
providers and the financial institutions, to work cohesively to enhance the payment services 
where gaps remain. 
This should be complemented with shared investment in infrastructure building and network 
expansion to achieve economies of scale. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2. 
Key priority areas to accelerate the displacement of cash and cheques 
 Progress in the displacement of cheques should be sustained 
Promising  progress  has  been  made  in  the  reduction  of  cheque  usage  through  the  use  of 
electronic  funds  transfer  services  such  as  the  Interbank  GIRO  (IBG)  and  the  Instant 
Interbank Funds Transfer (IBFT). This is mostly attributable to the lower transaction fees and 
the  efforts  by  the financial  institutions  in  offering  incentives  and  guiding their  customers  to 
adopt e-payments. Between 2011 and 2015, the number of cheques issued had reduced by 
27%,  from  205  million  cheques  in  2011  to  148  million  cheques  in  2015.  At  the  same,  the 
number of IBG transactions had increased by 147% from 60 million transactions in 2011 to 
149 million transactions in 2015. This is a key milestone as the number of IBG transactions 
surpassed the number of cheques cleared for the first time. The IBFT transactions had also 
increased significantly by almost eight-fold from 5.8 million transactions in 2011 to 47 million 
transactions in 2015. 
This signifies greater public confidence in the use of e-payments. Such achievement is also 
indicative of how effective collaboration and coordinated efforts by the various stakeholders 
in the payment value chain could produce the intended outcomes. We should put in more 
effort  to  sustain  the  cheque  reduction  whilst  promoting  greater  adoption  of  e-payments  in 
areas where the usage of cheques is still relatively high. These areas include interbank card 
and  loan  repayment,  over-the-counter  cheque  payments  to  government  agencies  and 
cheques usage in the takaful and insurance industry. 
Intensified efforts needed in the displacement of cash 
Our  progress  in  promoting  the  use  of  debit  cards  as  an  alternative  to  cash  however,  has 
been modest. For the period between 2011 and 2015, there was only a marginal increase 
from 1 to 3 debit card transactions per capita and from 7 to 9 payment card terminals per 
1,000 inhabitants. With the coming into force of the Payment Card Reform Framework on 1 
July 2015, the cost of accepting debit cards has been made more affordable through a five-
fold reduction in the interchange fees from about 1.00% to 0.21%. Concurrently, the industry 
has also committed to invest about RM1.1 billion to enhance the payment card infrastructure 
over the next five years. This would comprise efforts to expand the number of payment card 
terminals, adopt PIN-based verification for enhanced security and roll out contactless debit 
cards for greater transaction efficiency. 
The industry should capitalise on the lower interchange fees and the Market Development 
Fund created under the Payment Card Reform Framework to expand the number of payment 
card terminals among lower tier merchants. Additionally, the industry should leverage on the 
roll-out of contactless debit cards to promote the use of debit cards to displace cash. In this 
regard, an industry-wide promotional campaign should be launched in a coordinated manner 
focusing on educating and incentivising cardholders to use their ATM cards as debit cards to 
make purchases instead of making ATM cash withdrawals. Financial institutions should also 
review  the  effectiveness  of  the  promotional  campaigns  from  time  to  time  and  make  the 
necessary adjustments to ensure the intended outcomes are attained. 
3. 
Fostering synergistic collaboration between MyClear and financial institutions 
Synergistic collaboration between MyClear and financial institutions is critical as investments 
in technology are expensive. The constant need to invest in key payment infrastructures in 
this country is in line with technological advancements and the changing needs of consumers 
and  businesses.  In  this  regard,  MyClear  should  be  responsible  to  facilitate  the  pooling  of 
resources and adoption of new technology to expand the network reach and resilience of its 
payment  infrastructures.  Financial  institutions  on  the  other  hand,  should  leverage  on  the 
common  platform  to  compete  by  providing  innovative  and  value-adding  products  to  their 
customers. Such synergistic collaboration will prevent unnecessary duplication and wastage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of resources in the payment landscape. It shall reduce the cost of transactions over the long 
run. 
Modernising payment and settlement infrastructure 
MyClear  is  embarking  on  a  multi-year  programme  to  modernise  Malaysia’s  payment 
infrastructure. In the area of retail payments, a new real-time Retail Payments Platform will 
be developed to serve both as a catalyst and enabler for innovative payments in Malaysia. 
As  for  large  value  payments,  the  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  System  or  RENTAS  is 
currently  being  enhanced  to  adopt  a  multi-currency  system  that  leverages  on  the  SWIFT 
messaging standard. 
The  enhanced  RENTAS  would  cater  for  multiple  messaging  formats  including  the 
internationally-recognised  ISO  20022  which  supports  the  transmission  of  richer  remittance 
data and facilitates interconnectedness with other economies within the region. 
Enhancing capital market infrastructures 
With  respect  to  the  capital  market,  Malaysia’s  debt  securities  market  is  the  largest  in 
Southeast Asia. Malaysia also remains the leading global sukuk issuer, accounting for over 
53% of new global issuance worth USD34.8 billion in 2015. Over the past decade, BNM and 
MyClear had invested significantly to build the capital market infrastructures to facilitate multi-
currency securities issuance, depository and settlement via the Fully Automated System for 
Issuing/Tendering  (FAST)  and  RENTAS,  respectively.  There  are  immense  opportunities  to 
add  to  the  breadth  and  depth  of  the  Malaysian  debt  securities  market,  especially  in  the 
diversity  of  its  currency  and  investor  base.  Hence,  the  financial  services  industry  has  the 
opportunity  to  leverage on  Malaysia’s  capital  market  infrastructures  by  incorporating  FAST 
and RENTAS in the securities offering documents as an additional option for foreign currency 
securities issuance, depository and settlement. 
To facilitate the synergistic collaboration that I had highlighted earlier, MyClear would share 
its infrastructure development roadmap with the industry. This would assist both the financial 
and business communities to align their resources for infrastructure development as well as 
to  identify  opportunities for the  offering  of  innovative  solutions  to  their  customers.  MyClear 
and BNM would coordinate the industry awareness and educational programmes to promote 
the new payment services for mass adoption by businesses and consumers. 
4. 
Providing end-to-end financial solutions to customers 
Holistic financial solutions as a competitive edge 
Financial institutions are no longer differentiated by payment infrastructure that is proprietary 
and duplicative in nature. 
Through  the  centralised  payment  systems  offered  by  MyClear,  the  Malaysian  Electronic 
Payment  System  Sdn.  Bhd.  (MEPS)  and  other  payment  network  operators,  each  financial 
institution  can  now  access  and  leverage  on  the  entire  banking  infrastructure  to  achieve 
economies  of  scale.  In  order  to  remain  competitive,  financial  institutions  should  strive  to 
provide value added services and good user experience to their customers. 
It is important to bear in mind that ultimately customers would need more than just a payment 
solution. In this regard, the ability to offer holistic, end-to-end financial solutions that meet the 
customers’ personal and business needs would be the key differentiator. 
FinTech and its potential 
The proliferation of Internet and mobile technology and the rise of disruptive technology in 
the  financial  sector,  also  known  as  FinTech,  has  also  fuelled  new  business  models  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  created opportunities for new sources of growth. The offering of convenient, affordable and 
innovative financial solutions particularly by ‘agile’ non-bank service providers challenges the 
traditional  business  models  and  necessitates  a  re-evaluation  of  business  strategies  by 
financial  institutions.  Hence,  it  is  timely  for  financial  institutions  to  invest  in  financial 
innovation  and  explore  the  formation  of  strategic  alliances  with  other  innovative  financial 
service  providers  to  capitalise  on  such  emerging  trend.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  financial 
services industry to adopt technological advancement in their business model. It is better to 
embrace it now rather than to be embarrassed by it later. 
Conclusion 
Each participant in the domestic payment market has a critical role to play in advancing the 
country’s migration to e-payments. BNM will continue to work with the industry and act as a 
catalyst to foster a conducive payment ecosystem. MyClear as the operator of the nation’s 
key  financial  market  infrastructures  would  coordinate  the  industry  efforts  in  infrastructure 
enhancements.  Financial  institutions  should  continue  to  intensify  their  efforts  in  providing 
innovative  and  value-adding  financial  solutions  that  meet  the  needs  of  their  individual  and 
corporate customers. Businesses and consumers, on the other hand, should embrace and 
integrate  e-payments  and  other  digital financial  services  into  their  daily  activities  to  benefit 
from enhanced efficiency and productivity. 
The  symbiotic  relationship  among  all  the  stakeholders  will  drive  the  transformation  and 
modernisation  of  Malaysia’s  payment  ecosystem.  A  safe,  reliable  and  efficient  payment 
ecosystem will support the country’s economic growth, competitiveness and productivity. 
Let  me  conclude  by  congratulating  MyClear  and  the  winners  of  today’s  awards  ceremony 
from both the financial and business communities. I hope today’s event is the stepping stone 
and  would  inspire  bigger  achievement  in  our  endeavour  to  accelerate  the  migration  to  e-
payments. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
