  Carolyn Wilkins: China’s great transition – what it means for Canada 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Greater Vancouver Board of Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 5 April 2016. 
I’d like to thank Mark Kruger and Gurnain Pasricha for their help in preparing this speech. 
 Introduction 
If I were to ask everyone here what the value of the Canadian dollar is these days, I expect 
you’d assume I meant relative to the US dollar. And you’d probably get the value bang on. 
This  is  understandable:  the  United  States  is  our  biggest  trading  partner,  and  most 
Canadians, especially business people like you, are well aware of the links between our two 
economies. 
Now,  if  I  were  to  ask  you  about  the  exchange  rate  between  the  Canadian  dollar  and  the 
Chinese renminbi, the answers probably wouldn’t be as accurate. This makes sense too: it’s 
not  a  number  you  often  come  across,  even  if  you’re  reading  news  stories  about  China’s 
slowing growth and financial volatility. 
Yet, China is Canada’s second-largest trading partner and accounts for 17 per cent of the 
world  economy.1  More  than  400  Canadian  companies  have  a  foothold  there.  They  are  in 
sectors as diverse as life sciences, aerospace and information technology. China’s currency 
is on the way to becoming a global reserve currency. A decade from now, our children may 
convert Canadian dollars into renminbi as easily as we do now for US dollars. 
We  pay  very  close  attention  to  China  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  because  of  its  growing 
importance to our country’s economic and financial well-being. Today, I want to share with 
you  some  of  what  we’ve  learned  by  studying  how  China’s  economy  and  financial  system 
have evolved, and to discuss the opportunities and challenges that lie ahead. 
This is relevant to all regions of Canada, especially here in Vancouver, our gateway to Asia. 
It’s a real pleasure to be here, and I’d like to thank the Greater Vancouver Board of Trade for 
the invitation. 
In my remarks, I will walk you through four points that frame our thinking on China: 
(i) 
China’s  rise  on  the  world  stage  has  been  exceptional,  even  disruptive,  and 
beneficial for the global economy and Canada. 
The slowing of China’s growth to a more sustainable pace is not only inevitable, it’s 
also desirable. 
History teaches us that this type of transition is difficult to manage, takes time and is 
very likely to be uneven. 
Canada is not immune to the risks China poses to the global economy, but we’re 
well positioned to manage them. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
A giant awakens 
China’s  market  reforms  of  the  1980s  and  its  accession  to  the  World  Trade  Organization 
(WTO)  in  2001  marked  the  beginning  of  a  remarkable  transformation  that  has  been  felt 
around the world. 
                                                
1  On a purchasing-power-parity basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  For China, the process has been overwhelmingly positive, even though it has entailed some 
stresses, particularly environmental ones. Its economy has more than tripled in size.  More 
than a quarter of a billion Chinese people have been lifted out of poverty, in what has been 
the largest migration of rural workers to cities in history.2 Life expectancy has increased by 
nearly three years. And China is hosting the G20 this year, just one example of its growing 
presence on the world stage. 
China’s transformation has also yielded benefits for the global economy. It’s true that China 
and other emerging markets have presented stiff competition to exporters around the globe, 
including  in  Canada.  We  see  the  result  in  the  declining  proportion  of  people  working  in 
manufacturing industries in advanced economies, which has been difficult for many. And it 
likely  contributed  to  the  buildup  of  imbalances  in  the  global  financial  system  ahead  of  the 
financial  crisis  in  2008.3  Yet,  China’s  expansion  also  helped  drive  global  trade  to  record 
highs. This means that exporters have been selling into a bigger market. At the same time, 
businesses and households have benefited from lower prices for many goods.4  
China’s  growth  has  also  meant  better  prices  for  the  resources  Canada  sells.  China  has 
become the world’s second-largest consumer of oil, with its demand doubling over the past 
15  years.5  It  now  buys  half  of the  world’s  output  of  base metals,  compared  with  less  than 
20 per cent in 2001. 
This  has  helped  make  Canada  richer.  China’s  increased  demand  for  commodities 
contributed  to  the  big  improvement  in  Canada’s  terms  of  trade  –  the  price  of  our  exports 
relative to that of our imports – between 2001 and 2008. Our terms of trade has fallen over 
the past couple of years, in part because of slowing growth in China, but it remains just over 
10 per cent higher than it was when China joined the WTO. 
It’s  hard  to  overstate  how  quickly  the  economic  links  between  our  two  countries  have 
developed. Two-way trade between Canada and China increased more than fivefold over the 
past decade and a half, and our exports to that country now exceed $20 billion a year. British 
Columbia has seized this opportunity; for example, China bought just under one-third of the 
province’s exports of forestry products last year, compared with only 4 per cent in 2001. 
Our  governments  have  also  worked  to  encourage  trade  and  investment  through  accords, 
trade  missions  and  other  agreements  with  China.6  And  the  growth  in  foreign  direct 
investment in both directions speaks to the deep links that have been formed.7  
On  the  financial  side,  the  Bank  of  Canada  signed  a  $30 billion  Canadian  dollar/renminbi 
bilateral swap arrangement with the People’s Bank of China in 2014. This paved the way for 
                                                
2  R. Garnaut, L. Song and C. Fang, “Reform and China’s Long-Term Growth and Development,” in Deepening 
Reform for China’s Long-Term Growth and Development (Canberra: ANU Press, 2014): 3–25. 
3  B. S. Bernanke, “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States 2003–2007,” 
Banque de France, Financial Stability Review, no. 15 (February 2011): 13–26. 
4  L.  Morel,  “The  Direct  Effect  of  China  on  Canadian  Consumer  Prices:  An  Empirical  Assessment,”  Staff 
Discussion Paper No. 2007–10, Bank of Canada, 2007; M. Francis, “The Effect of China on Global Prices,” 
Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 2007): 13–25. 
5  According to the International Energy Agency, China’s oil consumption rose to 10.6 million barrels per day in 
2014, from 4.6 million barrels per day in 2000. 
6  Examples  include  the  Canada–China  Foreign  Investment  Promotion  and  Protection  Agreement,  the  Joint 
Declaration on Canada–China Clean Technology Cooperation, and the memorandum of understanding aimed 
at 
see 
http://www.international.gc.ca/trade-agreements-accords-commerciaux/agr-acc/fipa-apie/china-chine.aspx? 
lang=eng, http://news.gc.ca/web/article-en.do?nid=1036379, and https://news.gov.bc.ca/stories/china-and-bc-
sign-wood-frame-mou. 
increasing  British  Columbia’s 
to  China.  For  more 
lumber  exports 
information, 
7  China’s  investments  in  Canada  reached  $25  billion  in  2014,  115  times  more  than  they  were  in  2001. 
Meanwhile, Canadian investments in China rose by a factor of 10 during the same period, to $7 billion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the opening last year of the Canadian Renminbi Trading Hub, which will make it easier for 
our companies to use renminbi in business transactions. Canadian financial institutions are 
active  in  China,  and,  just  a  few  months  ago,  British  Columbia  became  one  of  the  first 
governments to issue Panda bonds in China. 
Slower –  but steady – wins the race 
Let me turn to my second point. While China’s economic growth has had an overall positive 
impact on the Canadian economy, that growth is slowing. It’s slowing to a more sustainable 
pace, and this is not only inevitable, it’s desirable. 
The Chinese economy expanded by a little less than 7 per cent last year. That sounds fast 
relative  to  advanced  economies,  but  it’s the  slowest  pace for  China  in 25 years  and  down 
from the double-digit numbers of a few years ago. 
The  slowdown  is  natural.  The  economic  strategy  that  the  Chinese  have  pursued  over  the 
past  15  years  cannot  continue  indefinitely.  The  strategy  is  simple:  add  more  workers  and 
more  capital  to  increase  the  economy’s  potential  to  produce  goods,  and  then  sell  those 
goods in global markets. 
This has run its course, for a couple of reasons. First, demographic forces are no longer in 
China’s  favour  –  the  working-age  population  is  projected  to  shrink  by  about  5  per  cent  by 
2030.8  Second,  China’s  reliance  on  investment  is  not  sustainable  –  it  was  46  per  cent  of 
GDP  in  2014,  compared  with  25  per  cent  for  other  emerging-market  and  developing 
economies and 20 per cent for advanced economies.9  
The  strong  investment  policy  is  increasingly  creating  redundant  or  unproductive  capital  in 
China,  which  may  boost  growth  in  the  short  run  but  also  increases  the  odds  of  painful 
economic adjustments in the future. 
A critical question is where growth in China is likely to settle if the transition is successful. 
Bank of Canada researchers judge that China has the potential to grow at an annual rate of 
around  6  per  cent,  on  average,  over  the  next  15  years.10  At  that  pace,  it  takes  less  than 
12 years for the economy to double in size. 
To understand how such growth is possible, recall that China’s GDP per capita is still only 
one-fifth of what it is in the United States. This means China still has a lot of room to catch up 
by adopting existing advanced technologies. As part of this process, the share of agricultural 
workers in China will continue to shrink, to the benefit of more productive sectors. 
With  Chinese  incomes  rising,  education  levels  should  follow  suit  and  boost  productivity. 
These improvements in human capital could potentially more than make up for the decline in 
the working-age population.11  
One implication for Canada is that China’s demand for commodities should remain high and 
grow from a higher base, even if the country’s economic growth is slower and less reliant on 
natural resources. 
                                                
8  According to United Nations population projections, China’s working-age population is estimated to decline by 
4.5 per cent between its 2014 peak and 2030. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Database, October 2015. 
9 
10  These values are based on J. Bailliu, M. Kruger, A. Toktamyssov and W. Welbourn, “How Fast Can China 
Grow? The Middle Kingdom’s Prospects to 2030,” Staff Working Paper No. 2016–15, Bank of Canada, 2016. 
11  Ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Solving the Chinese puzzle 
My  third  point  is  that  history  shows  that  the  transition  to  the  next  stage  of  development  is 
difficult to manage, takes time and is quite likely to be uneven. 
If  China  is  to  achieve  its  potential  to  grow,  it  will  have  to  avoid  what  economists  call  the 
“middle-income  trap,”  in  which  developing  countries  that  seem  destined  to  join  the  club  of 
advanced economies suddenly see their growth stagnate for many years.12  
Chinese authorities recognize that their specific challenge is to shift from an economy fuelled 
by investment to one supported by domestic consumption. Another is to boost productivity. 
To meet these challenges and to achieve the economy’s potential, Chinese authorities are 
working to fit a number of pieces together – much like a Chinese puzzle. There are many 
pieces, but let me mention three. 
Comprehensive social safety net 
The first one is outside the purview of central banking but crucial to achieving the rotation of 
demand  toward  consumption.  I’m  talking  about  a  comprehensive  social  safety  net.  In 
advanced  economies  that  have  a  public  pension  system,  unemployment  insurance  and 
healthcare, risks are pooled, and people can spend more of their income because there is 
relatively less need to save for a rainy day. That’s why people in developed countries save 
an  average  of  around  5 cents  of  every  dollar  they  earn.  Contrast  this  with  China,  where 
urban households currently save nearly 40 cents out of every dollar earned. 
Chinese  workers  and  capital  will  also  need  to  adjust  as  the  composition  of  the  economy 
shifts out of state-owned sectors like coal and steel, toward more productive sectors like high 
value-added  services.13  This  will  be  a  lengthy  transition,  in  part  because many  people  will 
need to relocate to different regions and perhaps even be retrained. 
China has taken steps in the right direction, bringing in pension reforms, higher healthcare 
spending  and  reforms  to  the  household  registration  system  that  will  give  migrant  workers 
access to basic services in smaller Chinese cities. China also made raising the level of social 
protection a priority in its new Five-Year Plan. 
Solid monetary policy framework 
The  second  piece,  which  is  very  relevant  to  central  bankers,  is  a  solid  monetary  policy 
framework to  provide  the foundation for  sustainable  growth.  China faces  what  is  known  in 
international economics as the “policy trilemma.”14 No country can sustainably maintain all of 
the following three policies: (i) a fixed exchange rate, (ii) independent monetary policy and 
(iii) free international capital flows. It’s the classic case of “you can’t have it all.” 
Resolving  this  trilemma  won’t  be  easy,  and  it  takes  time.  No  one  knows  this  better  than 
Canada. We successfully confronted the trilemma and then later adopted inflation targeting 
in 1991, which was the perfect complement to a floating exchange rate and free capital flows. 
This monetary policy framework has served us well for the past quarter century. 
But we should remember that it took us several decades, and a number of policy reversals 
and missteps, to reach this point. History buffs will recall that Canada let markets determine 
the value of the Canadian dollar in 1950, then went back to a fixed exchange rate in 1962 
                                                
12  S.  Aiyar,  R.  Duval,  D.  Puy,  Y.  Wu  and  L.  Zhang,  “Growth  Slowdowns  and  the  Middle-Income  Trap,”  IMF 
Working Paper WP/13/71, International Monetary Fund, 2013. 
13  The  13th  Five-Year  Plan  promotes  the  development of  industrial design,  engineering,  legal and accounting 
services, among others. 
14  The  concept  was  developed  by  Canadian  economist  Robert  A.  Mundell  and  British  economist  Marcus 
Fleming. Mundell won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1999. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and finally adopted a floating exchange rate in 1970.15 Yet we still lacked a robust monetary 
anchor  and  this  contributed  to a  period  of very high  inflation that  lasted  through  the 
early 1980s. The  lesson  for  us  is  that  orienting  monetary  policy  toward  achieving  low  and 
stable inflation can lead to better economic outcomes.16  
China  only  recently  moved  from  pegging  the  renminbi  to  the  US  dollar  to  maintaining  its 
stability against a basket of currencies. This has increased the variability of the renminbi/US$ 
exchange rate and allows for exchange rate movements that could facilitate deep structural 
adjustments.  Certainly,  in  Canada,  we’ve  seen  that  our  floating  exchange  rate  supports 
structural  adjustments,  like  the  reorientation  toward  the  non-resource  sector  under  way 
today. My colleague Deputy Governor Lynn Patterson gave a speech about this last week – I 
recommend it to anyone who wants to learn more about this transition.17  
That said, if Chinese authorities gear monetary policy toward supporting the exchange rate, 
there may be trade-offs with pursuing domestic objectives. Moreover, the appropriate level of 
the  basket  itself  changes  over  time,  leading  to  speculative  flows  if  the  target  level  is  not 
adjusted on a timely basis. 
Chinese  authorities  have  committed  to  further  liberalizing  the  capital  account.  Loosening 
restrictions on international flows, if managed well and at the right time, could help China’s 
transition.18  Liberalizing  the  capital  account  would  help  to  complete  markets  and  expand 
access to market financing within China. 
That  said,  liberalizing  the  capital  account  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  challenges  that 
developing economies face. Take the Asian Crisis as an example: countries liberalized their 
capital accounts before their financial systems were ready and suffered a currency crisis in 
1997 that set their development back a few years. One of the lessons is the need for well-
developed and resilient financial markets to allow for the pricing of risks and to accommodate 
large financial flows. This episode also illustrates that a lack of market-determined exchange 
rate  flexibility  can  encourage  excessive  unhedged  foreign  currency  borrowing.  Hedging 
raises the cost of foreign borrowing and would have limited excessive exposures. 
Financial stability 
Financial  stability  is  the  last  piece  of  the  puzzle  I’ll  mention.  There  are  some  points  of 
concern here. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, China embarked on a massive 
expansion  of  credit  to  support  domestic  demand.19  China’s  overall  debt  has  grown  much 
faster than the economy, now reaching some 285 per cent of GDP. Around 60 per cent of 
this  is  in  the  non-financial  corporate  sector,  mainly  state-owned  enterprises. This  sector  is 
where a lot of the excess capital and non-performing loans may reside.20  
                                                
15  J. Powell, A History of the Canadian Dollar (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2005). 
16  M. Parkin, “Mounting Evidence: Findings from Natural Experiments in Inflation Targeting,” E-Brief, C.D. Howe 
Institute, 31 March 2016. 
17  L.  Patterson,  “Adjusting  to  the  Fall  in  Commodity  Prices:  One  Step  at  a  Time”  (speech  to  the  Edmonton 
Chamber of Commerce, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2016). 
18  These benefits are discussed in greater detail in Kruger and Pasricha (forthcoming). 
19  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  which  conducts  a  worldwide  assessment  of  financial  sectors 
every quarter, identified China as a vulnerable financial system, as measured by three out of the four early 
warning indicators used. See Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2015. 
20  Data are from the Institute of International Finance’s Emerging Market Debt Monitor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  There are other worries too, such as potential under-reporting of non-performing loans in the 
banking sector and the strong growth in lending and other financial activity by entities that 
may be lightly regulated.21  
That  is  why  Chinese  authorities  are  working  to  strengthen  regulation  and  oversight.  For 
instance, they have improved the transparency of the country’s debt, which should make it 
easier to spot problems before they spiral out of control. Local governments, for example, are 
now  required  to  borrow  by  issuing  bonds  for  new  projects  rather  than  by  using  opaque 
financing vehicles. Moreover, China is a net international creditor – of about US$1.7 trillion – 
which insulates it, to some extent, from the decisions of international investors. 
The People’s Bank of China has so far been able to manage downward pressures on the 
renminbi that have come with capital outflows. An estimated US$600 billion left China last 
year.22 Some of the capital outflows have been  Chinese corporations paying down foreign 
currency  debt,  which  is  a  good  thing.  The  People’s  Bank  of  China  still  has  around  US$3 
trillion  in  reserves.  There  is  concern  in  markets  that,  if  capital  account  pressures  were  to 
continue,  the  central  bank  may  have  to  either  lower  its  target  range  for  the  currency  or 
introduce more-stringent capital controls. Chinese authorities are focusing on more proactive 
communications and reforms to foster trust in their financial system. 
Canada has a stake in China’s future 
This brings me to my final point. Canada is not immune to the risks that China’s transition 
poses to the global economy. It is nonetheless well positioned to manage them. 
At the Bank of Canada, we’ve been thinking through what a shock from China would mean 
for our economy.23  
Canada would be affected mainly through lower commodity prices and slower trade. Direct 
financial  spillovers  would  likely  be  relatively  small  because  our  banks  have  little  direct 
exposure to China. What’s more, the US and European banks that our banks do business 
with have strengthened their balance sheets since the financial crisis. That said, uncertainty 
about China’s prospects has had a surprisingly large effect on investor confidence in recent 
months, so this could be an important channel. 
To get a rough idea of how important the trade and commodity price channels could be, our 
staff conducted simulations using our economic models. They looked at what would be the 
effect on the Canadian economy if GDP growth in China were 1 percentage point lower than 
our baseline projection. They found that Canadian GDP would be 0.1 percentage point lower 
than it would have been otherwise. To give some perspective, if the same shock occurred in 
the US, the effect on our GDP would be six times greater. 
The  effects  of  a  shock  from  China  would  also  depend  on  a  number  of  other  factors  our 
models don’t capture well, such as what parts of the Chinese economy were growing more 
slowly and how severely global financial markets were impaired. A significant depreciation of 
the renminbi, especially if it were sudden, could be disruptive to the global financial system, 
with implications for Canada. It would also depend on the progress the Canadian economy 
has made in its own adjustment to the drop in commodity prices that we’ve seen in the past 
two years. 
Canadian  financial  institutions  have  the  capital  and  liquidity  in  place  to  handle  adverse 
shocks like this. Stress tests conducted by the International  Monetary Fund and Canadian 
                                                
21  Financial Stability Board, Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015, 12 November 2015. 
22  See the Institute of International Finance’s Annual EM Capital Flows Database. 
23  Bank  of  Canada,  Financial  System  Review  (December  2015);  Bank  of  Canada,  Monetary  Policy  Report 
(January 2016). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  authorities in 2013 showed that our banks can withstand a larger shock than even those we 
saw during the 2008 financial crisis or the recessions of the 1990s and 1980s.24  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude with a quote that dates back two centuries and that is 
attributed  to  Napoleon.  He  is  reported  to  have  said  about  China:  « Ici  repose  un  géant 
endormi, laissez-le dormir, car quand il s’éveillera, il étonnera le monde. » It means, “Here 
lies a sleeping giant, let him sleep, for when he wakes, he will shake up the world.” 
This  was  prescient.China’s  integration  into  the  world  economy  has  been  nothing  short  of 
extraordinary. 
As China’s economy continues to mature, its growth is slowing to a more sustainable pace. 
This is desirable. China has the potential to grow at a healthy pace over the longer run, but 
the transition will take time and there is uncertainty about whether this potential will be fully 
achieved.  That  means  China  may  go  through  some  periods  of  economic  and  financial 
volatility. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  watch  developments  in  China  closely,  given  its 
importance to the global economy and Canada. China’s transition poses risks, and Canada 
is  well  positioned  to  manage  them.  At  the  same  time,  lower  prices  for  oil  and  other 
commodities mean that Canada is going through its own complex adjustment. 
In March, the Bank of Canada left the policy interest rate unchanged, since the economy was 
evolving broadly in line with our expectations set out in our January Monetary Policy Report. 
Next week, we will update our projection and take into account all that has happened since 
January, including the measures announced in the federal budget. 
And  if  you’re  still  wondering  about  the  exchange  rate  and  have  resisted  googling  it,  the 
answer is around five renminbi per Canadian dollar. 
                                                
24  K.  Anand,  G.  Bédard-Pagé  and  V.  Traclet, “Stress  Testing  the  Canadian  Banking  System:  A System-Wide 
Approach,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2014): 61–68. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
